"ZD ZIFF: RAYILUK SCOOP! STARCRAFT BROOD WARS AGE OF EMPIRES: RISE OF ROME PLUS 31 TOUGH REVIEWS October 1998 The #1 PC Game Magazine The #1 PC Game Magazine W FANTASY GAMING FACI/OFF ORLD 12 KICK-AXE GAMES DUEL FOR DOMINANCE WIZARDRY 8 vs. SWORDS & SORCERY Heroes III  Diablo II  Baldur's Gate Myth II  Rage of Mages Ultima Ascension Return to Krondor and more! $3.99 USA, $4.99 Canada 10> Heroes of Might and Magic III 014024069523 "


"... and the seas became as BLOOD. "


"Blood It The Ghosen Blood, LithTech and the 'M logo are trademark of Morcha Prodocoon Inc. Kila WA. This game uses the LithTech engine and tools divulopou and licensed by Monolith Prodiration Blood l m Chosen is published and distribuitetty or internet R Y Software Corp. Windows 95 sa registered trademark of the Microsoft Corp GT is a trademark GT Interactin and the GT Games logo and GT logo are registered trademarks of Gintaraclive Software Sortware Corp. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies, STRE the chosen.com www.gtgames.com> www.gtinteractive.com Available Halloween at your local retailer. Order direct at store.gtinteractive.com or call 1-800-610-GTIS. HT WINDOWS 95 Take bloodshed to the next level with new 3D engine and fully modeled 3D characters. 30+screaming fast, totally immersive and completely bloodsoaked levels. Run a savage gauntlet of multiplayer mayhem from Teamplay to Level Racing "


"THE blood CHOSEN the second cut is the deepest Explore vast, vivid, environmentsand destroy everything in sight. Four customizable, playable characters: Caleb, Ophelia, Gabriella and Ishmael. Flame Throwers, Tesla Cannons, Voodoo Dolls and Humiliation Animations. "


NA


"FASTER THIRTER Balls to the wall, hammer down street racing that'll have you screamin If you like to watch, download the demo at www.accolade.com. For a really good time, order direct 28 real licensed vehicles ultra-fast sports cars and souped up muscle cars 17 real world tracks Killer high resolution graphics mode 2-player split-screen racing Shortcuts and alternative paths Ass kicking soundtrack featuring Fear Factory, Gravity Kills, Junkie XL, KMFDM, and Pitchshifter 2-player drag strip racing Cop chase mode you're the cop. More big crazy jumps, wild cop chases, cross traffic and racing mayhem "


"00:28: 50 03:20:96 01:13920 01:01: 63 00:58:05 00:02:05 fun DON'T STOP! ut in pure racing pleasure. alling 1.800.245.7744 POLICE ACCOUDE TEST DRIVES TEST DRIVES EVERYONE > GRADITY JUNKIE XL JUNKEXL RECORDS Go to #195 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Test Drive is a registered trademark of Accolade, Inc. Test Drive 5 01998 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved, developed by Pitbull Syndicate. All other trademarks are of their respective companies and are used GRADITI S opitcfisffter KEM CONTENT RATED DY ESRB "


"The meek may inherit the earth, but we strongly suggest they stay off our playing field. BLITZ 01998 Midway Games Inc. All rights reserved. BLITZ and MIDWAY are trademarks of Midway Games Inc. 1998 NFLP Team names and logos are trademarks of the teams indicated. The NFL shield, Super Bow and Pro Bowl are trademarks of the National Footban League Officially Licensed Product of the National Football League. Olficially Licensed Product of Players Inc. Distributed by Migway Home Entertainment Inc. Playors Inc Logo is a registered trademark of the NFL Players. PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Nintendo Nintendo 64 and the 3-D \"N\" logo are trademarks of Nintendo of America inc. 1998 Nintendo of America Inc. Licensed by Nintendo. All other Irademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. MIDWAY www.midway.com "


"Power-ups enable true arcade play. Jumbo-size players. In-your-face tackles. Cover-your-eyes-and-don't-look sacks. NFL BLITZ No refs. No rules. No mercy. Deadly long-range passing. Catch-me-if-you-can speed. Based on the #1 Arcade game. EVERYONE NINTENDO 2 m. E .. PlayStation Windows 95 Compatible Go to #169 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PLAYERS "


"Gertense Explosiva HTERS) Intense 3D spokesmodel, Flame\", modeled by the creative guys at Zygote Media Group. papers Other productes dels dretten Schritt dege wakatolica Cech 1913 paph Contoh H , AL30894-5450001779 Integrada phlant and took 33 de 2013, Flene od the Forest "


"Play with the Explosive Power of Intense 3D! This fall's games don't let you just play with 3D graphics accelerators — they demand them! With millions of triangles, hundreds of millions of texels and DirectX and OpenGL code, these games are going to explode across your screen... if you have the right 3D accelerator. Intense 3D is the right graphics accelerator! And with the world's fastest 3D game chipset, 16 MB of RAM, 3 of the year's hottest games, professional APIs, 16 x 9 aspect ratio, 1920 x 1200 resolution and gamma-corrected cinemagraphic images, Intense 3D is the best game accelerator value in the universe.\" Check out our website, www.intense3d.com, and let Flame, our spokesmodel, show you what the 3D experience is all about. INTERGRAPH COMPUTER SYSTEMS Some hitherto unknown alien civilizations may have better value 3D game accelerators, but we seriously doubt it. Go to #072 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"\"...performance was better than any 2D/3D combo card I've seen. Imagine DeathMatch QUAKE Il at 1600x1200 you can see the other guy before he sees you...will likely be the hot ticket in AGP cards in the near future.\" donar coming World Septeink \"The first word that comes to my mind when describing NVIDIAs new TNT 3D graphic accelerator is WOW! The visual quality and frame rates...were astounding.\" ---Manimum maximumpe.com Copyigit 1998 S18 S stems, Inc. All rights reserved. VELOCITY 4400s a traduiro STBStems, Inc. All trade names reference on the trademarks, service merks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. Product may differ from photosragh 130 WinBench 98 1.0 tests.conducted on a Patum 1 ACOMBE ostem. BAMB. 512K cache, 640.480X1GO 75t rern without Gol bypass as required for Microsoft Certification Memory and driver visions: SIB VELOCITY 4400 116 MB) AGP 4.10.01.00106 8/3/08 Diamond Monster 30 (12MB) PCI, 4510.01.07014716798ATI XPERT WORK 8MB) AGP-10.2471 6727,95: Matrox Millennium G200 (8MB) AGP 410.01.4110 7/13/08. Specifications and benchmark porfor ou to change without notice. "


"\"...performance so extraordinary it will change the next generation of games.\" NVIDIA RIVA TNT 128-Bit Twin-Texel Processor IGME VEICITY 441 VELOCITY 4400\" is the ultimate in gaming acceleration with Frame rates so fast and details so fine it will change the future of games for players and developers. VELOCITY 4400's 16MB outpowers VOODOO», G-200 and ATI Xpert. is simply the best gaming accelerator you can buy. Since 127. SE 3D WinBench 98 Performance VELOCITY 4400 1670  RIVA TNT\" 128-bit 3D/2D and video accelerator  16MB of memory for resolutions up to 1920x1200  250MHz RAMDAC for refresh rates up to 160Hz  Output to monitor or TV (s-video & composite)  Windows 95, 98, NT and OpenGL support  Lifetime warranty and unlimited toll-free support  Available for AGP and PCI bus Monster 3D 11 1120 Millennium G-200 1100 Xpert@Work AGP STB products are available at: W COMPUSA Cal True Babbage's 417 boulegur COWNICY 25 slectronica COW NECX \"A true 'supercard ...offers complere 2D and 3D compatibility, as well as the best Direct3D performance available. ...gaming will never be the same at resolutions of 1024x768 and above.\" STB products are available in systems from: GATEWAY2XO COMPAQ DELL IBM. Adrenalins Vault, www.avault.com S7 WWW.stb.com Go to #167 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"COMPUTER October 1998 No. 171 GAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine ne WORLD FEATURES PREVIEWS Age of Empires Expansion Pack: The Rise of Rome New units and features to kill time (and priests) before AOE II. Fantasy Face/Off ....110 ...........................58 .....112 kullsplitters unite! Gather up thy axes, halberds, pikes, and +3 magic underwear. Heed our call and rally 'round the CGW banner as we march in search of the best fantasy games in the realm. MIGHT AND MAGIC VI and FINAL FANTASY VII have already made a strong bid for dominance of the Kingdom. Set to enter the fray are the highly anticipated WIZARDRY 8 and SWORDS AND SORCERY. Join us on the field of honor as we test the mettle of each contender. Careful with that axe, Eugene! Wizardry 8 ... Heroes of Might & Magic III ..120 Swords and Sorcery .........128 Return to Krondor ..........132 Diablo II .. .140 Myth II ... .148 Baldur's Gate ...... Rage of Mages .... ......158 Revenant .160 Lands of Lore ... 160 Hexplore ..................160 Fantasy Games in the Works ..162 Delta Force Will this be the most impressive, realistic simulation of commando warfare?........ 64 ...155 WWII Fighters This could be the first sim to truly take advantage of 3D. 74 Caesar III We come not to bury Caesar, but to build Rome. ...78 West Front TalonSoft's next wargame covers the entire West Front from 1939 to 1945. ............86 Aural Fixation: Speakers & Sound Cards ound quality in today's games is better than ever. If your audio still sounds like AM radio, advance to the \"Sonic Age\" with Loyd Case as he takes a look at the latest crop of PC speakers and PCI sound cards.. Professional Sports Car Racing We test drive Virgin's first real racing simulation.. .....94 101st Airborne at Normandy Lead the Screaming Eagles behind enemy lines on D-Day..... ............. .102 ......... ..................166 "


"READ.ME REVIEWS Action Vangers ........................224 StarCraft: Brood War Civil & Uncivil CIVILIZATION Suits 3Dfx Voodoo Banshee BattleCruiser: 3000AD Gangsters: Organized Crime Rampage World Tour .........230 Terra: Battle for the Outland ............. 230 35 230 233 STARFIGHTER HARDWARE PO 220V and Redneck Rampage Rides Again ........ Jazz Jackrabbit 2 ........ Beast Wars: Transformers ........... Addiction Pinball ... Simulations ....233 Hardware News, Pipeline Intel Unveils Xenon News From 3D Labs and Number Nine Tech Watch ......... 193 Loyd Case The Lowdown on DirectX6 ...195 Killer Gaming Rigs .... ....200 Real3D Starfighter PCI............205 Matrox Mystique G200 ........205 AMD K6-2. ...208 ADS Tech. USB Hub.............212 ADS Tech. USB PCI Card ........212 Microsoft SideWinder FreeStyle Pro ...213 EZ-Link USB. ...................213 GAMER'S EDGE Descent: Freespace............236 X-COM Interceptor ............. 241 Sports StarCraft All You Ever Wanted to Know About the Zerg, but Were Too Dead to Ask ........292 Sanitarium: Part 1 A Road Map to Keep Your Sanity .......... Castrol Honda Superbike World Champions .............250 Microsoft Baseball 3D ........252 Microsoft Golf 98 .............260 Fox Sports Soccer '99 ........264 Strategy/Wargames MechCommander ............. 267 Cyberstorm 2 ................ 270 Unreal Essential Cheats and Map Shortcuts ...... 302 Gamer's Edge Tips DESCENT FREESPACE, TEAM APACHE, OUTWARS, X-FILES, EXTREME TACTICS, and More ........306 Sanitarium 298 MAX 2.. DEPARTMENTS Johnny Wilson Remembering Visionary Designer Dani Bunten Berry ........ Denny Atkin The Perils of Patches ..... irri Terry Coleman MicroProse Closes SimTex ... Letters Our Readers Speak Out.. Reviews Introduction .... Reviews Index: Three Months of Ratings Top 100 Readers Rate the Top Games ..... Hall of Fame The Greatest Games of All Time ......... CGW Online/GameSpot The Best Game Coverage on the Web On the CG-ROM Use Your Demo for Good, Not Evil ..... Greenspeak Another Page of Filler... Dominion ........ Medieval ........... Insurrection: Campaigns for StarCraft......284 Tribal Rage...................... 284 Incubation: The Wilderness Missions .......... 284 Puzzles/Classics Leisure Suit Larry's Casino .. ............287 Mega Solitaire ..............290 316 318 319 321 322 "


"WELCOME TO TSAT YOUR NEW RELIGION You're about to experience a Heretic revelation like no other. Powerfully intense action. Divine 3-D worlds. Almighty weapons and spells. And awe-inspiring third-person gameplay: a true out-of-body experience. I Corpus Revolutionary Quake Powered Action Seeing is believing. The cnhanced Quake ]]\" engine delivers fluid 3-D animation and fast-moving action, plus stunning special effects, and a smart camera that stays with the action. (COM. Heretic Meets Third Person You never knew it could be like this. Surrender to insancly fast-paced action from a frighteningly immersive third-person perspective. Cooperative/dcathmatch multiplayer has never seemed so real. PREPARE FOR THE SECOND COMING www.uctivision.com Heretic \" O 1998 Raven Soltware Corporation. Heretic is a registered trademark and Heretic \" is a trademark of Raven Software Corporation Developed by Raven Saltware Corporation. distributed by Activision, Inc. Aclivision is a registered trademark ol Aclivision, Inc. This product contains software technology licensed From Id Software, Inc. (\"ld Technology 1. Id Technology 1997 Id Softwarc, Inc. Quake\" is a registered trademark and Quake II\" is a tradeinurk of id Software, Inc. All Rights Reserved. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. "


"ACTIVISION Go to #236 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Published by Developed by Samsung www.godgames.com PopTop Software www.poptop.com "


"salated a wh Company Time Table Amor New Tetra Class Ral Berth not guaranteed IRAILROAD TYCOON Revised Fare 40A.I. & S. 3. D. CHICAGO ARRIVES TO NOV. 1998 CAPE TOWN OR JSEY He via 1024x768 graphics LA strategy game that runs on a i totally different kind of engine. Railroad Tycoon IIthe Railroad Tycoon Il logo and the PopTop logo are trademarks of Poptop Software, Inc. Gathering of Developers and godgames are trademarks of Gathering of Developers, Inc.  1998 Gathering of Developers, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Go to #124 @ www.computergaming.com/Infolink "


"PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING BMW M3 SALEEN MUSTANG "


"THE REAL CARS BMW M3. Panoz Esperante GTR-1. Callaway Corvette Saleen Mustang. And more. THE REAL TRACKS Laguna Seca Raceway. Sebring International Raceway. Sear's Point Raceway. Las Vegas Motor Speedway. Road Atlanta. And more of the best all-American tracks competed on for over 45 years. INTER active THE REAL FEEL Maximize your racing experience with performance upgrades and authentic modifications. Throw a turbo in your stock car and leave the competition in the dust. Ultra-fine physics and handling intensifies the action. THE REAL CHALLENGE 8-player simultaneous multiplay and superior A.I, based on world-class racers. THE REAL EXCITEMENT Dangerous sprints and treacherous endurance events with extreme weather and track conditions. DANOZ CALLAWAY CORVETTE RATING PENCING PC CD ROM www.vie.com IMAGE SPACE INCORPORATIO 0 1998 VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. VIRGIN IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF VIRGIN ENTERPRISES. ID.\" ESRB Go to #160 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"GREAT GAMES DEMAND RESPECT. "


"HERE'S WHY. \"Fun, hypnotic, immersive; three words that describe l-Magic's latest release Industry Giant in a nutshell.\" The Wargamer \"WarBirds continues to be the model for what an online game should be.\" Online Game of the Year '977'98 PC Games Magazine \"Seven Kingdoms stands tall as an inventive, enjoyable product destined to be remembered.\" GameSpot iF/A-18E CARRIER STRIKE FIGHTER INDUSTRY KINGDOMS ALLSTARSAS WarBirds MALHARI \"Vangers is one of the most unique titles seen in a long time.\" Games Domain \"For real-time strategy aficionados, this one's a keeper.\" Computer Life \"Outstanding depth of play\" PC Games \"Cin iF/A-18E CSF) ... you'll never have to fly the same mission twice, and you'll experience an unprecedented degree of interaction between allied and opposing forces on the land, in the air, and on the seas.\" All About Games INTERACTIVE MAGIC Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-789-1534 www.imagicgames.com Go to #168 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink WarBirds. Vanpers, Industry Guant, IF/A-18 Carrier Strike Fighter. Seven Kingdoms Ancient Adversaries, and, Malkari are trademarks and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc Copyright 1998. All rights reserved. Al other trademarks are property of their respective owners. "


"TALONSOFI'S WEST PRONT Jim Dunnigan Panzerblitz France 40 Jutland Founder of SPI * Enhanced Campaign Mode *NEW Improved Al NEW Command & Control * 16 Player Multi-Mode 500 NEW Equipment & Unit Types * NEW Linked Historical Campaigns * 8 NEW Campaigns covering North Africa, Italy & NW Europe 50 NEW Scenarios including Para-drops, Glider & Amphibious landings, Commando raids & Deep Desert Patrols! * NEW Macro & Accelerated Moving Charlie Kibler ASL-Red Barricades Solo ASL Battleground TS East Front Mark Herman We the People Pacific Ware Gulf Strike Richard Berg Campaign for North Africa Terrible Swift Sword Joseph Miranda Editor-Strategy & Tactics Mag. VP DesignHexagon Interactive John Tiller Battleground Age of Sail TS East Front Bob McNamara ASL-Advanced Squad Leader Battleground TS East Front GUIST DESIGNERS COMING FALL '98! American Gls assault Omaha Beach on D-Day! WWII PANZER ACTION! \"Never Before Have I Seen Such A Realistic And Thrilling Interpretation.\" PC Player ***** TALONSOFT. Call (410) 933-9191 or visit our web site at... www.talonsoft.com Copyright 1998 TalonSoft Inc., P.O. Box 43730, White Marsh, MD 21236 TalonSoft's West Front and Battleground Series are registered trademarks of TalonSoft Inc. All other trademarks are property of their respective holders Go to #242 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"She Saw Farther! Dani Bunten Berry's Legacy Brings People Together EDITO involved more than one player. Her first published game, WHEELER DEALERS, offered something different, an auction motif which was to surface in one of her masterpiece games, M.U.L.E. In her game of business management, CARTELS & CUTTHROATS, several gamers could around the computer. We're going to have to connect them out of the back by connecting their computers to each other.\" At this point, her vision of point-to-point gaming and the technology she and Dave Maynard were building to allow all of EA's games to be played n the 1960s, all of the would-be revolutionaries heard The Youngbloods sing, \"Come on people now/Smile on your brother/Everybody get together/Try to love one another/Right now.\" In the '80s, a software artist named Dan Bunten designed games specifically to do just that: Get people together. The games were designed to bridge the gap between humankind and the machine, to create social interaction. What was truly amazing was that the young artist was designing these games for the personal computer. Given today's multiplayer environment, it might seem strange to recall that the personal computer was believed by many to be an antisocial gaming platform. In the '90s, that same artist bridged the gender gap by becoming Dani Bunten Berry. As Dani, this pioneer in multiplayer gaming continued to espouse the idea that playing together brings us together. As I write this, Dani Berry has just passed away after a protracted bout with cancer, but the idea of bringing people together will always be part of her well-earned legacy. At a time when most computer games were designed for solitaire play, her games almost always during those phases and everyone was involved. Alas, M.U.L.E. was probably more pirated than purchased, and Dani never really saw the fruits of her labor. Ironically, her next two games were solitaire games. SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD was a major commercial success, and HEART OF AFRICA sold moderately well as a semisequel. Of course, her heart wasn't really in HEART OF AFRICA, and her next game was a turning point. ROBOT RASCALS was a scavenger hunt for the whole family in which each member takes turns looking for items on a distant planet. The catch was that the game used a deck of playing cards, as well as MODEM WARS was the product which she created-CYTRON MASTERS meets the modem. 688 ATTACK SUB (not by Dani) was the only other EA game to use the code developed for this point-topoint gaming. By this time, Dani had been wooed by MicroProse and had had two other important multiplayer Long before Kali was available for Internet play, Dani was bringing gamers together online. compete at the same computer by using its hard-copy planning sheets and utility to print game reports for off-line perusal and decision making. In her game of futuristic combat, CYTRON MASTERS, and in her game of gridiron strategy, COMPUTER QUARTERBACK, paddle controllers and joysticks were used to enable simultaneous play by two gamers on the same computer. By the time Electronic Arts was formed, the then Dan Bunten was tapped as one of the initial cadre of electronic artists who could \"see farther.\" She definitely did see farther. She saw the potential for socialization as she created her masterpiece and CGW Hall of Fame game, M.U.L.E., named for the futuristic pack animal/gadget that was used on a planet for mining and drayage M.U.L.E. allowed up to four gamers to play on the same computer. On each player's turn, the other gamers would be allowed to make simultaneous input during the auction phase. Things got pretty exciting GAME GURU At more recent conferences for developers, Dani continued to share her design insights with a new generation. titles published. In COMMAND HQ. which won CGW's 1991 Wargame of the Year award, she created a successful title that moved beyond the MODEM WARS formula. Then, in GLOBAL CONQUEST, she showed how four players could connect at once. Long before Kali was available for Internet play, Dani was bringing gamers together online. In addition to the important products that Dani created over her career, she spent her a good deal of time in recent years consulting with other designers and continuing the job of teacher and design guru that she began, almost by default, in the early years of the EA artist symposiums and the Computer Game Developers Conference Dani did not go gentle into that good night, but designed and tutored against the dying of the light. It still shines, Dani. For more information on the life of Dani Bunten Berry, visit her memorial Web site at www. mpath.com/danil. the computer, and the gamers interacted by stealing cards, swapping cards, or passing discards left or right according to the computer moderator's instructions. Its disappointing reception became an epiphany for Dani. She spoke at an Electronic Arts artist symposium shortly after ROBOT RASCALS made its disappointing debut and explained, \"We've failed at gathering people M.U.L.E. SPINNER At the first public CGDC, Dan Bunten (soon to be Dani Berry) retold the fascinating history of the development of M.U.L.E. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 21 "


"25 Years Old. Drives a Red \"This could be the last word in WWI gaming.\" RED BARON 3-D returns you to the era when man and machine first took to the skies in up-close and personal battles of skill and tactics. From raging dogfights high above the clouds to deadly straling runs along the war-torn countryside, you'll take to the cock of an aircraft made of wood, canvas, and wire. There are no parachute guided missiles, or radar. This is close range dogfighting at its best. GamePen.com 80 Kills. 3D Graphic Acceleration creates a world so real, it requires true courage to step into the cockpit. Clouds and sun glare for strategic aerial combat tactics. Visible trees appear at low altitude flying New cockpit, explosions, smoke, gun fire, hazing and fog effects. Dynamix A SIERRA COMPANY 1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On Line, Inc., dievue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. "


"User definable difficulty levels for players of all skill levels. Over 40 unique aircraft with 22 flyable planes. New and improved flight models with torque and gyroscopic effects. Incredible audio realism with wing stress, gun fire. bomb explosions. sirens, church bells, pilot stress, und ejected pilots. Convertible. , , nd brvr  ouired. Bullets riddle your plane shattering wood and canvas. Deafening anti-aircraft gunfire thunders in your ears and fills the skies with smoke and destruction. Distant sirens and church bells ring out through the air. warning of your approach above enemy townships. Enemy aircraft search the sky for any hint of your existence. But, this is your time and place to become a hero. You cannot deny your chivalrous nature. You are the Ace that your country pins its hopes upon to defeat the darkest of all enemies, the deadly Red Baron, Manfred Von Richtofen Go to #237 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink WON   Red Baron (3-D EVERYONE The best selling WWI aerial combat sim of all time is now 3D accelerated and massive multiplayer. CONTEXT RATED BY ESRB "


"The Perils of Patches Why Can't Companies Get Simulations Right the First Time? SIMULATION SPACE y need before then? Compare that to Looking Glass's FLIGHT UNLIMITED II. Here, patches did fix some problems with air-traffic control and plane Al, but they also added major features. Higher-resolution graphics, force feedback, an adventure creator, and even a new plane were added in various patchesall wonderful bonus features, but not features necessary to enjoy the sim out of the box. Why do companies ship games that need bug-fix patches? Sometimes, a product incorporates such Still, there's little excuse for programs to ship when they need patches for general playability. Consider that Novalogic and Jane's Combat Simulations have released numerous products that were quite playable out of the box, but used patches to fix only minor glitches and to add user-requested features. compare that to last year's release of RED BARON II by Sierra—it needed patches just to make the game work as advertised. Sierra seems to have seen the light with regard to releasing programs too early. As part of the company's reorganization earlier this year, it has made vocal commitments to releasing no more products before their time. As evidence of its renewed commitment to quality, Sierra's Dynamix division has kept the RED BARON Il team working on the product for nearly a year since the game's release. Recent patches have dramatically very impressive, with dramatic spe. cial effects, trees at low altitudes, faster frame-rates, and betterlooking cockpits. Despite the cost of keeping the development team on this project instead of moving them to the next game, the RED BARON II \"SuperPatch\" will be a free download, and Sierra also plans to offer it on CD at no cost (other than shipping and handling). Sierra does plan to release a new retail \"RED BARON 3D\" package as well, which will add support for 100-plus players in multiplayer games. Sierra has stated that owners of the original RED BARON who purchase the 3D version will receive a substantial (if not entire) refund on the purchase price of the new retail package.\" Sierra has promised that the upcoming ACES OF THE PACIFIC II and ACES: X-FIGHTERS will be of the quality gamers used to expect from the company's products. The t's an unfortunate reality that most sims aren't all they can be out of the box. Patches add features and/or fix bugs in programs. That's a good thing. The bad thing is that they're necessary in the first place. You can't fault a company for sticking with customers and fixing its product. You can fault it for shipping a product with known flaws and figuring it can fix them later with a patch. Consider your less hard-core gaming friends, and how few of them know what a patch is, much less where to find one and how to install it. When these folks get a new sim home and have problems with it, their solution isn't to go up to the company's Web site and search for a patch, it's to return the sim to the store. Another potential sim fan goes running back to the \"safe\" world of QUAKE and STARCRAFTor even worse, back to the Plugand-Play safety of a PlayStation. There are a number of reasons patches come to be. Not all of these are bad: Sometimes patches are written to add support for new hardware that didn't exist when the programs were under development. Witness the addition of support for 3Dfx accelerators in JETFIGHTER III, for instance, or patches for JSF and F-22 ADF that add support for Voodoo boards. Sometimes patches simply enhance already-working gameplay, such as the improved Internet play in recent versions of F-22 RAPTOR. But all too often, patches are necessary to make basic features of a game work at all. Witness Sierra's PRO PILOT, which shipped with terrible flight models, stuttering graphics on Pentium Ils, and numerous other problems. By the time the second patch was released, the program was a decent instrument-flying sim, but how many people gave up long Shipping a buggy product is likely to hasten the rush toward bankruptcy. improved the flight modeling in the game. By the time you read this, another patch will be available that will add 3Dfx (and possibly Direct3D or OpenGL) support to the game. I tried the preliminary version of this patch, and it was commitment Sierra has made to ensuring that RED BARON II purchasers get their money's worth is a good sign. Let's hope the \"new\" Sierra/Dynamix sets a good example that the rest of the industry can follow. CGW a wealth of features that problems just slip through despite heavy testing. This happened with JANE'S F-15, which has been patched to fix a crash bug in the Iran campaign, and to fix some avionics systems that didn't work properly. Sometimes a company in financial trouble has to ship products in order to survive-although shipping a buggy product is likely to hasten the rush toward bankruptcy, despite whatever cash it may raise in the short term. Sometimes comarketing deals are struck with retail chains that require products to ship by a certain date. Sometimes the marketroids and bean counters get fed up with a program's protracted development and insist that it ship right now, 50 as not to miss the holiday season. BETTER BARON The RED BARON II patch features dramatically improved flight models, 3Dfx support, and trees to make lowlevel flight easier. 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"as Star Wars ignited your imagination? Want to know all there is to know about the films, their creation, and the surrounding cultural phenomenon? The Behind the Magic CD-ROM set for your PC provides an extensive and entertaining exploration of Star Wars filled with interactive links, 40 minutes of digitized video, over 2,000 breathtaking images, a Star Wars trivia game and much more. Enjoy exciting new features, such as a Star Wars: Episode I section which provides a sneak peek at the upcoming motion picture. Discover never before seen materials (a 3D walking tour of the Millennium Falcon, Deriders GET INSIDE THE MYTH. GET INSIDE THE MAGIC. GET INSIDE STARWARS. an interactive Weapons Test) plus rare footage of the \"lost scenes\" not included in the original Star Wars films and previously unavailable to the general public. All told, it's a galaxy of Star Wars facts and fun at a price that's quite down to earth. Look for Behind the Magic wherever PC software is sold. STARWARS   TAGIC THE INSIDER'S GUIDE TO STAR WARS SV 311 FOR WINDOWS 95/98 drlj Lucasfilm Ltd & TM All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization * Offer valid through December 31, 1998 in U.S. and Canada caly and while supplies last Call 1-800-468-0100 for your free Star Wars poster while supplies last.* www.lucasarts.com Go to #182 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"TROUBLE AHEAD! 461 a Ana Taiwan's bold political activities challenge the power of Mainland China. With the fury of an angry dragon, China reacts crushing the upstart and expanding its empire. Soon 19 nations are drawn into conflict. World-wide war begins... Destroyed=0, Suppressed=0 Destroyed=2, Suppresed=0 PEOPLE'S GENERAL, the second generation of the critically-acclaimed Panzer General II, features: New ultra-modern and prototype weapons. New \"hide and seek\" capabilities. New unit design flexibility New Air Mission System. ASCO HATU DIOBOOM 00701 CHOOSE from over 200 task forces and fight as either Chinese or Western Alliance forces. Deploy weapons systems such as M1A3 and T-99 Main Battle Tanks, Werewolf Attack Helicopters, Starstreak Surface-to-Air Missiles and more. New 16-bit color and random events add realism to this strategy epic of global meltdown! BEEB2 PEOPLES GENERALE PEOPLE'S GENERAL. Strategy Gaming Looks to the Future. GENERAL PEOPLES SPEL To order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-716-8503 with Visa/MC (North America only). www.peoplesgeneral.com < GAME TERNET UNI 2202 UP TO 4 PLAYERS WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM C PLA SRL EVERYONE MPLAYER.COM MM WO) amplaye v LISTAD 1998 Strategic Simulations, loc. Mindscape Company. All rights reserved. Mindscape is a registered trademark and its logo is a trademark of Mindscape, Inc., a division of The Learning Company. People's General is a trademark and the SSI logo and Panzer Gerteral are registered trademarks of Strategic Simulations, Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Go to #112 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Agents of OLEMAN TCPDV CO Agents of Injustice After Milking Moo and MOM, MicroProse Shuts Down SimTex STRATEGYZWA espite the creative spin doctoring you'll hear from MicroProse, GUARDIANS: AGENTS OF JUSTICE is deadas dead as CHAMPIONS, that poster child for much-anticipated games that will never ship (at least AGENTS never graced a CGW cover). It would be easy to dismiss the demise of AGENTS as just another casualty of the dreaded Comics Curse that has afflicted virtually every superhero game for the past decade. But it would be wrong to do so, because the problem goes much deeper than that. to provide either of those essential gaming qualities—which must have been the reason that they were showcasing the game at E3 mere weeks before killing the product. Supposedly, the X-COM style combat system was \"slow as a pig,\" the code was ratty \"even for turn-based,\" and the strategic component was supposedly \"nonexistent,\" at least according to the online comments posted by the head of the MicroProse Hunt Valley liance in game design, the SimTex and everyone knows how well folks did have a \"patchy\" reputathat worked out. tion. I never could play MOM I could go on about the canceluntil version 1.3, and it's a lation of the Borg action title, or tribute to the quality of the comment on the rumor that design that I (and other spell MicroProse might lose its Star heads) kept at it despite the Trek contract entirely. But I'm not avalanche of crashes. Even the trying to be mean-spirited just for best-selling MOO Il required a the sake of it. It's just frustrating patch for multiplayer. to see a group of talented people Maybe the world is better off get shut down by some suits without AGENTS, once described who really don't understand their by a rival designer as \"X-COM in audience. Don't forget: These tights,\" which, at the time, was a are the same people who surpretty accurate assessment of themised that SID MEIER'S CIVILIZAgameplay. If the game had TION II would only sell 38,000 shipped, but required a patch copies, and, over one million after three and a half years of units and two years later, they development, it could have been can't figure out how to follow up the final blow to MicroProse's on CIV II's success. reputation and its pocketbook. And call me a brand loyalist if Ironically, it's by shutting down you must, but I can't get too excitsuch perceived marginal projects ed about the direction the X-COM (and evidently studios) that line is going these days. Space It's frustrating to see talented people shut down by suits who don't understand their audience. studio (who couldn't possibly have had an agenda). The End of an Era The official shelving of AGENTS—MicroProse, you see, still retains the rights to the game, so that it can be published at some later date (maybe February 31 of the year 2001)coincides with the shutdown of SimTex. Oh, excuse me: Technically speaking, that studio was known as MicroProse Austin, and you know how important a name is when you are striving for stability-just ask the Candlestick folks about how much their lives have changed now that they work at 3Com Park. If you've been following this industry for a while, you know that shutting down a studio is hardly anything out of the ordinary. Even so, these folks were the geniuses behind MASTER OF ORION (MOO) and MASTER OF MAGIC (MOM), both justly enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame. In an era of clones, studios such as SimTex are badly needed to provide variety and depth of gameplay. Of course, if you listen to MicroProse, AGENTS wasn't going Dark Side of the MOO Now, it's possible that all of these negative things may have been true, because we at CGW haven't had a beta of AGENTS TO test-drive for more than 18 months (which is why we never ran a sneak preview). Even before its untimely passage to gaming purgatory, AGENTS suffered from an identity crisis—and several redesigns as a result. So troubled was its development that the game holds the dubious record of having been shown at the past four E3 trade shows—which just happen to be the only four E3 shows ever. And to be fair, for all their brilMicroProse plans to stay alive, praying that the imminent release of FALCON 4.0 (really, any day now!) will deliver them from impending financial ruin. Don't kid yourself: If EUROPEAN AIR WAR isn't ready for prime-time soon, the Hunt Valley studio risks following the SimTex folks into the dustbin of gaming history. And what of Steve Barcia, the MOO Man himself? To his credit, Barcia remains a loyal company man despite the shutdown of the studio he created (and sold to MicroProse in 1994). His role, as it has been for the past year, is to continue as Creative Director of all MicroProse products: It's similar to the position Sid Meier held his last few years at MicroProse, sims and 3D shooters? Yeah, that's really serving your fans. If Westwood can finally get around to doing DUNE 2000, we deserve an SVGA version of classic X-COM strategy, complete with multiplay. Then again, role-playing is hot right now, so we have a better chance of seeing a DIABLO-style RPG with little green men.... Let's hope that the shutdown of SimTex isn't the beginning of the end for MicroProse. It would be a shame if the company that once set the standard for strategy games couldn't stick around long enough to publish BIRTH OF THE FEDERATION, much less a potential MOM II or CIV III. CGW You can reach Terry at terry_coleman@zd.com. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 27 "


"D-DAY 54 YEARS LATER YOU THINK IT WAS HARD THEN? TRY IT NOW. BORNE During the early morning hours of June 6, 1944, the troops of the 101st Airborne were handed one of the toughest missions of WWII to secure the beaches of Normandy before the early morning infantry invasion known as D-Day.. Go back in time to that fateful eve in 101: The 101st Airborne in Normand to lead a stick of 18 paratroopers through multiple campaigns and combat engagements in this realistic turn-based strategy simulation. From the barracks to the battlefield, you will command every aspect of the legendary landings: 80% casualties were expected. RATING PENDING 30% were actually lost. Can you do better? PC CD-ROM Windows 95 Or 198 GERI Exclusive Distributed by GT Interactive Software www.empire-us.com toll free 1800 216 9706 Go to #083 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink empire CONTENT RATEO BY ESRB    "


"Dueling Dads Boy, someone woke up in grumpy town today. Fine, but don't come crying to us when they hack off your limbs and leave you rotting in the hot African sun. We'll be busy playing AOE II. just read your article on turning your kid into an antisocial zombie gamer. As much as Parenting and Sesame Street editors may cringe to I hear this, my four-year-old learned his letters playing X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER. And learned them enthusiastically, because that meant he could play anytime, without dad's help. Now, he's moved on, using his new skills on OUTWARS. And to think, all this time I've been designing \"kids\" software. By the way, my preschooler can whup your preschooler at X-WING any day. :) -Andy Purviance Broderbund's Kid Studio Via the Internet Jeff Green responds: Yeah, sure your kid could beat my kid at XvT. That's because my kid moved on from that game six months ago, after beating every kid in California. Now, if you want to talk about UNREAL or STARCRAFT—you're on!!! Playing Havoc M1 TANK PLATOON 2 is a five-star game. No, it's not a three-star game or a two and one-half-star game (CGW#169, August '98). Anyone that has been playing the patched version of the game for the past six weeks knows that it is a five-star game. Also, on page 185 you identify the copter as a Mi-28 Havoc when, in reality, it is an Apache. -Steve Calovich Via the Internet Jeff Green's 4-year-old still refuses to go anywhere without her Terran marine uniform. Rotten Rabbit Redux In the August issue of CGW your writers mention, twice, how they received actual rabbit's feet (aka, \"mutilated rabbit remains\") as a promo from a software company, and how \"tasteless\" they found such a gift. I found this laughable. Poor Mr. Wilson, one of the recipients of such a horrifying present. Somehow, though, imagine his reaction would have been different had the promo been a pair of leather Air Jordans. And I have no doubt that there were a large number of formerly living critters consumed by hungry reviewers at E3, in the form of chicken wings and pork dimsum provided gratis at the parties thrown by software companies eager to curry (had to do it) favor with the writers. Grow up! And give us a break from your political correctness and sanctimonious attitudes. If I really wanted to read that sort of thing I'd pick up a copy of Time. By the way, I'm pretty sure the poor widdle bunny-wunnies weren't simply slaughtered by poachers who only took their feet, leaving the rest of the carcass to rot in the hot African sun, merely for the profits gained in the lucrative international rabbit foot black market; no, my money's on rabbit's feet coming from farm rabbits raised for meat and leather, a lot like cattle. The use of the feet is simply a way for the slaughterhouse to use the entire animal, as well as make a few more bucks. Let's look at a few facts: 1) Your magazine is printed on paper, which, of course, comes from trees. 2) Trees and forests are habitat for many types of wildlife, including rabbits. 3) If you were really all that worried about the welfare of rabbits you'd be trying to protect habitat instead of writing about how cool the castles look in AGE OF EMPIRES II. in the future I think I'll stick with magazines that don't spend quite as much time shilling Microsoft products. -Brian Whitehurst Via the Internet While the patched version of M1 TANK PLATOON significantly improved the game-as noted in the review—We review based on the final shipping version you buy. We believe that readers are better served by reviews that cover what they're getting in the box. We can't wait for multiple rounds of patches, and gamers have expressed mounting frustration with buggy games, so we rate final code. As for the helicopter, it was correctly identified as an Mi-28 Havoc. The Apache is very similar, but the staggered cockpit canopy, X-style tail rotor and five-bladed main rotor clearly identify this copter as a Havoc Let's Go Retro I don't want to sound ungrateful for the advancement in graphics and gaming-related technology these days, but I am calling for a retro movement in gaming. I don't believe that better graphics and taking up more space on my hard disk means a better game. Some of my favorite games of all time have pathetic graphics by comparison to today's upcoming games—but so what? I play games to have fun, not for awesome animation sequences. I walk into my favorite computer store and look at the selection of games with hesitation and contempt. The games have pretty boxes and an appeal based on what they promise, but if I don't wait for the review in CGWI'm afraid I'm going to buy a lemon. I remember when games like ZORK had to have awesome game. play because they had lame, or no, graphics. Back then there was more pressure to make a good quality game because graphics and glitz couldn't sell the game by itself. Looking at CGW's Reviews Index for the last three months, I see that only 28 of 72 games received better than a three-star rating. Hello? Is there so much pressure to get the games on the shelves that beta testing and such is being totally abandoned? I would rather wait an eternity for companies to make a game right (i.e. MECHWARRIOR 2) than to rush it to the shelves without thorough testing. Why bother to send products out prematurely? Some people may not consider CGW's review of games to be law, but I do. Rarely have ! disagreed with a review or bought a game before a review and not gotten burned. Until every game released can be of four-star quality or higher, CGW will remain my guide to computer game quality control and purchasing habits. -Bryan Lucke Via the Internet www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 29 "


"Mar '98 & 92 Mar '98 Even MYTHS BECOME REAL ON A FALCON OF FAME CHOICE Feb '98 1102 GAMES 19.9-8 Jan '98 RATED Family July '97  July '97 PLAYER June '97 SER QOAKIL | LEDGE PC GAMER EDITORS June '97 il K Feb '97 Jan '97 A List CHOICEN FALCON NOKTIIWEST Jan '97 C9078 SARE Jan '97 OF FAME Dec '97 CHOICE Dec '97 FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS \"My Soublighieris a trademark of Bangla Software Product Corp \"MACHV and Framerste is Lite are trademarks of Falcon Northwest Computer Systems, Inc, All nghts reserved. "


"rastotal WS MUCHT SOUL BLIGHIER CALL: 1-888-FALCON-1 WWW.FALCON-NW.COM FRAM FRAMACH VIFE IEE CUSTOM BUILT PCS STARTING AT $2,425 FOR GAME PLAYINC, GAME DESIGN, GRAPHICS, OR EVEN GETTING SOME WORK DONE. . Go to #257 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"COMPUTER GAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine W ORLD Don't worry-you won't see this kind of crap in our magazine. LETTERS The New Look CGW's new look is very interesting, but I still prefer the old look over the new. Sure, it's not hard on the eyes and it is a \"breath of fresh air\" (in regard to Jeanne Conrad's letter in the August issue), but the new look isn't as colorful and fun to look at as the old look was. It's very plain and the font on the cover looks like something from the '80s. Another thing: Please don't start showing Lara Croft in a bikini blowing kisses at her readers. The last thing we need is to look at gigantic polygons for breasts filling up the page, turning on the desperate, lonely male readers without girlfriends. Don't be like PC Gamer! -Kent Anjo Via the Internet P.S. You should be given an award for blowing up Coconut Monkey on the CD. Nice one! Johnny Wilson. Or have you pulled a Jimmy Hoffa on Mr. Wilson? Somebody call agents Mulder and Scully ASAP! Trefuse to buy another issue of the magazine until you remedy this injustice. And I will actively seek out the boycott support of my fellow Graybeard Gamers to join with me in pushing for the non-support of CGW. -Mark Mitchell A Highly Enraged (Now) Former Reader Via the Internet PUBLISHER Lee Uniacke EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Executive Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Atkin (Simulations) Reviews Editor Terry Coleman (Wargames) Technical Editor Dave Salvator (Hardware) Associate Editor Jeff Green (Adventure, Sports), Associate Editor Robert Machine Gun Coffey (Action, Strategy Copy Chief Joe Vallina Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Editorial Assistant Matthew Schaefer CG-ROM Editor Jack Rodrigues CG-ROM Assistant Thierry \"Scooter\" Nguyen Editorial Intern Kenneth Johnson Gossip Editor Linda Y. Fan Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games), Charles Ardal (Interactive Fiction), Loyd Case (Hardware) Founder Russell Sipe DESIGN Art Director Dan Fitzpatrick Associate Art Director Steven Wanczyk PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Production Manager Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Group Manager Michele Kellogg Assistant Manager Tamara Gargus Senior Prepress Technician Jackie Cuneo Technician Roger Drake HOW TO CONTACT YHE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to: CGW Editorial, 135 Main St, 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 CGWletters@zd.com Web site: www.computergaming.com ADVERTISING SALES Associate Publisher Suzanne Reider (415) 357-4915 East Coast Sales Manager Laura Pitaniello (212) 503-4851 East Coast Sales Assistant Megan Moran (212) 503-3926 Southwest Sales Manager Pat Walsh (949) 851-2556 Southwest Sales Assistant Sandy Marciniak (949) 852-5914 Midwest Sales Manager Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4944 Silicon Valley/Northwest Sales Manager Dru Montgomery (415) 357-4925 Marketing Manager Sat Sharma (415) 357-4935 National Account Rep Joann Casey (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Leslie Ventimiglia (415) 357-4930 Assistant to the Publisher Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 Sales Assistant Tallie Conner (415) 357-5398 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address inquiries to CGWAdvertising, 135 Main St, 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105, or call (415) 357-5398, fax (415) 357-4999. CONSUMER MEDIA GROUP Vice President Jon Lane Business Manager Cynthia Mason Executive Director, Marketing and Research Randy Cohen SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call (303) 665 8930 within the US and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604 7445 or write to Computer Gaming World, P.O.Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. The one year (12 issue) subscription rate is $27.94 in the U.S., and S43.94 outside the US; the fate for one year (12 issue) subscriptions with the monthly CD ROM IS $42.94 in the U.S., and 558.94 outside the U.S. Checks must be made payable in U.S. Currency only to Computer Gaming World EBACK ISSUES (SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY) Back issues can be purchased for $8 in the US and $10 outside the US (CD-ROM version not available). Prepayment is necessary. Checks must be made payable in U.S. currency only to Computer Gaming World Mail your request to Back Issuers, 2D, Inc, P.O.Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131. DE MAILING LISTS We periodically make lists of our customers available to mailers of goods and services that may interest you. If you do not wish to receive sudu mailing, please write to us and include a copy of your mailing label Sorry you don't like the new site, but ZiffDavis assigned CGW's Web administration to GameSpot, so we can't do anything about it. We will work with GameSpot to try to improve the site and add new features. As for the print redesign, that's what magazines do to stay current in the market. Our editorial staff wanted to refine the design, preserving the aspects that worked while enabling us to include more text and screenshots. Most of the feedback has been positive, although some disagree. If you look at the issues from a few years ago you'll see why we've made changes. Put another way, lots of people love automotive styling from the '60s, but the manufacturers no longer make those cars. CGW Thanks! PC who? <g> Department of Corrections nour August review of EA's TRIPLE PLAY 99 we inadvertantly showed screenshots of TRIPLE PLAY 98. DOH! Here's a correct screenshot of this game, which we rated 2.5 stars. If you want to see more screens, go to www.easports.com/99/ tp99/index.html. Last month in our 100+ Hot New Games feature we printed the wrong release dates for two games. We don't want to say whose fault it was (way to go, Gone to Hell in an HTML Basket What has happened to the only decent computer gaming magazine and Web site? The Web site now looks like GameSpot and acts like GameSpot-put it back the way it was! I say separate CGW from GameSpot. You guys have let Ziff-Davis screw up Computer Gaming World ever since they took control of the magazine and now, the final nail in the coffin, the Web site: ARRRGGGGHH! If you don't revert back to the old format of the Web site I will never visit it, it's useless now!!! And please bring back the CGW of old, this new format is horrible, I feel like I'm reading a magazine for teeny boppers. I have been an avid reader of CGW since 1987. It's bad enough that I have to be looked upon as a 39-year-old kid for playing computer games, but now you add insult to injury by turning the only magazine about gaming worth reading (and the only gaming magazine that respected adult gamers) into some worthless pile of hormone-induced dribble. And where the hell are the email addresses for the staff at CGW, I want to personally explain why I feel this is a bad move to Johnny), but Bethesda's REDGUARD and Dreamworks TRESPASSER are both scheduled to ship during the fourth quarter of this year. Also, the correct phone number for Dreamworks is (310) 234-7000. 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"The Rise of Rome took 520 years. * Your results may vary. Presenting the Age of Empires Expansion: The Rise of Rome. Age of Empires is now going where you always wanted it to go: Rome. In addition to the Roman Empire, this official Expansion Pack also includes the legendary civilizations of Palmyra, Hellenes, and Carthage, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. Test your mettle with new units like the crafty Camel Rider, powerful Scythe Chariot, fearless Slinger, and punishing Fire Galley-all on new and challenging maps. Plus, this highly anticipated Expansion Pack features four new campaigns and production queues to carefully plan your historic civilization's growth. So visit www.microsoft.com/games/aocexpansion and start extending Age of Empires into a new cra of world domination. AGE EMPIRES C RISE DE ROMES '   THE RISE OF ROME    S    ENSEMBLE TEEN to INTERNET GAMINO ZONE AQESINE ISRO Microsoft PLAY IT ON ZONE.COM You need the full version of Age of Empires tous Rise of Rome Expuasion Pack. Cins Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Age of Empires are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other covers "


"Where Technology Meets Technique THE FUTURE OF DOGFIGHTING ULIHA EIGHTERS INTERACTIVE OPTIMIZED FOR 30 ACCELERATOR CAROS MAGICO Interactive Magic P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 www.imagicgames.com Ultrations is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. Copyahit 1998 Eagle Interactive. All Rights Reserved Go to #188 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"READ.ME StarCraft, Round II THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD New Units Make for a Meaty New Expansion Disc ll is not quiet on the STARCRAFT front. Although the Overmind has been defeated by the Protoss forces, Kerrigan, the new Zerg Queen of Blades, has decided to consolidate the disparate broods and unite the Zerg for a strike against the traitorous Emperor Arcturus Mengsk I of the Terran Empire. Meanwhile, the Protoss are trying to rebuild their homeworld and to unite the Dark Templar and the mainstream Protoss. In STARCRAFT: BROOD WAR, the upcoming STARCRAFT expansion disc from Blizzard, you can play three new campaigns, one from each race. As the Terrans, you'll battle Kerrigan's advances and another potential civil war. As the Zerg, you'll track the progress of Kerrigan's rise to power. And as the Protoss, you will shepherd the reunion of the Protoss people. In addition to the continuing STARCRAFT story and campaigns, BROOD WAR will present three new tile sets: the nuclear wastelands of the Korhal, the homeworld of the Dark Templar, and an icy planet. The most exciting additions to BROOD WAR, though, are the extra units. (At this stage, many of the new units' stats are being balanced and could change significantly in the final product.) The Terrans will get a medic and the Valkyrie missile frigate. The medic will be able to heal organic units, cure any Terran units of Zerg ailments, and permanently blind units with a flash grenade. The Valkyrie frigate will fire volleys of missiles for air splash damage, a perfect defense against clusters of mutalisks or scouts. Blizzard scrapped early plans for a Valkyrie bomber in favor of the current missile frigate. The Zerg will get the lurker and the devourer. The lurker is a heavy unit that has no attack above ground but can burrow and then attack targets with multiple spikes. It will mutate from the hydralisk and have more hit points and a heavier attack. The devourer will mutate from the mutalisk (giving the mutalisk two aspects) and fire corrosive acid at a greater range than that of the mutalisk. Each attack by the devourer will reduce the target's hit points by one-third, with a minimum damage of three. The Protoss will get the ability to build the Dark Templar, which will be little different from the units available in the original STARCRAFT Protoss campaign, although their attacks may be mel. lowed for balance issues. Protoss will also be able to build the corsair, an air-to-air interceptor with a rapid plasma attack that will be most useful against mutalisks and scourges. It will also have the ability to cast disruptor fields that prevent units from firing ranged weapons within the field. Finally, you'll be able to combine two Dark Templar to create a Dark Archon. The Dark Archon will have no attack, but it will possess three powerful spells: mind control, feedback, and shockwave. The mind control spell will be extremely costof an enemy unit. Feedback will wipe out a target's energy bar and then inflict damage on that \"spellcasting\" unit. Shockwave will temporarily paralyze a field of organic units. It will be great in tandem with psionic storms against Zerg hordes. In addition to multiplayer support for the new units on battle.net, you'll find 30 new missions. For more info on BROOD WAR, go to www.gamespot. com/previews www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 35 "


"READ.ML Banshee Set to Scream Early Results From Guillemot Intl. Gamer3D Phoenix Are Impressive FORSAKEN ON Dfx's success as a 3D-only RUNNING THE NUMBERS company has been truly 3D WinBench WinBench Business Graphics WinMark remarkable. Even more remark(800x600x16) (1024x768x16) able is that the company has Matrox G-200 800 217 achieved this success by stand3Dfx Banshee 832 191 ing the typical graphics business model on Diamond Monster 3D II 798 NA its head. Typically, graphics makers sell about two-thirds of all their wares in new 3D GameGauge (800x600x16) systems, and the other third in stores as Matrox G-200 63. 6 3 7.642.5 27 25.5 12:6 238.7 upgrades. 3Dfx, from the advent of its first 3Dfx Banshee 113.7 61352. 692.9 270.5 Voodoo chipset, went the opposite way, Diamond Monster 3D II 1028 60. 1 56.28 74.4 60.3 399.6 appealing to the hearts and wallets of INCOMING gamers in stores, and picking up some TUROK QUAKE FAZAN QUAKEN deals for putting its chips into * Driver not ready for QUAKE I & II new systems. The compaNote that Banshee drivers are best versions, and results with shipping boards may vary significantly ny's first 2D/3D effort, result was that Voodoo Rush had pretty solid 3D Guillemot's Gamer3D Phoenix board (which Voodoo Rush, performance relative to Voodoo, but uses the Banshee chipset) with Alpha 2 drivers. was just that: its 2D was weak, because the 2D While these drivers were stable, they were very rushed. chipset and the Voodoo chipset shared early versions, and Glide wasn't yet working in The the same clock. And, to make matters them, so QUAKE and QUAKE-II wouldn't run worse, while the Voodoo ran at about (since 3Dfx's mini-GL driver runs through Glide). normal clock speed, the 2D chipset, But even so, Banshee delivered very solid Alliant's AT3D, was underclocked. Direct3D performance, and its 2D, though not as Well, 3Dfx still has an eye on the bigimpressive, was still pretty good. We stacked it ger pie, and it's looking to get a giant up against Matrox's Mystique G-200, the piece with the latest 3Dfx chipset, Voodoo fastest 2D/3D board we've seen to date, and Banshee, a 2D/3D integrated part that Diamond's Voodoo2 board, the Monster3D II. should deliver near-equivalent performance to Banshee outgunned the G-200 on 3D Voodoo , and 3Dfx says its 2D will be competi WinBench as well as on 3D GameGauge. tive with the best of the lot. We tested What's remarkable about the Banshee's 3D GameGauge score is that it doesn't include any contribution from running QUAKE or QUAKE II. Its 2D performance is 26 points behind Matrox, although that may improve with driver optimization. Compared to Voodoo2, Banshee was actually a hair faster running Direct3D games, and was also faster on 3D WinBench. Banshee does have a downside, however. Unlike Voodoo2, which has two Texture Mapping Units (TMUs), Banshee has only one. hen CD-ROMs were young, Interplay helped to legitimize the format by publishing For single-pass rendered games (all Direct3D collections of ex-floppy games on CD. It seems only fitting, therefore, that Interplay games and QUAKE in 3D GameGauge), this is returns to its roots with ULTIMATE STRATEGY ARCHIVES, an eclectic package that fine, but as multitexturing games begin to includes—you guessed it—some games that originally shipped on floppies. Some of these arrive, Banshee won't get the second pass for games are dated—SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION is really rough around the edges--but any of free, as does Voodoo2. Instead, the Banshee's these games will run on a 486 (and even a 386, in some cases), and the gameplay, in most fill rate will be cut in half, from about cases, is still timeless. 100Mpixels/sec maximum to 50Mpixels/sec. With the exception of DARK COLONY, almost all of these games really are classics: the original Still, Banshee will be a tough competitor HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC; the ambitious MAX; the grandiose CONQUEST OF THE NEW this fall, with Banshee-based boards recently WORLD; the deluxe version of SID MEIER'S RAILROAD TYCOON (with 16-color VGA graphics!), the announced from Guillemot, Intergraph, and underrated JAGGED ALLIANCE: DEADLY GAMES; and the original, as yet unsurpassed, X-COM. Diamond Multimedia, to name just a few. If you're looking to fill some holes in your strategy collection, or to introduce a friend to gamWatch for more Banshee-based board reviews ing, it would be hard to go wrong with this collection-especially at the suggested retail price of in the coming months in CGW's Hardware $34.95.-Terry Coleman section. -Dave Salvator Interplay's Ultimate Strategy Archives A Great Deal, Especially for Laptops W or CD ROM 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Civ Who? READ.ME 8DActivision and MicroProse Settle Their CIVILIZATION Dispute alk about confusion. It eventually spawned a sequel, Earlier this year, Advanced Civilization, along with MicroProse had three a number of additional cards and Civilization: Call products based on map extensions. to Power CIVILIZATION in the Sid Meier followed with his verworks. Meanwhile, Activision wassion of CIVILIZATION in 1991, touting its sequel to the game which had about as much in comand, along with Civilization mon with the boardgame as boardgame developer Avalon Hill, WARCRAFT II does with Lord of telling MicroProse that it couldn't the Rings. Still, Avalon Hill execs use the CIVILIZATION name any weren't very happy about the more. Well, the legal dust has name and threatened to sue finally settled, and Micro Prose has MicroProse. A compromise was come through it with the rights to reached: There is no record of any the CIVILIZATION name—not only money changing hands, but severfor computer games, but for al copies in the first run of Meier's boardgames as well. game had flyers advertising the The result of the proceedings is Avalon Hill boardgame. when Meier and Brian Reynolds Avalon Hill had rights only to that MicroProse will use the Avalon Hill proceeded with its teamed up for CIVILIZATION II, North America, and therefore CIVILIZATION name on its upcom own computer game, but which has since sold more than Activision's claim was invalid. ing CIVILIZATION II MULTIPLAYER ADVANCED CIVILIZATION (1996) 1.2 million copies worldwide. Lawsuit hell ensued, until GOLD EDITION, as well as on the simply didn't have any resources Activision attempted to fill the MicroProse bought Harland CIVILIZATION II: THE TEST OF TIME behind it, and the game's release CIVILIZATION III gap by licensing Trefoil's company-thus neatly add-on pack. In the meantime, was a disaster, selling less than the CIVILIZATION name from sewing up the rights to the Activision will still release 20,000 copies. MicroProse, in conAvalon Hill's boardgame. But game's name from the original CIVILIZATION: CALL TO POWER, but trast, had its biggest hit in years MicroProse countered that designer. —Terry Coleman under license from MicroProse. The big loser here is Avalon Hill (which, at press time, had been bought by Hasbro), which lost all rights to the game it had been selling for nearly two decades, and which will probably never publish a completed design for a in July 16, 1998, ZDNet hosted its annual awards ceremony for the Shareware Games of Civilization card game. Its the Year. Hosted by ZDNet's Shareware Guru, Preston Gralla, the awards ceremony celeCIVILIZATION III project is also in brated the best shareware programs as selected by the editors of Family PC, PC limbo after MicroProse shut down Magazine, and Computer Gaming World. During the selection process, ZDNet tabulates the most its Simtex development studio. popular downloads from its Shareware Library in each program category. These become the So how did all this come nominees for each category. Then, the editorial panels of respective ZD, Inc. magazines examine about? In the early '80s, small each product and vote on the winners. You'll find all of this year's winners on this month's CGEuropean developer Harland ROM disc. Trefoil released a boardgame Overall Shareware Game of the Year: EXILE III: RUINED WORLD V. 1.0 (Jeff Vogel, called Civilization. The game de Spiderweb Software) This game takes us back to those early days of role-playing. The graphics emphasized combat, unusual for are crude and remind us of early ULTIMAs, but the gameplay is solid \"hack and slash\" for those designs of the time, but it gave gamers who simply want an exciting dungeon crawl. you plenty to do: discover pottery, Action/Adventure Game Winner: EXILE III: RUINED WORLD v. 1.0 (Jeff Vogel, Spiderweb navigation, philosophy, and the Software) like-all the while trying to reach Board Game Winner: LASERCHESS 98, v. 1.0 (Blue Carpet Software) the Iron Age before your MediCard and Casino Game Winner: SOLITAIRE CITY, v. 1.015 terranean neighbors. (Pete Wiseman) CG-ROM Avalon Hill acquired the North Strategy, Puzzles, and Logic Game Winner: MVP WORD Check out more Sliardware American license to the SEARCH, V. 2.1 (MVP Software) information on this month's cd. boardgame, and it sold quite well. 1998 ZD Shareware Award Winners www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 37 "


"SPACE MARINES VS. THE CHAOS GATE\". OBRINOS is squad-level, turn-based tactical action that's utterly ..out of this world! Command a squad of up to 20 Space Marinies and pursue the evil Chaos Space Marines through the Warhammer 40,000 universe! PURSUE the campaign immediately. or take on randomly generated missions to gain experience and acquire items of power. Whichever : you choose — prepare for the unexpected! BESIDE EDAI CREATE your squad by choosing : from 50 different soldiers and a formidable arsenal of weapons. Missile launchers, heavy flamers and a full psyker combat, system are all at your disposal. AUCHER Fiodorus DOI DOO E GAME WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM INTERNE DEVELOPED BY MPLAYER.COM mplay WWW.CHAOSGATE.COM :: "


"FORCES ORCHAOS! COMMAND the vehicles of the WARHAMMER 40,000 universe: Predator tanks, Rhino APCs, Land Speeders and Dreadnoughts. BUILD custom missions with the powerful and extremely flexible Mission Editor WALL multiplayer mayhem with up to 4 players. XAS . 012 23 ENIGE 0202 Azazel EL CHAOS GATE.\" YOUR PORTAL TO TACTICAL COMBAT WARHAMMER 40,000 STYLE! WARHAMMER 40.000 USERSCHAOS E RGATEWARHAMMER Visit your retailer or call. 1-800-746-8503 \".with Visa/MC (North America only). . SIE SET LATINS RP 1998 Strategic Simulations, Inc., a Mindscape Company. All rights resewett, Artwork and attery 1998 Games Workshop Ltd. Mindscape is a registered trademark and its logo and Chaos Gate are trademarks of Mindscape, Inc., a division of The Learning Company. The SSI 1040 is a registered trademark of Strategic Simulations, the Wallhammer, Games Workshop and Space Marines are revistered trademarks and Ultramarines. Predator Rline, Ducadoulit. Terminators and Devastators are trademaths of Games Workshop Liu. All other trademarks and registered trademarks ve lhe property of their respective holders. SRB Go to #132 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Z NEWS FLASH README 20228298288989.?? Ultima: Ascension Producer Steps Out Ed Del Castillo, producer of ULTIMA: ASCENSION, has left Origin, citing \"philosophical differences.\" This led many hardcore ULTIMA fans, who had expressed disappointment with the direction the series is taking, to speculate that this might make for a turn back to traditional ULTIMA. While there have been no major changes to the design, Origin is obviously concerned with keeping the dedicated fans on board. The company released a Q&A soon after Castillo's departure which stated that the product is still taking a new angle, but promising \"character creation, statistics, inventory, and all the usual aspects associated with an ULTIMA.\" 04-98 ?BER PIPELINE 101: The 101st AIN Empire Interactive Q4 '98 Asheron's Call Turbine/Microsoft Q4 '98 Alien vs. Predator Fox Q4 '98 Baja 1000 Racing Red Orb Qi 99 Baldur's Gate Interplay Q4 '98 Battle of Britain Talonsoft Q4 '98 Birth of the Federation MicroProse Q4 '98 Blackstone Chronicles Legend/SS1 0 498 Civilization: Call to Power Activision Combat Flight Simulator Microsoft C&C: Tiberian Sun Westwood Creatures II Mindscape Dark Vengeance GT Interactive Daikatana Ion Storm/Eidos Diablo II Blizzard Drakan Psygnosis Enemy Infestation Panasonic European Air War MicroProse Falcon 4.0 MicroProse Fallout 2 Interplay Fighter Duel 2 Ocean Fighter Squadron Activision Fighting Steel SS1 Final Countdown Impact Flanker 2.0 SSI Fleet Command Jane's/EA Force Commander LucasArts Gabriel Knight 3 Sierra Grim Fandango LucasArts Harpoon 45 Heavy Gear II Activision Heretic Il Raven/Activision Homeworld Sierra King's Quest: Mask of Eternity Sierra Q4 '98 Klingon Honor Guard MicroProse Q4 '98 Knockout Kings EA Sports Q «99 Indiana Jones/Inf. Machine LucasArts Q2 '99 Int. Rally Championship THQ Q4 '98 Interstate '82 Activision Jagged Alliance 2 Sir-Tech Luftwaffe Commander SSI Q4'98 MechWarrior III MicroProse Messiah Shiny/Interplay Myth II: Soulblighter Bungie 04'98 National Hockey Night ESPN Digital North vs. South Interactive Magic Omikron Eidos Panzer Elite Psygnosis Prey 3D Realms/GT Interactive Prince of Persia 3D Red Orb Q2 '99 Professional Sports Car Racing Virgin Q4 '98 Quest For Glory V Sierra Q4 '98 Railroad Tycoon II Pop Top Requiem 3D0 Return Fire 2 Panasonic Return to Krondor Sierra Revenant Eidos Q1 991 Smart Games Chal. 3 Smart Games/Hasbro Q4 '98 Space Bunnies Must Die Panasonic Q4 '98 SpecOps: Ranger Team Bravo Panasonic 04 '98 Specops: Pro Pack Panasonic StarCon Accolade Starship Troopers MicroProse StarSiege Sierra Sword & Sorcery Virgin Q4 '99 Tomorrow Never Dies MGM Q4 '98 Trans-Am Racing '68-'72 GT Interactive 04 '98 Ultra Fighters Interactive Magic War of the Worlds GT Interactive Q4 '98 WCW Nitro THQ Q4'98 West Front Talonsoft Q4'98 Wheel of Time Legend/GT Interactive Q2 99 Wings of Destiny Psygnosis Q1 '99 wwil Fighters Jane's/EA Q4498 You Don't Know Jack 4 Berkeley Q4 '98 98989898 Sports replicates the game precise provides multiplayer online ly as well as captures the NBA games to AOL, sued in September lifestyle in one package.\" 1997. The gaming company claimed that AOL unfairly promotActivision Acquires ed its own games at the expense Head Games of Kesmai's licensed content. Activision has acquired Head Games Publishing in an attempt Where to Meet to broaden its consumer base and Women? Online become a player in the \"value Games! priced\" software market. Head A study by the Interactive Games, publisher of popular Digital Software Association (ISDA) mass-market titles such as claims that 53 percent of gamers Cabela's BIG GAME HUNTER, is who play online are female. These now a wholly owned subsidiary findings seem to go against the of Activision. conventional wisdom about who plays games online and what they WarCraft Il Platinum like to play. According to Josh Offers Online Play Fershee, ISDA Manager of Finally, WARCRAFT II comes to Membership Services, women tend battle.net! Blizzard announced to see things in terms of their that WARCRAFT II PLATINUM, set connectedness to other people. to ship during the holiday season, Online gaming offers this sense of will feature free relationship (with others).\" play on the com Although male online gamers pany's battle.net prefer the action, strategy, and service. This new Wargame genres, women online version of the seem to stick to trivia, card, and classic will be a boardgames. The statistical Windows emphasis on the classic puzzle 95/98/NT game, genre may require online game but will retain services to refocus their target multiplayer comaudience. patibility with the MS-DOS verMulti-Player Games sion. Along with the missions Network Announces from the original game and the Free Service Option. BEYOND THE DARK PORTAL expan Multi-Player Games Network sion set, the PLATINUM edition (www.mpgn.com) has recently will include two all-new Orc and instituted a plan that allows new Human veteran campaigns. The subscribers to access all games product will sell for $35, with a free of charge. The biggest differ\"substantial rebate\" for current ence between the free plan and WARCRAFT II owners. the pay service is the introduction of mandatory banner advertiseAmerica Online and ments. Players will have some Kesmai Work Out movement restrictions in the RPG Legal Problem KINGDOM OF DRAKKAR and the America Online and Kesmai DRAKKAR II. Furthermore, players have ironed out their legal dis will not be able to perform characpute. In a joint statement, the ter maintenance with the free sertwo companies announced that vice. Still players will be able to they will prolong their professionget a taste of the range of MPGal relationship at least through Net's services before committing February 2001. Kesmai, which to a monthly fee. Qi «gg Q1 99 Q4 '98 04'98 Q4 '98 Q4 '98 &&& Celtics' Antoine Walker to Assist NBA Live 99 EA Sports has signed the Boston Celtics' Antoine Walker to assist in the design of its upcoming basketball title, NBA Live 99. EA Sports has routinely drafted professional athletes to aid in development of its games in order to enhance realism and quality. Walker will join the ranks of such previous All-Star EA collaborators as Tim Duncan, Tim Hardaway, and Mitch Richmond. Regarding his new role in game development, Walker said, \"I am thrilled to join the EA Sports team to work on NBA Live 99. I continue to be amazed at how well EA 04'98 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Forget the box. Forget limits. Forget small. The future of games is online. Massive. Random. Forever changing. Populated by thousands. Real people. Real battles. Real adventures. This is GameStorm. GAMESTORM. www.gamestorm.com The best massively multiplayer games. Virtually any networkable CD-ROM game, Award-winning editorial content Thriving player communities. All in one package, for one price. Unlimited play. $9.95 monthly. First month FREE! KESMAI ENGAGE HEAT.NET GAMESPOT games online s Warrior III, Aliens Online, Warcraft II, Diablo, Claw Virtual Featured games include: All the latest news, reviews, zilla Online, Jack Nicklaus PoolTM, DescentTM, Splatterball, QUAKETM!&ll, NetFighterTM features, tips, downloads nline Golf Tour, Multiplayer RolemasterTM: Magestorm, Darkness Falls, Hexen || TM, Battlezone, Total and more from the cleTech, Legends of Kesmai, RolemasterTM: The Bladelands Annihilation, Mech Warrior 2, Internet site named rship Troopers, casino, card, Caesar's Palace, Billboard Live WarCraftTM II, Postal ...and virtually \"Best Gaming Site\" ad board games...and more! Trivia... and more! any networkable CD-ROM game! by Entertainment Weekly. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kesmai is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation.ENGAGE games online is a service mark of d HEAT.NETM are trademarks of Segasoft Networks, Inc.GameSpot is a trademark of GameSpot Inc. All other trademarks, registrations, and copyrights are properties of their respective holders. "


"RATING PENDING RP 100 CONTENT RATED BY ESRB Westwood www: westwood com "


"Engage in the most powerful Lands of Lore experience yet. Immerse yourself in a 3D role-playing world populated with savage beasts and a huge cast of cunning characters. LANDS, PRI COMING WINTER 1998 Explore vast new worlds including the Ruloi Homeworld, the Shattered Desert, and for the first time, the entire city of Gladstone. Qo1  Westwood Studios, Inc. Lands of Lore is a registered trademark and Westwood Studios is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 3Dfx and the 3Dfx logo are registered trademarks of 3Dfx Interactive. All rights reserved. Choose one of four familiars who can accompany you as a scout, spy, fighter, gatherer, healer or thief. Go to #255 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"READ.ME Gangsters: Organized Crime Eidos Dares You to Order a Hit This Winter focuses on 1930s Chicago-style mob warfare, in which you play a new-blood crime boss for your local district. The aim of the game erhaps that trip to the New Jersey shore has put organized crime on your mind. Or you may have just watched Donnie Brasco for the umpteenth time. Whatever the case, Eidos is betting that people T want to experience life as a mob boss, and will publish Hothouse house Creations' GANGSTERS: ORGANIZED CRIME to give gamers a legal venue for organized crime. The game feels more like The Untouchables than The Godfather, as it In the Works KTXERSIFA HE BRIDE 02gVW ACE host of menus that let you hire new goons, scope out your controlled territory, and issue orders about what you want your goons to do in the upcoming week. Orders range from simple extortions to contract killings to torching buildings. Once you've issued your orders, you start the next phase of the game by \"hitting\" the streets. You then get to watch and control your goons in realtime. You can opt to have your goons do some extracurricular strong-arming after they finish their initial orders, or you can have them wander the streets and expand your power base. The mix of turn-based \"empire\" management with the real-time \"missions\" (and a dash of multiplayer) could make for an interesting challenge for strategy gamers. And hey, when was the last time you ordered a hit on a quy because he looked at you funny? --Thierry Nguyen is to, of course, gain control of the city, via mobster-style tactics. You'll have to contend with other crime bosses, the local police, and the ever-encroaching FBI. Gameplay consists of turnbased crime-empire management mixed with some real-time criminal activity. You start out with a BattleCruiser's Back The Controversial Title Is Finally Set to Hit the Shelves in Finished Form t's hard to think of a project that had a rockier development than that of BATTLECRUISER 3000AD. The product has seen nearly a half-dozen publishers and years of delays, and it even suffered through the premature release of an unplayable alpha version by Take2. Despite a lack of financial support from a publisher and merciless Internet flame attacks, developer Derek Smart has stuck with the program, and a series of free patches has resulted in a fairly solid, entertaining game with a number of enhancements including 3Dfx support Now the product is set to hit store shelves with all the bug-fixes, a variety of enhancements, 50 new missions, and a comprehensive mission builder, the new moniker will be BATTLECRUISER 3000AD 2.0. The product will ship under Interplay's affiliated title program at a budget price somewhere around $20. Purchasers of the original version of the game will be able to download an upgrade to BATTLECRUISER 3000AD 2.0 that will include all of the game's core features except the mission editor, but with only 25 new missions. 100 10000500) STARPATH ATCE2 ATU-3 ATU-L JUPITER PRB 1 MARS PRB 2 PRB 3 PRE! -PBS RATERRENHILITABA. PRE 8 POBY PRE DO 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"COMMANDOS BESIDENEMEL TOMB RAIDER THE DARK PROJECT AVENTURES DE LARA CROFT Only Eidos challer ses your ima Sination! FINAL FANTASIZ. VI Now for the PC. BOBO BOMES www.eidosinteractive.com 1918 S Cod. Al e . FM Party R esad.0095 B kofoni Sto LP. A fondo de Crottare trademarks of Core Design Sonar registered trademarks of South Cota ION STORM DAIKATANA LORO MIYAMOTO, GURERLY BOHNSON and MICIO r eved 1000 on Suom. LP. Thor The Dark Project is adorar or Looking Glass Studios 1990 Long S. 1097-1998 Com Ei che Commandes and Revenant are trademarks of Endod, PA 197971 L e rved Go to #115 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink EIDOS "


"OCEAN US FINS GERMANICUS You send in your nautical expert to singlehandedly remove a gunboat from the Nazi fleet. He will prove invaluable to you in all your naval operations. TREAD Mkuna Not always satisfied with being the get-> away driver, you allow Tread to hone his skills in close combat. He considers it R&R. RES 3 Tulip hidup COMMANDOS: Behind Enemy Lines and Eidos Interactive are trademarks of EIDOS Pic. 1997-1998. Eidos. All Rights Reserved. Moky Hamam then we in SPOOKY Novions Trojetskog Galaxy Your finest draft pick, this former French spy master leads a raid on an unsuspecting Nazi U-Boat. Use him widely for infiltration and sabotage missions. Colonia Agrippina Senorituruan Cortlane TONIN YOU CONTROL EACH COMMANDO EIDOS THE DIRTY HALF DOZEN Play the DEMO! Buy the game! www.eidosinteractive.com "


"2021 DUKE Call in your sniper to weaken enemy fortifications and expose this Nazi stronghold to a weapons raid. To him every Nazi looks like the one that took out his family. You send in your pyro lovin' munitions expert to take out enemy mobile missile capability. Apparently, there's plenty of dynamite to go around. o IN10 ONES Na JNFERNO  sla      Ely's TINY When the going gets tough, you send in your fiercest warrior to finish the job. Tiny takes out a communications center without the usual supporting cast. GO T-11 COMMANDOS BEHIND ENEMY LINES \"A real-time strategy sleeper.\"-Computer Gaming World. \"Excellently rendered terrain and brilliant Al make this a fantastic combat simulation.\" Gamespot Go to #276 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Gangsters ORGANIZED CRIME\" EXPECT A HIT SOON www.eidosinteractive.com EIDOS Helse www.eidosgames.com N T E R ACTIVE "


"THE DON OF A NEW ERA IN GAMING Gangsters: Organized Crime 1998 Hothouse Creations Ltd. Published by Eidos Interactive Ltd. Eldos Interactive is a trademark of EIDOS, plc. O 1998 EIDOS. All rights reserved. Go to #158 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SQUARESOFT EIDOS www.eidosinteractive.com 09928 Eidos Eidos Interactive is a trademark of Eidos, P. 1997, 1998 Square Co.Lid. All rights reserved. Final Fantasy and Square Soft are trademarks of Square Co, Lid. "


"PC GAMER EDITORS \"90%-beautiful graphics, huge compelling story, unique gameplay\" CHOICE PC Gamer \"a unique and fascinating experience you can't get from any other PC game\" Computer Games Strategy Plus \"amazing, bizarre, huge\" GameCenter \"no game collection would be complete without FFVII\"   GameBuyer FINAL FANTASY HI Now for the PC. Go to #277 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"(e mr PlayStation des interactive Tome Radet Lara Croft and her lid anest and trademarks of Fidos, PC 2 95 to P estan d the P "


"everything you asked for, Monkey swing, crawl or sprint-dash when you can't fight your way out. LGCO Wreak havoc through snow, wind and rain with jaw-dropping realism. Check your gut in manic, eyeball-blistering action. Kayak rapids and motorcycle your escape from environments that will lose your mind TOMB but sorey, RAPHIE INVENTURES DE LAKA CAD still no nude code. EIDOS INTERACT Go to #111 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Golf: The Action Game? READ.ME GOLDEN TEE GOLF Takes an Arcade Approach to the Green Golfer 1 Sitoke 4 t's fair to say that golf isn't core realism in favor of blazing the game most people have speed and sheer fun. The title's in mind when they think of 3D accelerated 16-bit graphics arcades. Yet, since 1996, engine delivers lush, detailed Peter Jacobsen's GOLDEN TEE environments featuring special 3D GOLF has consistently rated effects such as fog, water reflecamong the industry's Top 5 coin-options, and multilayered machines. Its popularity-believe it shadows while the relaxed or not-has been compared to the physics model promises forgiving original PACMAN phenomenon of gameplay for even the most frusthe late '70s. Now PC gamers can trated duffers. find out for themselves what all three 18-hole courses are the hullabaloo is about with scheduled to ship with the game, Incredible Technologies' Win 95 playable by up to four people version of the arcade smash. (hotseat, modem, direct link, LAN, or Internet). Although only two In the Works scoring styles will be offered stroke or skinsnumerous variMuch like Sony's addictive HOT ables provide the potential for SHOTS GOLF on the PlayStation, long-term play value, such as the GOLDEN TEE GOLF eschews hardability to change pin and tee placements, alter green contours, and adjust wind velocity. S. Wedge Ms. TURN. LOPTIONS WUEN Low CLUB Y TO FR Unlike the coin-op game, which uses trackball controls, the PC version uses the mouse to simulate the natural backswing and followthrough of a club swing. Called TrackSwing, this control method is remarkably easy to learn, allowing players to concentrate more on techniques and strategies, and less on swing mechanics. No more twitch-and-click. Streamlined, yet loaded with features, look for GOLDEN TEE GOLF to make a huge impact on this highly competitive sports genre. -Scott A. May Playing Lately Nimonio CGW Survey Last Month Months on Chart StarCraft (Blizzard/Cendant) Might and Magic VI (3DO) Age of Empires (Microsoft) Quake II (id Software/Activision) Unreal (GT Interactive) Diablo (Blizzard/CUC) Jedi Knight (LucasArts) Wing Commander: Prophecy (Origin) Fallout (Interplay) Total Annihilation: The Core Contingency (Cavedog) Myth (Bungie) Battlezone (Activision) * Check your mailbox: We mail a survey to 1,500 randomly chosen subscribers each month. The results of Playing Lately indicate what games readers are blowing the most time on, as opposed to the readers' overall quality ranking in the Top 100 UNNAN fondi PC Data Best-sellers** Last Month Final Fantasy VII (Eidos) StarCraft (Blizzard/Cendant) Mech Commander (MicroProse) Unreal (GT Interactive) Flight Simulator '98 (Microsoft) Deer Hunter (GT Interactive) 7. The X-Files Game (Fox Interactive) Titanic: Adventure Out of Time (Cyberflix) 9. Myst (Red Orb) 10. Sim City 2000 Special Edition (Electronic Arts) **This list indicates what the top-selling PC games were, as calculated by PC Data, for June 1998 54 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Internet audio Can a modem hurl you into the center of a mosh pit? In a word, no. But with near CD-quality audio and 3Com U.S. Robotics smoother-streaming video, the new V.90 U.S. Robotics 56K* standard modem, comes closer than ever with 56K before. It connects up to 80% faster than other 28.8 modem brands. And it's compatible with nine of the top ten Internet providers and over 1,400 more around the globe. No wonder U.S. Robotics is the world's bestselling modem. To learn more, contact a U.S. Robotics reseller or visit www.3com.com/56k. 3.Com *Capable of receiving downloads at up to 56 Kbps and egulation receiving speeds are limited to 53 Kbps. Actual speeds may vary. Requires compatibles phone lin s erver cowpment. Complies with both the determined V.90 ITU 56K standard and X2 Technology. Rautication expected September 1998. Se www.gcom.com/56k for details 1998/3Com Corporation Onits subsidiaries. All rights reserved. 3Com, the 3Com logo and U.S. Robotics are registered trademarks and a trademark of 3Com Corporation or its subsidiaries, 14556 2.98 Go to #106 @ www.computorgaming.com/infolink "


"SPEED LIMIT ENFORCED BY AIRCRAFT HIGHWAY PATROL) BITING POIN RP PC 3D acceleration not required Need for Sneed, Electronic Arts and the Electronic Arts logo are liademarks or registered trademarks of Electronic Arts in the US and/or other countries. All rights reserved. Software copyright 1998 Electronic ATTS. All rights reserved. Automobi Fellati 550 Maranello distinctive design are trademarks of Ferrari S.p.A. Corvette is a General Motors Trademark used under license to Electronic Arts Inc. 3DIX 1998 301x Interactive, Inc. The 3Dix Interactive logo is a trademark 01 30tx Interactive, "


"DOO LED HAHA One minute you're running down speeders in a Lamborghini Diablo cop car. The next you're flying down the freeway in one of ten exotic Supercars. Because out on these roads, everybody obeys a higher law. The law of velocity ELECTRONIC ARTS\" www.needforspeed.com Lamborghini, Diablo SV. Countach 25th and all associated logos are trademarks of Automobili Lamborghini SpA Ferrari 550 Maranello, all associated logos and the Go to #104 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink, "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS YOUR BEST SOURCE FOR THE HOTTEST GAMES IN DEVELOPMENT Age of Empires: The Rise of Rome Age of Empires: The Rise of Rome GENRE: Real-time Strategy RELEASE DATE: 04 '98 DEVELOPER: Ensemble Studios PUBLISHER: Microsoft With Camel Riders, Fire-spouting Galleys, and a Ben Hur-mobile, This Expansion Should Nicely Bridge the Gap to AoE || north, the east, and the south. Pusillanimous: Only if I can do it by Ken Brown A conversation at the Roman bath: without having to leave my villa. Supercilious: Bah! May you be crushed by Carthaginian war elephants! Pusillanimous: All right, don't be such a Titus. Tell me more and maybe I'll queue up some Centurions. Supercilious: The Empire is once again under attack! Tomorrow we must marshal our asses to the borderland and join Lugubrious Sextus in repelling the ill-tempered and foul-smelling Huns! Pusillanimous: Not again. These Huns keep coming back like the meatloaf at the Coliseum. They are really getting on Minerva. Supercilious: We face dire threats! New enemies oppose us from the Reports say they have terrible new beasts that never drink and only relieve themselves when no one is watching. It could mean curtains for everyone in a toga. Pusillanimous: Get Agrippa. The Roman army is the best in the world. Rather than bleeding to death in the wilderness, I think it better I remain here with my concubines and my divine thoughts. Supercilious: Pusillanimous, you idiot! If you don't fight we'll be overrun! Do you not wish the honor of being victorious in battle? that can significantly affect the fortunes of war. And since our advance scouts tell us AGE OF EMPIRES II has been delayed until early next year, this may be the only chance you have to reign victorious until then. Developer Ensemble Studios seems intent on giving gamers their money's worth. Rather than farming out the expansion to an outside developer, they've worked on it themselves with the same attention to detail shown in the original game. They even enlisted former id Software Designer Sandy Peterson to lead the design. If you're one of those guys who thinks an expansion pack is just another wave of Huns, we've got news for you. The RISE OF ROME has new units, new civilizations, new technologies, and several other new features 38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"1210000 10000 10000 10000 ron Age Diplomacy Menu SNEAK_PREVIEWS Roman Camel Rider ***046 Civs and Uncivility THE RISE OF ROME includes four new civilizations in addition to the 12 from the original game): the Carthaginians, Hellenes, Palmyrans and Romans. Carthage was a Phoenician colony founded around 800 BC near modern Tunis. Hellena controlled the Aegean Sea and most of the Greek peninsula for 450 years after the death of Alexander the Great. Palmyra (meaning place of palms) was a desert city in the Middle East on the trade route between Damascus and the Euphrates River. And we all know the Romans, everyone's favorite ancient sports team, unless you were Christian (or from the People's Front of Judea). The new civilizations benefit from several of the Expansion Pack's new units and technologies. In the version I played, the Carthaginians have four new units and four new technologies, in addition to numerous units from the original game. But all of the civilizations from the original game have at least one new unit, and most have three or four. There are five new units in the expansion pack. Slingers are Tool Age infantry units that throw rocks with a sling. They have a +2 attack against archers and increased attack against walls and towers. Camel riders are fast Bronze Age units that have special advantages against horse-mounted units. Horses were unaccustomed to camels' odor in ancient times, and they often refused to engage them. Consequently, camel riders have an attack bonus against all cavalry, scouts, horse archers, and chariots. Since both of these units can be introduced relatively early on, they can create some new challenges even for experienced AOE players. The other three units are all from the Iron Age. The scythe chariot is a Ben Hur-era sport utility vehicle with two horses and scythe blades on its wheels to chop up defenders like a Cuisinart. It has more hit points, more attack strength, and more armor than does a chariot. It also has a high resistance to conversion and a double attack against priests. Armored elephants are expensive upgrades to war elephants, but they pack a wallop and they're hard to bring down. They have +1 piercing armor; more attack strength than war elephants; and siegecraft, which aids them in destroying walls and towers. Like war elephants, they inflict trample damage to adjacent enemy units. Good luck defending against them-try converting them instead. Lastly, fire galleys are like floating flamethrowers. They're very effective against triremes, but are vulnerable to catapults and catapult triremes, because artillery does bad things to flaming pots of fire. ROMAN BLOODBATH Roman and Carthaginian camel riders and scythe chariots earn their combat pay. Neither last long in such circumstances. technology that allows you to exceed the population limit with barracks units. With logistics, barr acks units (except slingers) only count as half units toward your population. This makes it easier to build lots of shock troops and visit them upon your former allies. The other three technologies are all in the Iron Age. Martyrdom lets you convert an enemy unit instantly by sacrificing one of your priests. (You can't use martyrdom on other priests.) Medicine increases the priests' healing rate by as much as three times, making it possible to heal even war elephants fairly quickly. Finally, the tower shield adds +1 infantry armor against ballista, heliopolis, and missile weapons. Only infantry and academy units bene. fit from this technology. Most of the civilizations have three or four of these new technologies, except for the Palmyrans, who have none. (However, the Palmyrans are currently slated to get all five of the new units. The Hellenes and Yamato each receive only one new technology. Perhaps the most interesting new technology is available to every civilization at any time: unit queues! Yes, you can now order up a number of units from any production facility (as in STARCRAFT or TOTAL ANNIHILATION), and they'll keep churning out as long as you have sufficient resources and you haven't exceeded the unit population limit. If you exceed the limit, a message appears and production is halted. The units remain queued up, though, so you can do a hasty \"angel of death\" act to resume production. As in the original game, you can stop the production of units at any time. You can also decrease the queue by right-clicking on the unit button in the interface. New Technologies As with the new units, RISE OF ROME has interesting new technologies that can change the dynamic of the game. There are four new technologies: logistics, martyrdom, medicine, and tower shield. Logistics is a Bronze Age New Units IDEN Slinger: Rock-slinging infantry with attack advantages against archers, walls, and towers. Camel Rider: Camel units have an attack bonus against cavalry. scouts, horse archers, and chariots. Armored Elephant: This behemoth has siegecraft, more attack strength, and more armor; but if it's converted, look out. Scythe Chariot: The Ben Hur unit is conversion-resistant, and is hell on priests, the scythes on its wheels damage adjacent enemies. Fire Galley: The dragon of fighting ships, it spews flames to take out triremes, but takes more damage from catapults. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 59 "


"AGE OF EMPIRES: THE RISE OF ROME SNEAK PREVIEWS RISE AND FALL OF ROVE Here's a closer look at the new Roman building set, including the new Coliseum wonder. And moments later, what the city looked like as Nero fiddled. game was the tendency to units to tire an enemy inite even if they were in the midst of your troops. This resulted in disrupted attacks and friendly-fire damage. Some crafty players capitalized on this by building house foundations in the midst of enemy catapult groups. Ensemble indicated that they've booted that little crutch. days as a city-state in 400 BC to the Pax Romana period when Rome controlled vast regions of Europe and the Middle East. The Rise of Rome campaign includes battles with the Etruscans, the Carthaginians, and Hannibal. The Ave Caesar campaign puts you in Caesar's toga to battle pirates, invade Britain, suppress the revolt in Gaul, and crush Pompey in Greece. So with the new campaigns, new units, new civs, and new features, will this pack be enough to make you spend your gold? Well, the campaigns won't put many veteran AOE players over the top. but the new features will make the package worthwhile if the price stays around $20. CGW Veni, Vidi, Vici Most expansion packs feature new campaigns, and THE RISE OF ROME is no exception The campaigns are still under construc tion, but it appears that there will be four or five new campaigns with four to six scenarios in each. Three of the campaigns will trace the history of Rome from its early intornately, the expansion pack In addition to the new map will let you set unit gathering t ypes there's a new map size to ints, as you can in STARCRAFT, play with The new gigantic maps which would certainly make 250x250 tiles, as opposed to the Hirecting traffic easier. It appears 200x200 tiles in the huge map. we'll have to wait for AGE OF This should give players in multi-MPIRES II to do that. player games more space to spread out. Cartography 201 No matter on which map type If you're tired of the random you play, you should see a more maps from the first game, RISE OF equitable distribution of resources ROME will let you play with four The random-map generator is said new map types: continental, to provide each player equal access Mediterranean, narrows, and hill to berry plants and other resources country. Continental is one big They've also changed the water land mass with water around the width parameters so you shouldn't periphery. Mediterranean is have problems with boats getting almost the opposite, with a sea intrapped behind docks anymore. the middle and land around the Most random maps will now also edges. (If you play with four play include cliffs. ers on this map, each player starts out in a corner.) Narrows is simi Artificial Incompetence lar to continental, but with rivers One of the biggest gripes players and shallows. If you don't like had with AOE was how stupid the water, you'll love hill country units were. How many times did there's not even a lake. you see your units idly stand by while their comrades were being hacked to bits a short distance away? And how many times did you have to personally usher a unit around the map so he wouldn't get blocked by trees or water? We've Trato Cavalry Golds 00 Dond 70) been assured that these problems will be a thing of the past. 53% Pathfinding has been improved, and, in fact, there are different options for pathfinding now in the game settings. Units also seem to QUEUE UP! RISE OF ROME has be more aware when their buddies simple unit queues that help are being attacked (Ensemble did you spool up production. release a patch for the original Unfortunately, you can't desgame that accomplished the same ignate automatic gathering thing. We highly recommend it.) points à la STARCRAFT. Another Al problem in the first New Technologies Logistics: Barracks units (except slingers) only count as half units toward your population. Martyrdom: Lets you instantly convert an enemy unit (except priests) by sacrificing one of your priests. Roman Stable Medicine: Increases priests' healing rate. Tower shield: Adds +1 infantry armor against ballista, heliopolis, and missile weapons. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"play games? buy them at GameDealer.com B PLLY Games FREE! GAMEDEALER COM THE INTERNET'S GAME SUPERSTORE i play games **T-Shirt with every order over $50. GREAT PRICES ON THESE TITLES & MORE 1-800-610-2614 WINDOWS VIP CODE: CGWI fallout WWW.GAMEDEALER.COM Balours MACINTOSH Gate Thousands of Titles PLAYSTATION P Lots of Information NINTENDO ES Prompt Delivery F-16 AGGRESSOR BALDUR'S GATE FALLOUT 2 RAINBOW 6 SEGA Lowest Prices Fax 1-212-387-8021 International 1-212-358-9100 251 Park Ave South New York, NY 10010 * $4.00 rate US Priority Mail, US orders only. Additional shipping methods are available. «All orders placed before November 25, 1998, $4.00 Shipping*  1998 ActionWorld, Inc. All rights reserved. The GameDealer logo, The Internet's Game Superstore and I Play Games are trademarks or registered trademarks of ActionWorld, Inc. in the US and other countries. All other trademarks belong to their respective owners. TRE STRATEGT! Go to #238 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"1:35:65 3326 8/9 196KM/H 1.333 KA 3/9 194MPY High speed racing only feet from the ground. Collect power-ups and fire power-downs. Experience the tension, thrills and speed of an arcade-style game. Only quick reactions and sheer flying skill wil see you through the finish line. * Sicasgo SEGAS FT Inner Workings www.heat.net Fast, Free, Online gaming "


"RACING THIS CLOSE TO THE GROUND is PLANE CRAZY. Anyone can fly a plane in the open skies. But only a razorsharp, thrill-hungry speed freak can wing it at low altitude through a gauntlet of canyons, cliffs and city streets without becoming ground meat. Crosswinds, down drafts and a posse of other insane pilots shooting power-downs up your fuselage mean this is a race to the finish! So come hungry. Come low. come fast... Or don't come at all. VM EXTREME AERIAL RACING 1.58 26.90 9/9 21 8MPH 8/9 21 JMPP Plane Crazy A.I. means the better you get, the better they get. Up to 8 pilots can race over LAN or HEAT.NET Buy equipment and tune your plane's performance. Sonic cannon accesses short cuts and creates obstacles. www.segasoft.com/planecrazy 1998. Sedasole Networks Inc. All riants reserved. SegaSott tho Sognsaft 109 HEAT HEAT NET and the marks at SegaSoft Networks Inc Plane Crazy is a trademark of tonur Worluns Plane Crazy Game rungs Ltd, The Inner Workingu logo is a registered trademark in the UK and the European Wolon Windows is a bademark of the Micon Corporation. The ratings cortis a trademark of the mematy Diadal Software Association Go to #161 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS 115m Selected: M4, Burst Mode (0,0) SNIPER ACTION This enemy is about to be hosed from 115 meters. Delta Force's Voxel technology allows for very long-range vision. by Joe Vallina ou are the elite, a Delta Force commando. Not just the best, but the best of the best. According to Jeff Beatty, out of a typical recruiting class of more than 300 soldiers (who are hand-picked from the U.S. Army Rangers, Green Berets, and paratroop squads), only around 14 will make it to Delta Force. This group is so highly regarded, says Beatty, that during the Gulf War, the Israeli government gave the allies an ultimatum: Send the Delta Force on Scud-hunting missions, or Israel would enter the war. That's a pretty good recommendation, indeed. And Beatty should know. President of Total Security Services International and a former Delta Force assault-troop commander, he has commanded Delta Force squads all over the world. He received commendations for valor in Grenada after his helicopter was shot down and he escorted the survivors to safety, and now he's serving in a new role as advisor to Novalogic. This new mission, while not involving life or death, could be very important for gamers interested in the most realistic, squadbased gameplay to date. Delta Force This New Soldier Sim Could Put Gamers Into Battle Like Never Before The Heart of Combat target and hit you before you even see them. (Those not so simulation-inclined will be able to toggle the game's realism level.) Using Voxel-based rendering technology has enabled Novalogic to show distances heretofore unknown in this type of game, and with a minimum performance hit. Unlike in games such as QUAKE, in which showing large distances meant slowing down frame-rates (hence discouraging the use of large, open spaces in the games), in DELTA FORCE, these distances present less of a performance problem. However, that's not to say that you'll be able to see seamless gameplay if it's running on a bottom-line machine. The first time I played DELTA FORCE, it was on a top-of-the-line Pentium II, 400MHz monster machine, and the game ran flawlessly. However, on slower machines (a Pentium 200MHz MMX, for example) the game slowed noticeably. At this stage in its development, DELTA FORCE isn't fully optimized, and 3D-card support has yet to be added. I hope that the game will run passably on slower systems when it's in the final release. As soon as CGW gets final code, we'll let you know. Character movement in the game will use motion-capture technology that was directly supervised by Beatty. According to the former commando, Delta Force training is different from that of other military forces, in that Delta Force operatives are trained to be able to offensively fire at the enemy at all times. This means that such seemingly simple actions like crouching, crawling, and even running are taught in a way that maximizes the soldier's ability to shoot. Novalogic is mak ing sure that this training is incorporated into the way that your character moves onscreen. The game's missions will be based in reality as well. The game will be divided into five campaigns, each of which will consist of two or three lengthy missions, and you'll choose which mission to start with. In the end, all players will play every mission in the campaign, but each mission's difficulty will depend upon the order in which you play them. For example, if your overall campaign objective is to destroy an enemy fire-base, it may prove beneficial to first play a mission in that campaign that lets you destroy the enemy's communications facility. In this way, you can keep the enemy from calling in reinforcements when you begin UnQUAKE Novalogic is quick to point out that DELTA FORCE is not a QUAKE clone, nor is it meant to be first and third-person shooter graphics notwithstanding (you'll be able to toggle between the two views). This game is a simulation, pure and simple, and this means that you can forget about health meters and surviving a pointblank rocket blast. Instead, one well-placed bullet can take you out, just as in the real world. Snipers from unprecedented in gaming, at least) distances can Delta Force GENRE: Sim RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98 DEVELOPER: Novalogic PUBLISHER: Novalogic OVER THE SHOULDER When you play in the third-person perspective, you'll be able to see what your character sees, via a small view screen (upper right corner). 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Hes Suave! His Debonair! HE'S DEAD! HE'S His Manny Calavera star of... "


"TM GRIM FANDANGOS Mingle with over 50 BIZARRE CHARACTERS! Race FA 23, ACROSS STUNNING 3D! Exotic locales... E lle An epic tale of CRIME and CORRUPTION in the LAND of the DEAD! LUCASARTS ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY presents GRIM FANDANGO Starring MANNY CALAVERA as your Travel Agent of Death in an extraordinary ADVENTURE by TIM SCHAFER, Creator of FULL THROTTLE and DAY OF THE TENTACLE Available on WINDOWS 95/98 CD-ROM ZADE SV911 CONTENT MATED SY ESRB ris  1888 LucasArts Entertainment Company LLC. All rights reserved. Download the amazing playable demo at www.lucasarts.com/products/grim "


"    EIIDIT    one WOMANS 0 e [ olendenttung  ! ONE Travel Agent's ultimate CUSSIO FACE euit-Stuheng DANGER ii q m@-mroyed TUXEDO! ...his very SOUL} "


"Here's what the Critics are saying about GRIM FANDANGO! \"...an adventure gamer's dream come true.\" . Gamepower Voted \"Best Adventure\" at E3. Unified Gamers Online \"...an Art-Deco epic that will have adventure gamers jumping for joy.\" PC Gamer \"Anyone interested in the future of the adventure game genre should be excited. We sure are.\" Computer Gaming World GRIM TM FANDANGO TEEN Download the amazing playable demo at www.lucasarts.com/products/grim ST321 "


"the main assault on the base in a later mission. The five campaigns will take place in different areas of the world. These will include Peru (or another South American jungle country), Libya, Uzbekistan, Siberia, and the Indonesian coast. Keep in mind, though, that DELTA FORCE is still a work in process, so these regions could change prior to final release. Promised mission objectives will include search-and-destroy nighttime raids, hostage-recovery missions, base-destruction raids, and the like. In the game, you will work individually or, more typically, in groups of three to four commandos. According to Beatty, the real Delta Force uses the minimum amount of squad members deemed necessary to accomplish SNEAK PREVIEWS TANKS FOR THE MEMORIES Capturing this tank could be one specific mission objective in an overall campaign. GROUND ZERO TO OVERLORD As in real-life missions, in DELTA FORCE, you'll be able to use satellite mapping to find your way around the area. SMILE WHEN YOU DO THAT If these storyboard drawings are any indication, the motion-captured graphics in DELTA FORCE will make sure you enjoy the dirty work. the given mission objectives, and the addition of hand-to-hand DELTA FORCE's gameplay will sneak attacks, in which your charreflect this strategy. Also, you acter must employ chokes and could work in conjunction with lethal knifings to silently gain local law enforcement, such as in access to mission objectives. This a mission where you have to cap is in stark contrast to the \"get the ture a drug lord-and the evi biggest gun you can and kill dence needed to convict him. everything that moves\" objectives Beatty promises that the in most shooters. In fact, in many game's missions will challenge missions, you may well want to gamers with life-and-death situa avoid conflict altogether, if that tions, and to add to the pressure, would facilitate the accomplishmany of the missions will presentm ent of the specific objective. a moral dilemma as well. You'll be Of course, if you do want to get forced to choose not only that big gun, you'll have several between mission objectives, but from which to choose, all from also between right and wrong. the real Delta Force commandos' arsenal. Weapons in the game More Than One will include the M-203 grenade Way to Skin a Cat launcher, the M-P5 submachine One of the more intriguing gun, the M-4 machine gun (a aspects of combat in the game is shorter version of the standard M-16), hand grenades, claymore mines, and various handguns, among others. Also included will be a simulation of the hand-held computerized devices used by the real-life Delta Force commandos to coordinate objectives, coordinates, and the like. Although the opponent Al components and actual motioncaptured graphics weren't complete as of press time, if Novalogic comes through with all of its promises, DELTA FORCE should enthrall gamers who want more realism in their firstand third-person action. For many gamers who are intrigued by the prospect of a war simulation, but who don't want to join the virtual air force to play one, this could be the ticket. CGW Gara ONE LAST TWITCH With DELTA FORCE's realistic combat, take one bullet in the head and you'll become really familiar with this proposed scene. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 "


"Actual screen shots. FINALLY, YOU REMEMBER A DREAM. \"Charts new territory in the breathtaking beauty of the graphics.\" Adrenaline Vault "


"BAS Copyright  1998 Piranha Interactive Publishing, Inc. ONLY, IT'S NOT YOURS. Megue aqui breaking the time corpheus employs ground-breaking QuickTime VR technology in creating an adventure that will have Iyou quickly confusing the real with the surreal. Four years in the making, it employs a graphical environment of truly titanic proportions. Its addictive gameplay and gripping mystery will soon have you sacrificing your own dream time for Morpheus time. 3 CDs packed with high quality sound and video  Full 360 degrees of movement in 6 unique worlds  Live action video intensifies drama, suspense and realism Morpheus  Eul El Production's Expand your mind. Go to www.morpheusgame.com Go to #137 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PIRANHA INTERACTIVE PUBLISHING "


"TM «Super Mario ...Adventuring spirit of Tomb Raider\" with the platform jumping puzzles of Mario 64\".\" -PC Gamer Published by WIZARD Works Developed by UTOPIA TECHNOLOGIES INC A GT Interactive Company "


"with Hot Sauce» -PC Games Fully animated 3D arms and legs for punching, running, climbing and swimming Stunning graphics in 65,000 colors with standard SVGA or 3Dfx cards, including the new Voodoo 2 cards Spectacular Bump Mapping technology creates incredibly detailed textures* MONTEZUMA'S S RETURN Includes the top-selling 1980's original Montezuma's Revenge Actual Gameplay Screen Run Out and Get NOW or Call: 1-800-229-2714 Go to #125 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink  Utopia Technologies, Inc. * Bump Mapping requires 3Dfx Voodoo 2 card. "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS dials, and other cockpit details, all meticulously rendered in 3D. Pop to an external view of your aircraft and you'll find a stark contrast to the factory-fresh, crisp appearance inside the cockpit. The aircraft textures are highly detailed, down to paint chips in the camouflage and stains from firing guns. Things get more dramatic when you start taking hits. Holes (both bullet-hole textures and actual transparent holes) appear in the wings, fuselage, and control surfaces. If a wing or control surface is blown off, you'll even see primer-colored structural pieces at the separation point. At one point, the cowling blew off the front of my P-51, exposing the top of the Merlin engine. MIDAIR This unfortunate collision between two P-47s does a good job of illustrating the damage detail that WWII FIGHTERS displays. WWII Fighters This Audiovisual Feast Takes Sims to the Next Level by Denny Atkin very couple of years, a flight simulation comes along that advances the state of the art and sets new standards for the sims that follow. That honor has been shared by such titles as RED BARON, FALCON 3.0, BATTLE OF BRITAIN: THEIR FINEST HOUR, F-15 STRIKE EAGLE III, EF2000, and LONGBOW 2. If the development team working on WWII FIGHTERS keeps up at its current pace, this sim will join that hallowed list as the first sim to truly take full advantage of 3D technology. there's a lot more to a good simulation than good graphics, but part of the enjoyment of a simulaaniovment of a simula. tion is a convincing environment, one that lets you completely lose yourself in the experience. And no other simulation in fact, no other computer game I have seen-has managed to re-create so accurately the appearance of a real-world combat environment. You see the difference when you drop into the cockpit. Most sims swap between a detailed, prerendered bitmapped cockpit and a simpler, polygon-based virt ual cockpit. Here, you're always in the virtual cockpit view, but that doesn't mean the cockpit lacks detail. Each instrument is 3D rendered, right down to stuttering rendered, right down to stuttering needles and shadows around the dials. This level of detail extends even to the warning messages written on the panel. All the instruments are simulated—not only the common instruments like altimeter, airspeed, and horizon gauges, but also the turn-andbank indicator, suction, manifold pressure, coolant temp, and the panel clock. Pan around the cockpit using the mouse or joystick view hat and you'll see the throttle, various toggle switches, trim controls, Nice Atmosphere In the version I evaluated four of the flyable aircraft were mostly complete graphically, but there was still a lot of work to be done with the landscape. There were very few objects placed around and only basic city landscapes. Still, the details that were there trees, cows in open fields, horsedrawn carriages around farms, and tanks and artillery crossing the countryside-were very well done. There's a rolling landscape, but there are only a few sharp changes in terrain elevation, so you probably won't be diving into valleys to dogfight. The most impressive thing about the environment, though, is the simulation of clouds. The only place you've ever seen clouds like these before is out the window of a 737. With all the details cranked The Reference Desk It's Got the Look The most striking aspect of WWII FIGHTERS (née FIGHTER LEGENDS) is its graphics engine. We're the first to admit that WWII Fighters GENRE: Flight Sim RELEASE DATE: Q3 '98 DEVELOPER: EA San Mateo PUBLISHER: Jane's Combat Simulations he interface in WWII FIGHTERS is a beautifully rendered virtual museum. Here you'll be able to access the various mission types or get more information on the planes and the pilots who flew them. The reference information from Jane's All the World's Aircraft is presented nicely, in a far more readable manner than the text in LONGBOW 2 and F-15. You'll also find surprisingly lengthy Wings-style videos that give background on the Ardennes battle and the planes flown during it. The real gems, though, are the interviews with various WWII aces. Pilots like Francis \"Gabby\" Gabreski (above), Clarence \"Bud\" Anderson, and Gunther Rall provide video anecdotes on what it's like to fly the fighters simulated in the game. 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS CLOUD NINE The striking cloud layers do much to increase the immersion factor in WWII FIGHTERS. DELUXE PANELING The 3D virtual cockpit features a full suite of working instruments; take damage and you'll even see broken glass in front of crucial dials. up, you'll see both cloud layers and individual cumulous (\"puffy\") clouds. The transition into and out of the clouds is strikingly realistic. The 3D puffy clouds add yet another layer of atmospheric authenticity, but be warned that they may suck a lot of your computer's resources. Turning the 3D cloud layer off (the flat cloud layer still provides a convincing environment) doubled my frame-rate in the alpha version; however, the code may be optimized before the game's release. Fly Me Now, we all know that Fernando's old adage, \"It is better to look good than to feel good,\" doesn't apply to sims. So how does WWII FIGHTERS fly? The good news is that the flight models are far more impressive than what we saw at E3 a few months ago. There are five flightmodel settings, from \"Rookie\" to \"Wicked.\" With the realism turned up, 1 was able to spin and snap-roll the Mustang. Performance seems to be quite accurate, with Me-262 drivers being forced to use boom-and-zoom tactics against slower but more maneuverable Spitfires. If you get into a turning fight, popping out your flaps can help you pull the enemy into your sights. The adjustable enemy Al was still in the works in the version I flew. The view system is very well done. The virtual cockpit allows a top-notch padlock view, which follows the targeted enemy plane. This is complete with an optional pop-up window, which can help you gauge your plane's attitude. You can also access a set of fixed views from the numeric keypad, or you can use the mouse or view hat to manually look around. missions, and multiplayer missions. The quickmission builder is similar to that found in the U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS series, allowing you to choose four sets of up to four aircraft on each side, as well as time of day, weather, and ground targets. Single missions and campaign missions are all set during the Battle of the Ardennes, better known as the Battle of the Bulge. The missions are prescripted (the powerful mission editor is also accessible, which gives you the option of creating your own missions), but your performance will affect the mission that follows. In fact, if your side's performance is poor enough (or good enough, if you're flying for the Axis), the Germans can actually win the battle. Multiplayer mode should prove very popular. Not only will you be able to fly quick missions over LAN or Internet, but you'll also get to fly cooperative single missions. All this innovation does come at a price. WWII FIGHTERS will require a good-quality 3D card (the game supports 3Dfx Glide, Direct 3D, and OpenGL) as well as a fairly fast processor. Although the game is stunning at 1024x768 with 3D clouds enabled, you're probably going to want to run at 640x480 with clouds disabled, unless you own a fast Pentium Il system. Still, if the crucial computer pilot artificial intelligence comes together in the final product as well as the rest of the sim has so far, a few minutes at the stick of one of this game's fighters may send you out pricing a new PC. CGW BLACK SKIES The white clouds below may be harmless, but the black flak bursts could ruin the day for this P-38. Branches of Service There are five modes of play: Instant Action, quick missions, single missions, campaign QUITE A MESS This Messerschmitt Bf 109 is about to enter the fray. The sim's flight models are impressive so far. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 75 "


"Microsoft Windows 98 radically accelerates your access to your favorite applications. It does this by figuring out what programs you use most and rearranging them at a tiny micro level to be quicker and more efficient. \"YEAH, YEAH BUT IS TFA Works better. Plays better. 1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft, Where do you want to go today, Windows and the Windows logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. Source: NSTL 4/98. Results based on differences in application load times on identical hardware systems running Windows 98 versus Windows 95 "


"YEAH, STER? you say Well, yes. An average of 36% faster, now that you mention it. You know, you should relax a little and read at a more leisurely pace. Let your operating system do the hurrying. Where do you want to go today? ant to go today?\" Microsoft www.microsoft.com/windows 98/ "


"File Apr 331 BOS SNEAK PREVIEWS Caesar III Watch Your Back in This Ambitious Strategy Sequel be 327 March by Johnny L. Wilson AESAR III appoints you as the governor of a province during the age of the Roman Republic (fifth century B.C. forward-after the fall of the Etruscans at the end of the sixth century B.C.). As in SIMCITY, you start with a clear landscape with various topographical features and must determine the most efficient layout and growth pattern for a profitable, content, and ever-increasing population. You'll fight entropy in terms of crime, shoddy construction, inefficient protection and power grids, economic factors, and invading enemies. Success requires considerable tweaking and micromanagement, so it is really more for the SIMCITY 2000 manager than those who enjoyed the original SIMCITY. On the province level, the game is not dissimilar to CAESAR II, but it has significantly better graphics and sound, along with more options. O! 187 XEM 22 something to do with the excess goods you are creating, as well as adding to the economic model. The emperor (an anachronistic abstraction  representing the two consuls who controlled the Roman Republic TINTITIE FILM Pro UM during 027 peacetime BOTTER or the dictator who conSY trolled the MP3 republic during military your city'e prodotto ruoted 1.000 crises, as SO V u lire, it is listur well as the Caesar of Population milestone Imperial Rome) demands goods and VOX CONSULIS, VOX POPULI You'll build the city in CAESAR III and the simaccomplish citizens will determine if you're successful or not by \"voting\" with their feet. ments, More population is better, since it increases the tax base. which must be completed within a certain purposelessness by giving you quality-of-life is extremely importime frame. these mini-goals to be fulfilled tant. In CAESAR III, you can build This intervention by the emper within certain time frames within amphitheaters, theaters, coliseums, or is an interesting touch because the less time-sensitive objectives fountains, gardens, baths, libraries, it gives you a sense of purpose in of the individual scenarios. Unforand more in order to help citizens the game. SIMCITY always had a tunately, in one of the tutorial scefeel better about their lives. The tendency to be more free-form; it narios in our pre-Alpha version, animated sequences are delightful was more of a toy than a game. we found the emperor demanding and the associated sounds build CAESAR III avoids this sense of a shipment of weapons in a sce ambience without being too intrunario in which sive. I'm one of those guys who there was no regularly turns off sound and e Finances option to start music after the first couple of playmining for ore ings, but I didn't in CAESAR III. or building a CAESAR III also addresses someforge. I hope thing that was marginalized in Sid this will be fixed Meier's CIVILIZATION-religion. in the final verMuch of what we know of sion. Otherwise, Classical Rome, we know with this intervention regard to myth as well as embellNORMEUBE will quickly ished history. Can you imagine a become annoyRome without the gods? CAESAR ing and frustratRENDER UNTO CAESAR If you don't build ing to gamers. ONLINE enough government buildings, the only things As in SIMCITY, sure about CAESAR III are debt and taxes. For more info on this upcoming game building up the and more go to www.gamespot. com/previews.html Aedile Pleasures Unlike CAESAR II, though, CAESAR III really focuses on the city level more than the empire level. Many gamers who purchased CAESAR II really enjoyed the micromanagement required to make the most out of a province in that game, but found the empire level strategies to be disorienting and unsatisfying. In CAESAR III, the perspective of empire is brought to you via both the trade and emperor function. The trade function gives you Caesar III GENRE: Strategy RELEASE DATE: 04 '98 DEVELOPER: Impressions Software PUBLISHER: Sierra Studios 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"BLOODSHED RUTHLEDIGE DEATH. BEFORE DISHONOR "


" MicroProse, Inc. All rights reserved. STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION & 01998 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved. MICROPROSE is a registered trademark and Klingon Honor Guard is a trademark of MicroProse, Inc. or its affiliated companies. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Many Klingons died honorably during the making of this game. LAGI ESRB CONTENT RATED BY bronne ALLIR RATING PENDING THE NEXT GENERATION VETI YS Amount or call 1-800-695-GAME, day or night, U.S. and Canada. Available on PC CD-ROM. Visit your local retailer "


"ENJOY SOME KLINGON FAMLY VALUIES. In a bloody world of distrust and violence, only the most brutal will survive. So sharpen your Batleth and prepare to defend your honor in the heart of the Klingon empire — presented in awesome Unreal \" 3-D action. Shred vicious Nausicans, Andorians and even other Klingons. Overpower intelligent enemies who adapt to your assaults, including fiendish TarChops and RopeDs. Take on Deathmatch and multiplayer challenges created by the Internet's top level designers. It's the ultimate test for the ultimate warrior. | KLINGON HONOR GUARD \"IT'S A GOOD DAY TO DIE\" O PROSE www.microprose.com Go to #224 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"CAESAR III SNEAK PREVIEWS only one glaring enemy was on the move, it was exception in the sometimes difficult to get the pre-Alpha we units into physical contact. were playing: In Assuming your subordinate Al our version, the gets a little smarter, though, the ARAR prefects could battles could be considerably collide with barmore interesting than those in barian citizens CAESAR II. and be unable The Al for the defenders seems 2 to extricate significantly smarter. During themselves. some battles, I saw some defendOther than that, ers stand atop the city wall defythe movement ing the destructive onslaughts of VISO was remarkable. elephants until said heroes died X L24 under a crumbling avalanche of Consul rubble as the walls collapsed. of War This was intensely impressive, to The combat say the least. I also appreciate IN VINO VERITAS It takes wheat farms, vineyards, olive groves, and pig farms to sequences were the automatic defense of the balrecreate Rome's economy. Note that the vineyard and winery are depicted differthe weakest listas being able to wear down ently from the wheat farm. part of CAESAR the attack waves before you II. They weren't were forced to risk too many III gives you the opportunity of satisfaction. In CAESAR III, you truly integrated into the core gladiusand pilum-bearing building temples to various gods, don't merely harvest the forest game and they were more of a (swordand spear-wielding, as the need arises. It's even amus. and start building. Instead, you distraction than an interesting respectively) soldiers. ing at times. At one point, I harvest the forest by building a pastime. In addition to building timber yard. You use the timber to forts, walls, and military institu Good Forum stating that he was going to wipe create furniture by building a tions, you'll need to set the for As the deadline for this article out my ships if I didn't build a workshop. You store the furniture mations of your units and direct looms over my head like the temple to honor him. Upon read in a warehouse. Eventually, you their attacks. A certain amount of crumbling tenements of ancient ing that message, I could just establish a trade route to sell your your city's defense will come Rome, I find myself continually imagine a one-eyed oracle wan goods elsewhere. To build from the dering through my city, reading the weapons, you'll have to mine the ballistas bloody entrails of a recent sacriore to fuel the workshop to build built in fice, and cursing our lack of rever the weapons. Pottery moves advance, ence for the god of the sea. through the same stages, begin but your Although that would make for ning with the clay pit. The interde orders to interesting animation, the nice pendence of the economic food various thing about the way religion is chain is interesting. units integrated into the system is that Plus, you get a real bonus in can be you know exactly where the CAESAR III. Each economic activity critical. effects of neglect are going to rip has its own animated sequence. To comple through your economic system. You'll see farmers taking their mand wheat along the road to the gra your units, TRUNK-AIDED CARTHAGINIANS In this battle repreQuaestor Glory nary and granary workers hauling you right senting a Punic War era conflict, your cohort won't A quaestor was sort of a B.C. the grain up into the storehouse. click on stand much of a chance against Hannibal's eleSecurities and Exchange Com You'll see lumber stacking up in the group phants. Note the ballista atop the tower in the mission administrator. For me, one the timber yard and being hauled and get a lower part of the screenshot. of the most enjoyable features of in carts to the workshop. You'll choice of CAESAR III is the economic model. see clay being hauled to the pot formations. Formations include: drawn back to the game to take It's like a combination of SID tery workshop. Prefects march the tortoise, line abreast, line in just one more screenshot or try MEIER'S RAILROAD TYCOON and along the roads, bash rioters in column, regular, and \"mop up.\" just one more tactic before I put SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION. The the head, and throw buckets of Once the formation is selected, this article to bed. To paraphrase graphics remind me more of the water on fires. Right click on citiyou can point-and-click on the Shakespeare's Antony. \"I come to small maps in RAILROAD TYCOON zens and you'll get some idea of target point where you wish to praise CAESAR III, not to bury it.\" and I always enjoyed the sense of their feelings and agenda. The citisend the units. Unfortunately, in This early in my experiences building up the industries and zen database must be very robust the early version, the cohorts or with the Republic, I'd say that towns flanking the railroad depots to keep this happening. Further, legions would slavishly go to CAESAR III looks likely to build a in that game. CAESAR III gives me the path-finding Al seems quite that specific point rather than bigger empire than even that of a chance to do so with even more intelligent for these citizens with engaging the enemy. If the CAESAR II. CGW M OND SELL 82 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"REVENGE OF THE BRETHREN From the creators of Titanic: Adventure Out of Time \"RedJack: Revenge of the Brethren is a delight to play.\" Gamefan \"Swab the decks and get ready for some good, old-fashioned pirate action.\" PC Gamer In-depth storyline Stunning scenery Challenging puzzles Non-stop action CHEMATIC IN-GAME CINEMATIC IN-GAME I THO An epic graphic adventure coming soon for PC/Mac hybrid Download the demo at www.thq.com An epic grap Uit De Mac OS RedJack: Revenge of the Brethren, the RedJack: Revenge of the Brothran logo, Cyberflix and Dream Factory are trademarks of Cyberfil Inc 02153 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"I HAVE AN ENORMOUS TANK BATTALION. I HAVE AN ARSENAL OF WEAPONS AT MY FINGERTIPS. I'VE DESTROYED BUILDINGS IN MY WAY. SO WHY I AM ONE WITH THE CROSSHAIRS. lito will, We DENE RLD 00000000 Jokes are Who I AM A FORCE TO BE RECKONED WITH be 117 AMPOO D0000 50% TERRATOOLS Computer Graphics Solutions Hey hot shot, you're dead because you didn't think. To save the Earth in Urban Assault you must manage your resources, upgrade your technologies, control your squadrons, and deploy your troops using an interactive map. All this at the same time you're shooting everything in sight. 1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Urban Assault are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries, "


"Microsoft I'VE TELEPORTED INTO MY SATELLITE. I'VE DRIVEN MY VEHICLES LIKE A MANIAC. AM IDEAD? I HAVE THE FIERCE AIR FORCE. I TORCHED A TAERKAST BIPLANE. I KNOW HOW TO DEFEND MY HOST STATION 3513 It's the perfect blend of action and strategy that you can make even more challenging with multiplayer capabilities. So use that gray matter. Or you'll lose it. Think yourself over to www.microsoft.com/games/urbanassault Bespre o URBAN ASSAULT "


"West Front D-Day Approaches for TalonSoft's Revamped Engine SNEAK_PREVIEWS insists that armored combat in the North African desert has the fluidity of naval warfare. The conclusion I drew from my conversations with McNamara and Rose is that the core engine-the brains of the game, if you will-can accomplish only so much. The heart and soul of the Germans tended to fight on a diffuse front, which made for a tense, enjoyable scenario. If all the other scenarios are as well designed as Omaha Beach, we're way ahead of EAST FRONT. Stuna pe Moda Mali el. al by Loyd Case he folks at TalonSoft are a lot like American GIs during World War II. When they succeed, they keep pushing forward. If they run into a setback, they drop back, regroup, and come out swinging. Last year, TalonSoft shipped EAST FRONT, which sported an ambitious new tactical turn-based combat engine. The game initially had significant flaws, but TalonSoft has steadily issued patches to address key problems. With WEST FRONT, TalonSoft hopes to substantially tackle the issues of the first game, while adding features that address the unique nature of the Western Front in WWII. GG SMOOTH HEXSIDES The sloped terrain of WEST FRONT definitely looks better than the \"falling off the shelf\" effect of EAST FRONT. Many Games in One WEST FRONT, like its predecessor, will consist of a large number of battles combined with tools to create individual scenarios. However, TalonSoft is also adding a historical campaign, which should appeal to grognards who want to compare themselves against history-more on that a bit later. In some ways, WEST FRONT IS even more ambitious than EAST FRONT was. It spans the entire history of the Western Front of World War II, from 1939 to 1945including the North African the ater. According to TalonSoft's Bob McNamara, the North African battles are almost a separate game, as the nature of desert warfare differs considerably from combat in the hedgerows of Normandy or the winter forests of Bastogne. In fact, Jim Rose, TalonSoft's CEO, The new type of campaign consists of a series of linked scenarios. You'll 90. be given a unit that's a battalSAPPERS, GUNS, AND MONEY It's a good thing that the WEST FRONT engine runs so ion in a famous much faster, since you have to push around so many gorgeous graphics every unit, such as turn: everything from flaming tanks and panic-stricken infantry to engineers Panzerarmee erecting bridges over streams. Afrika. You then take that battalgame thus lies in the hands of the campaign Squared ion through a series of historical scenario designers, a fact that was The WEST FRONT team is taking battles, giving you a chance to see borne out in a mostly completed a hard look at the dynamic cam how you compare to your real-life scenario that TalonSoft provided paign, one of the main sources of counterparts. The campaign will on the Omaha Beach landings. criticism directed at the game have some branching, depending You see, a distinct shortcoming engine. McNamara suggested that on how well you perform, so there of EAST FRONT's campaign was one feature in the final game may be some hypothetical battles that each battle would contain would give the gamer limited abilas well (shades of PANZER only a few victory point locations. ity to tweak his forces and their GENERAL II's invasion of The result was that gameplay start locations before the next bat England if you crush France often resembled a bizarre turn tle, much as in STEEL PANTHERS. quickly enough). based take on the real-time This would prevent, for example, a Casualties carry over from one strategy genre, as the struggle battalion from showing up with battle to the next, but there's also degenerated into melees around five HQ units. He also alluded to opportunity for replacements. I'm the victory-point hexes. fixes in the overall Al—the oppo hoping that TalonSoft provides The Omaha Beach battle in sition forces won't lead with an some detailed unit histories to go WEST FRONT, however, employs a HQ unit, for example. Dynamic with the campaign. Historical series of spread-out victory loca campaigns are planned for campaigns include the Big Red tions. So, when I was playing the Tunisia, the Western Desert, Italy, One (First Infantry Division in Americans hitting the beach, the and Northwestern Europe. Sicily), Kampfgruppe Peiper at the West Front GENRE: Wargame RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98 DEVELOPER: TalonSoft PUBLISHER: TalonSoft 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Map BETH I DEPLOYED MY GUYS USING THE TRANSPARENT MAP. I TOLD MY GUYS TO ATTACK FROM BOTH FLANKS. 2 I KNOW WHERE THE TECH UPGRADE SECTOR IS. I KNOW WHERE TO PLACE MY HOST STATION. I KNOW WHERE THE POWER STATIONS ARE. SO WHY AM I STILL DEAD? 'I SAW A MYKONIAN CUBOID FORMATION. I'M BEING SMART ABOUT MY MOVES. som Use your map to deploy your troops and jump into any of 15 different types of vehicles. I KNOW WHICH SECTORS ARE SECURE. Create your squadrons and set their level of aggressiveness to defend, attack, or raid. ZONE PLASTUFENLE Battle 5 unique alien and human enemy races. Hey mastermind, you're dead because you didn't get your hands dirty. In Urban Assault, you have to battle on the frenzied front lines at the same time you're strategizing the entire war. Of course, your years studying at military school will come in handy, but to win, you better warm up that trigger finger. Shoot your browser over to www.microsoft.com/games/urbanassault. URBAN ASSAULT 1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Urban Assaltare either iristered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the US and/or other countries "


"SOUTHPEAK INTERACTIVE www.southpeak.com "


"IN THE DARK SE SIDE OF THE REED IS THE ON OTHERS WILL THE RIS THE RICHES B WATAKES DEADLY SIN PEOPLE WILL DO THE ALIEN M S TO KEEP TH WHATEV BURIED DEEP I DO ANYTHING EVER IT SICE OF HHE Moon\" THEM HIDDEN. JG COLONY. EP INSIDE TO FINDE Dark Side Of The Moon is a deep-space sci-fi adventure that will immerse you in 360° of completely seamless, incredibly realistic, motion picture quality gaming. LATINS MADING RP WIN 95 CD-ROM WIN 95 VIDEO REALITY "


"D-Day: Omaha Beach 19 SNEAK PREVIEWS A TOUGH NUT FOR THE ALLIES TO CRACK 1. The interface allows you to call in support ing air or artillery fire with the click of a button and you'll need it. 2. U.S. landing craft hit the beach, with infantry drawn to scale. 3. Some landing craft aren't quite so luckygraphically showing why amphibious assaults were so risky. 4-5. The Germans have placed a variety of pillboxes, some with artillery support, others armed with antitank guns. 6. In addition to the rain of small-arms fire, advancing troops also have to deal with mortar installations. 7. Breastworks and entrenchments dot the landscape, providing plenty of cover for defenders. 8. At least with the new graphics, it's easier to tell where the best defensive slopes are-and which paths to avoid. U a 100 Battle of the Bulge, the British Guards Armored Regiment at Arnhem, and the 3rd Recon of the 21st Panzer in North Africa. no provisions for snipers. A feature that tends to puzzle newcomers to the game is supply management. To address some of the confusion, pressing the W key now shows you the best resupply radius (that area in which your unit has a 50 percent or higher probability of being resupplied). McNamara also let us in on another big change: Units in WEST FRONT will move and fight within a command radius, through the use of command posts. Moving individual units willy-nilly will now be very inefficient-command and control are now paramount to success. While you can no longer ignore the chain The Good War There are quite a few differences between the eastern and western fronts of Europe during WWII, which has led to some serious style modifications in the combat engine. And as is normal for the second game in a series, WEST FRONT sports several technical enhancements to its engine. Although the graphics appear much the same, there are subtle improvements. Most hexsides are now sloped, giving a more realistic, less choppy appearance to the map. The designers plan to add 3D animations of aircraft making passes during close air support. Unfortunately, the 2D map is still somewhat spartan in appearance. One feature that should appeal to everyone is the inclusion of paradrops and glider troops. The scale of the game is such that individual platoons scattering during a paradrop will be handled by disrupting the entire unit, rather than trying to account for individual men scattered across terrain. As in the original, the only units in WEST FRONT representing a single man will be leaders; there will be of command, you'll now be able to give orders to entire companies, and they'll actually move as a single unit. This change alone should speed up play immensely over that of EAST FRONT. McNamara noted that there's no provision in the game engine to account for nationality differences. For example, early in the war, American Gis tended to break easily, but then would reform quickly. This would often confuse German units when an enemy they thought they'd beaten would suddenly hit back hard. So, it's up to the WEST FRONT scenario designers to put their spins on nationality differences, and from what we've seen so far, such designs look likely to happen. Speaking of scenarios, in addition to the campaigns, there will be 40-50 individual battles. Despite EAST FRONT's problems, some of its battles were enjoyable; and there will no doubt be some sleep lost over WEST FRONT as well, given famous battles such as the Bulge and Arnhem. In addition to scenarios that cover the campaign areas, there will be the usual share of unique battles, like the Italians invading Greece and some hypothetical 1939 battles between the Allies and Germany. Command and Control, Human-style One of WEST FRONT's most exciting aspects is its multiplayer option. Instead of the familiar two-player option, the game will support up to eight generals over a LAN or the Internet. One advantage of WEST FRONT's turn-based system is that latency won't be a big issue, as it is with multiplayer real-time strategy games. Each side will have an overall commander who issues orders, determines who gets reinforcements, and handles overall strategy. Command and Control is no longer a hypothetical idea. It will be interesting to see how some games play out over the Internet: The simulation of commanders getting orders from afar makes Internet play reflect the real-world issues of distant subordinates. Individual battalion commanders can either choose to follow orders-or not. Just remember the overall commander determines where the reinforcements go! QUAKE has its clans, maybe wargamers can create virtual combat commands of their own. As for me, I'm looking forward especially to the North Africa battles, but they all sound appealing. Now I just need a few good battalion commanders.... CGW SHIFTING SANDS In far-out zoom, these mechanized units are camouflaged nicely: when viewed up-close (inset), you can see a lot of subtle details that weren't available in EAST FRONT. 90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"WELCOME TO THE FEEDING GROUNDS AGGED ALLIANCE Your mercenaries will climb, swim jump and crawl their way through blistering firefights. Take the blend of strategy, role playing and tactical combat that made Jagged Alliance one of the best games of all time'. Ada dozens of new weapons. Over 150 Fight to free an entire nation quirky characters. Your own sector by sector, town by town. custom mercenary. Incredibly realistic combat. Thousands of lines of digitized speech. Face off against an array of hungry predators, from férocious enemy soldiers to dark secrets lurking underground, 22 ELE DE The result is the perfect feeding grounds. The only Encounter dozens of characters. Treat them well, and they'll sundort ting missing is YOU. your cause. Treat them badly, and they'll stab you in the back. Meet Your Mercs The Best of Strategy Nonlinear gameplay, blistering day and night battles, and advanced tactical combat. The Best of Role-Playing Create your own character, improve your team's skills, and explore a huge world. 500000 STEM SIRTECH www.jaggedalliance.com Hire more than 50 different mercenaries, each with their own personality. Go to #126 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink *As rated by Computer Gaming World and PC Games. "


"A Classic RPG *Minus the faeries, spells, and other crap. Sequel to the 1997 Role Playing Game of the Year. OSTASSEN SKILL DETS 00 Bigger Game World. Improved Combat AI. Comprehensive RPG System. HATIRG PEADING Windows 95/98 FALLOUT 2: A POST-NUCLEAR ROLE PLAYING GAME  Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Fallout, Interplay, the Interplay logo, Black Isle Studios, the Black Isle Studios logo, and \"By Gamers. For Gamers.\" are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Windows and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are properties of their respective owners. CONTRATORY "


"Fallout 2 A POST MUCILAR ROLE PLAYIKC EKKE ISLE HY CAMERS. FOR CAMERS. For more information call 1-800-INTERPLAY or visit our website at www.interplay.com. Go to #166 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS BMW. OCA YO Professional Sports Car Racing DEJA FUEL Both the technical specifications and the appearance of the cars (except for the lack of alcohol and tobacco ads) are as close as possible to the real cars in the Professional Sports Car Racing Association. Setting the Pace for the Next Generation of Racing Games a real simulation instead of the arcade racers on which the company had cut its 3D teeth. By Johnny L. Wilson ou don't expect to see mechanics in one of the sponsor's luxury boxes between races. Even if you did, you wouldn't expect to see them huddled around a computer watching a beautiful brunette play a driving game. And even if you expected to see all that, you still wouldn't expect to see them laughing as smoke rose from the tires of a pic ture perfect image of an expensive Porsche spinning out of control into a guard rail. You wouldn't expect that, of hand at the game. Having just taken a ride in the pace car, thought I knew the Vegas track fairly well. Not at high speeds, 1 didn't! Skid marks painted the track as I spun out of control on my first attempt to navigate the tight curves in the Vegas infield For the first time, I began to realize that Virgin intended to create Taking the Wheel I decided to redeem myself. I had the Virgin gang load up the Road Atlanta track. This was one I'd driven myself. I knew where the braking points should be and course, unless you knew that this was the owner, head mechanic, and pit crew of a rival BMW team watching the product manager for Virgin's PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING demonstrate the game at the Las Vegas Speedway earlier this year. They then watched their own BMW go through its paces. They were impressed with the realistic look of the car and they were impressed with the way it handled. The members of the BMW team quickly agreed to let Virgin put their car in the gameand just as readily agreed to give the company plenty of technical specifications to make the car handle even more realistically in every circumstance. Such was my first encounter with PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING. I listened to the mechanics ask questions and I heard the producer, Chris Dudas, offer the right answers. I waited for the pros to leave and then tried my a leo Professional Sports Car Racing GENRE: Sports RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98 DEVELOPER: Virgin PUBLISHER: Virgin PORSCHE SURROUNDINGS The bold paint job of the #17 Porsche sparkles on the track at Sebring, Florida. 94 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Odds of landing this move: 10 to 1. Odds of fathering children afterwards: 1,000,000 to 1. MOTOCROSS MAPNESS. Start the madness at www.microsoft.com/games/mofocross Sick stunts and even sicker crashes. 16 get some serious air stunts like the outrageous Heel Clicker and insane Nac-Nac. Loads of notify-your-next-of-kin wipeouts. Elther way you land it, you're a crowd favorite. Boredom is a four-letter word. You'll constantly admire the mind-messingly photorealistic environment, whether you're face-down in the dirt or 20 feet in the air And keep it all fresh with a built-in track editor and 8-person multiplayer capability. What makes a phat ride? Physics. Choose a track. Or not over Separate physics models for rider 30 tracks, including Supercross, and bike mean you can pull Nationals, Baja, and the dreaded wheelies out of the gate, dive into Stunt Quarry, plus off-track hairpin tums, and showboat during terrain that's so hairy you may your Big Kahuna stunt (as if the Big find yourself saying, \"Track? Kahuna ain't showboaty enough). What track? EVERYONE INTERNET GAMING ZONE Motocross Madness requires a 3-D card, ESAS PAYIT ON ZONE COM 1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reservod: Microsoft and Motocrost Madness are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the US and/or other counutes, E Zone C Microsoft "


"SHOGGEN mobile armor divisior It's not the size of your weapon that counts.. 1000 1350 GROND 50 Windows\"95198 In stores in October! CD-ROM "


"whatever! 1000 1350 CHOYO INITIE www.shogo-mad.com MONOLITH Shogo: Mobile Armor Division and the \"M\" logo are trademarks of Monolith Productions, Inc. PRODUCTIONS www.lith.com Go to #143 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING SNEAK PREVIEWS IT'S THE ONE The Porsche GT-1 leads the pack into the straightaway at Laguna Seca. g figured I could find the racing line fairly easily. This one was significantly better, thank you very much. The track was just as remembered it-save for two small details. The \"S\" was slightly constricted in the game. The real track lets you cheat through it on a line if you get the right angle and there's no one beside you (fat chance!). The game didn't. Also, the game didn't give you that feeling of falling away to the right as did that final curve before the grandstands on the real track. The producer promised to check on those points and we looked at other tracks. Sebring! Ah, there was a surprise. I don't ever remember a PC racing game that allows you to change drivers in mid-race. If you want to drive a realistic 12-hour race at Sebring, the proram is supposed to let you change drivers and have the Al spell you. The producers admit that they don't know if anyone actually will drive the full 12-hour Sebring race, but they are planning for it, and that sounds like a neat feature-even if it is rarely used. Someone needs to do some thing for the fanatics, and I'm glad Virgin wants to do it. there are specific front and rear settings for ride height, tire pressure and compound, spring tension, camber, bump, and rebound. So, there is plenty of tinkering to do and a chance to get an edge at each track by having the optimal setup. Everything is easily handled via sliders, and all racing setups can be saved for future use. Las Vegas, Road Atlanta, Laguna Seca, and Lime Rock will be in the game. Night driving and weather will play intricate roles at each of the tracks. Drivers will be able to choose from GT3 to GT1 cars, from an assortment of actual Porsche, BMW, and Panoz team cars. The cars look great and are faithful to the actual appearances, except for the omission of tobacco and alcohol advertising. Setup isn't quite as robust as in some of the Papyrus games or in CART RACING, but it is sufficient. Time in the garage will enable gamers to adjust brake balance, weight distribution, starting fuel, gear ratios for 1-6 gears, front air dam and rear wing. In addition Back in the Garage For the detail-oriented, Virgin is already able to confirm that speedways at Sebring, Mossport, What's the Difference? Many gamers will want to know what the difference is between this and other racing games. Like others in its class, PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING offers race replay from multiple angles, plenty of setup options, a quick race feature for those who don't want to go through qualifying, and a career mode. In addition, it offers a look at sports car racing, a form of professional racing that's very accessible to most of us. We can identify with the idea of driving a Porsche or BMW, even if we can't afford one. Finally, PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING offers a unique racing experience in the lengthy races where drivers change. We don't know how good the driver Al is going to be or how well the simulation will handle caution flags, but we do believe that PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING is going to win the checkered flag with a lot of race fans if those features are well-implemented. Folks at Virgin hope it will put them in the winner's circle for good. CGW Der W PANOZ, SEE YA' The Panoz racing team will be featured prominently in PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING, as it has been on the circuit. 98 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"When Solar Systems Collide... Let the Battles Begin Exploration Expansion Exploitation Extermination IDOLENNIT Manage Resources:  Acquire and hold asteroids . Mine asteroids for minerals  Generate and transfer power  Buy/Sell resources, ships, and votes to the guild for credits A PETENSIVE eg 103 MALKAR Dynamic 3D solar system with all asteroids in constant orbital motion creates unique challenges as resources and territory move over time. SIMULTANEOUS TURN-BASED STRATEGY GAME MAGIC =O= Multiplayer capabilities for up to 40 players via LAN, Internet, and play-by email, featuring cooperative and competitive play. INTERACTIVE A MAGIC Interactive Magic P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 www.imagicgames.com Design and construct modular ships. Options allow for specialization: offensive, defensive, construction, maintenance, tracking and surveying. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-789-1534 for additional information Go to #247 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"yor KATING PENDING RP ATERRA ECHNIX www.sierrastudios.com CONTENT RATEO BY  1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. @ and or TM designate trademarks or or licensed to, Sierra On-Line, Inc. All Rights Reserved. "


"A NEW EVIL HAS RISEN. ' A NEW QUEST HAS BEGUN. RAYMOND E. FE IST'S Raum THE OFFICIAL SEQUEL TO THE BEST SELLING RPG OF ALL TIME. Go to #192 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS. 101: The 101st Airborne in Normandy This Air Assault Takes a Few Chances and generally cause confusion in the enemy's rear area. Without them, the fortunes of war could have easily been reversed. by Marc Dultz Ithough dozens of U.S. combat divisions saw action in the European Theatre of operations during World War II, one elite formationthe 101st Airborne came to symbolize the resolve of the American Army; they demonstrated the skill, flexibility, and sheer tenacity of the average serviceman. Involved in several of the most climactic battles of the war, the legendary Screaming Eagles would inevitably play a decisive role in both the Market-Garden and Battle of the Bulge campaigns, time and again smashing the Axis juggernaut and helping to pave the way to total Allied victory. Of all its heroic deeds, however, the 101st was most acclaimed for its pivotal role during D-Day. Dropped onto the Norman countryside in the early-morning hours leading up to the invasion, these gallant men were called upon to seize vital objectives, destroy as many German units as possible, 101: The 101st Airborne in Normandy opposition within the immediate drop zone. After securing the landing site, you must quickly coordinate remaining forces, determine which troopers can perform certain critical functions, and decide how to best accomplish the mission at hand. To this end, the troopers must immediately scour the countryside to find their weapon and supply caches: two all-important equipment bags that parachuted with them during the initial drop. Afterward, you'll dole out all of the heavy weapons, ammunition, provisions, and other gear to the remaining members in the group, being careful not to waste anything, since re-supply may not be possible during the mission. T o finally move toward the primary objective, you must identify, with some degree of confidence, distinguishing terrain features found on the tactical map, then compare this information with data provided on the strategic map. After fixing the objective's position, the squad must then proceed with haste toward it, being careful to avoid prolonged entanglements with the enemy, since skirmishes inevitably sap the squad of precious men and materiel. The squad may be ordered to link up with French Resistance fighters in the area, or to join with other units, allying themselves with men that may be lost or following a different set of orders. Air Assault 101 In 101: THE 101ST AIRBORNE IN NORMANDY, publisher Empire Interactive and developer Interactive Simulations have teamed up to recreate the storied exploits of the Screaming Eagles, portraying-in rather stark and sometimes brutal fashion-the paratroopers' role within the framework of the D-Day invasion. Although the game attempts to remain faithful to the history of the invasion, certain events and engagements have been altered to preserve the overall flow of the game and play balance. Serving as a squad commander, you are charged with selecting, paradropping, and leading a \"stick\" of 18 paratroopers behind enemy lines. You and your troops must then locate and fulfill your primary mission objective within a prescribed period of time. Landing scattered, sometimes injured, and often miles away from your main objective, you and your men must come to grips with many of the same hazards the real-life soldiers faced in the crucible of battle. First, you must determine where the bulk of your forces have landed in the early morning darkness, and in the process eliminate any local data LSLELLELTI 196 Wet 612 QR GENRE: Wargame RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98 DEVELOPER: Interactive Simulations Inc. PUBLISHER: Empire Interactive PARADANCE If you fail to give thought to the arrangement of your officers and specialists on the transport plane, you run the risk having them separated from the main group-which provides a nice touch of realism and challenging gameplay. QUA COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 "


"SILLA    OUEEEC PERH TITUTTERIT FALLATION BOO 00 BAD DAY? 40-60 40-50 3040 e 10 100 m TO 0652 ATON BORT LOUPE OLENA B URE 24% AUF L 162 ac OTI ROE DOO Take it out on Canada (no hard feelings, eh?) GLOBAL WINA Elle com www.psygnosis.com/globaldomination Call 1-800-771-3772 for ESRD Game Raling Information ROM Playstation PSYGNOSIS COMING SOON Global Domination Payanosis and the Psyhtis Inda afe Morand 1990-8 Psyonesa 11. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Pablished in the USA by Psypnosis under license trim Sony Computer Entertainment Europe PlayStation and the PuyStation logos are registered trademarks of Sumy Entertainment Inc. The ratings icon is a traderrurk of the Interactive Digital Software Association Go to #268 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"EYES FORWARD. VOICES MUTE. BODIES AT LINES DRAWN BY MY OWN HAND. POSITIONS VEIL OF DISCIPLINE ALL THAT LIES BETWEEN PRECISION OF OUR RANKS WILL SOON GIVE SWORDS CLASHING IN FRENZIED WRATH. BUT INSIDIOUS. EVEN MORE MERCILESS. SILENCE. October » THE SIEGE OF MADRIGAL ale pran] STVA "


"T eam RIGID ATTENTION. READY TO FOLLOW MY CHARGE. BATTLE TAKEN AND FORMATIONS SET ON MY ORDERS. A THIN US AND UTTER HYSTERIA. EACH OF US KNOWING THE WAY TO SCREAMS GURGLING FROM BLOODY MOUTHS AND FOR NOW WE FACE AN ENEMY EVEN MORET UN SOUL BLiGHTERV Wars are fought on the battlefield. That is where the fighting takes place. That is where the real action is. And that is what makes Myth II: Soulblighter a completely different strategy game. No time spent gathering and building. No playing gencral from a distant ivory tower. Your time here is spent in the fray. Trying to fight smarter and harder than your enemy. Myth II: Soulblighter gives you the full battlefield experience with a real 3D cnvironment and a rotating camera that lets you view the carnage from every angle. The battle tactics you employ are key. Seizing the high ground and taking castle walls means life or death. Formations you select, from one warrior to your entire army, decide your fate. Everything that made Myth: The Fallen Lords 1997's Game Of The Year is here. With improvements to game play and graphics, a whole new storyline and bungic.det, the world's best free site for multi-player gaming. BUNGIE Cart Call 1-800-295-0060 or visit our website at www.bungic.com for more information, Myth II: Soulblighter is coming soon. Go to #122 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink *Access to bungle.net is FREE. Player is responsible for all applicable internet fees Myth II: Soulblighter, Myth: The Fallen Lords, and bungie.net are trademarks of Bungie Software Products Corporation. 1998 Bungie Software Products Corporation, All rights reserved "


"HALAR MELIAU MENU 101: THE 101ST AIRBORNE IN NORMANDY SNEAK PREVIEWS MAT Well kubbard Tuu Mw/Os 1719:50 1979 MOVE OUT! Each soldier can stand, crouch, lay prone, crawl, walk, run, and even hide. GOVERNMENT ISSUE Beyond the basic gear, each trooper's load contains two chutes, a \"Mae West\" life jacket, and some spare clothing. SILK STALKINGS This trooper would be wise to cut himself down quickly, before a German squad spots his chute. While reinforcements are always welcome, it should be pointed out that these units could also end up sidetracking your squad from its primary objective. is designed to appeal to the pure strategy gamer. Being a boardgamer from way back, I wanted the strategy element to be strong, as it is in boardgames. I think we have accomplished this, while at the same time developing 101 to appeal to a more casual gaming audience.\" Each turn in the game represents 20 seconds, while each terrain tile measures approximately six feet across. Beyond the game system, players will no doubt be struck by the incredible depth of play and enormous attention to detail in virtually every facet of the game. In fact, just about every imaginable aspect of a paradrop operation has been painstakingly modeled, beginning with the briefing and outfitting phase back in England, and continuing to the actual airdrop on French soil. First, you choose which of nine different types of missions to attempt, which range in scope and scale from the seizure of an impor. t ant bridge to the blowing of a fuel depot. Next, you can choose Look Before You Leap 101 uses neither an isometric nor a 3D perspective to portray the battlefield, opting instead to use a series of expansive overhead maps, similar to the type employed in CLOSE COMBAT. Even more remarkable, 101 is turn based, instead of the more fluid real-time system embraced by many of today's strategy games. Tim Brooks, founder and president of ISI, explains why he elected to buck the trend: \"There are basically two reasons. The first has to do with the Al. The real-time gaming engines of today don't allow for a very intelligent computer opponent. There isn't time for the detailed calculations necessary for an intelligent Al. The second reason, which is just as important, has to do with a true strategy game. 101 to let the computer autoselect the 18 paratroopers who will comprise the stick, or you can handpick each man from the more than 40 different enlisted men and officers portrayed in the game. Each soldier possesses different personality traits, skills, and special training, rated in various categories from intelligence and endurance to weapons usage and throwing ability. Certain soldiers can even speak French or German, invaluable skills should the mission entail having to interrogate prisoners or converse with the locals. Players then move on to the armory and quartermaster's office, where they outfit each soldier or let the computer handle it for them. Again, the lengths to which from the group with no hope of ever rejoining their squad mates. When it's finally time for the soldiers to hit the silk, each man in the stick steps into the doorway then hurls himself into the ominous void. One by one, a series of AVI files vividly depicts how each soldier fared during the jump. Most land without a scratch and can cut loose from their chutes and make ready for battle moments after touchdown. Others aren't so fortunate and drift off course, while others crash into trees or buildings. Some soldiers may fracture a limb on impact, while the truly luckless hang like limp targets for any German snipers that may be lying in wait. It's a brutal scene, no doubt, but one that accurately reflects the perils of a nighttime drop into hostile territory. Once the troops are on the ground, the gamer then controls the actions of each soldier. Action points are expended to perform various functions, conduct move. ment, exchange items and, when the case warrants, fire at the enemy. It's a familiar, tried-andtrue system that seems to work especially well given the level of detail depicted in this simulation. NON NEXT STOP, BERLIN 101 provides a wide variety of missions, such as ensuring that German reinforcements never reach the front. For example, you must carefully consider not only which type of weapon each soldier will take into battle, but also whether or not he's toting cleaning patches, water canteens, two types of field rations, and even personal items. How's that for authenticity? Once the soldiers have been properly outfitted, squad members must board a transport aircraft for their date with destiny. Just prior to takeoff, you choose where each soldier will sit on the airplane, since a soldier's seat assignment ultimately determines the order in which each paratrooper will exit the aircraft. Let's assume you bunch together several officers or explosive experts in one section of the transport plane. If the plane is subjected to flak or drifts off course during the critical jump phase, several members of the squad may become separated Death From Above? 101 has a long way to go before it earns its jump wings as a combat simulation. Still, what we've seen so far makes us believe that this could turn out to be one of the most exacting portrayals yet of men in combatexemplifying in graphic detail the trials and tribulations of that unsung warrior of World War II, the paratrooper. CGW 106 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ONE MAN AGAINST AN EMPIRE BULLOBXX2 The Elder Scrolls Adventures JEDGUARD BETHESDA SOFTWORKS PRESENTS THE ACTION-ADVENTURE EPIC OF A LIFETIME FEATURING AN EVOLVING STORY WITH SWASHBUCKLING DUELS N A LIVING 3D WORLD FALL 1998 WWW. REDGUARD, ELDERSCROLLS.COM Go to #177 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Bethesda Softworks 1370 Piccard Drive, Rockville, MD 20850 Fax 301 926-8010 www.bethsoft.com Bethesda Softworks\". The Elder Scrolls and RedguardTM are trademarks ol Media Technology Limited. Copyright  1998 Media Technology Limited. All rights reserved. The 3Dix logo is a trademark of 3D1x Interactive. Inc "


"THUMBLESS RETURN FIRE VETERAN AND HUNGRY 1995 Record Games, HETUAN FRE 07 Proti pahling, Inc. All cos Beberved all their trademarks are property of their respective compani o n in "


"FEEL LIKE KICKING THIS LITTLE Punk's Burt? THEN You're READY FOR RETURN ARE 2 THE SEQUEL TO THE AWARD WINNING STRATEGY GAME, AVAILABLE NOW FOR your PC, AND IT'S MORE INTENSE THAN EVER. It's up to you to CAPTURE LEG. your opponent'S FLAG WHILE You TAKE CONTROL OF SOME OF THE NASTIEST ASSAULT VEHICLES EVER MADE IN A KILLER 3-D ENVIRONMENT. WERE TALKING EVERYTHIN 6 From Jump JETS TO TANKS. THERE'S EVEN A SLEW OF MULTI-PLAYER OPTIONS IF YOU WANT TO WAVE WAR WITH YOUR FRIENDS. Just DONT COME BEGGING TU us If you LOSE FOR ORDERS AND INFORMATION CALL 1.888.797.5867, PRE-ORDER AT YOUL LOCAL RETAILER TODAY. RETURN FIRE www.return Fie 2. Com Panasonic LADINSPRES RP Opcord www.ripcordgames.com PROLIFIC ROM Go to #078 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"COVER STORY KICK AXE: Twelve New Fantasy Games Take You to Other Worlds for Mind-bending Exploration and Heart-pounding Combat eality stinks: Bills, traffic jams, George Clooney of life, and where every deed fulfilled is rewarded with a pot of gold. With the success of recent titles such as movies. It's enough to drive some people to drink, MIGHT AND MAGIC VI and FINAL FANTASY VII, the fantasy genre is well represented on the and other people straight off to other worlds entirely. PC these days, and in the coming months it's going to get a whole lot better. Take us, for example. Confronted with the (Castle Waiting) and Jeff Smith (Bone), the In the following pages, we take a look at mundane assignment of, say, writing the open best fantasy stories explore the most ageless some of the most highly anticipated projects, ing text for a CGW cover story, one writer took of themes: honor, courage, loyalty, and trust; including Sir-Tech's WIZARDRY 8 and Virgin's refuge instead in his favorite fantasy realm, bonding with others in times of adversity SWORDS AND SORCERY, as well as some very MIGHT AND MAGIC VI, bravely slaying a horde and sacrificing oneself for the greater good. worthy titles you might never have heard of. of angry dwarves while searching for a magic Plus lots of head-bashing and guts-impaling. Most are role-playing games, but two of the artifact. Who cares about deadlines when The best fantasy computer games play off games, MYTH II and HEROES OF MIGHT AND there's treasure to plunder? such themes as well. Slipping into the worlds MAGIC III, are strategy games steeped in Fantasy can offer much more than simple of WIZARDRY or MYTH or DIABLO, gamers can high fantasy. escape. From J.R.R. Tolkein and C.S. Lewis to plunge into situations far removed from dreary So ready your armor and weaponry, Grassmodern practitioners such as Raymond E. reality, where axe-wielding is a prized skill, hopper, and follow us now on our quest for Feist and comic book artists Linda Medley where magic-both good and evil-is a fact the best fantasy games for the coming year. A10 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computerganing.com "


"COVER STO! COLGATE SMILE This handsome guy from MYTH II is just one of the charismatic fellows you'll meet on your journey through our fantasy feature. 112 120 128 132 Contents Wizardry 8 Heroes of Might and Magic III Swords and Sorcery Return to Krondor Diablo II Myth II Baldur's Gate Rage of Mages Revenant Lands of Lore III Hexplore 140 148 155 158 160 160 160 www.computerenie.co COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVER_STORY Life, Chaos, and the knowledge of Everything by Johnny L. Wilson IMRAN Ancheide Whavarsham olem POTRE A TRUTH TO TELL In NPC encounters, such as this one c) with Aletheides (whose name is rooted in the Greek word \"truth), you'll use the parser or keyword list to discover if NPCs are telling the truth. eturn with me now to those thrilling days of yesteryear. No, I'm not talking about the days of Trebor and Werdna in the earliest WizARDRY games. Return with me to the conclusion of WIZARDRY 7: CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT, the last game in D.W. Bradley's trilogy that began with WIZARDRY V. At that conclusion, you discovered that the secret of life is matter infused with energy in the correct proportion. In WIZARDRY 8, you discover that the Astral Dominae (the ultimate artifact of life which was incarnated in WIZARDRY 6: BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE, and which the Dark Savant recovered at the end of WIZARDRY 7) is not the only artifact crafted by Phoonzang, the Cosmic Lord. Indeed, Phoonzang also shaped the Chaos Moliri (the ultimate artifact of change, currently in the possession of the Mook, those dog-like creatures introduced in WIZARDRY 6) and the Destinae Dominae (the cosmic cache of all knowledge). each race has its own special abilities) is the capacity to merge items together, a cosmic cross between Rube Goldberg, Doc Savage, and Inspector Gadget. As always, the WIZARDRY background and plot line allow enough comic (or should that be \"cosmic?\") relief so that a lighter tone overall exists in this universe than in most role-playing universes. Part of the fun is in conversation. Characters will talk to the rest of the party and to the leader, as did the characters in JAGGED ALLIANCE. Better than in JA, however, you'll be able to choose the voices for members of your party. When you create characters, you'll choose a voice sample and the personality that goes with it. The personality choice will determine whether the characters provide comic relief or an obnoxious counterpoint to your leadership. WIZARDRY 8 doesn't always have a light hand, however. Brenda Garno, the long-time WIZARDRY expert who has taken over the reins of the series, is keenly interested in character interaction. At times, you'll be faced with moral dilemmas and conflicting agendas. At other The last artifact was hidden by a madman on a planet called Dominus. Phoonzang had hoped that the artifacts were hidden beyond the reach of mortal hands. Unfortunately, chaos and entropy have caused those talis mans of power to become acces. sible once more. Indeed, at a time when the Cosmic Lords are preparing for the Ascension (an apotheosis unseen in our world since the physical demise of L. Ron Hubbard), a tremendous wave of would-be successors are converging on the planet Dominus. Wizard of \"Ha\"s So, in the grand tradition of the previous WIZARDRY adventures, magic and technology meld in a strange blend of medieval hackand-slash, enhanced by just enough science-fiction to keep gamers from getting complacent. The indigenous races on Dominus are low-tech; the spacefarers chasing the three grails of Phoonzang are definitely high-tech. Indeed, the high-tech races introduce the possibility of a new character class—the Gadgeteer. The Gadgeteer's best special ability (each character class and WIZARONY 8 RELEASE DATE: 02 99 DEVELOPER: 51-tech canada. Lid PUBLISHER: Sit Toch Software VIEW MASTER You'll be able to choose between a traditional, full-screen, or modified interface screen as you explore WIZARDRY 8. A112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES You still have the helpful interface below, but have more room in the combat window. Or, you also have the option of a full-screen view where the interface disappears entirely. You'll still be able to call it up when you need it, but most of the time, it's out of your way. most importantly, the new engine allows for some extremely asymmetrical environments. Mountain paths are uneven and narrow, towns and fortresses feel more like actual architecture, and large structures offer a true sense of proportion. In addition, the game features nearly 90 spells, and more than 3/4 of those spells have unique spell effects, complete with dynamic lighting. WIZARDRY 8 has plenty of visual pizzazz to spare. COVER STORY Wizard of Pause The philosophy underlying WIZARDRY 8's combat system has times, you may face illness or possession by another being or spirit. You may have to deal with a kidnapping. You might merely have to decide whether to trust a nonplayer character (NPC). You might even end up killing the NPC who was placed in a situation in order to warn you about an upcoming trap or offer a clue about a puzzle you'll need to solve. Of course, sometimes NPCs will lie to you. NPCs are built around an evolv. ing knowledge database. Many have a need-based agenda of their own and this is continually modified by what gets discovered in the course of the game and how that information is traded. This means that you could feasibly have an encounter with an NPC at any point in the game. The NPC encounter structure even has an elaborate system for trading information and items, as well as for sorting through any of the existing knowledge database by letter, person, item, time, place, or other. You can type in questions using the traditional parser system or you can click on keywords in the keyword list. Best of all, you can customize the keyword list according to what you learn in the game. You can also recruit up to two NPCs to join your party. Of course, they won't always want to join your party; and even if they do, they won't always stay long. Sometimes, they'll even steal some of your hard-earned goodies, but the logical behavior and individual agendas of the NPCs add to the credibility, as well as enjoyability, of the WIZARDRY 8 universe. any point in the game). One screen has character portraits and iconic attribute information for every member of the party, framing the action window or firstperson perspective. The player's command is augmented by an extremely intuitive interface along the bottom of the screen. In that interface, you get a dynamic overhead view showing the party's relative position and threat detec tion on a more strategic map, the traditional WIZARDRY text descriptions of each battle round, and a directional view that shows the party's facing with regard to threats-much like a flight-sim's radar instrumentation. Sounds just like the WIZARDRY 7 look with smooth-scrolling and a couple of new features, doesn't it? Wrong. This is not your ancestor's WIZARDRY. You can also opt for a wide-screen view where you get a bigger action window, but only have attribute sliders and an abbreviation for each character framing the sides of the action. wwvo WWE TH: 10ak WC: 2422 PC: 2101 Wizard of \"Ah\"s WIZARDRY 8's new C++-based engine allows for more flexibility than ever before. Naturally, it follows the de rigeur trend of providing a smooth-scrolling 3D perspective with full D3D and Open GL support. Gamers will also have a choice of three different screen sizes (which they can change at ENGINEERING FEAT WIZARDRY 8's new engine allows for interesting territories, such as a sea cave (top), and large interiors, such as this passageway. U www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 113 "


"Ne first class. No coffee service. N. inflight movie. WWII FIGHTERS The fasten seatbelt sign is on — as you experience the turbulence of WWII dogfighting in the Battle of the Ardennes over Belgium. You're at the throttle of a P-51D Mustang where there's nothing between you and German FW-190's but six machine guns and your own quick thinking. Choose one of 7 different WWII Allied or Axis fighter planes, recreated with the detail only Jane's can offer. And it's all historically accurate, with true life graphics including 13 planes, ground troops and detailed bridges. Jane's WWII Fighters, Real seat-of-your pants flight sim excitement. No fancy instruments and no forgiveness. ESRH LATINS ERAS "


"No friendly skies. PH HANO HOLD Jane's COMBAT SIMULATIONS No compromise in accuracy. You'll fly the best fighters of WWII, including the P-51D Mustang. Bf 109G. P-38J Ligtiting, and the Me 262 No computerized instruments here. The cockpit features a lifelike panel you can actually read as the view pans to track your ant bomme nval. No detail is too small. Jane's graphics are so accurate, you'll see details like falling bits of fuselage as a plane is hit-and falls apart. We Build Sims By The Book www.janes.ea.com We Build Suns By The Book and Electronic Arts are trademarks or registered of Electronic Arts in the US and/or other countries, Jane's is a registered trademark of Jane's formation Group, LTD Jane's Combat Simulations is an Electronic Arts Brand, Photograph by John M. Dibbs. Go to #144 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVER_SIT to determine whether to put all of your spellcaster's strength in one massive attack or to divide up the attacks among smaller opponents. The new magic interface is a considerable crocodile's teeth would do cutting and biting damage, but the tail is basically a club that does crushing and bludgeoning damage. Finally, though it may be obvious, each weapon is databased in such a way that you will only be able to choose attack options that make sense for the type of damage that weapon can do. WIZARDRY 8 is much more robust in this area than previous WIZARDRY games have been. only changed slightly. Instead of hopping on the real-time bandwagon, WIZARDRY 8 has opted to stay with phased combat. This allows for better management and more tactical nuances. (Remember, phased combat isn't just taking turns. It's applying action points and initiative to determine who can get in the first shots and who can perform multiple attacks per round.) Realizing, however, that there is a new generation of gamers that doesn't have the patience of the hardcore role-players, the new game also features a \"continuous combat\" system. Once you've input your basic tactics, the party will continue to use those tactics without having to have round-byround input from you as the player. Better yet, this is not a onetime decision made at the start of the game, but you'll be able to Wizard of Laws Early (pre-alpha) experimentation with WIZARDRY 8 indicates several probabilities. First, move freely back and forth between the combat systems according to your mood or needs. My favorite change in combat, however, is the ability to perform preemptive long-range combat before the bad guys or monsters are in tactical range. It never made sense to me that I had to wait until the party was at swordpoint to unleash a game's version of the Nuclear Blast spell on unwitting opponents who blunder into my sphere of influence. I also like the fact that the new magic interface allows you Defining Personality in WIZARDRY 8 When creating a character in WIZARDRY 8, you'll need to consider psychological factors. Personality generation is basically a quick-click process. You choose the general description of your character, modify that by a specific qualifier, and then choose a sample portrait, voice type, and sample quotation. Following is a chart of the personality descriptions and qualifiers, MYSTIC PIZZAZZ The U new spell effects for psionic blast (top), magic missiles (middle), and fireball (bottom), illustrate WIZARDRY 8's dynamic lighting effects. improvement over previous games. Another welcome change is the program's ability to switch targets automatically. Assume you're underwater and fighting a school of razor-toothed Baruta fish. You choose the optimal attack forms for each of your characters and proceed to wipe out one of the fish during the first round of combat. Previously, you would have had to make all of the same choices for the next target before proceeding. Now, the program merely follows through and applies your attack choices to the next closest target in the group of monsters. All of which leads to the most important combat change in the game. The monster Al is much smarter than in previous games. Monsters navigate around each other, avoid collisions, and hunt you down. They run away when they have no chance of winning, and they know how to use ranged combat to ambush you. Plus, the database underlying the monster creation is such that they may not only have multiple attacks per round, but multiple types of attacks. For example, a GENERAL DESCRIPTION Tough Intellectual SPECIFIC QUALIFIERS Aggressive All Muscle Burly Leader Chaotic Eccentric Arrogant Kindly Smug Con Artist Cunning Loner Laid-back Clown Nervous Savage Thrill Seeker WIZARDRY 8 looks to be more than a worthy successor to its heritage-this game could be a defining moment in the series. Second, WIZARDRY 8 seems likely to offer the richest RPG experience yet. Third, WIZARDRY 8 is sure to miss first quarter of '99 and head into mid-year. Fourth, it seems almost certain that Sir-Tech Canada, Ltd., the developer of the game, will become a major developer-even if Sir-Tech Software ceases to be a full-service publisher. Fifth, and finally, it seems very probable that at least three editors at CGW will lose more than 100 hours of their lives on this game. It's that magical. Carefree Other A116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Remember when you used to torture these guys? "


"They remember you. ARMY MEN Real Combat. Plastic Men Take any one of six classic army men figures into combat in this squad level action-strategy game. Melt attacking infantry with your flamethrower or shatter enemy vehicles with your bazooka and tank. "


"ARVY REAL COMBAT. PLASTIC MER: www.armymen.com Break your troops out of a heavily guarded POW camp in one of over 30 action-packed missions. Make your way through alpine, desert and bayou terrains or play against your friends on special multiplayer maps. 1998 The 3D0 Company. All rights reserved. Army Mon is a trademark of the 3DO Company. All other trademarks are properties of their respective owners. Go to #113 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PUTRE "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES HEROES OF MIDI W MAGIC II COVER_STORY Everything Gets Bigger and Better in New World's HEROES || Sequel to wonder what had become of Queen Catherine. In HEROES III, we find out that Queen Catherine returned to her home of Erathia to find her father dead and the land in disarray. As she sets about trying to rebuild her father's empire, she finds a mysterious undead enemy at her doorstep trying to complete the ruin of the empire. The by Elliott Chin he best turnbased strategy franchise in recent years is about to get even better. HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC III is slated for a December release, and it looks like HEROES II on steroids. Jon Van Canegham, the creator of both the MIGHT AND MAGIC and HEROES series, says that HEROES III will be bigger and better than HEROES II, but it will be similar enough to keep that HEROES feel. It's more than just HEROES II with new graphics. The entire town and heroes model has changed, and the spells, monsters, and artifacts have been beefed up with plenty of additions. minicampaigns, one in which you play for Catherine's side and one in which you play for the enemy. Act III is the last minicampaign, and here you play Catherine's general in the final showdown against her undead father. Each minicampaign will have from three to four scenarios. The scenarios in each campaign will also be more story-oriented than those in HEROES II. Now, there will be quests within scenarios. Basically, by entering special adventure sites, you'll be given optional quests that might affect the outcome of the current scenario and successive scenarios in the minicampaign. WORLD WITHOUT END HEROES III's world maps are going to look like a lusher version of what we're used to, along with a number of underground sites to explore. Might and Magic In your capacity as a general, you'll hire heroes, just as you did in HEROES II. There are now 16 hero types, but instead of the hero dictating the town type, the town type will now dictate the hero (see the sidebar for the castle and hero types). Basically, each town produces two hero types. At the Castle, for instance, you can hire a knight or cleric. At the Tower you can hire wizards or alchemists. Of all the HEROES II hero types, only the sorceress does not make an appearance in HEROES III. The heroes' abilities will also be more differentiated. The HEROES II skills return, but with 10 new types. Certain skills will be available only to certain hero types. For Heren Dhe te ng The Third Chapter If you've played MIGHT AND MAGIC VI, you know that New World is now tying its HEROES and MIGHT AND MAGIC series together with a common story. The story in HEROES II led to MIGHT AND MAGIC VI, which in turn leads us to HEROES III. In MIGHT AND MAGIC VI, we discovered that Queen Catherine left Enroth shortly before King Ironfist disappeared at the beginning of the game. At the end of MIGHT AND MAGIC VI, we were still left mysterious figure turns out to be the raised body of her father. Now, Queen Catherine needs your aid to destroy the evil armies, lay her father to rest, and restore the empire to its former glory. The campaign for HEROES III is a little different from that of HEROES II. Instead of a large campaign, the game's story will be told through six minicampaigns that are split into three acts. Act I has three minicampaigns that you can play in any order. In each campaign, you'll play from a different side-Catherine's, the enemy's, or a neutral side 50 you see the war from three different perspectives. Act II has two D D e Henoes Of MICHT AND MACIC III RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98 DEVELOPER: New World Computing PUBLISHER:3DO PARTY FOR YOUR RIGHT TO FIGHT Bigger combat screens, tougher monsters, more spells--all this and more means we'll soon be up all night again, battling it out in HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC III. 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"IN STORES IN OCTOBER! THE ULTIMATE RPG CHALLENGE PAGE of MAGES UNLEASH THE MAGIC meta Lilit Call our new Rage of Mages Hint Line: 1-900-CALL-LITH Available in October Windows95198 www.lith.com CD-ROM www.rageofmages.com PRODUCAND.IS Kur Mind the love are trademarks of M otic Production, Inc. Go to #142 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Qboyka NIVAL entertainment Nival Entertainm19 Huku intertainment 1998 "


"Jazz is back. And this time he's got a wild hare \"Jazz Jackrabbit 2 is the perfect game for the whole family, featuring zany characters, a story right out of a Saturday morning cartoon, and vintage side-scrolling gameplay,\" GameSlice \"Demented humor, memorable characters and animations combine with fast action and eye-catching graphics to create what could be one of the summer's hottest titles.\" online gaming review \"Adrenaline-pumping action from start to finish.\" The Adrenaline Vault \"Jazz Jackrabbit is back in business for a sequel that one-ups every other platformer in existence.\" Game Slice \"The best side-scrolling game ever...Jazz Jackrabbit 2 is destined to become a classic.\" PCME Created by Published by EPIC \"*****\"The Adrenaline Vault «kkkk Hotgames \"****\" GamePower AMERA . www.epicgames.com www.godgames.com de pe "


"FUN FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY! * FROM THE CREATORS OF UNREAL COMES THE HILARIOUS SEQUEL TO THE 1994 ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR! Devan Shell is up to no good again. This time, he's stolen Princess Earlong's diamond Fing. As Jazz, or his spaced-out brother, Spaz, you must travel through time and take on wacky turtles, bizarre monkeys and more if you want to get the ring back from the evil Devan. If you don't, you could be history INCLUDES BOTH THE FULL VERSION OF THE ORIGINAL JAZZ JACKRABBIT AND THE JAZZ CREATION STATION LEVEL EDITOR, WHICH ALLOWS YOU TO CREATE YOUR VERY OWN LEVELS! ACKRABBIT www.jazzjackrabbit.com Go to #123 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 0.1998 Gathering of Developers, Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. 38 .329 "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES De Guy Debug 2 COAVER_STORY JE LI Town Ecco example, you can select the Battle Tactics skill for the knight and barbarian, but not for the wizard. You'll also be able to personalize heroes via equipment. Instead of just dumping artifacts on a hero, you'll now equip them on a \"paper doll.\" Each hero will now be able to wield one weapon, a suit of armor, a shield, and a few rings or other special items. You'll no longer be able to load up on multiple weapons, but there will now be more artifacts (their number increased from 64 to 128) to distribute among your heroes. And some of the artifacts can be combined for greater effects. The spell system is also improving. Now, all spells fall into four schools of magic: air, earth, fire, and water. While the Wisdom skill will still determine what level of spells you can learn, the Elemental skills will determine the skill at which you cast those spells. Greater proficiency in an Elemental skill will mean greater effects for your magic. So, even though a knight might be able to cast spells via Wisdom, he will never learn fire magic, and thus never be able to cast fire spells as well as a wizard. This added level of learning means there will be even more powerful grades of magic and more differentiation between spellcasting and fighterstyle heroes. have seven slots for troops. To accommodate the greater number of slots in a stack, the tactical map will nearly double in size. There will also be more terrain nodes that could affect movement or attack on the battlefield. The monsters you'll command will also be beefed up. Now there are 59 creatures, and every monster type has an upgraded formfor a total of 118 monsters. Those upgrades won't just be differentcolored creatures, however. The upgraded beasts will be re-rendered (HEROES III uses 3D prerendered monsters) and will sport new attacks and animation. Heroes will now also be able to purchase more war machines to bring into battle. In addition to the catapult from HEROES II, you'll be able to buy a ballista that will shoot at troops behind enemy walls, a first-aid tent that will regenerate the hit points of the first unit-group in your stack, and an ammo cart that provides unlimited ammunition to your ranged troops. You won't be able to have more than one of each type, but you can load up on all four war machines for battle. TOUGH TOWN Like everything else in the game, the towns are being beefed up with more units and expanded with many more options. See that floating city in the sky? That's home to the angels and archangels-the game's toughest new units. with upgrade opportunities). The town's defenses can likewise be upgraded, from simple walls to a moat and missile tower to two more towers and fortifications. Each town can also build a market place with a resource silo that adds a resource bonus for that town's native resource-type. For example, the castle town (knights and clerics) gets a gold bonus, while the tower town (wizards and alchemists) gets a mercury bonus. Every town will also have a blacksmith who can build the new war machines. However, a town will offer only one machine type. The knight blacksmith can build catapults while the wizard black smith offers first-aid tents. Each town will also have some special, advanced building. One town type can build artifact artisans, a building that allows you to buy or sell artifacts. Another town type can build a freelancer's guild, which allows you to sell creatures. Yet another town type has the Portal of Summoning, which basically gives you a bonus creature pool for one type of creature home you control on the global map. Other additions to the global map will be more adventure sites, including quest sites, as well as entrances to the underground worlds of HEROES III. Many scenarios in HEROES III will have underground sections, which can sometimes double the map sizes. The Economic Side The enhancements in HEROES III extend to the towns themselves. Now, there will be more buildings to increase your economy. Each town will have a town hall that can be upgraded for increased gold and creature production (like a combo of the statue and well but Call to Arms Combat in HEROES III will be bigger. Both heroes and towns will Towns and Heroes Here are the eight different town types, the heroes they support, and some monster examples per town: Town Heroes Sample Units Castle................ Knight, Cleric ..........................Cavalier, Archangel Tower ............... . Wizard, Alchemist .................... Archmage, Genie Rampart ................ Druid, Elf ................................Battle dwarf, Gold dragon Inferno............... Demoniak, Heretic ................Hellhound, Devil Necropolis.............. Necromancer, Death Knight ......... Vampire, Ghost dragon Dungeon .......... Warlock, Overlord................ Beholder, Black dragon Stronghold ............. Barbarian, Battlemage..... Wolf rider, Cyclops Fortress....... ..Witch, Beastmaster ............. Basilisk, Chaos hydra Good Tidings It's seems like an eternity since HEROES II shipped, and many strategy fans have been yearning for another good turn-based strategy game to play. With all the promise it holds and the addictive quality it's sure to possess, HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC III might just give us fantasy junkies that fix we so desperately need. Let's hope all goes well between now and the game's projected release date in December. A COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"LOOK INTO THE FUTURE OF ROLE-PLAYING From acclaimed game designer D.W. Bradley, creator of Wizardry V, VI and VII, comes an adventure as infinite as your imagination. Swords and Sorcery Come Devils, Come Darkness is about to change gaming forever. fuords Burbery INTERACtive COME DEVILS COME DARKNESS  Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. Swords and Sorcery is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. 18061 Fitch Avenue, Irvine, CA 92614 U.S.A. For information on this product's rating, please call 1-800-771-3772. Go to #240 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"ou know the feeling. It sets in around the 5th or 6th pot. It's a bit beyond the traditional adrenaline rush. Well, that's what it feels like when you get to the 5th and 6th cylinders in Dead Reckoning. And with 9 more cylinders left to conquer, each featuring a more challenging alien opponent than the last, you'll be wired for days. So don't put your plans for universal domination on the backburner. Check out the Dead Reckoning web site at www.deadreck.com now and look for this addictive game to hit store shelves near you soon. Dead Reckoning is massive multi-player fun to the last drop Who spiked 15 unique cylindrical battlefields Customize your game by selecting wingmen, ships and opponents Battle other players via internet, modem, IPX or direct connection Designed to take full advantage of 3D card acceleration PER "


"MMWMVINA RECKNING. the coffee? Warning: This game is served scorching HOT. 12 GOLDTREE Go to #134 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES SWORDS & SORCERY: COVER_STORY COME DEVILS. COME DARKNESS D.W. Bradley's Long-awaited Return to Role-playing Is an Old-school Fantasy—With a Few New Tricks EAT THIS U) SKULL BOY Whether you're exploring or fighting, you'll be able to switch on the fly between firstand third-person perspectives from any character's viewpoint. In this screenshot, we have a first-person attack on a skeleton seen from the eyes of the mighty Babar. By Jeff Green one of the most y job in life is to ambitious RPGs of make the world's the year. greatest RPG.\" Thus speaks Old School D.W. Bradley, At its core, designer of SWORDS AND SWORDS AND SORCERY is an SORCERY: COME unabashed highDEVILS, COME fantasy, old-school DARKNESS, a RPG of yore, with fantasy role-playing game due a rich, stat-heavy NICE TRUNK SWORDS AND this Christmas from Virgin Intercharacter system SORCERY'S 3D engine keeps all active Entertainment. And though the characters in sharp perspective, and a storyline that might sound like an impossieven at close range. Shown here are that actually tries ble burden to place upon oneself, two of the more fantastical races, the to tell a story, if sheer enthusiasm and force of elephantine Omphaaz and the snakewhile providing will were all it took, you'd almost like Lizzord. enough freedom have to take him at his word. of exploration and Bradley-designer of Sir Tech's designing with a 16-person team subquests so that gamers don't WIZARDRY V, VI, and VII—is a long at his new company, Heuristic feel that they're on a leash. time, hard-core gamer who loves Park. After spending some time The plot, actually, isn't likely to RPGs, loves to talk about RPGS, with him and playing a pre-alpha break any new ground, but it and most importantly, loves to talk version of the game, I can say that remains firmly in the \"heroic about his new RPG, which he's SWORDS AND SORCERY is certainly quest\" genre. Set in the fantasy world of Gael-Serran, the game sets you upon a quest to retrieve a legendary magic sword, which you'll need as the first step toward defeating Cet, the Lord of HUMAN SEEDWARE GNORBIT Death who has recently awakened from an entombed state, Your explorations will take you Pixir KOMPHASZ WSKA GOURK to three distinct environments: Badeen (a forest setting), Ishad N'ha (mountains), and Seaville F RATING (The Great Sea). Within each ZOND \"hub,\" as Bradley calls them, REITLING there are four regions, for a total DOX+2 6+2 INT41 STR-2 FOR-3 of 12 distinct game environments. VORS These environments will run the gamut of classic fantasy settings: THE RACE CARD You can create a party of up to six o characters from 10 distinct races. You could even a serpent temple, dwarven mines, play the game with a solo character, but you probably haunted castle ruins, ogre lands, wouldn't last very long. a sunken city, a pyramid, and more. Each hub serves as a central location, in which players can buy and sell items, heal or resurrect party members, and store excess inventory items and gold. The party-based game lets you create and use up to six characters, though you can use fewer if you want. Fantasy fans disappointed by the human-only characters in MIGHT AND MAGIC VI will be thrilled to know that Bradley is including 10 races in SWORDS AND SORCERY, including the Whiskas, a feline race (a staple of Bradley's games), and the Oomphaaz, a spiritual elephantine race. Each will have its own particular advantages and disadvantages. After selecting a race, you'll choose a class for each character, assign ability points, choose skills and spells, and name your character. Stats are divided between mental traits (Intelligence, Spirituality, Will, and Presence) and physical traits (Strength, Dexterity, Agility, and Fortitude). FOREG SATILITY 7 EXY AGUTS 9 SWORDS & SORCERY COME DEVILS. COME DAOKNESS RELEASE DATE: 0409 DEVELOPER: Heuristic Park PUBLISHER: Virgin interactive Entertaiment 2128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES One of the more interesting gameplay aspects of the partybased system will be the ability to group characters. At some points in the game you're going to want to split up the party—to have some members perform sentry duty, for example and Bradley said there will probably also be puzzles in which your party will definitely need to be in two places at once. turn-based or real-time system, the game employs phased turns, somewhat akin to FINAL FANTASY VII's phased combat, in which battles take place in continuous time, but each character can only attack when \"ready\" (a state determined by stats, damage taken, and so on). The speed of phases can be adjusted, so battle can play out as fast or slow as you want to deal with it. multiplayer mode. That is, if three different human players all approach an NPC, how does the NPC carry on three conversations at once? And does the NPC have the same conversation, or does it carry on different ones depending on who it's talking to? Such concerns both inspire and COVER_SITORY \"I had a vision of all this 25 years ago,\" he said. \"To get to see it happen, to be a part of it, is a very cool thing. That's the great part about this job. Of course at other times, when trying to get the game done, the job sucks and all I can think is, 'Please shoot me.\" New School Newest School So far, so good. Though, clear But Bradley's biggest innova ly, we're on well-traveled ground tion—and biggest challenges for the long-time RPG player. in the integration between What does Bradley have up his SWORD AND SORCERY's singlesleeve to modernize the experience? \"WIZARDRY VII was my last statement, my farewell to that style of gameplay. I knew that 3D Some UFOURO would be the next big thing, and it's taken me three years to figure out what to do with it.\" What he decided to do was to craft a 3D engine that will allow a third-or firstSTRENGTH IN NUMBERS Each person perspective from character class has its own disthe point of view of any tinct advantages and disadvancharacter in your party—a tages. The Omphaaz are spiritual perspective that can be beings, and thus begin the game with a high level of Spirituality. switched at any time, onThat elephantine body also gives the-fly. Whether traveling them a high rating in Strength. through the world, or in combat, you'll thus have multiple angles, and multiple and multiplayer modes. The idea viewpoints, from which to view for multiplayer is not deaththe action. match, but cooperative play, in While playing the pre-alpha, it which gamers can explore the almost felt like too much choice world together. (Whose perspective should I fol \"I'd been involved in live rolelow? Am I better off in first-or playing, creating adventures, third-person?), but it became since college, when I did it on pen clear with time that that kind of and paper,\" says Bradley. \"What decision-making will figure into miss in terms of interaction I've the game's strategy-and was tried to recreate on the PC.\" clearly more dynamic and liberatCoolest of all is the fact that ing than the static party perspec. you will have the ability to freely tive in standard first-person RPGs. transfer party members and game Combat is another area that items between single and multihas a different feel to it. You can player games. Anything that happre-assign characters to attack on pens to a character in one game their own or to wait for you to will be true for that character take control. Rather than a strict globally, which could be both good and bad. You can advance your character in a multiplayer game, or pick up some badass weapon, and then take it back to your single-player game. Conversely, if your character dies in a multiplayer game, you'll need to revive him/her at the town hub for your single-player game as well. The idea is to build an emotional attachment to the characters you create to make your actions have consequences. There will also be items that you can customize and interchange between singleand multiplayer games. Players with the correct abilities will be able to cast enchantments or spells on a weapon, for example, to increase its speed or inflict extra damage on dragons. Bradley envisions players going specifically to buy, sell, or trade items with each other, which players could then use in single and multiplayer games. How to make this kind of integration between modes work is a huge problem, and neither Bradley nor Virgin pretend to have all the answers yet but they claim that they're almost there. One problem the team just solved was how to script and code NPCs in Quest for Glory SWORDS AND SORCERY appears to be the kind of RPG that is going to either soar or sink, depending on Bradley's ability to make his visions work-and on his ability to keep the game fun as well. As he put it himself, \"It doesn't matter how cool an algo rithm you create; if it's boringit sucks.\" Combining old-school sensibilities with new-school technology, SWORDS AND SORCERY has the potential to be a first-rate fantasy game. Here's hoping that all the algorithms work, and that the game doesn't suck. INN MA THIS TOWN IS OUR TOWN SWORDS AND SORCERY has U three town \"hubs\" to which your party can return for buying and selling, healing, resurrecting, and more. These hubs are represented visually by 2D screens. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 120 "


"Made From The Best Stuff On Oddworld. "


"Some cry because of the challenging gameplay. Others cry for their enslaved brothers. But most Mudokons cry because electrodes are attached to their tear glands, stimulating the ingredients for SoulStorm Brew, the best-selling nauseating elixir from SoulStorm Brewery. In the classic Oddworld tradition, Abe's Exoddus delivers more intuitive communication and entrepreneurial evil than ever before. Richer language. Lusher environments. Tougher challenges. Deadlier farts. Welcome to the tastiest gaming brew ever concocted. Slug it down. New & improved save feature! Save your game anywhere! AN ALL-NEW EPIC FROM THE CREATORS OF ODDWORLD: ABE'S ODDYSEE Fart possession! No other game has it no other game wants it! SAS LLAUGHING ASIANES TURK2 Slap some sense into those Mudokons but look out for laughing gas! TIF TOU STERK ABE FXODDUS A complete Exoddus requires more stealth than a ninja army. Evil rules but Abe's new powers mean you're up to the task! odd to the last drop Available at your local retail store. Order direct at store.gtinteractive.com or call 1-800-610-GTIS TEEN ONEED A HINT? 1-900-CALL-2GT (225 5248) (95 per minute $1.95 for fax back maps) Must be 18 years or older or have parents permission to call. Touch tone phones only. Ole AIT D ES LINE OF DopwonGa DODDWORLD Y INHABITANTS GT Interactive PlayStation Aware Liletorms in Software ROM Virtual Entertainment www.gtgames.com www.oddworld.com www.xitinteractive.com AVT O 1998 word bailants, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Created by Odk world. Published and Distributed by GT Interactive Software Clos a trademark and Lo trademark of interactive Software Corp. PlayStation and the PlayStation logos ara registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Odworld inhabitants Logo is a registered trademark of Odworld Inhabitants. Inc. Al other trademarks are the property of their respective companies, Go to #183 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVER_STORY licensed by Sony for TANARUS and EVERQUEST), which furiously began working on the game code. Soon RETURN TO KRONDOR was alive and well once again. In late 1997, 7th Level found itself on the verge of collapse, and it looked as if RETURN TO KRONDOR would be going down with it. Pyro Technix's General Manager, Sinjin Bain, felt he had to save not only his own company, but RETURN TO KRONDOR as well. This is when Sierra came back into the picture, purchasing Pyro Technix in December 1997, along with the rights to RETURN TO KRONDOR. Once again, the world was right for RPG fans everywhere and especially for fans of Feist's fantasy world of Midkemia. KRONDO Allack Unevaluatecl Arabic Thug) mo SWORD PLAY RETURN TO KRONDOR's combat will be turn-based, but in a 3D-space, which will allow for complex tactical thinking. Big World Everyone at Pyro Technix calls RETURN TO KRONDOR an \"epic\" game, and after spending a day at the company's studio, I have to agree. This is a huge game, with upwards of 2,000 backgrounds representing more than 200 locations, 180 real-time 3D characters, 25,000 frames of motion-capture, more than 100 inventory items, 30 cinematic scenes, and over 100 individually designed, turn-based combat scenes. Although there are similarities to BETRAYAL, the True 3D engine provides an enhanced perspective, The Next Chapter in Fantasy Author Raymond E. Feist's Epic Tale of Midkemia Is Done at Last by Jayne Hitchcock fter languishing for years on the vaporware list, with its demise foretold by many, Raymond E. Feist's RETURN TO KRONDOR IS finally back on track. You've heard this many times before, but rest assured, fantasy fans everything is ready to roll for an October release. When Sierra On-Line, developers of the award-winning BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR, dropped the KRONDOR license a few years back, the highly anticipated sequel was thought to be lost forever. Although THIEF OF DREAMS (the title of the proposed sequel) never came to fruition, 7th Level jumped at the opportunity to purchase the KRONDOR license in 1996. The sequel was promptly renamed RETURN TO KRONDORbut bad luck seemed to follow it. 7th Level produced some wonderful backgrounds, got the character voices recorded, and had the basics of the game down, but it seemed to have trouble with the technical aspects of the game. In stepped Pyrotechnix, a Cincinnatibased game development studio (developers of the True 3D engine NETURN TO KNONDON RELEASE DATE: 04 98 DEVELOPER: Pyrotechnix PUBLISHER:Setra On Line (KRONDONI DO YOU WORK OUT? One of the game's main characters is Jazhara, a Keshian sorceress, who apparently has enough free time when not casting spells to work on her abs. A32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVERSTORY fight, the ring changes color to show your health. When you control more than one character at a time, there is a solid ring around the other characters to keep track of all the health colors. Three fighting styles offer a variety of choices, each with unique advantages and disadvantages. You'll be able to jump easily from one character to another in order to coordinate an effective combat strategy. If your character can cast spells, you select a spell best suited for your character's combat situation. As the spell is cast, it's rendered in 3D from the character's hand to the opponent. Although there are 60 preset spells available in the game, you can make new potions with ingredients you've gathered in your inventory (if your character is a Lesser Path mage). Spells are arranged in six Paths, each concen trating on a magical theme. KRONIN developed by Feist, 7th Level, and Steve Abrams. As in BETRAYAL, the game is being divided into \"chapters,\" and you'll have a party of characters at your command: James (a.k.a. Jimmy the Hand from earlier Feist books), Jazhara (a Keshian sorceress), William ConDoin (son of the magician Pug). Brother Solon (an Ishapian WarriorPriest), and Kendaric (a wizard). The plot is a blend of fantasy political intrigue, and adventure, set in Midkemia during the time immediately following the events in BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR. Sidi, a magician driven insane by contact with the mind of Nalor the God of Evil, hires a sinister crimelord named Crawler to attack an Ishapian transport ship and retrieve the Tear of the Gods, a valuable Ishapian religious artifact. Sidi hopes the Tear will act as a direct link between him and Nalorgiving Nalor an eye on the world, and Sidi direct access to Nalor's knowledge. The Crawler knows that the Ishapian ship will be well-guarded TALK TO ME Like all of his work, Feist's 10-chapter story U will be dialogueand plot-rich, allowing for great flights of fantasy in between all the head-bashing. We have some nice cameraswitching and formation algorithms, so there are some views that are missing or are less than optimal that we have to regenerate to maintain the continuity.\" Combat not only looks better, but is more fluid and realistic. Your character has a green ring of fire around his or her feet, and as you Return to Midkemia Pyrotechnix has added other minor creative touches, but the script and storyline are as originally with a mix of 2D and 3D for fast rendering in software and hardware, freedom of motion in characters, and real-time audio, among other things. One of the most fantastic features is the game's realtime 16-bit lighting, which creates lifelike shadows and colored lighting as the game moves from day to night. Overall, the game has a much more realistic look and feel, and it's guaranteed to draw gamers deeper into the story than did BETRAYAL. \"It was tough for anyone (two years ago) to understand what RETURN TO KRONDOR was going to look like, except for the backgrounds, which are beautiful,\" Bain says. \"But that's not what this game is about. It's much deeper and more complex-the voices, the music, the characters, the whole nine yards. As Ray (Feist) saw the characters come to life with the motion-capture and combat animations, he became very excited and understood the experience that we were going for. \"It's such a big game and there have been so many modifications,\" Bain continues. \"For instance, the voice recording was done more than a year ago and the script has changed a bit, so we have to reloop dialogue things like that. Jeff Mills (formerly with 7th Level) is reauthoring and reimplementing the design. KRONDOR Limpassable HEAL, BOY All of the spells in RETURN TO KRONDOR are animated with unique graphics. Here, we see a heal spell. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 33 "


"RECOIL RATING PENDING ned WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM ZIPPER INTERACTIVE CONTENT RATLOST ESRB 01993 Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Recoil is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. The ratings icon Is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association. Windows is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. "


"Virgin INTER active FOR THOSE WHO THINK GUN CONTROL HAS SOMETHING TO DO WITH AIM.. Command a rapid motion battle force tank. Morph into four different Vehicle types: land, hover, amphibious and submersible. ARC SABRE NAPALM CANNON FREON BURST CANON HICH EXPLOSIVE MKRTAR Tote 18 high-powered weapons of mass destruction. PROXIMITY HIGH EXPLOSIVE MINE PROXIMITY MOLECULAR DISTORTION MINE TETHER-GUIDED EXPLOSIVE MIXILE EN-AMED RAPID-FIRE ALLE ON Battle your way through six treacherous, mission-based worlds. REMOTE HIGH EXFLOSIVE MINE LOCK-OV EXPLOSIVE MIASTLE LOCK-ON PRACTICAL NUKE SONIC BURST CANNON Manipulate high-tech, indoor environments and striking outdoor LASER DESIGNATOR textures, or become one with the earth. LASER SABRE Playable demo available at: www.vie.com/recoil Go to #205 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVER_STORY and assigns his toughest, most ruthless operative to the case: a vicious mercenary known as Bear. Sidi presents Bear with a magic amulet that will grant him immense power as well as give him protection from Ishapian magic. Sidi intentionally fails to mention the amulet's other properties. The amulet's power stems from the evil that seethes within Bear's innermost being. During a fierce battle, the Ishapian ship is sunk and its crew is killed. As Bear fights his way toward the Tear, the amulet protects him from the magic of the Ishapian priests by absorbing their spells and turning their power against the hapless defenders. Before Bear can seize the Tear, however, the Ishapian ship sinks, carrying it to the bottom of the Bitter Sea. Knute, the horriunk fied by the changes taking place in Bear, and with the idea of steal. ing an object holy to the Gods. He escapes with most of the loot from the Ishapian ship and flees to Krondor, where, after hiding the treasure, he is promptly arrested for piracy. Meanwhile, Bear has come to Krondor to pressure the Wrecker's guild into raising the ship, only to find out that knute has been caught. He plans to kill k nute and anyone else who might know of Sidi and the Crawler's plot. It is this volatile situation in which you and your party find yourselves as RETURN TO KRONDOR begins. The Magic Hour So far, everything has been on schedule since Sierra resurrected the game last December. The ship date has not moved beyond October. This coincides with the timing of Feist's upcoming novel, Krondor: The Betrayal, which is slated to come out in hard-cover in November—and, in a rare reversal, the book will be based on the original computer game (see sidebar). If you're ready for dragons, vampires, skeleton snakes, adventure, great turn-based RPG combat, alchemy spellcasting, and graphics that will knock your socks off, roll up your sleeves and get ready for RETURN TO KRONDOR. Again. Interview with Raymond E. Feist The thing about this type of fantasy role-playing design is that it's novel-like. In other words, no matter what the mechanics of the game might be and no matter how they evolve, along with no matter how computer technology evolves, at the bottom line, games are story-driven. Given that as long as the stories are good, the games will be good. The only thing that would end the franchise would be if people just didn't care that much for fantasy role-playing games set in my universe. At 52, an age when most authors are content with writing just books, Raymond E. Feist continues his active participation in the KRONDOR computer games. We spoke with Feist as he was getting ready for the upcoming launch of RETURN TO KRONDOR. CGW: How was it that you originally settled on 7th Level for RETURN TO KRONDOR? Feist: When you see RETURN TO KRONDOR, you'll see why that was a good call. I was a little concerned about the structure of the company, and that proved to be a reasonable trepidation, as later events proved. In the end, the people who were left at 7th Level, especially cofounders Bob Ezrin and Scott Page, Were heroic in their attempt to \"do the right thing\" and keep both the license holders and stockholders from losing everything. My hat is off to them for that and for keeping RETURN TO KRONDOR alive. What was the experience like writing Krondor: The Betrayal, based on the first KRONDOR computer game? After having written books for almost 20 years, I was surprised at how different it was to work from someone else's script. The problem was finally realizing I couldn't write a book of the game, but rather had to break the game down to its essential elements, then construct a novel from that. The game and novel are very different from each other in significant ways, which is what you'd expect, given the nature of each medium. People who are very familiar with the game will be surprised, I think, by the novel, but if they liked the game and the characters, they'll like the novel. How do you feel computer games have evolved since you first got into them in the 1980s? From the beginning, games have driven a large part of the development of computers. Each game is developed to be \"faster, smarter, sexier, louder, better, and bigger\" than the last one, and yet the developer is always consumed about backward-compatibility. Television producers never worry about how many people out there have compatible TVs. It's a fascinating issue and one that has far more impact on choices made in game design and development than most people realize. Trying to straddle technology is one of the single most potentially destructive issues in game design, and it's unique to game design. As a writer, who needs only pen and paper, this is a constant source of amazement to me. Are you an avid gamer? I'm sort of a one-game-at-a-time type. I find something I like and beat the hell out of it before I move on. I've played lots of things once just to see what the fuss was about, but right now I'm trying to get that perfect Civ Il game. Do you think we'll see more KRONDOR games now? As many as people want. I don't see any reason why we can't eventually see 10, a dozen, whatever. Web Sites About Raymond E. Feist Midkemia Press www.midkemia.com/steveal The Raymond E. Feist Internet Resources Index www.netunlimited.net/-srussell/ Feist_Resources.html Raymond E. Feist Book Reviews home1.swipnet.sel-W-176331 books/re_feist.htm RIFTMUSH-An RPG based on Raymond E. Feist's Riftwar Saga www.ptbo.igs.net/-amanley/rift/ Usenet: alt.books.ravmond-feist 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"The most anticipated RPG of the year. In the FORGOTTEN REALMS, we've lived through foul pestilence, vicious battles, exorbitant taxes, and even the occasional dragon. But when HE showed up, things really started getting ugly. Prepare to be immersed into a world of intrigue and mystery on a perilous quest to rescue a storic land from impending war. Even your own soul is at stake as you and a party of adventurers become Z e ntangled in a dangerous riddle of betrayed alliances, dark prophecies and murder. Will you become the unlikely hero of the story, or merely another of its unfortunate casualties? Before you answer, the big guy here might have something to say about it. Explore an immense intricate game world from cloud-covered mountains & rain drenched plains to dark catacombs & abandoned temples all meticulously rendered in lush, 16-bit SVGA graphics. Invoke more than too spells Freeze enemies with an icy blast from a Cone of Cold, or incinerate them with a searing stream of magical flame. Push your Icadership skills to the limit as you guide a party of up to six characters, cach with a personality that affects gameplay. Don't let your stubborn fighter pummel the arrogant thicf you may need their teamwork in your next battle. Crcate your character from six AD&D races and 26 different classes and subclasses. You control every attribute, down to skin and hair color, weapons, and armor all accuratcly depicted on-screen. lootges Gercomes hang Baldur's Gate, COMING SOON! FICT Microsoft\" Windows BIDWARE BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS.\" www.interplay.com Dungeons & Dragons mm 01998 BioWare Corp. All rights reserved. BALDUR'S GATE. FORGOTTEN REALMS, the FORGOTTEN REALMS logo, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, ADED. the AD&D logo and the TSR logo are trademarks of TSR. Inc., a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc., and are used by Interplay under license. Interplay, the Interplay logo and \"By Gamers. For Gamers.' are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. The BloWare logo is the trademark of BioWare Corp. All rights reserved. Exclusively licensed and distributed by Interplay Productions. All other copyrights and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Go to #163 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"LISTEN AS THOUGH YOUR LIVES DEPEND ON 11. Incredible multi-player capabilities over 30 players per arena FREE' via Hovaworld's Large Scale Multi-Play servers. Choose between weapons like H&K LP5-suppressed for close-quarters battle or the Barret .50 caliber Sniper Rifle for explosive long range killing, plus an arsenal of many others. Watch your enemy's every move, listen for their approach then strike with brutal precision over the most heartbreaking pieces of terrain the world has ever seen. INOVALOGIC THE THE ART OF WAR\" www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 "


"Your TEAM is dug in 5 miles west of the extraction point. You HEAR the enemy slowly surrounding you. You're down to your last few rounds cold, dog-tired, wounded. The only way out means someone has to stay 29 behind. BE Welcome to Hell, ladies Over 40 gut-wrenching missions across five continents from air field takedowns in Central Asia, clearing out South American cartels to stopping Nuclear & Bio terrorism in Northern Russia. Play in either ist or 3rd person across miles and miles of vast outdoor environments. Engage the enemy over unprecedented distances. A Premiering Novalogic's Voxel Space 3 graphics terrain with 32-bit color. DIGDOLBY SURROUND FREE* LARGE SCALE MULTI-PLAY — EXPERIENCE IT NOW ON novaworld.net 1998 Nentorlit. Maud Speed Mostale se regstered trademarks wel Necta fort, Water and The Art of more thens a Mandige like any responsible oplice nteret . Kvalgte reserves the role og de tres el enlace Go to #127 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVER_STORY Blizzard's RPG Sequel Gets More Time for a Major Facelift and co-designer for DIABLO II, to learn more about the game's progress. by Elliott Chin nless you've been living under a rock for the past two years, you've no doubt heard of DIABLO, the real-time action/RPG that (dare say it?) revitalized the role-playing game genre. Are those boos I hear? Well, even though DIABLO wasn't a hard-core RPG in the way MIGHT AND MAGIC VI or the classic ULTIMAs are, it was an undeniably addictive game that made plenty of gamers give the roleplaying experience a try. So, in that respect, it was a good thing for role-playing games. Now, although the RPG is no longer in need of a jump-start, DIABLO is still coming back to work his magic a second time. Since we reported on DIABLO II in our February cover story, a lot has been added to the game. Recently, we talked to David Brevik, founder of Blizzard North, and Erich Schaefer, co-art director The Classes The first character class we revealed in February was the amazon, but her four cohorts were just revealed several months ago. With DIABLO II, Blizzard North is trying to further differentiate the character classes. Each class will have up to 30 different, unique abilities. The abilities of the amazon will be exclusive to her class, as will those for the paladin, and so on. Even spells will be exclusive to a character class, so that the sorceress and necromancer, for example, won't share any spells. Some essential spells, like Town Portal and Identify, can't be learned and will instead be cast solely through scrolls or staves. The way characters learn new spells and abilities will also change. The current plan is to present a skill tree to a player when his character levels up. The player can then pick a skill to learn from 075) SCALE SCALE THIS Blizzard has changed the scale of the le architecture in DIABLO 2 to more accurately depict the characters in the world. That doesn't mean it's going to hurt any less when you're flailed, though. Let's take a closer look at the five character classes. the list presented. You'll also be able to learn some skills when you complete a quest. No more studying books. However, Schaefer says books will still help you. You won't be able to automatically increase in skill just by reading a book, but they will offer temporary bonuses. Amazon: We covered her extensively in our February cover story. She is a cross between the rogue and warrior from DIABLO, with the most powerful ranged attacks and medium-strength melee attacks. Her primary weapons are the bow, crossbow, spear, and javelin, and many of her skills derive from the use of those weapons. Paladin: The paladin is a holy warrior, and the game's second most powerful melee fighter. He also has a good array of defensive and healing magic. He will fight with the sword and shield combo or other variations of this theme. Some of his skills will be special melee attacks, including a sword and shield bash that temporarily OH, YOU BARBARIAN! DIABLO II's big-ass fighting machine, the barbarian is skilled in a variety of twohanded attacks. One drawback: no magic for Mongo. DEATH BECOMES YOU The necromancer is a spellcaster with the game's most interesting ability-to summon monsters, often more than one at a time. GOOD KNIGHT The paladin is second to the barbarian in terms of melee fighting, but he also has a host of defensive and healing magic spells at his disposal. RELEASE DATE: Q2 DEVELOPER: Blizzard North PUBLISHER: Blizzard 140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES ONLINE stuns the target. The paladin will also be able to cast defensive spells that increase spell resistance or bestow temporary regeneration. In multiplayer parties, he'll be a good character to have. walls, fireballs, lightning blasts, a freezing spell that duplicates the Stone Curse spell, warmth (another name for healing), and enchanting weapons with flame or cold. These are only some of her spells, and Blizzard North has more sensational spells planned. Of course, she'll be weak in handto-hand combat. For monthly updates on DIABLO II's progress, check out GameSpots DIARIES Designer Diary at www.gamespot.com features/diablo2 dd/ same goes for the transition from a town into the wilderness. Schaefer says barring memory constraints, you should be able to summon multiple monsters to do your bidding. And, they'll fight with better Al than did the golem. In both cases (raised and summoned monsters), the necromancer will get XP for the crea. tures his minions kill. The third type of spells will include some direct, poison-based spell attacks, as well as the ability to poison his own weapons for added damage. COVER STORY Barbarian: This is the game's ultimate fighter. All the barbarian's skills will be physical attacks. Some skills will include a charge (like the Rhino Demon from DIABLO), a whirling attack that allows him to hit multiple enemies, slashes that knock an opponent back (like the Bear ability in DIABLO), and the ability to wield two weapons simultaneously. In fact, the barbarian will be the only character that can fight two-handed. The barbarian will be unable to use magic (except for perhaps Town Portal), but will instead have natural magic resistance. Necromancer: The necromancer is the other spellcaster, but his abilities are more subtle than those of the sorceress. He'll be weak in melee attacks, but he will have a powerful spell repertoire that will be split into three categories: The first type of spells will include the ability to manipulate existing monsters. The necromancer will be able to control or confuse monsters, heal them, or improve their attacks with spells. The second type of spells includes summoning monsters and raising monsters. The lowlevel raising spells will allow a necromancer to create a skeleton or ghost from an existing corpse although the reanimated minion will be at half hit points only. The more powerful summoning spells will require no corpse and will call full-fledged monsters. Unlike DIABLO's golem spell, where only one could be in effect at a time, Artificial Intelligence Brevik says that the monsters' Al will distinguish them from one another. He admits that in DIABLO, all the monsters just rushed at you, but in DIABLO II there will more enemies that act differently. While the look of DIABLO II might seem similar to that of DIABLO, the engine is, in fact, completely rewritten. This type of makeover takes time, and Blizzard wants to be sure that the game is perfect before its release in mid1999. From what we've seen, barring any mishaps during development, DIABLO II should be well worth the wait. Sorceress: The sorceress will be very similar to DIABLO's sorcerer. She will be the character with the most direct and spectacular magic attacks. In DIABLO, there were basically three types of magic: fire, lightning, and miscellaneous. In DIABLO II, there will also be cold and poison spells. The sorceress' spells will be drawn from the fire, lightning, and cold schools. She'll have close to 30 possible spells, which will include fire Going to Town Act 1 in DIABLO Il takes place in the Sisters of the Sightless Eye Monastery and its surrounding encampment. You have to battle the demoness Andariel and save the corrupted rogues. Act II takes place in the deserts around the Tomb of Tal Rasha and the nomadic town of Lut Gholein. You'll be following DIABLO to this location, where the Lord of Terror hopes to locate the buried monk Tal Rasha, who houses the soul of the devil Baal in his body. While Act II is already in the major design and programming phase, only preliminary work has been done on Act III, and even less has been done on Act IV. I PUT A SPELL ON YOU Don't be too charmed by this lovely sorceress. She has the most powerful and spectacular spells in the game, including new cold and poison spells. So back off. You'll be able to hire NPCs to join your party. In Act I, at least one rogue will join for the duration of a quest, while in other acts, other characters might join you. The other improvement we've seen in the game is the elimination of load times between levels. Now, when you enter a town portal, your transport to the surface is instantaneous. The GO PLAY OUTSIDE In DIABLO II you'll be able to kill stuff outdoors as well! www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 141 "


"CYBER BARRY LINEBACKERS ARE LIKE FREIGHT TRAINS. SOMETIMES THEY GET DERAILED. PC 3D ACCELERATION NOT REQUIRED. 1998 Electronic Arts Electronic Arts. EA SPORTS, the EA SPORTS logo, its in the game, to the garde John Madden Football and Cyber Athlete are trademarks or register Interactive, Inc. All rights reserved. Oficially Licensed Product of the National Football League Players. 1998 Players to the PLAYERS INC logo is a registered trademark of the NFL Players, NFL Materi trademarks are property of their rescective owners "


"THOMAS Meet Barry Sanders. Cyber Athlete\" and instant TD machine. Think you can stop him? Better put some pads on your PC. This is football Madden-style. Super hi-res graphics. Bigger big men. Head-to-head internet play. Turf-burning One-Button Mode\". And for every D you draw up, some sweet jukes just waitin' to shred it MADDEN NEL in the if it's i e game, SPORTS it's in in the game. EVERYONE ademarks of Electronic Arts in the US and/or other countries. All rights reserved 3Dix.1998 3D interactive, to the gove Interactive Togo is a trademark of 3D 1998. NELP Team names and 100 are trademarks of the teams indicated. All other therefore marre trademarks of the National Football League. Al other Go to #131 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink ESA SOUCY. PLAYERS "


"30 AC R EQUIREN, 1998 Electronic Arts Electro ORTS, 116 EA SPORTS logo, in the game, i n med Cyber Athlete are trademarks or registered trademarks of Electronic Arte e U.S. andor other ed eme, Ekeness and other than ods, the Tiger Woods , m y 1000s, and other indicar of NIKE Roc reproduced on this product are the turks and coo l estors and/or other About their respectro write condent. POA TOUR PGA TOUR and Second to sign are trademarks owned by PGA TOUR. INC and used by permissione trademarks are topeny of these t rights rese actual prop owns tot be used in wie SPIKEMARKS AFTER WALKING ALL OVER PLEASE FIX YOUR OPPONENT. 83911 83915 "


"that s entro Woods ETW.COD and MORE Inc. and   hv th t    n nd mrko  Go to #139 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink EVERYONE if it's in sin to Meet Tiger Woods, Cyber Athlete\" and pin-seeking missile launcher. Can you beat him? Don't even think about layin' up. 'Cuz his game is big. Bald. And full of fist-pumping attitude whether it's a 350 yard drive or 40-footer for bird. You gotta go for the pin on every hole. Not to mention the jugular. he game SPORTS TIGER game WOODS it's in in the 9 PGA TOUR GOLF "


"Vo us Meet Charles Woodson, Cyber Athlete\" and 3-way To threat. Think you can knock his Wolverines off their championship throne? There's only one way to find out. Make it to the Tostitos Fiesta Bowl where #1 meets #2. It's a long. hard road. And it's littered with teams who run out of guts. Hope you're not running low, NCAA FOOTBALL 99 ne game if it's in SPORTS Sin the it's ! game EN NCAA 0 Tostitos TrEITA BOWL 3D ACCELERATION NOT REQUIRED. 1998 Electronic Arts Electronic Arts, EA SPORTS, The EA SPORTS FOO, the game in the game and Cyber Anime are tradema reserved. The ca s e. Collegate Products and is the exchesive property of the College LIENSK Com The Cologia Larisan Produk bers the property of the independe Teisteted trademark of the NCAA Mesin SA Stie mark owned by the Dawntown Aletic Club of New York City, Rom. All other trademarks are property respective own "


"CYBER WOODSON YOU ONLY WEAR THE UNIFORM FOR YEARS. BUT YOU CAN WEAR THE RING FOREVER. EVERYONE roastered trademarks of Electronic Arts in the US and/or other countries. Al rights reserved. 20101998 80x Interactive, Inc. the 3Dix Interactive logo is a trademark of 3D interactive, Inc. All rights Veting Group. All natis. lopos. Tean s and incats associated with the NCAA, universities, bowis, and conferences are me exclusive property of their respective owners. I NOMA Football Jogo is a Go to #136 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PC  "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES MYTH II: SOULBLICHTEN COVER STORY Bungie Plans to Up the Ante With Its Second 3D Tactical Strategy Game in the MYTH Universe beautiful, but it was sometimes a bit too hard to play and control. So, this year, Bungie has decided to revamp the game's interface, streamline the controls, and adjust the pacing. And, to create a true sequel to MYTH, rather than just a tweaked rehash, Bungie has improved the gameplay with a more ambitious design. by Elliott Chin ate last year, Bungie's inaugural PC game, MYTH, crashed into the gaming industry like a tidal wave, washing aside traditional strategy fare and picking up strategy game of the year awards from numerous game publications, including Computer Gaming World. That was no easy feat, especially with competition like TOTAL ANNIHILATION, DARK REIGN, and AGE OF EMPIRES. Yet, what MYTH had, and what its competitors lacked, was true 3D terrain and in-your-face, tactical gameplay. But even Bungie would have to admit that MYTH was far from perfect. Sure, it was innovative and Lords will be another behemoth: the Maul, a giant who wields a spiked club. Soulblighter will also gain the services of the Stygian Knight, a slow but heavily armored nasty, and the Warlock, a spellcaster that will take advantage of MYTH II's new magic system (more on that later). Bungie also says that a third faction, an ancient race mentioned in passing in THE FALLEN LORDS, will present themselves as a powerful enemy in an unexpected part of the game. You'll have some new allies to help you fight WHO'S GONNA CLEAN UP THIS MESS? the new tide of Battles will be just as juicy and carenemies. All the nage-filled as they were in the first game. units from MYTH will return, but the Since your ultimate enemy is a number of total units will jump Fallen Lord, the armies you'll face from 15 to 25. According to Bungie will consist of many undead creatures. There will also be large living tures. There will also be large living among your new cohorts will be beasts, such as the Trow and Ghol Journeymen, who rediscover the from MYTH. Also joining the Fallen physical prowess of their days as the elite Guard of the old Kingdom. You'll also gain the services of a new magic-using unit that will have some deadly spells. The Fallen Have Gotten Up MYTH II's story picks up 60 years after MYTH: THE FALLEN LORDS. Alric's peaceful kingdom is under attack by mysterious forces. The graveyards of villages are being robbed, and you must start out on an expedition to investigate these thefts. Eventually, you discover that over that Soulblighter, a Fallen Lord from MYTH, is behind the evil doings. Out With the Old The most immediate changes to MYTH II are its interface and controls. We all had a rough time with the gesture clicking and with keeping our units under tight control. MYTH II will address those issues. Now you'll be able to rotate the screen by moving the mouse to the corners of the screen (simple, but surprisingly missing from the first game). You can issue movement orders on the overhead map and give waypoints by holding down the Shift key The game will also feature an optional control bar at the bottom of the screen with all the common BRIDGE OVER GHOULISH WATER Animated 3D objects, such as this drawbridge, will be prominent in MYTH II: SOULBLIGHTER. MYTH 11: SOULBLICHTEN RELEASE DATE: 04 98 DEVELOPER: Bunge PUBLISHER: Bungie 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"BERATHIA: Plan, VORI DEYIA < 204) FOI  TAL Build, Explore, Anticipate... NIG HON ERAT SN KREW LOD BRACADA "


"Attack! RATING PERDIRG 01998 The 3DO Company. All rights reserved. New World Computing, Heroos of Might and Magic, 3DO, and their respective logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of The 3DO Company in the U.S. and/or other countries. All other trademarks belong to their respective owners. New World Computing is a division of The 3DO Company September Issue of Computer Gaming World, Top 100 Chart CONTENT RATED BY "


"HEROES I OF MIGHT AND MAGIC THE RESTORATION OF ERATHIA Epic Battles of Strategy and Tactics. SA  50% LARGER TACTICAL COMBAT MAP  16 DIFFERENT HERO TYPES  COMPLETELY REDESIGNED TOWNS AND CASTLES  OVER 100 UNIQUE UNITS AND CREATURES  HI-RES, 16-BIT COLOR GAMEPLAY 11.83 ST Fircorandu 2 99.999 92.999 99.999 99.999 0 9099 93.999 DAY NEW WORLD COMPUTING UIVITULINO M9DGAME OF 1997 3DO www.heroes3.com THE SEQUEL TO THE MOST POPULAR Go to #093 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES COVER STORY commands presented as easily accessible buttons. Gesture clicking will be eliminated. You can simply click and drag a unit or formation with the mouse to change its direction. An arrow at the selected unit's feet will point in the direction it is facing. Alternatively, you can use the left and right arrow keys to rotate your formations. Player feedback will also be improved. Now, when you pass your cursor over a unit, a dimly lit display of its hit points or spell points will appear. Mission objectives will also be presented more clearly at the start of levels, as will new objectives that pop up during the course of a mission. improved, and liquids will have realistically undulating waves and reflections. The levels will be more populated and varied. For instance, you'll see flying birds and more ambient villagers and farm animals. The characters, while still 2D sprites, will have double the frames of animation for smoother movement. They'll also feature multiple-attack animation for more realistic-looking fighting. ronments and fortifications. Some battles will take place within castles (the roof will be cut away so you can see the units inside). Zartman showed us one example of a level that blends indoor and outdoor envi ronments; in it, you'll have to storm a castle only to see the enemy raise his drawbridge (yes, the game will include 3D animated objects). You'll then have to send a dwarf to destroy the winch for the bridge, at which point you'll brave a hail of arrows from the ramparts and then break into the castle to cap. ture a baron. The baron will try to flee through the castle hallways with his entourage, and you'll have to catch him before he makes his exit. In addition to 3D objects like the drawbridge, there will be rotating windmills and 3D fire. Archers will be able to fire flam ing arrows that will set trees on fire and spread flames through a forest, impeding the movement of troops and damaging those NOOKS AND CRANNIES The terrain texture mesh used to create the landscapes in MYTH II is much finer than before, which translates into more realistic terrain. Bigger Graphics The look of the graphics is the other obvious area where MYTH II will improve. Although at first glance the graphics might seem to be a minor enhancement over the first game, there is a lot more being done to create a richer environment. The mesh for the terrain will be finer, for example, meaning that it will be much more detailed. You'll see bumps and grooves in the road, and travel through levels with sharp cliffs and smoother hills. There will also be indoor enviKNOCK, KNOCK Moving gates will add to the game's feel. will also be added, so fire will glow and objects will have more realistic shadows. The improved lighting will probably be most prominent in night missions. The rendering of water will also be Single-player Enhancements The other criticism leveled at MYTH was the difficulty of the single-player missions. Says Zartman, \"The spectrum of difficulty levels is much wider. The timid levels will be cakewalks for gamers who knew their way around MYTH, but still interesting for newbies, while Legendary diff icultyl will be even tougher than the first time.\" Higher difficulties will not only add more troops, but also include different troop combinations and placement. Bungie is also improving scenario design for MYTH II to add more variety to the gameplay. In addition to the indoor missions there will be some missions that add gameplay elements from multiplayer MYTH modes. There will be increased character interaction, as in the MYTH scenarios in which a townsperson led your troops to a secret meeting between a corrupt official and the Fallen Lord's troops. Zartman says. \"There will be more talking to characters. For one thing, they will now give you hints if you seem to be missing the point of the level. We don't want it to get RPGish, but, just as the ambient life will add more verisimilitude to the landscapes, so (will) more talking among NPCs make the villages more real.\" Gameplay enhancements include a new magic system based on spell points. Says Zartman, \"Every spell depletes mana, which regenerates in time, so the number of spells is effectively infinite. There are also many new spells, like the fireball and cloudkill.\" (The latter sends a lethal cloud drifting slowly toward the enemy formations.) There will also be spells to confuse enemy units and prevent them from attacking. However, the magic won't take over the focus of the game, which will still be tactical combat. Zartman says, \"We aren't going to let it turn into a game of dueling magic users--the magic units will have their place.\" The enemy Al is also going to improve, with better pathfinding so formations won't get tangled up or get caught in friendly fire. Bungie is also planning multiplayer enhancements and new multiplayer game modes. From what we've seen and heard already, it looks as if Bungie's work is going to significantly improve the gameplay of the original MYTH. If so, look for MYTH II to be one of the biggest fantasy strategy games in recent years. dd more WE GOT YOUR SIX Formations will return in MYTH II U and thanks to double the combat animations, battles will be even more realistic. 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"THE SAGA CONTINUES.. 30 NEW SINGLE PLAYER MISSIONS 120 NEW MULTIPLAYER MAPS URETALIFTION W Authorized Add-On fon UDUMADAV STARIRAFT Published by WIZARD Workai AVAILABLE AT YOUR FAVORITE RETAILER Stardack AGT INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE COMPANY OR CALL: 1-800-229-2714 PLYMOUTH, MN 55441 Go to #103 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink 01998 MizardWorks, Inc. All rights reserved Starcraft is a trademark and Blizzard Entertainment is a trademark ora registered trademark of Davidson & Associates, Inc. in the U.S. and/or other countries. 01998 Blizzard Entertainment. All rights reserved. "


"adventure in 3D-mentia! Mind-bending 8-player multiplayer mode! 150 levels spanning 5 weird worlds. Customize your own insane levels or build one from scratch! You can run, but you can't hide. Trying to stay one step ahead of the game. Sprinting through an ever-changing 3D maze of twisted paths. Hunted by hooded foes at every turn. Pushing the limits of gaming stamina. Lode Runner 2 -easy to play, impossible to master. Prepare for cerebral overload! FROM THE DEVELOPERS OF THE BEST-SELLING PUZZLE GAME, LODE RUNNER 1-900-CALL-2GT BA NEED A HINT? GT Interactive Software www.glinteractive.com lode unner MacSoft EVERYONE www.gtgames.com Available at your local retail store Order direct at store.gtinteractive.com or call 1-800-610-GTIS ROR ROM Go to #207 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink egistered aleracine Software Lode Runner 191992393 Prend Software Development Company. All nohts reserved. Lode Runner is a registered trademark owed by Douglas E. Smith and is exclusively hesed. Copyright 1983 Douglas E Smith Presage and the eye logo ale segistered trademarks of Presage Software Development Company Published and Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. GT and the GT Games fogo are trademarks and the GT 10go trademark of G Corp. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES  The Wait Is Almost Over for the Most Anticipated Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Game in a Decade life. But if you fancy yourself a better artist, there's even an option that allows you to import your own pictures in place of the portrait For AD&D fans who miss their college days of gaming with their buddies, BALDUR'S GATE is a godsend. Interplay plans to support the product even further by offering expansions. If you're any kind of role-playing enthusiast, BALDUR'S GATE will surely be on your mustget agenda this fall. COVER_STORY HATUURL Bioware has put into making the game look and feel like AD&D adventuring should. The game's art is spread across five CDs, giving players one of the most detailed gameworlds ever. In addition, the weapons and armor all appear on the adventuring characters just the way they look on the character's equipment view. Spells have also been duplicated as closely as possible to the effects listed within the AD&D Player's Handbook. Fighters will be allowed to specialize in weapons to four different levels of mastery, as per some of the more recent AD&D rules. Another added bit of realism is the game's reputation system, in which players actions reflect upon how the locals view them. Don't think that all these enhancements in graphics and realism will diminish the core of AD&D gameplay, however. The designers, being avid role players themselves, have made the character creation and advancement system as true to real AD&D gaming as possible within the limits of computer gaming. You're allowed to adjust your statistics within reason, as well as choose proficiencies. As complicated as character creation can sometimes get, Bioware has trimmed down the procedure to provide only the essentials and leave the roleplaying to the players. To further enhance your character, the predrawn portraits for the player characters are nothing short of amazing. The level of detail and the personality within the pictures bring the whole realm of fantasy adventuring to FEEL LIKE A NUMBER Number-crunchers will appreciate the extent to which BioWare has gone to faithfully re-create the AD&D rules and systems in BALDUR'S GATE. by Tahsin Shamma here are two kinds of people. Those who know of and eagerly await BALDUR'S GATE, and those who know nothing about computer RPGs whatsoever. From what we've From what we've seen, BALDUR'S GATE is going to be the best Advanced Dungeons & Dragons computer role-playing game to come around since the gold-boxed games of years past. At the heart of it all is a true role-playing system, set up just the way casual friends would get together and play in the real world. The single-player mode allows players to create their characters and then adventure with a group of NPCs throughout the world of the Forgotten Realms. Players who want a more \"real-world\" gaming experience go through the same steps, but instead of NPCs, a true party adventuring system allows for groups of gamers to connect online and adventure togetherjust as they would in a normal game. To make this system manageable, multiplayer games allow one player to become the party leader, making decisions such as in which general direction the party travels, and who is allowed to speak to NPCs. Basically, it confers the status of the Dungeon Master upon the computer, but allows all the freedom of party adventuring. The other monumental thing about BALDUR'S GATE is the amount of time and effort that BALDUR'S GATE RELEASE DATE: 04.98 DEVELOPER: BioWatu PUBLISHER: Interplay Sequence Attack Sequence Attack LEOS A OLD SCHOOL KILLIN' Hack and slash the old-fashioned way in BALDUR'S GATE, the most ambitious and promising Advanced Dungeons & Dragons RPG in a decade. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 55 "


"Look deep, deep inside and you will find a place of anger, vengeance and brutality  1998 Bioderbund Sollware, Inc. All rights reservod. Warlords is a trademark of SSG. Reign of Heroes, Darklords Rising and Red Orb Entertainment are trademarks of Broderbund Software, Inc. "


"WARLORDSHI LORDS RISING DARA The sequel to 1997's Go there. It is your last hope to conquer the truly wicked. www.warlords3.com A pall of unspeakable evil, merciless slaughter and unbridled destruction has fallen across the Realm of Etheria. The servants of evil, the Darklords, spread like a contagion across the land. Will you be able to stop their unholy juggernaut? Welcome to Darklords Rising, the greatly anticipated sequel to Warlords III: Reign of Heroes, 1997's turn-based strategy game of the year. Discover the bigger, deeper, darker universe of Darklords Rising:  4 entirely new campaigns and 15 new scenarios  31 new army types, for a total of 95  5 new uniquely skilled heroes for a total of 15  9 new multiplayer games including Crusade, North vs. South and Instant Chaos  More challenging, adaptable and aggressive AI  Fully functional map, item and campaign editor  Bonus: Includes original campaign and scenarios from Warlords III: Reign of Ileroes In short, more adventure, deeper gameplay and fewer chances for survival. Turn-Based Strategy Game of the Year. WARLORDS II DARKLORDS RISING REDORB Go to #175 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES RARE OF MAL COVER_STORY Into the Darker Side of RPGS by Johnny L. Wilson ark images abound in fantasy: Instruments of torture; decaying corpses; and magical components like boiled druid skulls, the ashes of immolated royalty, and herbs from the darkest, swampiest, and most dangerous portions of the land all make an appearance sooner or later. bermages must either conjure the most sadistic plagues on their victims or mysteriously invoke CLOBBERIN' GOBLINS Llewellyn the mage blasts the goblins over the hill with fireballs as another mage, Renasta, simultaneously heals him. the most benevolent altruistic forces, depending on their moral orientation. RAGE OF MAGES understands the darker side of fantasy. RAGE OF MAGES may look, at first glance, like a Super Nintendo Entertainment System role-playing game from an earlier era, because it uses a top-down perspective in which tiny figures navigate the terrain, but RAGE OF MAGES features considerably more graphical detail and darker images than you'd expect in a console game. Criminals hanging from gallows and corpses that decompose prior to yielding up their treasures are just right for the game's ambiance. You'll also notice that the terrain offers 3D similar to that in TOTAL ANNIHILATION, as well as dynamic lighting effects. RAGE OF MAGES also offers a detailed statistics-based character system. Characters are rated in physical strength (Body), nimbleness and dexterity (Agility), intelligence (Mind), and magical capacity (Spirit), as well as the familiar hit points, spell strength (Mana), armor class, encumbrance capacity, and experience points. Fighters and mages can have up to six primary fighting/casting skills, and all characters are rated in accordance with their resistance to differing types of magic (Fire, Water, Air, Earth, and Astral). Also, since everything operates in real-time and the lighting is dynamic, each character is rated in terms of visual range (Sight) and movement (Speed). But RAGE OF MAGES isn't just another old-fashioned RPG. It fea tures real-time combat that makes sense. Not only can you command individual characters, portions of the party, or the entire party to attack or defend, but there are other optional commands. Characters can be told to MICROSOFT STORE O ROOM Buying and selling at the general store in Plagat is as easy as clicking and dragging in any Windows program. guard another character, defend themselves, stand guard at a specific point, swarm against a strong enemy, or retreat from battle. In short, the characters can be handled via the standard pointing, lassoing, and clicking that players are familiar with in realtime strategy interfaces. And, if you just like the combat aspects of the game, RAGE OF MAGES promises multiplayer support for up to 16 players. Further, the Al is sophisticated enough so that, should you have two mages at your disposal, you will find that one mage will cast offensive spells while the other continually and automatically heals the members of the party who are being wounded in combat or replenishes the mana points of the mage engaged in the offensive spellcasting. It's a formidable combination and not something routinely built into the Al routines for a questing party. RAGE OF MAGES may have quests that resemble the standard \"Kill Foozle\" or \"Medieval FedEx Courier\" scenarios, but you never have any doubt concerning what your party is supposed to be doing. Think of it as mission b ased role-playing with a realtime combat style. You know if your mission is to look for survivors in a labyrinth, get the plague cure to a healer, clean out an outpost of your enemies, or chase down the treasure in a lost hero's grave. You never have to worry about backtracking. The game assumes that victory is the climax of a mission and returns you to the headquarters town of Plagat via the standard Indiana Jones/1930s-like serial convention of an animated dotted line crossing an antique map. Unfortunately for those who need cut-scenes to tell the story, RAGE OF MAGES doesn't contain any fancy animated sequences. RAGE OF MAGES is an intriguing RPG that offers bite-sized chunks of play that are serialized into a larger story. You'll be able to sit down and play through a mission in an hour or less, and still have that overall epic experience. If you're like me, you'll have trouble stopping at the end of just one. RAGE OF MACES RELEASE DATE: 01998 DEVELOPER: Buca Entertainment PUBLISHER: Monolith Productions BCA There atu aurad er Last Breath It's all night thouch The churakunte fats nade is Jar wallettuarenhing NALU AU ista W h anys sad song BLAH,BLAH, YADDA, YADDA Conversation is provided in both audio and text format, but the badinage is not exactly out of Lethal Weapon 4. A158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"YOU WANT IT! WE WON'T MAKE YOU WAIT. MULTIROLE FIGHTER YOU WON'T HAVE TO READ A 300 PAGE MANUAL OR FLY 500 MILES BEFORE YOU ENGAGE THE ENEMY. CONTROLS ARE INTUITIVE, MAKING IT A SNAP TO JUMP INTO THE ACTION AND ENJOY THE FOLLOWING FEATURES: A SUPERB FLIGHT MODEL TESTED AND REFINED BY LOCKHEED MARTIN TEST PILOTS V FASTEST 3DFX SUPPORT, UP TO 1024x768 WITH VOODOO 2 (INCREDIBLE WITH SLI) V HIGH RESOLUTION VIRTUAL COCKPIT WITH TRACKING MOUSE HOTSPOTS 6 OF FREEDOM GRAPHICS SYSTEM GIVES YOU UNPRECEDENTED VIEWS OF THE ACTION SO DON'T WAIT, GRAB THE STICK & FLY THE F-16 MULTIROLE FIGHTER TODAY. IBS INTEGRATED BATTLE SPACE WHILE F-16 MULTIROLE FIGHTER IS A STAND-ALONE PREMIUM SIMULATION WITH OVER 40 MISSIONS AND A MISSION EDITOR. IT IS ALSO YOUR TICKET TO NOVAWORLD WHERE YOU CAN BATTLE OVER 100 AIRPLANES INCLUDING MIG-29 FULCRUMS AND F22 RAPTORS FLOWN BY THE MOST DEVASTATING OPPONENTS — YOUR FRIENDS, ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS AULTIROLE FIGHTER Go to #094 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink NOVALUGU www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 F22 Raptor owners can receive free upgrades to IBS over the Internet or an updated CO for a nominal charge. O1998 Novalogic, Ix. Novados de lavadopit lagu rugitmed tundemaku wdfuerw. NovoWorld, wes, luegrated Butle Space, F-22 und Ruptur w katerats el volopic, le ladheed Martin, the Ladleed Maria star logo and F-16 Multiple Fighter are trademarks of the Lockheed Martin Corporation and are used under license to Novalogic. I lehet trademarks as property of their respective IBS EXPERIENCE IT NOW novaworld.net). "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES Eidos Draws Its Sword in the DIABLO Clone Wars COVER STORY Release Date: 0498 Developer, Cinematix Publisher: Eros Interactive Wind, and Body spells-from which to choose. We've had a chance to play the game a little bit, and though there are many balancing issues still to be worked out, the one thing that puts this game over, even at this early stage, is its graphics. Done with the assistance of Canadian fantasy artist Den Beauvais, REVENANT's rich, colorful look (with ambient lighting throughout) helps create a beautiful fantasy world—the kind of world we love to get lost in (and beat stuff up in). Look for it this fall. Jeff Green ith Blizzard's DIABLO II still at least half a year away, what's the RPG hack-and-slash fanatic to do? The answer might very well be REVENANT, a third-person, isometric, action/RPG coming this fall from Eidos Interactive. Though the game definitely shares DIABLO's basic look and feel, and Eidos has consciously acknowledged the influence, the company is doing enough that's different to make REVENANT stand out on its own. The game is set on the fantasy isle of Ahkuilon, a land of ruined LANDS OF LORE III Westwood Studios Fights Back With a Newer, Better LOL Choose. Release Date: 04 98 Developer Westwood Studios Publisher: Westwood Studios As in the prevHexplore ious games, LANDS OF LORE III will still be a first-person adventure/RPG hybrid, with the same basic look-but it will be enhanced in every possible way. First of all, the engine is fully accelerated I don't dismiss Infogrames' upcomfor 3D, and all the FMV characters ing HEXPLORE as one of them. have been replaced by voxel-basedDespite its retro look, HEXPLORE ones. The entire interface has been manages to add some features revised, including the inventory sysand enhancements that may tem, spell and weapons screens, please the old-school RPG gamers and automap feature, making the out there. game much easier and more intu HEXPLORE casts you as Mac itive to control. Bride, a rough'n'tumble Scottish The most intriguing new feature adventurer. An evil mage named is the addition of four guilds (war Garkham is looking for The Book rior, wizard, cleric, and thief), of Hexplore, which holds the prewhich will let players develop dif cise location of the Garden of ferent sets of skills, depending Eden. In typical fantasy fashion, upon which guild they choose. Mac Bride needs to get some Joining a guild will also give you friends and thwart the evil mage. access to a familiar (an indepen HEXPLORE is played from an isodent creature that can be sum metric point of view, but gives you moned to aid you in battle, as well the ability to rotate your view a as help with other tasks, such as full 360 degrees around the map. hunting, spying, and stealing). In addition, you control up to four LANDS OF LORE III will maintain a characters in your party (Mac stronger RPG feel than did the Bride and a warrior, a mage, and previous games in the series. an archer, with about three to four We came down hard on LANDS characters in each occupation OF LORE II, but we're looking for offering to join your adventure). ward to this next game as much The single-player game also has a as anyone. Westwood looks as if story that comes to light as you it has learned its lesson-let's go to certain places and talk to hope so. — Jeff Green people who direct you through the game. The interface is click-andAV point, à la DIABLO, and the game NATUUREI boasts over 200 maps and a huge number of monsters, weapons, Infogrames' Retro and items. You can also play multiRPG Brings Back player games in which you and a Old-school Gameplay team of up to three friends can try to retrieve The Book of Hexplore. Release Date: 03.98 HEXPLORE's dated look may Developer Infogrames Entertainntent Publisher: Infogrames Entertainment hold the game back, but its gameplay—which is reminiscent IABLO made the old of DIABLO and GAUNTLET-comschool gameplay formula bined with its size, story, and of \"thwack creatures, get multiplayer elements, means gold, gain experience\" that it could be a nice addition popular again. The clones to your fantasy hack-and-slash are now following, but library. Thierry Nguyen ou kind of had to feel bad for Westwood Studios regarding LANDS OF LORE II. Here was a hugely ambitious, years-in-themaking, epic, fantasy Revenant civilizations that is now controlled by three Warlords. You play the role of Locke D'Averam, a warrior who has been summoned back from the dead (hence, the game's title), to help one of the warlords take revenge on another, who he believes has kidnapped his daughter. More than just windowdressing on the combat, the story (and extensive backstory) is key here, and should even please non hack-and-slash fans. Unlike in DIABLO, Locke and the rest of REVENANT's characters are rendered with full 3D-polygons, and Eidos is claiming that it has motion-captured over 50 different movements for combat alone, with a wider range of strikes, parries, and other moves not often seen in games of this type. The spell system is also extensive, with eight categories—Life, Phase, Flame, Lightning, Earth, Frost, loved game it looked like it couldn't lose. But the \"years-inthe-making\" proved to be the game's undoing, because by the time it came out it looked at least a year out-of-date, and ended up a big disappointment. Now, however, we're happy to say that Westwood's LANDS OF LORE III, due this fall, looks as if it will return the fantasy series to prominence, as you embark on a quest to prove yourself worthy of claiming the throne of Gladstone. Lands of Lore III 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"THE WAT IS OVER FLY WHAT WE FEARED MiG-29 F UL C RU FLYING AT MORE THAN 2X THE SPEED OF SOUND THE MIG-29 CAME OUT FROM BEHIND THE IRON CURTAIN TO CHALLENGE THE BEST TECHNOLOGY OF THE WEST. So, EVEN THOUGH THE COLD WAR IS OVER, THE MIG-29 FULCRUM IS ONE HOT PLANE TO FLY. FEATURING: * AUTHENTIC MiG-29 FLIGHT MODEL DEVELOPED WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF YURI PRIKHODKO, MIG-29 TEST PILOT & COSMONAUT * FAST AND FURIOUS 3DFX SUPPORTED COMBAT WITH HIGH DEFINITION GRAPHICS (1024 x 768 RESOLUTION) 7 FLY AND FIGHT IN OVER 40 EXCITING SINGLE-PLAYER/COOPERATIVE MISSIONS IN CONFLICTS AROUND THE WORLD OR USE THE MISSION DESIGN TOOL TO CREATE & PLAY YOUR OWN MISSIONS IBS INTEGRATED BATTLE SPACE\" TAKE TO THE SKIES IN YOUR MIG-29 AND FLY HEAD-TO-HEAD AGAINST OTHER PILOTS (OVER 130 PLAYERS PER ARENA!) FLYING MIG-29 FULCRUMS, F-16 MULTIROLE FIGHTERS AND F-22 RAPTORS IN NOVALOGIC'S REVOLUTIONARY INTEGRATED BATTLE SPACE. innin ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS MIG-29 M FULCRUM Go to #128 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink NUVALUGIU www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 IBS EXPERIENCE IT NOW novaworld.net F22 Raptor owners can receive free upgrades to lS urut the Internet or an updated CD for a numisal charge. 1998 NovalojIr. Novalogical thea Novalogic logu aeglatered trademarks ad forum. NowWw. ES, katayated Butle Space. F-22 Raptures telemals el Novalogic, Ladheed Martin, the scheed Martin star logo and -16 Meine Fightere trademarks of the cheed Martin Corpusw and are used under license tu Novalogic, Inc. All other trademarks are property of Geir respective ownert, "


"KICK-AXE FANTASY GAMES because of its feudal Asian setting. Will it be a samurai DIABLO? We should have a bigger story to tell in next month's CGW. COVER STORY xe-wielders, maceslingers, and flingers of pixie dust gather round. There are many more quests to pursue and skulls to bash in games due out over the coming year. Because we must get back to our ale-drinking and other important pursuits, we don't have the time to give them all their proper due, but here are some of the other fantasy-based titles you can look forward to in the near future. Total Annihilation: Kingdoms Cavedog Entertainment is taking its wildly popular real-time strate gy game into the realm of fantasy with TA: KINGDOMS, due early next year. Look for a brand-new storyline, involving four distinct sides dueling it out with combat and magic. works and stirring up a lot of controversy. Garriott's attempts to take the series in new directions has some of the diehards up in arms, while others are adopting a more wait-and-see attitude. We've been guilty ourselves of some prejudging. Now we're waiting and seeing. We hope, as much as anyone, that this legendary fantasy series goes out with a bang. The Elder Scrolls: Morrowind Bethesda's follow-up to DAGGERFALL is still way, way off (a year, at least, and probably more), so don't get your hopes up anytime soon. But the company's REDGUARD, due by year's end, is a TOMB RAIDERstyle hack-and-slash adventure also set in the fantasy world of Tamriel. See CGW's August cover story for more info on REDGUARD. Legend of the Five Rings: Ronin Activision's upcoming RPG, based on the collectible card game of the same name, is one of the fantasy games we're most anticipating Anachronox Tom Hall's already legend-in-themaking fantasy RPG for lon Storm is well on the way, but may be later than we first thought. Rumor has it that lon Storm pulled some members of the ANACHRONOX team off the game to help finish up John Romero's delinquent DAIKATANA. Ultima Ascension The latest and, apparently, final chapter in Richard Garriott's megapopular ULTIMA series is well in the A Fantastical Year Is your inner elven mage eager for battle? Check out the past year's worth of fantasy-based games reviewed by CGW. GAME RATING ISSUE WORTHY TITLE? COMMENTS BATTLESPIRE ***** May '98 Nay DAGGERFALL follow-up has dated graphics and limited, overly difficult gameplay. BETRAYAL IN ANTARA **** November '97 Maybe Traditional turn-based RPG with good story is long and kinda dull. BIRTHRIGHT *** December '97 Maybe AD&D strategy/fantasy hybrid is deep, but overly ambitious for its own good. CIV II: FANTASTIC WORLDS *** March '98 Yea Expansion set for CIVILIZATION II takes the classic game to new and different worlds. DUNGEON KEEPER ** October '97 Yea Original, funny game lets you play an evil underground overlord puttin' down the good guys. HELLFIRE *** April '98 Yea Yea DIABLO expansion kit isn't great, but it's a no-brainer for hard-core DIABLO fanatics. LORDS OF MAGIC ***** April '98 Hellishly buggy, disappointing nightmare of a game that coulda been a contender against HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II. MIGHT AND MAGIC VI * August '98 Yea Huge, addictive game is a triumphant return for one of the classic fantasy RPG series. MYTH ***** February '98 Yea Brilliant, ground-breaking game with deep gameplay and story. CGW's 1997 Strategy Game of the Year. WARHAMMER EPIC 40,000: * March '98 Yea Good game based on the classic tabletop FINAL LIBERATION miniatures game is marred by ugly art. WARHAMMER: DARK OMEN ***** July '98 Yea Best Warhammer computer game yet is a 3D-strategy game à la MYTH. WARLORDS III **** October '97 Yea Wonderfully addictive turn-based strategy game is the best in a great series WARWIND II **** April '98 Maybe SSI's real-time strategy game is a decent WARCRAFT-alike. Nay AVA COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"This isn't a Dating Service This is where you SCORE! \"NovaLogic's programmers did a superb job with the multiplayer codeeven in games with over 30 players, there was no perceptible lag in close-in combat.\" \"IT'S A BLAST.\" -Computer Gaming World novaworld. The 1st [and ONLY] Large-Scale Gaming Service that DELIVERS: FAST, FURIOUS, SMOOTH GAMEPLAY MODERN COMBAT GAMES COMPETING IN ONE ARENA FREE* LARGE-SCALE MULTIPLAYER GAMING Most gaming services offer just matchmaking to players and charge a hefty fee. NovaWorld's Integrated Battle Space\" servers keep you connected with over 100 other opponents per arena and it's FREE. MIG-29 NOVALOGIC www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 IBS-EXPERIENCE IT NOW novaworld.net 1998 NovaLogic, Inc. NovaLogic and the NovaLogic logo are registered trademarks and NovaWorld, F-22, Raptor, Fulcrum, Delta Force, Integrated Battle Space are trademarks of Novalogic, Inc. F-16 Multirolo Fighter, Lockheed Martin and the Lockheed Martin star logo are trademarks of the Lockheed Martin Corporation and are used under license to Novalogic, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. U.S. Patent #s 5,625,759 and 5,550,959. With purchase of any Novalogic product. Novaloglo reserves the right to change the terms of service at any time. Go to #129 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"WELCOME TO BLACKSTONE ASYLUM FASTEN YOUR STRAIGHT-JACKET. IT'S TIME TO IMMERSE YOURSELF IN THE CHILLING WORLD OF JOHN SAUL'S BLACKSTONE CHRONICLES: AN ADVENTURE IN TERROR THE FIRST COLLABORATIVE EFFORT BETWEEN NY TIMES BEST-SELLING AUTHOR JOHN SAUL AND LEGEND ENTERTAINMENT. STUNNING 24-BIT ARTWORK SURROUNDS YOU IN THE EVIL THAT IS BLACKSTONE ASYLUM WHERE TORTURED SPIRITS FROM THE PAST OFFER YOU THE ONLY HOPE OF SAVING YOUR MISSING FAMILY. AND YOUR SANITY. BON APPETIT. JOUNCANTS WWW.BLACKSTONE-CHRONICLES.COM GEND Blackstone Chronicles LEGEND MINDSCAPE (UICIDIREIT John Saul's Blackstone Chronicles An Adventure in lentor 1998 Mindscape, lic. a division of the Commy. All rights reserved. Jolini Saul's name and likeness are the properly ol Judun Saul The Original novel The Blackstone Clutoniclus 1997 John Saul. Used under license by Mindscape, Inc. in conjunction with Legend Entertainment, Windows is a registered trademark or trademark of Microsoft Coricat in the United States and/or other countries All other tradeks ant copyrights are the property of their respective bidders "


"WILL YOU BE DRESSING FOR DINNER? Haar light MATINE MAIS Go to #191 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Page 179 1 view), uterg, con "


"Aural Fixation quiet revolution has begun taking over the noisiest part of your PC: the audio subsystem. SoundBlaster compatibility, once the Rosetta stone of PC audio, has become less and less important as games have migrated to Windows 95/98. More and more, games are using higher-resolution audio, and some titles have even incorporated Dolby Surround for ambient effects. Speakers, that crucial last step in making audio come to life on your PC, have improved considerably, with very solid-sounding units as low as $100. In the first section of this feature, beginning on page 170, we'll put 12 new speaker systems to the test. Meanwhile, sound cards have almost all moved to the PCI bus, and most can accelerate 3D positional-audio. The question is, should you replace your audio plumbing or just get new speakers—or both? In the second section of the story, which begins on page 179, we'll give you an earful of PCI sound cards to help you make up your mind. Let's listen in.. Text by Loyd Case Photography by Michael Falconer Page 170 22 www.computengan SAMPLER CASINO WORDS  Acroger 1998 167 "


"DEMONS FROM THE PAST CAN TORMENT YOU... SANI ARIUM "


"OR SET YOU FREE \"Sanitarium is a triumph. Irresistably compelling. Deeply metaphorical\" Next Generation Online **Through its deft juggling of mood and story, Sanitarium creates one of the most compelling, involoving adventures to grace a hard drive in a long time\" -Game Spot \"Sanitarium is easily the most disturbing computer game of 1998\" -PC Games \"IF «Jacob's Ladder\" was reality squared, Sanitarium is reality cubed\" -J.O.Herz The New York Times The lirst adventure game where your emotions play with your intelligence. A SHOCKINGLY DISTURBING ADVENTURE.. Go to #233 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 1-9-9-8 BEST OF THE BEST BEST OF THE BEST TEEN Windows 95 DREAMFORGE PC CD-ROM GAMES ESTATE GAMES AlList Download demo at www.ascgames.com Bandarium Mis a Vademark of American Soltworks Corporation. BotoSoll Games Joint Venture No. 1 (1997 Adolf Woossnor. ASC Games is a trademark ot American Softworks Corporation.1998. Sanitarium is developed by DreamForgo Intertainment, Inc. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Plata Soliware Association. All rights reserved WARIUM 18 AGES 19. SANI ARILM ARILIN "


"Speak No Evil New Speakers Offer More Sound for Less ound quality in most games is better than ever. But an audio subsystem is only as strong as its weakest part. And despite all the advances that have taken place recently in sound cards, many gamers are still using the tiny speakers that came with their \"multimedia kit.\" Trying to drive high-quality audio through a pair of $5 speakers is like trying to attach a garden hose to a fire hydrant. Something's gotta give, and it's usually audio quality. But there's really no reason why your ears-or your pocketbook-have to suffer. Just take a listen to the latest crop of powered speakers, which range in price from $70 to $350. For the most part, it's all ear candy. Advent Powered Partners AV390 The Sub-$200 Limbo Stick The AV390s are the high end of Advent's Powered Partners product line. They sport features like virtual Dolby ProLogic (using a chip developed by Aureal The field of sub-$200 speakers is crowded, so you have to be pretty good to stand out. However, the laws of physics are tough to violate, and since most of these units are fairly compact in size, it's tough to get good sound out of them. Manufacturing cost is a factor, too, so some of the really inexpensive speakers cut corners, such as having permanently attached cables instead of (more expensive) connectors. Advent Powered Partners AV190 * *** * (which is usually set only once anyway). The mute switch is a nice feature: You punch the volume control, and the speakers mute. The DSP and virtual ProLogic work, although I preferred the DSP setting to the ProLogic setting. Actually, I really pre. ferred the non-surround setting the best. In WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY it sounded as if there were some nearby sounds to the right and left of me, but I didn't really experience the rear effect. The missing (virtual) center channel seemed to be insufficient. As standard speakers, the AV390s sound pretty good. Overall tonal balance is smooth and slightly warm. They do tend to distort when you turn them up very loud, however. Still, you could do far worse than a set of AV390s. Give them a listen before you purchase them, though. Advent Powered Partners AV390 Price: $199.95; Contact: Interract, (800) 732 8666, www.poweredpartners.com PROS: Pleasant, warm sounding speakers, easy setup: no power brick. CONS: Distort at high levels, bass unit should be mounted side ways to minimize floor footprint. These are minuscule versions of Advent's AV390s, and they lack the AV390s' virtual Dolby surround capability. The bass unit has a 5.25-inch long-throw woofer, and the satellites consist of single 3-inch drivers in the classic triangular cabinet. As with the 390s, you can attach the bass unit to the side of a desk or a wall, which is the preferred setup. The AV190s aren't as loud as the AV390s, but the overall tonal quality is quite similar. With music, they sound a bit warm, especially vocals. It was also easy to overdrive these speakers with \"hot\" music source material, but I didn't notice it so much with games. Of course, you can't shake the rafters with these babies, nor does the bass go as low as in some of the more expensive speakers, but that's the point. These speakers are cheap. At $70, nothing in their price range can match them, unless you can find a good deal on a pair of Cambridge SoundWorks' PC Works. Advent Powered Partners AV190 Price: $69.95; Contact: Interract, (800) 7328666, www.poweredpartners.com PROS: Pleasant, warm sounding speakers, small desktop footprint no power brick. CONS: Distort easily: large bass unit floor footprint nor very loud. Boston Acoustics BA-635 Semiconductor) and a DSP to broaden the sound stage. The bass unit is large and square, and is meant to be mounted sideways, as its controls face down. If you have a side of your desk or a nearby wall free, this is a cool feature; but if you have tube-framed furniture, then this design is problematic, as the bass unit will take up a large floor footprint. Setup is fairly simple, with straightforward cable connections, and all the needed controls are on the right satellite, except for the power switch and bass volume fhen I had to give these puppies up for the photo shoot for this article, I was nearly reduced to tears. I really liked these tiny guys. Although they aren't really loud, they put out more than enough volume for a small office or dorm room. 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"CONFIDENCE IS HIGH Ninger INTERactive --16 Aggressor is the closest anyone utside the military will get to experiencing light in the cockpit of an F-16. Selected as ne of 1998's \"Hot 100\" games by both Computer Gaming World and PC Gamer --16 Aggressor boasts a fly-by-wire system hat's been modeled and Integrated to berfection--a technological feat few if any light sims can claim. GGRESSOR The difference is tangible. Takeoff is Incredible. Acceleration is awesome. Manueverability is phenomenal, weaton representations of the F-16's cockpit and controls enhance your flight experience as you take out enemy, targets in 40 geo-political missions over destablized regions of Africa. F-16 Aggressor. Any closer to the real thing and we'd have to shoot you. Jorld class technology eaturing flight modeling o accurate that only top ecret military features have been excluded. The F-16 \"Fly-by-wire\" system has been precisely modeled and Integrated to offer you a filght sim that soars above the rest. 40 exciting missions spread across 4 campalgns with a vast array of military targets. Uniquely detalled enemy A.I. that controls tanks, helicopters, boats, tralns and cars with Incredible reallsm. Engage in up to 4 player simultaneous Interactive alr combat in target-rich environments over the Internet or LAN. RATING PERDING WWW.VIE.COM RP So Go to #089 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink CONTENT RATED BY ESRB "


"100MS EVERYONE ESE 8 Officially licensed product of the NFL Players and NFL Properties. The NFL shield design is a registered trademark of the National Fog League, Team names. Nicknames. logos and other indicia are trademarks of the teams indicated. TMO1998 NFLP. Player Miyo in are usilened if hileThirth of lia NFL Players.198 PlayPUS IMG. PlaySalian | INTE UL,CLICuad by 989 SPUSHU PT] lulumidthy Inc. PC game dieveloped by 1980 Sports. Authtunile Fonli ne Jence. 989 Spotis and 969 Sportb000 are tradernal; Sony Computer Entertainment America Inc, Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. The 3Dic Interactive logg Hadermurikol apig Intel active Inc1990 Sony Computer Entertainment Amurio 10. Sony Computer Enterialim 000 trademark of Sony Corporation. PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment PlayStation ROM SAT FLAYERS "


"IE WENT 92 YARDS, BROKE TWO TACKLES, JUKED ONE CORNER AND BLEW THE NUMBERS OFF THE FREE SAFETY. C'MON, LET THE GUY DANCE. Football doesn't get any more real than NFL GameDay '99. This year, we've given NFL GameDay '99 a stadium full of new features, like all-new graphics and gameplay, brilliant sportscasting by Dick Enberg and Phil Simms, and Authentic Football Intelligence, a new innovation which has players thinking and reacting just like they do in the pros. NFL GameDay '99 by 989 Sports. Take a few snaps and you'll see why it's the best-selling football game around NEL GAMEDAY GAMEDAY  GAMEDAY 989) SPORTS PlayStation www.989sports.com Go to #264 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AURAL FIXATION SPEAKERS JBL Media 2000 These speakers look deadly I cool. In fact, these were proba bly the best looking speakers in the roundup. It's too bad they don't sound as good as they look. JBL has long had a history of developing studio monitors, and its home speakers are decent as wall. That's why I was scratching Moreover, when playing music, they sound very smooth and uncolored. Even when cranked up, the BA-635s have very little noticeable distortion. With games. they sound even better, and are great when paired with a low-cost ABD-capable sound card. The bass unit is tiny, and yet it seems to put out enough lowfrequency audio to satisfy everyone except Bach organ fugue aficionados. Boston Acoustics is one of the few speaker makers that manufactures its own drivers, and the results seem very positive. If all you've got is $100 then the BA-635s are a good buy. Boston Acoustics BA-635 Price: $99. Contact: Boston Acoustics, (978) 538-5000; www.bostonacoustics.com PROS: Clean, uncalored sound small desktop/floor footprint easy setup. CONS: They're not very loud my head after listening to the Media 2000s. The only theory I can come up with is that they were designed for people who want to listen to music at low volumes. The overall sound is fairly clean, but the bass unit doesn't deliver any punch. Musical material sounded fine at low volumes, but distorted if you turned the volume up past the 50 percent level. No matter how much I fiddled with the sound card or the speakers, these guys sounded anemic, at best. Game audio was equally disappointing. For $160 (the going street price) you can do a lot better. JBL Media 2000 Price: $160 (street): Contact: /BL, (800) 4/1, vvv.jol.com. PROS: They look cool. CONS: Incapable of high volume, no bass punch aneric Sound. MIDILand/S2 4030 I've liked what I've seen of S2 I speakers before, but they were always devilishly hard to find. Last year, S2 signed a distribution agreement with MIDILand, so perhaps its speakers will be more widely available in the future. The 4030s are a set of relatively low-cost sub/satellite speakers. S2 has attacked the control issue by Look, Ma, No Sound Card Within minutes of setup, the speakers were live-not a single reboot needed. The audio quality of the ADA-70s seemed to be a bit warm, and they were fairly loud. You can control output levels from a knob on the right speaker or from the Windows mixer. There was a low crackling sound, but Altec-Lansing is aware of the problem and promises that it won't be in the shipping product. magine a world with no sound cards. You would no longer have to hassle with IRQS, DMA, and a host of other annoyances that assault us even in a Plug-and-Play world. Sounds too good to be true, eh? In fact, such a world may be just around the corner. We managed to get a sneak peek at a pair of USB speaker sets. One is from longtime speaker giant Altec Lansing, and the other is from a little outfit in Redmond called Microsoft. That's right, Microsoft is doing speakers. As you read this, the Altec Lansing ADA 70 should be in your local computer superstore. The Microsoft speakers-codenamed \"First Bass\"-should be out before Christmas. I took a look at preproduction versions of both units. Not surprisingly, both speaker sets are designed for Windows 98. However, they do have analog inputs, so you can still plug sound cards into them should you feel you're not ready to make the move to Windows 98. But if you do upgrade, under Windows 98, the digital audio is streamed out the USB port and the digital-to-analog (DIA) conversion to analog sound is handled by circuitry inside the bass module. Plugging the ADA-70s into the USB port was a startling experience. Windows 98 detected the speakers and installed all the drivers. No software came with the system. speaker. The bass unit used a 5.25-inch driver coupled with a 5.25-inch passive radiator-a fairly sophisticated technique that gets a bigger bass sound out of relatively small drivers. When running the ADA-70s, MIDI music is generated by Windows 98's new software MIDI renderer, which caused a fairly steady 15 percent CPU load on a Pentium 11/400 (according to the Windows System Monitor). The Microsoft speakers, ironically enough, have their own custom software that took just under 10 percent of the CPU cycles. However, MIDI is less prevalent in recent games than in those from years past, so this may not be much of a factor in the long run. Certainly the quality of the MIDI soundsbased on Roland Sound Canvas samples was pretty good. There are still reasons to have sound cards-neither speaker set handled 3D audio. There was a tantalizing \"3D Audio\" checkbox in the Microsoft equalizer, but it didn't seem to do anything. Even so, both speaker sets worked amazingly well. Maybe we will be able to ditch that sound card after all.-L.C. Microsoft \"First Bass\" The Microsoft speakers were also quite loud. Unlike the ADA-70s, the First Bass system did ship with software. Included was a nine-band, software graphic equalizer and a new MIDI software renderer. The First Bass sound was warm overall, but the equalizer allowed me to tweak the audio balance to my heart's content. You can adjust volume, bass, and treble from controls on the right Altec Lansing ADA-70 Price: $149.95: Contact: Altec Lansing. (800) ALTEC88 www.altecmm.com/ Microsoft \"First Bass\" Price + $200; Contact: Microsoft. (425) 882-8080; www.microsoft.com/hardware 174 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"AMD PGL PGL NEWS UPDATES OVER $250,000 NEWS UPDATE PROFESSIONAL GAMERS LEAGUE IN CASH AND PRIZES! To Sign Up or For More info, Go To: http://www.pgl.com The First Pro Sports League for the Computer Gaming Crowd *MIDWEST CONNECTION Quake players and clans in the Pacific time zone have gotten the lion's share of the fame and glory, at least in the eyes of the general public. But the Quake cognoscenti have always known that America's Midwest and East regions are home to some of the country's greatest players and teams. Well, the PGL is an equal-opportunity kind of league, and as the Midwestern gods of gaming join up, it's our duty — nay, our pleasure to make them known to a wider audience. Here then is a closer look at the MidWest's scariest squad, Unforgiven... UNFORGIVEN TEAM HONORS/TITLES: Big 12 First Place, Division DC-Con 3 First Place DC-Con 4 First Place DMCon 97 ist Place DMCon '98 ist Place Elite Eight Second Place T2 Quarterfinalists T3 Second Place REAL NAME: Thomas Dawson ARCHIAMESISnone RALLI: Dave Chun ARCHITES. Originally, PREFERRED WEAPON: 1 \"really like the Brett Honneus, aka \"honus.\" Now, I don't really lightning gun. CONTROTTER mouse/keyboard have one... BREADERE WEAPON There's no ALSO PLAYS: Anything that's multiplayer, feeling like having a lightning gun and a lot of I'll play it :) BIRTHPLACID: Champaign, IL cells. Com Logitech Mouseman 96 RESIDENCE: Monticello, IL. AGE: 20 keyboard ANSO PAM Tekken2, and I dabble CONNECTION: TI CPU SPRED: 300mhz in all of the 3D shooter games. S HPIRACIRE FAVORITE LEVEL: Any of the Quake Li Chicago, IL R IDIZO St. Louis, MO SE 19 deathmatch levels FAVORITE SAYING: RECORO formerly dual T3 ethernet, now \"Zoinks\" HOBBIES. Reading, competitive modem BUDBUDG: 200mhz AVORITE HVIT games/athletics, tinkering with computers DM, Favorite Saying: \"asdkitalskdjfsa;j\" BORRIES Messing with computers, playing/watching sports, I'm also a big movie buff REAL NAME: Dan Hammans ARCHNICKTOSTIS: none really =) REAL FAMEEric Paik ARCHNEMESIS: myself PREFERRED WEAPON(S): Rocket Launcher/ PROIERRID WIDAPON(S): Double Barrel Lightning Gun/Boomstick CONTROINTERS Logitech Shotgun w/ Quad CONTROTTITOR Logitech Mouse + keyboard ALSO PLAYS: All Games BIRTHMouseman and Keyboard ALSO PISAYS: PLACE: Ames, lowa RESIDENCE: Ames, lowa Windows solitaire BIRO PIACB: Omaha, NE EGE:18 CONNECTION: 128K ISDN CPU SPEECT: RESIDENCE: Omaha, NE AGE : 22 66mhz FAVORIINE TEVELL DM FAVORITE CONNEOTION: Cable Modem CPU Dan SAYING: \"wouldn'tyouknowitmyspacebarisbroken\" SPEED: 300mhz DAVORITE LEVELS: HOBBIES: Car stereo, hockey, IRC, model railroads Deathmatch: DM6; Teamplay: DM3 LAVORITE SAYING: (not suitable for publication) HOBBIES: Reading, golf, chillin' on RC V VON DO YOU LIKE TO WATCH? 1..As always, the PGL is featured regularly ed regularly T V on America's most popular television show dedicated to computers and the COM Internet, TV.com, airing weekly all over the country. Check http://www.cnet.com/content/Tv/Tucom/Where/ for the station and air times in your area! RICO STARTRAFT CHECK OUT Www, pg1.com FOR ATL THE SEASON 3 HIGHLIGHTS! QUAKEL STARTRAFT AMD) VADVENT Chez AMD Computer ABESTI GTE GE MGV Memory MCV Memory R E ST Rohin the Aubates Logitech AMD, the AMD loro, and the combination thereol, are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. PGL Professional Gamers' League, and the PGL logo are trademarks of Professional Gamers' League. TEX. Total Entertainment Network, and the TER logo are trademarks of TE Network, Inc. QUAKE a resistered trademark of id Software, Inc. The id Software name and the Idoso are trademarks of ld Software, Inc. Starcraft is a trademark and Blizzard Entertainment is a trademark of a registered trademark in the US. and/or other countries. US Robotics and the US Robotics logo are registered trademarks and the Xa loro are trademarks of COM Corporation or its subsidiaries. All other logos, trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. The Professional Gamers League will be subject to all applicable federal and state laws. The Professional Gamers' League reserves the rit. In its sole discretion to modily this contest in any manner whatsoever including, but not limited to rules. prizes and start date) as well as the right to cancel this contest for any reason. Go to #275 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"OTNN OUTDOORS SEASON OPENS NOVEMBER 23 PRO HUNTER UNREAL 3-D technology, for a truly realistic hunting experience.  Multiplayer Online play  Realistic animal behaviors  Active Wildlife Environment. UTRE PUREINS DREAMFORGE RP PC CD-ROM) Tercera parte Windows 95 Go to #091 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PHN O MINN Odor Pro Hunter Strademark of American Sotwork Corporation. INNS and the TNINXIOS Are Togorod sorvice mara TNN Outdoor Imdemark of Network Enterprises, Inc CPEG 96 Limited Partnership ASC GAMM A trademark of American Softworks Corporation 1998. TNN Outdoor Pro Hunter in dewlond by breamlogo Intertainment Too, Wadow 93 registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation The mingia con il trademark oldalteractive Digital Software Association Ad r eserved CONTENT RATEDET ESRB "


"SPEAKERS. AURAL FIXATION placing all the speaker controls in retails for $140, but Quickshot a small box, which you can mountgear tends to be discounted heavin a free 5.25-inch drive bay in ily, so you can probably find this you PC. It's a slightly geeky, but a setup for much less. very workable solution. These speakers sound pretty For a fairly small set of speak good during gameplay. I say that ers, the 4030s pump out a robust first, because you wouldn't want sound. It can't be described as to play much music through them. \"uncolored,\" but it's still pleasing Vocal material sounded strained, to the ear, and you can crank up in particular, and sibilants (the these speakers pretty loud. When \"ssss\" sound) were quite exaggerplaying music, the 4030s seemed ated. The Bass Machine had a to emphasize the vocal spectrum two-position crossover switch that and there was just a touch of either overemphasized or underedginess to the sound quality. emphasized the bass material, Game audio sounded pretty good. though some fiddling with the If you can't mount the control box bass volume helped. in your PC, you can always attach In games, though, you can it to your monitor with some usercrank these babies up loud. The supplied velcro. Bass Machine provides a satisfyAll in all, these are a decent set ing rumble during explosions and of affordable speakers that man other similar effects. The real age to pump out a reasonably downside is that these are sepaimpressive volume. rate units and don't seem all that MIDILand/S2 4030 well tuned to each other. Price: $189. Contact: MIDILand, (886) 592. 1168, www.midiland.com Quickshot Sound Force 680/Bass Machine 2 PROS: High volume for such small units, Price: $69 each; Contact: Quickshot (408) good control layout, compact size. 263-4163; www.quickshot.com CONS: Music has a slightly edgy and colored PROS: Don't distort: loud gaming audio: quality to it relatively low cost. CONS: Music quality not very clean do better for less money. Sony SRS-PC71 Price: 5105 Contact: Sony, (800) 352-7669, www. ita.sel.sony.com/products/av/personal/ PROS: Star Trek look, decent game audio. CONS: Expensive for what you get lousy music playback Quickshot Sound Force 680/Bass Machine 2 Sony SRS-PC71 W e reviewed the Sound Force 680s a few months back and found them to be a decent set of low-cost speakers. This time around, we paired them up with a Bass Machine 2. The combination although they do have a 20 wattper-channel RMS amplifier. Music audio sounded clean and uncluttered, but suffered from the lack of bass. Game audio fared better, but big explosions or rumbling sound effects were a bit tinny. If you have the desk space and a few more bucks for a dedicated subwoofer, these might be very solid speakers. They would also be superb as the rear speakers in a four-speaker setup-but that would be an expensive set of rear channel speakers. Yamaha YST-M100 Price: $180; Contact: Yamaha, (714) 522 9000, www.yamaha.com PROS: Clean sound; easy setup CONS: Big desktop footprint: low end response is lacking. Yamaha YST-M100 These goofy-looking, standI alone speakers would look right at home in Jean-Luc Picard's If these speakers had come out quarters. They are also paradox Tabout three years ago-before ical: They sound terrible with the shift to dedicated powered music, yet pretty darned good bass unitsprobably would with games. have raved about them. These speakers distort at the First, these are big desktop merest whiff of any dynamic speakers. Although they'll work range in strong musical scores. with a subwoofer, they don't ship Part of the problem may be the with one. These have a two-way lack of a dedicated bass unit (the design, with a 3.5-inch midrange/bass driver is only 2.6 woofer and a 0.6-inch inches). I don't recommend dome tweeter. these at all if you like playing However, therein lies your music CDs in your PC. the problem. Although Game audio is a different these speakers sound story. I cranked up the audio in fairly clean, the lack of a MECHCOMMANDER and QUAKE subwoofer is really noticeIl pretty loud, and didn't noticeable. Yamaha specs the freany distortion. Even in-game q uency response down to music seemed fine. Go figure. just 50Hz, and that's an At any rate, if you like the way optimistic number. they look, and you don't listen In addition to being big, to much music, you might these guys are also heavy, Ana www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 171 "


"AURAL FIXATION  SPEAKERS The High-Price Spread These speakers are for people who want to go a bit beyond the mundane-and have the dollars to do it. Boston Acoustics Media Theater & Media Theater Surround Price: $299 (Media Theater), 599 (Media Theater Surround); Contact: Boston Acoustics, (978) 538-5000, www.bostonacoustics.com PROS: Aniple volume, easy setup, good overall sound quality. CONS: Slightly bright: no treble control pricey, MIDILand/S2 4100 * * * * Boston Acoustics Media Theater and MediaTheater Surround These are the most expensive speakers in the roundup (unless you add the Surround option to MediaTheater). These were also the only ones that were so loud they actually hurt my ears. The S2 4100s deliver stunning volume, and for the most The MediaTheater system consists of a (by-now) familiar powered bass-plussatellite configuration, with a couple of twists. First, as with the Advent AV390s, the MediaTheaters support virtualized Dolby ProLogic. However, unlike the Advent system, Media Theater can come with a pair of actual rear-channel surround speakers, housed in a single cabinet, as an option, if you don't want to go with the virtualized Dolby. The Media Theater's 6.5-inch throw woofer and 3-inch midrange/tweeter drivers deliver satisfying volume in most cases. Adding the MediaTheater Surrounds are a nice bonus, but bear in mind that they work only with Dolby ProLogic sound sources, you can't use them, for example, to act as the rear speakers in a four-speaker DirectSound3D setup. Overall tonal balance was a little bright, but, unfortunately, the Media Theaters have no built-in treble control with which to adjust the tonal balance. So, if your sound card can't adjust the tonal balance, you'll have to live with the brightness. The subwoofer control is on the right satellite, which is a nice touch. Music sounded pretty good (although, as before, it was a bit bright), and these speakers didn't sound strained until very high volume levels. Game audio can be pumped up pretty loud, though it won't shake any rafters. The virtual ProLogic works reasonably well, but you get the best sound quality with the optional Media Theater Surround speakers—which work surprisingly well. The MediaTheater system is not cheap; but price aside, it does deliver a solid audio experience. This system gets bonus points for ease of setup, convenient controls, and the rear surround speaker option. part, the tonal balance is pretty good, albeit a bit bright. Like their smaller siblings, the 4030s, the S2 4100s have a slick (or goofy, depending on your perspective) control box. Although the tonal balance did tend to be too bright for my tastes, I was able to adjust the treble control a tad to get a more pleasing sound. The satellites are beefy twoway units with a 4-inch midrange and 0.6-inch dome tweeter. The huge subwoofer section (which is very near to a \"true\" subwoofer) sports a 50-watt bass amplifier and a 25-watt-per-channel amp for the satellites. The woofer itself is an 8-inch long-throw woofer. The whole affair can pump out superhigh volume. I ran the MECHCOMMANDER intro movie through these speakers and the experience proved to be mind-blowing, and game audio sounded positively incredible. The \"3DSP\" feature does a decent job of widening the sound stage. Despite being a bit bright, these are terrific speakers, especially if you don't mind irate neighbors. MIDILand/S2 4100 Price: $349 (estimated street price): Contact: MIDILand, (888) 592-1168: www.midiland.com PROS: Really loud, good sound quality overall, good controls. CONS: Slight edginess and brightness to the tonal balance; not cheap. How We Tested Testing speakers is a challenge, especially if you don't have access to an anechoic chamber with an oscilloscope. I used a wide variety of musical sources to check out speakers' overall sound quality. My ears tend to be biased toward what used to be called \"classical\" speakers, so I prefer those speakers that don't emphasize any portion of the sound spectrum at their default settings. As a reference, I used the Eminent Technologies LFT-11s. While ostensibly \"multimedia\" speakers, the LFT-11s can stand up to audiophile speakers costing upward of $1,000. In addition to music, I ran a number of .WAV files with test tones, which ranged from 30Hz to 15,000Hz. I also used some inphase and out-of-phase pink noise samples. Then I put them through their paces with a number of games. Oddly enough, some speakers that didn't sound that good with music performed better with game audio, and I tried to point this out when it was the case. Finally, to test the pair of Dolby ProLogic-capable speakers, I fired up the intro to WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY. 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 "


"Ear Candy A9419-DESTE Bot10294 ALMONDS Part 2: PCI Sound Cards Bring Superior Performance by Loyd Case COMPUTER GAMIAJOR ba 179 "


"OM "


"'You command turn of the century tanks, battleships and observation balloons. They command 200-foot Fighting Machines. Size doesn't matter. Strategy does! It's not how big your units are, it's what you do with them. When the Martian war machine lands on the green and pleasant land of 19th century Britain, strategy is all you've got. And in this revolutionary non-linear war, you'll need it. Deploy your forces anywhere on the map of Britain. Choose your missions. Pick your battles. Because you can lose a battle and still win the War. Maybe. It's your primitive tanks against their Fighting Machines. Your biplanes against their Flying Machines. Your observation balloons against their Xeno-telepaths. 150 30 rendered units stand between you and Martian domination Or experience strategy from the other side and play as the Martians! JEFF WAYNES 'T W w il The War of the Worlds the original british invasion Based on the classic novel by H.G. Wells and featuring a fully remixed 45 minute score licensed and composed by best selling artist Jeff Wayne UTINEN Devigned to GT Interactive Software AD Microsoft Wrdon95 SWOIR TO www.gtinteractive.com Available soon at your local retailer Go to #162 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink *The War of the Worlds\" 1998 Rage Software Limited. All Rights Reserved. Published and Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. GT is a trademark and the GT Logo is a registered trademark of GT Interactive Software Corp. The Story, script, artwork and logo from Jell Wayne's Musical Version of \"The War of the Worlds Ollie Record Productions. The musical score from Jett Wayne's Musical Version of \"The War of the Worlds\" 1978 Jell Wayne Music Publishing) Lid. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"0 AUDIO 3D 993 Positional Audio AZTECH PCI 338-43] BRFUTTERGOGHIACULTYFORFLUIX DOTTERT Wide omade 5/01 oldini oliwia Doldal elen g Aztech PCI 338-A3D y production system (the one I use to write all these reviews) still has an AWE-32 with a Roland SCD-15 Sound Canvas daughtercard. I think it's time to retire the old ISA standard-bearer. Of course, I couldn't just pick a card. I had to test a range of them, for both my benefit and yours. Why PCI sound cards? One thing driving the move to PCI audio is the Microsoft/Intel PC 98 spec. But it's not just the Wintel giants strong-arming an unwary public—there are some very good technical reasons to move to PCI. Game audio is getting more complex. Positional 3D audio-including DirectSound3D and Aureal A3D-moves a lot of data across the bus. Throw in multiple sound streams, which are becoming increasingly prevalent, and you can easily leave the old ISA bus gasping for breath. PCI's faster bus speed-up to 133MB/sec-gives audio much more bandwidth to make use of. The sound-chip designers have been hard at work taking advantage of this newly available (to audio, anyway) bandwidth. As with 3D graphics, we now have audio chips capable of accelerating DirectSound streams. I reviewed a representative sample of these new cards and revisited three others that CGW rated recently. The results follow: a handy guide if you're comparison shopping for a new sound card. | urking under this mouthful of a L name is a card that superficially resembles the Turtle Beach Montego. The version we tested lacked a wavetable header, but I've heard that some of the 338s do have wavetable headers. How you can tell without opening the box is anyone's guess. The driver set appears to be the Aureal reference drivers. The sound quality was comparable to the MagicWave PCI, but this card didn't pop when I powered up. Some users have reported odd crackling in some games, but I didn't encounter this. There's no real manual, just a thin flyleaf that looks photocopied. The card comes with a minimal software bundle of multimedia utilities. The MIDI sounds were on a par with the other cards in this roundup, and digital audio seemed fairly quiet, though there was a little hiss at higher volumes. Overall, there's not much to distinguish this card from the pack. Aztech PCI 338-A3D Price: $69: Contact: Aztech, (510) 623-8988: www.aztechca.com PROS: Fairly easy installation; A3D positional audio. CONS: Practically nonexistent documentation; slight ambient hiss Worth Another Look Price: $99 (M80). $149 (MX200): (both prices are MSRP); Contact: Diamond Multimedia, (800) 468-5846; www.diamondmm.com Turtle Beach Montego efore we dive headlong into the newest cards out there, let's look at these summaries of our most recent PCI audiocard reviews from past issues, along with the cards' CG scores, so you can compare. Roland Sound Canvas sample set) and also supports four-speaker DirectSound3D. Both cards use Aureal's A3D positional audio algorithms, but they have a DSP (digital signal processor) solution instead of one that uses an Aureal chip. Neither card does well in DOS. The digital audio on both cards is pretty good, and the cards are pretty quiet. Both cards had some teething problems with some joysticks, but the most recent driver set seems to have solved most of the issues. If you can spare the $50, the MX200 is the better card. The full CGW reviews for these cards are in the following issues: M80: June 1998, MX200: September 1998. Monster Sound M80 and MX200 Monster Sound M80 PLINIS CURICA Monster Sound MX200 Monster The Montego is probably the best of the Aureal Vortex cards currently on the market. This is a very quiet card-you'll hear no discernible hiss, even when the volume is cranked all the way up. There's also a wavetable header, so if you don't like the Aureal wavetable, you can add your favorite MIDI daughtercard. The Montego is a solid, unassuming card that, with some careful shopping, can be found for under $100. The full CGW review for the Montego is in the August 1998 issue. Turtle Beach Montego Price: $129 (MSRP): Contact: Turtle Beach, (800) 233-9377; www.voyetra.com U MX200 Advanced Sound for Heart-pounding 3D Gaming DIAMOND h erd wen de? The retail prices for these two cards differ by $50. The core cards are very similar, but the M80 has a cheesy wavetable and supports only two speakers. On the other hand, the MX200 has a superb wavetable (based on the fep Seder 182 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"PC Audio Has Changed Forever. "


"Sound BLASTER Lwe CREATIVE CBLASTER Environmental Au Emitiron maltado Soledlidi Ho To BUT Experience the most powerful sound card ever! Sound Blaster Live! introduces a new dimension of audio by including features and performance surpassing professional Hollywoodquality audio equipment. Sound Blaster Live! incorporates the superior surround-sound rendering of Environmental Audio to create sound so real it has to be Live! With an amazing 256 voices of music synthesis and real-time audio enhancement, enjoy live concert-like music productions so dynamic, you'll feel like you're right in the middle of an orchestra. The Sound Blaster Live! hardware-accelerated Environmental Environmental Audio Extensions (EAX\"), supporting Audio new titles, offers an experience that goes way beyond 3D audio. Add the ability to enhance all your existing by CREATIVE games and legacy audio with true digital processing. It will blow your home theater away! "


"PCI 256 dio — So Real It Has To Be Live! Benefits of Sound Blaster Live! 256-Voice Music Synthesis Remarkable 256-voice capability goes beyond the quality and performance available in most Hollywood-Quality Audio Re-Creation professional music equipment. Professional-quality synthesizers and digital I/O provide audio fidelity that rivals movic Sound Blaster PCI Standard theaters with digital sound Be assured of near-perfect Sound Blaster compatibility while enjoying the benefits of the PCI bus, Powerful Audio Processing Engine Environmental Audio Extensions/ Broad Driver Support With the EMUTOK I audio processor, every signal is processed at 32-bit, 1920B, 48kH using An open standard that allows the broadest support from software developers. 8-point interpolation to smooth the sound instantly improving any audio source. Sound Blaster Live! Website www.sblive.com Environmental Audio Enhances Existing Content Visit the Website for instant access to the latest applications, cnhancements and drivers, Experience depth and realism beyond existing 3D audio. Apply preset environment such as hall, cave or underwater to your existing games and applications for incredibly true sound. Rich Software Bundle An amazing array of software to enrich your experience with Sound Blaster Live! Multiple Speaker Output Produce surround-sound audio on your PC with built-in support for two or four analog speakers. Digital I/O Card This hardware feature provides digital S/PDIF I/O and a breakout of the MIDI V through MIDI DIN connectors. A Digital DIN connector is provided for further connection of up to cight digital speakers. WWW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM Go to #154 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink CRETIVE "


"Sound Blaster Live! Card What is Environmental Audio\"? eative. Envir Digital I/O Card Technical Specifications Wave-Table Synthesis  E-mu Systems EMU 10K 1 music synthesis engino 64-voice polyphony with E-mu's patented 8-point interpolation technology 192-voice polyphony PCI wave-table synthesis 48 MIDI channels with 128 GM & GS-compatible instruments and 10 drum kits Uses SoundFont technology for user-definable wave-table sample sets; includes 2MB, 4MB, and 8MB sets Load up to 32MB of samples into host memory for professional music reproduction Environmental Audio — the next audio platform by Creative, Environmental Its revolutionary technology recreates Audio real-world multi-dimensional audio by CREATIVE on your PC. It immerses you in sound so vivid, you experience games, music, and other existing audio applications rather than just hear them. By nature, the human ear is intolerant of audio imperfections. The Environmental Audio Platform addresses this problem by introducing a system comprised of the following components:  Environmental Audio Hardware powered by the powerful 1,000+MIPS, 2 million transistor EMUIOKI\" audio processor chip, Sound Blaster Live! provides the highest possible audio fidelity with multiple digital audio input/output (1/0) capabilities. Environmental Audio Software Technologies created by E-mu Systems, Inc., a subsidiary of Creative, that provides high-end audio equipment to Hollywood studios, will change the way you perceive audio forever. They include: E-mu Environmental Modeling\" which accurately positions audio objects in a 3D space by rendering audio reflections and; Creative Multi Speaker Surround\", which allows real-time panning and mixing of multiple sound sources using two or more speakers. These technologies will greatly enhance audio content from the past, the present, and the future. Environmental Audio Extensions (EAX) enable game and application developers to easily enhance their software with highquality Environmental Audio effects. EAX is designed to be a natural extension to Microsoft DirectSound 3D API and has received overwhelming support from hundreds of software developers. Environmental Audio Speaker Systems work well with two-speakers, but Environmental Audio will deliver its full potential with Creative's new line of multi-channel systems. The PCWorks\" Four PointSurround\" speaker system is the best companion for your Sound Blaster Live! It offers four compact satellite speakers and a powered subwoofer: The Desktop Theater\" 5.1.a PC WORKS great companion for your PC-DVD system, is a five-satellite plus powered subwoofer speaker system with an amplifier and a built-in Dolby Digital decoder. SOUNDWORKS Effects Engine E-mu Systems EMU 10K1 patented effocts processo  Supports real-time digital effects liko roverb, chorus, flange, pitch shifter, or distortion across any audio source Capable of processing, mixing, and positioning audia streams using up to 131 available hardware channels Customizable effects architecture allows audio effects and channel control Full digital mixer maintains all sound mixing in the digital domain, eliminating noise from the signal Full bass, treble, and effects controls available for all audio sources 3D Audio Technology User-selectable settings are optimized for headphonos and two or four speakers Acceleratos Microsoft DirectSound\" and DirectSound 3D Support for Environmental Audio property sot extensions Creative Multi Speaker Surround\" technology places any mono or stereo sound source in a 360° audio space Creative Environments-user-selectablo DSP modes that simulate acoustic environments like Hall, Theater, Club, etc. on any sound source REPONTSECUND Hollywood Quality. 32-Bit Digital Audio Engine User-selectable bit rates from 8 to 16-bit User-selectable sample rates from 8kHz to 48kHz All sound sources are handled with 32-bit precision for highest quality output . Analog and Digital VO modes supported Hardware full-duplex support enables simultaneous record and playback at 8 standard sample rates Utilizes AC97 audio codec Look for the Environmental Audio logo on selected Creative and Cambridge Sounds Works products, and new supported game titles to ensure you are getting the Live! experience. MIDI Interface/Joystick Port Supports MPU-401 UART mode IBM compatiblo 15-pin joystick port with analog support Support for digital and Directinput game devices Sound BLASTER Works with Windows 98 The PCI Audio Standard WWW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM 1998 Creative Technology Ltd. All other brand or product names listed are trademarks or registered trademarks and are property of their respective holders. If you're not on the net, call 1.800.993.5227 for more information Go to #154 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SOUND CARDS  AURAL FIXATION CI SOUND CARD PCI AUDIO SONIECT ONOWVIG $$70 Exceptional Aur your Multinted not loud) occurs when you first power up the system. While the Turtle Beach Montego is more expensive, it's definitely quieter and has the wavetable connector, should you want to replace the default Vortex MIDI. If you're on a budget, check this out. MagicWave PCI Price: $69.95, Contact: IOMagic (949) 727 7466; www.iomagic.com PROS: low cost, A3D positional audio CONS: Distinct popping sound on startup some ambient hiss. Aura of its PCWorks speakers.) Creative's setup software has improved steadily over the years, and the installation of the PCI 128 went flawlessly. One reboot later was greeted with an entirely new Windows startup sound. The first thing I did was turn the volume on the speakers up-way up. My ears were greeted with a most pleasing silence. MIDI tests revealed very crisp acoustic piano, a hallmark of Ensoniq MIDI. The drum sounds were a bit more problematic, as the kick drum sounded a little flat in the 2MB sample set. The snare d rum transmogrified into a wood block in the 4MB set when playing back our sample MIDI files. The horns sounded much better with the 4MB set, though. Digital Diamond Sonic Impact * * * Sound Blaster PCI 128 creative Labs acquired Ensonia not long ago, and the company immediately began pumping out sound cards that use Ensonig's established PCI technology. The CREATIVE cards. The MagicWave PCI from IOMagic is one of two such cards reviewed here. The MagicWave bears a strong resemblance to the original Vortex reference board, right down to the bare-wire connectors for the CDROM audio cable. Hooking up the CD audio is a bit of a chore. It took a couple of tries to get the software to install, but there were no major meltdowns. The MIDI sound is pretty much what we've come to expect with Vortex boards: It's decent, but unspectacular. The acoustic piano is a bit muffled and the horn section has that characteristic \"synth\" sound. However, the card does ship with a software version of the Yamaha XG Wavetable—which is fine for musical playback, but isn't too useful for game MIDI because of the potential CPU hit. I ran several analog and digital game controllers, including Microsoft's Freestyle gamepad, without any problems, but I didn't have the somewhat problematic Rage3D to test. There's just the slightest hissing noise when the gain is turned all the way up. Also, a distinct popping sound (though The Sonic Impact uses the ESS Maestro 2 audio chip, the latest PCI audio accelerator chip from ESS, which is a significant improvement over the Maestro 1. The Sonic Impact's installation was pretty straightforward. The card has two output ports, but there's no mention of DirectSound 3D support. Connecting a second speaker set seemed to just play back the same stereo channels. Turning up the amp with no audio playing revealed golden silence. The MIDI sounds were decent. though unspectacular. The Sonic Impact supports DSS (downloadable samples), which may see support in future computer games. The joystick port works fine with most game controllers, but the READ.ME file specifically calls out the Thrust Master Millennium 3D Inceptor and Rage3D gamepads (or any \"3.3-volt controller\") as not working. All in all, the Sonic Impact is a decent, low-cost PCI sound card It's unpretentious, generally works well, but isn't really leading-edge in any way. Diamond Sonic Impact Price: $69.95; Contact: Diamond Multimedia. (800) 468-5846; www.diamondmm.com PROS: Low cost, clean digital sound, and decent MIDI CONS: No apparent 30 positionalaudio support, problems supporting certain game controllers Sound BLASTER CI28 Four Channel Andin for The 3) ter wand Nepal and R PCI 128 is the latest card in the series. This card has support for DirectSound3D through support for four speakers. (To take advantage of that very feature, Creative also offers a four-satellite version ed/VAVE sound quality was pretty good. I briefly attached a set of rear speakers just to see if this feature worked. Playing UNREAL was certainly a different experience somewhat better than Aureal A3D virtual positional 3D, but not much so. If you have the space and the inclination, the four-speaker setup may be an interesting option. All I had on hand for DOS audio was QUAKE; the PCI 128 handled the audio chores with aplomb. There was no noticeable crackling, as has been the case with past Ensoniq cards. Overall, the PCI 128 is a decent low-cost card that offers positional audio only through four-speaker support. The PCI 128's MIDI is reasonably good, its digital sound is A3D AUDIO ACCELERATOR My AAA 32 PCIE A3ofera the DOW OL MagicWave PCI and direk Support 1281km Aules Hindu st in the e Aureal's Vortex chipset has found its way into a number of relatively low-cost retail sound Donam www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 187 "


"IT'S TIME YOU 1998's BIGGEST GAME! PC Gamer RATINE PERDANE RP CONTENT RATED BY ESRB Commond & Conquer is a registered trademark of and Command & Conquer Tiberian Sun, and Westwood Studios are trademarks of, Westwood Studios, Inc.  1998 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"SAW THE FUTURE COMMAND CONOUER. TIBERIAN SLIDE COMMAND CONQUER. 123 TIBERIAN COMMAND 2CNOS COMING FALL 1998 Westwood\" WWW. westwood.com Go to #252 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AURAL FIXATION SOUND CARDS YAMAHA SEHINGTO WAARNA Rebooting would simply bring up the message again. The only workaround for this situation was to click the cancel button, go to device manager, and click the \"Restart\" button there. Only then would Windows do a soft restart, and I would have audio. In Windows 95, I never got the joystick port to work properly, despite the fact that I carefully followed the installation instructions. Then there's the 100 classical MIDI sequences, complete with friendly front-end to allow you to select which piece you want to play back. Unfortunately, no matter which title selected, the same music would play back. So I'm left scratching my head. This is a terrific sounding card with one of the worst setup debacles I've run into since the days of late, unlamented UltraSound. I'd have to give this one a bye until the software is cleaned up. Yamaha Waveforce 192XG Price: 599: Contact: Yamaha, (714) 522 9000; www.yamaha.com PROS: Very realistic wavelable. CONS: Terrible setup: slight hiss with high gain: joystick problems amille Spiel WAVEFORCE 192) SOUNDCARD XG MO clean, and its installation is simple. This is one card that's definite ly worth a listen. Sound Blaster PCI 128 Price: 599.99, Contact: Creative Labs (408) 428-6600, www.soundblaster.com PROS: Very easy to install support for fourspeaker positional audio. CONS: No virtualized 3D audio; slight inconsistencies in MIDI playback Sound Goods Yamaha Waveforce 192XG very realistic-certainly the best in this roundup. When I cranked up the amp with no sound playing, there was a little noticeable hiss, however. Games and low-res .WAV files played back without any noticeable breakups or artifacts, though. The big problem with the Waveforce 192XG is its installation. I tried installing it under both Windows 95 and Windows 98. Under Windows 98, it went into a weird infinite-reboot cycle. Even after a second clean Windows 98 installation, the same thing occurred. Every time I booted up, i'd get a message telling me, \"Your configuration has changed; you need to restart Windows for the changes to take effect.\" s for my choice of sound card, I'll probably switch to the Diamond Monster Sound MX200 for my production system. It's a solid card, it's fairly quiet, and it has terrific MIDI, A3D support, and four-speaker capability. It's lacking in DOS performance, but I find that I just don't run DOS games anymore anyway. I really wanted to like the Yamaha Waveforce 192XG, but the setup difficulties make me leery. Creative Labs has shored up Ensoniq's PCI offering with the PCI 128. It's a fine sound card with no glaring weaknesses, but it doesn't really stand out, either. Of the Vortex cards, the Turtle Beach Montego bears serious consideration, but it also costs a bit more than most of the others. Now that PCI audio is a reality, the last real holdout on the ISA bus is fast becoming history. Now if we could just have some PCI-only systems.... CGW hen I heard that Yamaha was bringing out a PCI sound card incorporating XG MIDI with 3D positional audio, I was pretty keen to test it. But then the horror began. Actually, the Waveforce 192XG sounds pretty good. Its MIDI is Vas Product Features Comparison CGW Rating *** Price $69.00 3D Support DirectSound 3D, A3D Aztech PCI 338.A3D (510) 623-8988 www.aztechca.com Diamond MonsterSound M80 (800) 468-5846 www.diamondmm.com *** $99.00 DirectSound 3D, A3D *** $149.00 Diamond MonsterSound MX200 (800) 468-5846 www.diamondmm.com DirectSound 3D, ABD $69.95 None Diamond Sonic Impact (800) 468-5846 www.diamondmm.com $69.95 Magicwave PCI (949) 727-7466 www.iomagic.com DirectSound 3D, A3D Sound Blaster PCI 128 (408) 428-6600 www.soundblaster.com $99.99 DirectSound 3D $129.00 DirectSound 3D, ABD Turtle Beach Montego (800) 233-9377 www.voyetra.com **** Yamaha WaveForce 192XG (714) 522-9000 www.yamaha.com $99.00 DirectSound 3D, CRL 190 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 Www.computergaming.com "


"190 DEMONSTRATION 1 Tear out this page. 2 Crumple into ball. 3 Toss over your shoulder. The sound this ad will make when it hits the ground behind you is the power of A3D from Aureal, the only audio that works the way your ears do. No wonder game makers like Interplay and GT Interactive are featuring A3D in their newest titles. Experience it for yourself at www.A3D.com 3D BELIEVE YOUR EARS Go to #271 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 1998 Aureal Semiconductor, Inc. A3D and Aureal are trademarks of Aureal Semiconductor Inc. Other trademarks are properties of their respective owners. "


"Voodoo Banshee Contest URL: www.3dfx.com/win-a-banshee Copyright 1998 301x Interactive, Inc. The 3Dix Interactive logo, Voodoo, Voodoo Graphics, Voodoo, Voodoo Banshee and Voodoo Rushare trademarks and/or registered trademarks of 3Dtx Interactive, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved. Go to #120 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"IN SEARCH OF THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE Is Xeon Right for Gamers? TechWatch ntel wants to sell more CPUs. Now before you say, \"duh,\" consider that this simple statement belies the number of different target markets they're trying to sell to. These range from the sub-$1,000 PC segment to gamers to business users to the high-end workstation and server market. Intel has a lot of competition on the low-end and in the business segment from AMD, Cyrix, and IDT/Centaur, but it enjoys a performance lead selling to gamers. So having an interesting high-end story completes Intel's market picture. To address this, Intel has begun shipping its Xeon processor. Is Xeon something gamers should be thinking about buying? Most likely, the answer is no. First of all, the plumbing differences between Xeon and the rest of the Pentium II line have nothing to do with the CPU core itself, but rather the Level 2 (L2) cache architecture. Pentium Ils ship with 512KB of L2 cache that runs at half the CPU's core clock-speed on its own back bus, which means that it doesn't have to share bandwidth with main memory. So a PIl/400MHz CPU's L2 runs at 200MHz. Xeon runs a larger, embedded L2 cache--512KB, 1 MB, and, eventually, 2MB-at the same core clock-speed as the CPU, so a 400MHz Xeon's L2 also runs at 400MHz. Now, all of you early adapters out there may be saying, \"Where do sign up?\" But having an embedded L2 increases the CPU's die size and manufacturing cost, although this added cost doesn't quite explain the Xeon's astronomical price tag$2,800 for a Xeon with a 1MB L2 cache. The question is, even if you're prepared to pony up for this thing, will it affect your games' performance? On nearly all desktop applications, including games, the sweet-spot for L2 caches is right around 512KB, and anything beyond that may yield a small gain, but most likely doesn't justify the additional cost, and certainly doesn't in the case of Xeon.-Dave Salvator nVidia RIVA TNT: This is nVidia's next-generation 2D/3D graphics accelerator, which may well out-perform two, yes two, Voodood boards running SLI. The company anticipates that the TNT will have a fill rate of 200-250Mpixels/sec, as compared to twin Voodoo2s, which are generally in the 180-200Mpixels/sec range. ETA: Q3 '98 inte FireWire: This part, also known as IEEE 1394, is a high-bandwidth bus (400Megabits/sec, or SOMegabytes/sec) that will support high-quality digital video, hard-drives, and other storage devices. All FireWire devices will be hot swappable, which means that you can attach/detach devices and immediately be able to use them without rebooting your machine. ETA: Q4 '98 3D Labs and Number Nine Ready New Metal does 32-bit rendering throughout the pipeline. It also supports anisotropic filtering, AGP 2X, 32-bit Zbuffer, and has a special, demand paged virtual texture mapping capability that the company claims speeds up texture fetches and eases texture management. Shipments are slated for late 03 or early Q4 '98. D Labs is well known for its high end, OpenGL-oriented 3D accelerators. Their lowend accelerators, the Permedia line, have been decent entry level OpenGL parts, but have lacked robust Direct3D functionality and fill rate. 3D Labs has now seen the light. The comIRON WORKS pany has created a division to focus on the consumer market space, and has announced the Permedia 3 chip, whose \"native\" API is Direct3D 6.0. Certainly, its paper specs are impressive. As with the RIVA TNT the Permedia 3 sports dual-texturing engines and a claimed fill-rate of 250Mpixels/sec (or 125 trilinear MIP mapped pixels per second). Also like the TNT, the Permedia 3 focuses on DirectX 6 features, including bump mapping, multitexturing and stencil buffers. The chip including 16and 32-bit Z-buffering, per-pixel MIP mapping, and trilinear filtering. There's also support for 4and 8-bit palettized textures and full-scene antialiasing. It's the first chip we've seen in the consumer arena that will support up to 32MB of video RAM, though the first offerings will be 16MB. The T2R IV is a fully 128-bit chip and has a built-in 250MHz DAC. Plus, it's a full AGP 2X part. Number Nine isn't quoting fill-rate numbers, but they look to be in the 100—150 Mpixel/sec range. As with past efforts, it should have superb true. color 2D performance. -Loyd Case The T2R IV Intel IA-64: Intel's next-next-generation of processors will be a substantial departure from their traditional X86 CISC-based architecture. This new 64-bit CPU will use a new set of Very Long Instruction Word (VLIW) instructions, and use a technology termed EPIC (Explicitly Parallel Instruction Computing) to execution of instructions in parallel. ETA: Q4 '99 Number Nine Buys a New Ticket Number Nine dipped its toes in the 3D waters last year with the Revolution 3D, which used their 3rd generation Ticket-2-Ride chip. Although its 2D performance was top-notch, its 3D performance was lackluster. So the company went back to the drawing board and created the Ticket-2Ride IV (T2R IV). The T2R IV offers the now-familiar set of 3D features, S3 Savage3D: Since the 3D performance for S3's ViRGE part faltered, 53 realized that it needed to produce a competitive 3D part, and so it is working on the Savage3D. This part should have a fill rate of around 125Mpixels/sec drawing trilinear filtered pixels, which should make it competitive with nVidia's RIVA 128zx, Matrox's G200, and Intel's 1740. ETA: Q3 '98 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 193 "


"CAN YOUR PC SPEAKERS DO THIS? HE DuniWIN T 000 00' The aftereffects of the Philips Digital USB Speakers. Not your average PC speakers. Whether it's the DSS350 or DSS370, immerse yourself in the experience of high intensity sound. Featuring \"Incredible Surround --3D digital sound quality and «Hot Plug & Play» for easy installation. Philips Digital USB speakers. It's not only sound you can hear, it's sound you can feel. For more info, call 1-800-835-3506 or visit us at www.usbaudio.philips.com *>1998 Philip Electronics North America Corporation E PHILIPS Let's make things better. Go to #140 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Another Year, Another DirectX HLARDWA you're using USB). The four-axis limitation of the old game port will finally go away, and we'll have easy hot-swap support for game controllers The new version of DirectInput introduces support for HID (Human Interface Devices), which is a generalized way of approaching all input devices. It's the underlying software technology that enables support for USB as well as multiple devices. that will be changed on the fly by DirectMusic, depending on the type of action in a game. Having dynamic, context-sensitive music in lieu of canned loops may breathe life into the waning support for MIDI in games. DX6 Is More Than Just a Nip-and-Tuck e're quickly approach However, it may be post-Christmas ing the Christmas before we see shipping games that shopping season. This take full advantage of DirectX6. means new graphics cards, new games, new More Input computers-and a After a very bumpy ride, new version of DirectX Directinput now finally understands Hey you, there in the USB, paving the way for easier back row: Stop wailing and gnash game controller setup and multiple ing your teeth. controller support. That's right, you'll no longer have to remove It's Better. No, Really... Past versions of DirectX have given users quite a number of headaches. I'm confident that this release will probably cause an equal number of headaches. The multitude of different computer configurations almost guarantees there will be problems. But I've been running the beta of DirectX6 on one computer, and have been pleasantly surprised at its relative LOYD CASE stability. Of course, most of my hardware is fairly current. Most of the problems I've heard about come from people who have older systems, or who have older devices (such as non-Plug-and-Play sound cards) in newer systems. and reinstall joysticks. Windows 95 There are some real improve users have long been tantalized by ments here, though many are from the apparently long list of conthe developer's perspective. trollers that seem to be supported. DirectX is now somewhat more However, you could never activate accessible to developers, and its the second controller. That little documentation is beefed up. problem will be fixed (at least if Sounds Good to Me Audio support has also improved in a couple of key areas There will be support for 3D positional audio through DirectSound3D. There's even a provision for virtualized positional 3D through the use of HRTF (head related transfer functions) algorithms. In layman's terms, this means that Getting Graphic DirectDraw has been improved to handle multi-monitor support under Windows 98. There's better AGP support, though most of that's under the hood. There are some additional visual features, such as better support for 2D transparency. But the biggest improvements have been to Direct3D. One of the major complaints from developers regarding Direct3D has been its use of execute buffers, which forced experienced 3D programWe should all rush out and download DirectX6 when it ships, right? Not necessarily. you can get positional 3D audio with only two speakers. Another emerging technology is DirectMusic, which, when fully opera tional, will allow dynamic music scores using MIDI. In other words, a composer might create a motif PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS 3D WinBench 98 (800x600x16) ONWARD AND UPWARD DX6's optimized geometry engine makes for a 26 percent jump in 3D WinBench performance. mers into a completely different paradigm for rendering 3D scenes. In DirectX5, Microsoft introduced DrawPrimitive, which began looking a bit like the way OpenGL does things—but it was still slower than execute buffers. In DirectX6, according to some sources, DrawPrimitive has expanded into several different methods for drawing polygons, and is actually faster than execute buffers. There's support for other features, too, like bump mapping and stencil buffers. All of these things are important, but the biggest change is DirectX6's significant performance improvement. You probably won't see much improvement in current Direct3D games, but titles that use the Direct3D geometry pipeline for lighting and transforms will get a big boost. You can see this in 3D WinBench 98, Continued on page 197 DirectX5 614 DirectX6 beta 776 3D GameGauge (800x600x16) RUNNING DX5 GAMES: The optimizations produce a small bounce for dx5games. dx6 games using d3d's geometry engine will get a bigger bounce 349.4 DirectX5 98.9 DirectX6 beta 99.0 52. 7 54.0 50. 7 52.0 44.7. 55. 6 163.6 0 728 32.8 366.2        | F22 How we tested: The test system was CGW's Lean Machine, a Pentium 11/300 with the 440BX chipset 64MB of RAM, and a Diamond Monster3D 1/ with 8MB of RAM. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 195 "


"The Phoenix has a ded Maxi Gamer Phoenix Guillemot's Maxi Gamer Phoenix brings the next generation of graphics after Voodoo2\". This Voodoo Banshee based 2D/3D card delivers world fastest 2D and scorching 3D. Burn your enemies in Hell. Experience the Power of Phoenix 220/30 Grupo Card MAXI GAMER Voodos Banshee Game Gauge-Blazing Performance 16 MB Maxl Gamer Phoenix 486 Key features of the Maxi Gamer Phoenix Intel 740 269 Riva 128 253 V Industry first 128-bit VGA, 100 MHz single-cycle Windows GUI Acceleration V High-resolution : up to 1600X1200 in 32 bit with a vertical refresh rate of 120 HZ Voodoo2 technology developed by 3Dfx Interactive Inc. V Ultimate 3D experience with 100 Mpixels/sec, 100 Mtexels/sec & 4 Million triangles/sec. V No-compromise 3D image quality at high frame rates with 16MB RAM on board, V Compatible with all games developed for Voodoo technology Verite 2200 219 0 100 200 300 400 500 Score Performance based on a PII-400 system, all compellive numbers recorded from CGW, Voodoo Banshee score run and recorded at 3Dfx with Alpha1 drivers. WIN A MAX GAMER PHEONIX AT OUR WEBSITE: www.guillemot.com w GUILLEMOT INTERNATIONAL, GI, MAXI GRAPHICS & MAXI GANER PHOENIX ARE TRADEMARKS OR REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF GUILLEMOT INTERNATIONAL. VooDo02\" AND VOODOO BANSHEET ARE TRADEMARKS OF 3DFX INTERACTIVEO. ALL OTHER TRADEMARKS AND/REGISTERED TRADEMARKS ARE OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS. GUILLEMOT INTERNATIONAL. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. COMPARISON CHART TOLL FREE NUMBER : 1-800-967-0863. WEB SITE : WWW.GUT LLENOT.COM Go to #180 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"LOYD CASE Tech Tips HARDWAR Copy Windows Setup Files to Your Hard Drive I've written about reloading Windows 95/98 in the past. One huge timesaver is to copy the contents of the WIN95 or WIN98 folders on the Windows 98 CD to a similarly named folder on your hard drive. These folders contain the install files for Windows. With OSR2.x, the install files will take up about 70MB; the Windows 98 directory takes up about 170MB. Heck, that's less than most games these days. If you need to load/reload Windows, just point at the appropriate directory and run SETUP. Your install will be much smoother, and there will be no more \"hunt the CD\" games. It will be faster, too. Game Crashes With PCI Sound Cards While reviewing PCI sound cards (see this month's sound card roundup), I found out that some games just don't like DirectSound acceleration. If your game crashes with a DirectSound error, try disabling DirectSound acceleration. You can easily do this with most Aureal A3D cards in their Control Panel. Other sound cards may not offer the option. However, Windows 98 has an acceleration slider under the Advanced Properties tab. Sliding this all the way to the left disables audio acceleration. Mostly, you want to keep it on—it does help overall game performance-so don't forget to turn it on for most games. Nuke the Temp Folder Recently, I peeked inside the Windows temp folder (windows temp) and found nearly 60MB of junk there-old install files and other useless garbage. I deleted all of it. You might do the same. It's perfectly safe to remove anything in \\windows\\temp, and you'll free up some space in the process. QUESTION: There's two outs with a runner on third, count is two and two, and the game is on the line. As the pitcher winds up, you see your teammate barreling One other addition is the reference rasterizer, which isn't something a gamer would use on a regular basis, but it is a great tool for 3D-card driver writers. The reference rasterizer generates 3D images from Direct3D code that look the way Microsoft intends them to look. It's a guaranteed way of getting a \"good\" image. If the 3D card's images can't at least look as good as those generated by the reference rasterizer, then there are either driver problems or limitations in the hardware. towards home and you step away from the plate. The ump yells \"Strike Three,\" at the same time your teammate touches home. The run scores? Continued from page 195 which uses D3D's geometry pipeline. Most of today's D3D titles don't use the geometry pipeline, though, because it was slow and inefficient. It's very likely that the new geometry pipeline will be faster than most of the custom-written pipelines. So you probably won't see much of a boost in current Direct3D titles. Curiously, GL QUAKE and QUAKE Il run quite a bit faster, even though the D3D games in our 3D GameGauge score didn't shift by much. However, there's a more significant reason for developers to use the new geometry engine: CPUs. The trio of CPUs that support AMD's 3DNow! instructionset extensions (AMD, Cyrix, and IDT/ Centaur), as well as Intel's upcoming Katmai CPU release, can significantly improve performance of Direct3D games-but only if they use the D3D geometry pipeline. Developers could actually hand-code their own T/L engines, but that's a big can of worms to open. The new version of DirectX is even efficient in terms of code size. In DirectX5, all the .DLL files (18 or so) for Direct3D took up more than 3.5MB. In DirectX6, there's now one.DLL file that's about 750KB. That's right, folks, here's a release of a product from Microsoft that actually takes up less disk space than its predecessor. Will miracles never cease? TRUE Go to Page 226 Caution is the Watchword All this sounds great, and we should all rush out and download DirectX6 when it ships, right? Not necessarily. For one thing, you should check to see if your drivers support DirectX6. In the beta version, at least one Direct3Dcapable card had worse image-quality problems with Direct3D using its DirectX5 driver under DirectX6. Make no mistake about it, DirectX6 is a big leap-at least as big as the jump from DirectX3 to 5, but this is possibly even more significant. For one thing, Windows NT 5.0 will finally have full hardware support for DirectX6. But you might want to be careful about using it until you have a reason-a DirectX6capable game, for instance. Compelling game titles: Now there's a good reason to upgrade. CGW FALSE Go to Page 251 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 197 "


"HOW DO YOU FULL VOODOO 3D WITH 2D ACCELERATION FOLD THIS AD COMPLETE 2D ACCELERATION IS NOV MOS PIOND mtb AR M NEW! 3DFX VOODOO BANSHEE 2D/3D TECHNOLOGY FUSION ISION  Scorching 3D performance at 60 frames/sec  True 128-bit 2D acceleration DIAMOND  16MB of fast SDRAM        DIA  Awesome Glide Direct3D, and OpenGL game support Accelerate your world. Enter the Monster Fusion z100 Sweepstakes at: http://www.diamondmm.com/monsterfusion RE PRETINSON 16MB 29 3D 1998 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc All rights reserved. Diamond and the Diamond logo are registered trademarks of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Monste "


"COMBINE A GAMING SESSION -ON A SINGLE CARD? AOC TO FIND OUT FUSED WITH VOODOO 3D GAMING. Want blistering 2D and 3D acceleration battlefields. It rips through the most extreme 2D action Windows 98 on one graphics card? Pick up Diamond's at resolutions up to 1920 x 1440. It delivers smoother, new Monster Fusion. It's the first card to fuse the faster 3D images at 60 frames per second. In fact, blinding speed of 128-bit 2D graphics with intense it even tools your system for faster performance Voodoo 3D gaming power. By harnessing the powerful in other applications. Plus, it includes an explosive new 3DFX Voodoo Banshee technology, Monster Fusion software bundle featuring the latest in 3D gaming. delivers the speed you need to survive on today's So nuke that slow PC. Pick up some Fusion today Fold These Pages! To find out how we combined 2D graphics and 3D gaming on a single card, bring the two edges of this ad together until the dotted lines meet one another. a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated, 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA 95134. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Go to #208 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"BUILD THE BEST SYSTEM MONEY CAN BUY HARDWARE These are our top picks for each component.* Use this list to build your dream system, or to upgrade select components. All products tested using ZD, Inc. benchmarks or a variety of games, or both. NO HOLDS BARRED PRICE $353 $638 $119 COMPONENT Motherboard CPU Memory Disk Controller Primary Graphics Secondary Graphics Hard Drive CD-ROM/DVD Monitor Primary Audio MIDI Secondary Audio Speakers Modem Networking Case Power Supply Keyboard Mouse/Pointing Device Action Game Controller Flight Joystick Rudder Pedals Driving Controls PRODUCT ASUS P2B-LS Pentium 11/400 128MB PC100 SDRAM Built-in Ultra2 SCSI Canopus Total3D/128V AGP Quantum 3D Obsidian X24 Seagate Cheetah 9LP Plextor Ultraplex Sony 500P5 Diamond Monster Sound MX200 Roland SCD-15 AWE-64 Gold LFT-11 3Com Impacto Built-in Intel 10/100 chip In-Win 19500 Turbocool 300 MS Natural Keyboard Logitech Mouseman Plus Rage 3D Saitek X-36 ThrustMaster RCS TSW $194 $599 5606 $139 $1,295 $105 $188 5136 5599 $186 $80 5115 $125 $49 S43 $20 $129 590 WEB ADDRESS www.asus.com www.intel.com N/A N/A www.canopuscorp.com www.quantum3d.com www.seagate.com www.plextor.com www.sony.com www.diamondmm.com www.edirol.com www.soundblaster.com www.eminent-tech.com www.3com.com N/A www.in-win.com www.pcpowercooling.com www.microsoft.com/hardware www.logitech.com www.thrustmaster.com www.saitek.com www.thrustmaster.com http://soliinav.net thomas/ $375 TOTAL: $6,183 LEAN & MEAN PRICE $139 $251 $118 50 $101 $149 $179 $54 $239 $94 COMPONENT Motherboard CPU Memory Disk Controller Primary Graphics Secondary Graphics Hard Drive CD-ROM Monitor Primary Audio Secondary Audio Speakers Modem Networking Case Power Supply Keyboard Mouse/Pointing Device Action-Game Controller Flight Controls Driving Controls PRODUCT ABIT BX6 Pentium 11/300 128MB SDRAM Built-in UDMA/33 Real3D Starfighter Diamond Monster 3D II 8MB Seagate Medalist Pro 6.5 ASUS 34x CD drive Optiquest Q71 Turtle Beach Montego N/A Boston Acoustics BA635 US Robotics V.90 NIA Elan Vital T10AB Built-in, 230W MS Natural Logitech Mouseman Plus ThrustMaster Rage 3D CH F-16 Combat Stick N/A WEB ADDRESS www.abit.com.tw www.intel.com N/A N/A www.real3d.com www.diamondmm.com www.seagate.com www.asus.com www.optiquest.com www.voyetra.com N/A www.bostonacoustics.com www.3com.com NIA www.elanvital.com.tw N/A www.microsoft.com/hardware www.logitech.com www.thrustmaster.com www.chproducts.com NIA $99 S82 $0 590 50 $49 $43 $20 534 50 TOTAL: $1,741 \"We have made every effort to ensure that this information would be timely and accurate. However, new hardware is constantly being released, and magazine production and distribution involves an 8-to 10-week delay. In cases where new products were close to release at presstime, we have kept our current top choice so that we only recommend finished products we have tested. Lists compiled by Dave Salvator and Loyd Case. 200 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Lara looks better With ATI XPERT@Play 98.  ATI XPERT @Play 98 is the only Digital Flat Panel-ready graphics card with in-your-face 3D, 2D, video and TV-out. You don't get that from 3Dfx Voodoo?.  Strap-on 8MB of power, 3D to the max, and DVD picture quality video playback from the #1 worldwide leader in graphics boards.  All ATI XPERT graphics boards are available in either PCI or fully enabled AGP 2X versions. The AGP version includes a free Software DVD offer.  Get TV on your PC with ATI-TV. . For more information on ATI's Digital Flat Panel support check out www.atitech.com. A ATI-TV ESTE A XPERT@Play 983 Features 20 TV Outlet DVD-Quality 3D PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ZD 3D WINBENCH 98' ATI IPERTOPLAY 93 BIAMOND STEALTH 11 5220 POWERED BY Designed for DVD MATROX PRODUCTIYA G10Q 346 Microsoft Windows 98 Copyright 1998. ATI Technologies Inc. ATI, XPERT@Play 98. ATI-TV and RAGE are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of ATI Technologies Inc. Lara Croft and her likeness is a registered trademark of Eldos Interactive and Core respectively. All other company and/or product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers. Features, performance, and specifications may vary by operating environment and are subject to change without notice. Products may not be exactly as shown. Tested on Pentium I MMX-400MHJ128MB/512 cache/Windows 98/Test Mode: 640x480x16bpp60Hz. Tested using driver version ATI XPERT Play 98 8MB SGRAM AGP version 5.20 / Diamond Stealth II 5220 4MB SGRAM PCI 4.10.01.0101 Matrox Prodcutiva G100 BMB SDRAM AGP 4.10.01.328. Tests performed wlo independent verification by ZD and ZD makes no representations or warranties as to results. Please refer to www.atitech.com for further information on ATI's software DVD offer. SIO shipping and handling charge may be applicable. Offer subject to change and/or cancellation at any time without any notice. Now You See It. Ao www.atitech.com/cgw "


"great. you get better accuracy but that are you going to do 59 programmable functions. 2 directional pads-one for smooth, joystick-like control, one for megafast, mega-deadly digital action. Proportional flippers let you \"feel\" how hard or soft to hit, swing, "


"and cautas kiin extra Jodies yolVNW 10% Grauis is a trademark of Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. All other registered and unregistered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. C1998 Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 6/98 turn or kick. The new Xterminator game controller. Be the first on your block to make your neighbors say, \"What's that smell?\" Check out www.morekills.com. GRAVIS. Go to #138 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"«What a Sensation. The Ultimate Per4mer Offers the Greatest Horsepower, Torque and Force Effects of Any Force Feedback Wheel I've Ever Used.» Anthony Professional Race Car Driver C.A.R.T. Toyota-Atlantic Racing Series FEEDBACK TECHNOLOGY Sega Rally Championship & Daytona USA Deluxe Included What does engine size have to do with Force Feedback? Everything! Bigger engines deliver bigger horsepower, torque and the ultimate in force effects. The Ultimate Per4mer Force Feedback* Racing System houses the largest engine and includes the most rugged foot pedals of any product available. The Per4mer Specs Beat Everyone Hands Down! Engine: 18 vpmdc Torque: 3.9 foot lbs. 1 245 rpm RPM: THRUSTS THUDS Horsepower: 13.35 w 30:1 Gear Ratio: Transmission: JOLTS JERKS Dual Belt Drive 12V-DC, 1700 mA Electronics: BUMPS Dual Processor High Speed Micro Controller & Pulse Width Modulation Amplification Move over Microsoft, Thrustmaster and ACT Labs. You all use smaller engines. Was it to save money? Smaller engines generate far weaker force effects reducing the excitement and realism! Don't be fooled. Bigger names do not mean better products. Twice the power, stronger torque, better road grip, superior handling, precision steering, quicker response time, and the most rugged racing pedals. This is why we named it \"The Ultimate Per4mer Force Feedback Racing Wheel.\" 000 ULTIMAT PERLY Available At Fine Retailers Computer City Babbage's Software Ste Microcenter m Go to #148 @ www.computergaming.com/infolinky www.perymer.com FORCE Another fine product by SC&T International, Inc. All rights reserved. *1-Force Force Feedback Technology Licensed from Immersion Corporation. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"REVIEW REAL3D STARFIGHTER PCI GAMING We Don't Need No Stinkin' AGP EDITORS: CHOICE STARFIGHTER ARDWARE by Loyd Case ost of the action on the new 3D-chip front has been revolving around AGP (with the notable exception of 3Dfx). This makes gamers with PCI rigs nervous about obsolescence, not to mention green with envy. I mean, have you tried to find a good ISA 3D accelerator recently? Believe me, it's tough. COMPUTER The folks at Real3D, who had a lot to do with the Intel i740 architecture, have noted the anguish of these users, and have ridden to the rescue. They took the i740, which is ostensibly an AGP-only part, designed an AGP-to-PCI bridge chip and came out with a PCI version of the Starfighter. There will be several configurations of the PCI Starfighter; the board I tested had 8MB of main memory (frame buffer) and 8MB of AGP (texture) memory. The 1740 only uses system memory for texture storage; the bridge chip fools the 1740 into thinking that the local texture-memory is system memory. The Starfighter PCI's overall performance was pretty good. The 2D performance in WinBench 98's Business Graphic WinMark test at 1024x768x16-bit color was nearly as fast as the RIVA 128 2D numbers I've seen in the past-just a bit under 100. The 3D WinBench 98 numbers were also pretty good, coming in at 294 at 800x600. 3D GameGauge came in at 139 at that same resolution. Contrast that with 144 for an STB Velocity 128 running at 640x480, and you see that the Starfighter PCI is a solid performer. Having all of that local texture memory certainly helps. However, this performance doesn't come cheap. In an era where you can pick up a Diamond Stealth II 4MB card for under $100, the Starfighter PCI 16MB is expensive at $199. Of course, that is 12MB more than the Stealth II. So if you're in the market for a good 3D primary card with good 2D performance for your PCI-only rig, then check out the Starfighter PCI. As an added note, this might also be a great card for those with an AGP Starfighter looking to do Windows 98 multimonitor setups. CGW GAMING **** * WORLD PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS WinBench 98 (1024x768X16) 3D WinBench 98 299 (800X600X16) APPEAL: PCI users looking for a little AGP action. PROS: Faster than most PCI accelerators we've seen. CONS: It ain't cheap. Price $199 Manufacturer: Real3D (800) 393-7730 www.real3d.com 3D Game Gauge 232 2 5. 0 29,5 20,6 17. 12.3 138.7 (600x600) FORSALIN GOOD DADI \"Refresh rate was 85H2 Test system: Pentium 200MHz with the 430TX chipset 64MB of EDO RAM, and EIDE storage components. photo: Michael Falconer GAMING REVIEW MYSTIQUE G200 Mystique 6200 TN 3072 Mystique's Revenge EDITORS: CHOICE by Loyd Case he original Mystique left us baffled. At the time the part first shipped, it had reasonable performance, but at a relatively serious image-quality penalty. Matrox listened, went back to the drawing board, and came out with the MGA-G200 accelerator DIC COMPUTER chip. The G200 is a fully AGP 2x compliant part with a full suite of 3D rendering features, including per-pixel MIP mapping, 32bit rendering, table fog and 98's Business Graphics WinMark blending modes. at 1024x768x16 and 176 at The Mystique has built-in TV-out 1024x768x32. On 3D WinBench capability, which the business 98, Mystique scored an 800 at oriented Millenium G200 lacks. 800x600x16, and passed all 25 However, Mystique uses less quality tests. The G200 posted a expensive SDRAM. We put the 234 on CGW's 3D GameGauge at 8MB Mystique through its paces 800x600, and image quality is the on our Pentium II 400MHz No best we've seen yet. I also took it Holds Barred rig with Windows 98 out for a spin with the newly and DirectX6. enhanced, large-texture version of 2D performance came in at an BATTLEZONE at 1024x768. The impressive 217 running WinBench frame-rates hovered between 27 PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS WinBench 98 217 (1024x768x16) 3D WinBench 98 800 (800x600x16) 3D Game Gauge 63. 6 2 7. 642.5 27.0 235 426 238.7 (800x600)          \"Refresh rate was 85Hz Test system: Pentium II 400MHz running Windows 98 and DirectX6. and 35fps during gameplay, and image quality was terrific. Low QUAKE II and GL QUAKE scores dragged down Mystique's overall 3D GameGauge result, but that score will probably only get better. Matrox is initially shipping a D3D wrapper, which translates OpenGL calls to Direct3D, but Matrox is readying a full OpenGL ICD which will probably be available by the time you read this. Overall, the Mystique G200 heralds the coming of thirdgeneration, multipurpose graphics cards: fast, beautiful 3D coupled with excellent 2D and digital video performance. Mystique's combination of versatility and performance makes it a strong contender as your next 2D/3D AGP card. CGW WORLD APPEAL: Users looking for fast 2D and fast 3D with lots of expandability. PROS: Solid Direct3D; excellent 2D; lots of room for add-ons; OpenGL functionality via D3D wrapper. CONS: OpenGL ICD not quite here yet. Price: 5149 for SMB: 5198 for 16MB Manufacturer: Matrox (514) 822-6320 www.matrox.com/mga photo: Michael Falconer www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 205 "


"ADVENT.....IT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CRUNCH?! AND... AMD? PGL Official Speaker of the PGL CHECK OUT THE MAD SCIENTIST AT WORK... WWW.POWEREDPARTNERS.COM 1998 Interact Accessories, Inc. A RECOTON COMPANY. All rights reserved. Advent and Powered Partners are trademarks of Recoton Corporation. The AV390PL is manufactured unde license from Dolby Laboratories. Dolby and the double-D symbol are trademarks of Dolby Laboratories. EA SPORTS, the EA SPORTS logo. John Madden Football, and \"If it's in the game, it's in the game are trademarks or registered trademarks of Electronic Arts in the U.S. and/or other countries. All rights reserved. Officially Licensed Product of the National Football League Players  1998 Players Inc. The Players Inc. logo is a registered trademark of the NFL Players. NFL Materials @1998 NFLP. Team names and logos are trademarks of the teams indicated. All othe (NFL-related marks) are trademarks of the National Football League. "


"11. KKRUUN With Powered Partners' 5 channels of Dolby Virtual Surround Sound and jaw-breaking bass, you'll feel that 270-pound linebacker breathing down your neck. So don't just get your head in the game, get your whole body in it. With the AV390PL from Advent. 3-speakers and 70 watts of rich sound that makes gaming better. L.ALKING MADDEN NFLT 99 PLAYS BIGGER, LOUDER SPACE-SAVING, DOWN-FIRING SUBWOOFER MOUNTS ON THE WALL OR UNDER YOUR DESK! AND BETTER ON POWERED PARTNERS! SPORTS ELECTRONIC ARTS VADVENT P Powered Partners Available through COMP   \" and other fine retailers. "


"REVIEW  AMD K6-2 Finally, a Viable CPU Alternative HARDWARE K6-2 Is AMD's Strongest Showing Yet Against Intel AMDA 3DNOW! by Dave Salvator ompeting against Intel ranks right up there with root canals on the fun scale. More to the point to compete against Intel is to try not just to make a better CPU, but to make a better CPU than the company that invented it. And yet, there are four companies making the attempt: AMD, Cyrix, IDT/ Centaur, and, most recently, Rise. Most of the non-Intel CPUs can compete with Intel in integer performance (important for business applications). Where they trail is in floating-point performance, which is key to making 3D games go fast. But that may be changing. AMD has implemented a new set of floating point instructions, dubbed 3DNow!, that can accelerate the CPU portion of Direct3D's and Glide's pipeline. And as our tests show, AMD's new K6-2 not only matched a similarly clocked Pentium II, but in some cases, outqunned it. How'd they do that? accelerating Direct3D transforms and lighting if D3D's T/L engine is used. Given that, there will be great incentive for developers to use D3D's T/L engine. The DirectX 6.0 version of the D3D T/L engine has also undergone a substantial rewrite, and should perform much better than its predecessor. But a downside for AMD is that aside from the important) 3DNow! advances, AMD made no enhancements to K6-2's floating-point unit: Games that aren't 3DNow!-aware will still trail Intel's performance. COMPUTER GAMNG **** WORLD APPEAL: Gamers on a budget looking for the best non-Intel performance. PROS: Solid integer performance: impressive game performance when running on 3DNow! CONS: Standard floating point performance still lags behind Intel when 3DNow! technology is not used; potential motherboard compatibility issues. REQUIREMENTS: Socket-7 motherboard compatible with K6-2. 5179 for 300MHz part (street price) Advanced Micro Devices Sunnyvale, CA (800) 538-8450 www.amd.com/products/cpgik623d/index.html 3DNow! Explained AMD's new technology consists of 21 new floating point instruc tions that can put two floatingpoint values into a single MMX register and compute two results in parallel. And since 3DNow! can issue two instructions simultaneously, there's a potential peak throughput of four floating-point operations per cycle. This matters to gamers because previous AMD CPUs handled at most one operation per cycle; the deeper pipelined Pentium II's floating-point unit (FPU) can issue only two. Another important new feature is called Pre-Fetch, which keeps the floating-point unit from stalling while waiting for more data to process. This could mean that for the first time Intel finally has some serious competition on all fronts of X86 CPU performance: integer, floatingpoint (3D), and MMX. But AMD's success with 3DNow! is far from a given.AMD will have to clear at least one major hurdle before it can declare any kind of victory: Games don't get the 3DNow! performance boost \"for free.\" A game must be written using either Direct3D's transform and lighting (T/L) engine, some thing very few developers have opted to use, or custom assembly code. Ironically, in wooing game developers to use Direct3D's T/L engine, AMD may actually have a friend in Intel. Intel's next processor, code-named Katmai, will have its own set of instructions for A Run for Their Money A look at the numbers shows AMD often trailing both Intel CPUs, though AMD scores a few victories with its 3DNow! technology. The lift that 3DNow! provides showed up in 3D WinBench 98 (which uses D3D's T/L engine), and in QUAKE and QUAKE II because AMD wrote a 3DNow! driver. However, AMD's standard FPU is much slower than either Intel chip, which is evident from the 3D GameGauge score. An accelerated version of INCOMING was in the works at press time. While AMD trailed Intel in many tests, the K6-2's numbers are still respectable. And given AMD's aggressive pricing, it could be a good choice for gamers on a budget. Socket 7 motherboards with AGP and a 100MHz system bus are on the market, and AMD has a list of compatible motherboards on its Web site. Also, at press time, there was a serious scarcity of 333 MHz chips, though 300MHz parts seemed to be widely available. If you want to do an inexpensive upgrade, the K6-2 on an AGPequipped motherboard will keep most games cruising smoothly. It won't match Intel performance across the board, but it will get the job done. And if 3DNow! takes off, AMD will be an even more compelling option. CGW PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS 995 WinBench AMD K6-2 333MHZ 771 Pentium II 350MHz w/440BX 856 Pentium II 300MHz w/440LX 718 1150 1770 1540 766 668 WinBench 98 CPU32 (Integer Test) WinBench 98 FPUMark 3D WinBench 98 640x480x16 427,4 3D GameGauge (800x600) AMD K6-2 333MHZ 134.6 Pentium II 350MHz w/440BX 148.3 Pentium II 300MHz w/440LX 142.6 44. 3 57.5 28.8 87.7 74.5 67.6 72.2 40. 9 71.9 62.3 67.7 32.4 107.3 73.1 474 479.3 67.0 FORSAKEN INCOMING TUROK F ZZADF QUAKE QUAKE II Testing Notes: All three systems had 64MB of RAM RIVA 128 AGP accelerators, and a single Voodoo board. We used the Voodoo board for all 3D tests. 200 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"WAVEFORCE 192XG A R D The Yamaha WaveForce 192 XG PCI Soundcard provides the sound quality. (For the monitor, you're on your own.) We know the sound of alien carnage splattered around the walls of a mutli-channeled surround sound movie theater gets your adrenal glands pumping. Now you can get that kind of intensity right out of your PC with the Yamaha WaveForce 192 XG PCI Soundcard. 3D positional audio, downloadable sounds, an advanced wavetable synthesizer, incredible sound effects, 676 sounds + 21 drum kits and easy installation make destroying entire alien civilizations a full on blast. Get the WaveForce 192 XG... and let the real games begin. YAMAHA XG THE WAY YOUR COMPUTER SHOULD SOUND. YAMAHA For free brochure please call (800) 823 6414 ext. 413. www.yamaha.com 01998 Yamaha Corporation of America. P.O. Box 6600. Buena Park. CA 90622 6600 Yamaha and WaveForce are registered trademarks of Yamaha Corporation, WAVEFORCE 192XG GENERAL Xe MOI III | MICROSOFT Wedness Go to #101 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"MILLENNIA 300 MILLENNIA 350  Intel Pentium Il processor 300MHZ  64MB SDRAM  6.4GB Ultra ATA hard drive  17\" Micron 700Vx monitor (15.9\" display)  New MicroTower case  82440EX chip set  512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS  3.5\" floppy drive  32X max speed CD-ROM drive nVidia Riva 128, 4MB SGRAM 3D AGP graphics PCI 64-voice Wavetable sound . Advent AV009 stereo speakers  3Com/U.S. Robotics 56K WinModem**  104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98  Microsoft Home Essentials with Microsoft Power Pak  5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty  Intel Pentium II processor 350MHZ  64MB 100MHz SDRAM  8.4GB Ultra ATA hard drive  17\" Micron 700Vx monitor (15.9\" display) New MicroTower case 82440BX chip set  512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS . 3.5\" floppy drive  32X max speed CD-ROM drive  nVidia Riva 128, 4MB SGRAM 3D AGP graphics PCI 64-voice Wavetable sound  Advent AVO09 stereo speakers  3Com/U.S. Robotics 56K WinModem** . 104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98  Microsoft Home Essentials with Microsoft Power Pak  5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty haa $64/mo Consumer Lease aa | $72/mo Consumer Lease HARDCORE SYSTEMS inside pentiumell New Micron MicroTower leatured Add Microsoft SideWinder Precision Pro Joystick for $59 Add subwoofer for $59 23 Mankhones, tac Alice Moon s oorske fotomes 10 pracy or ga y. Al poche metto by Prices and spectatory be changed the prices do not in thipping and handing and any apleshetats 30-day money back policy is not cost turgandang Ditingg a ! Magprosand bestime het. Alt subject to Moron Elections uniems and conditions of the mon t er une kasing are based on and out of mess a ge bodo morale. The red de logod Petun med bademarks d isatud Croitor MouseWatu Weds N d the Wadows logo are gistered tradems Moros Corpoate Pudedame deron perdeteks on registered trademarks of Memekaits, berpendidates d es pictor for the purposes only and may taras ve organic **Maxmin edelupa handing and posten leading Hva er det po sto add a bit less fun the minerals CD-ROM awal O w ne DVD ROMI Jak "


"MILLENNIA 400 MILLENNIA 400  Intel Pentium II processor 400MHZ  64MB 100MHz SDRAM  8.4GB Ultra ATA hard drive  17\" Micron 700VX monitor (15.9\" display)  New MicroTower case  82440BX chip set 512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS  3.5\" floppy drive  32X max speed CD-ROM drive  nVidia Riva 128, 4MB SGRAM 3D AGP graphics PCI 64-voice Wavetable sound  Advent AV009 stereo speakers  3Com/U.S. Robotics 56K WinModem**  104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98  Microsoft Home Essentials with Microsoft Power Pak 5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Intel Pentium II processor 400MHz  128MB 100MHz SDRAM 10GB Ultra ATA hard drive  19\" Micron 900Lx monitor (18\" display)  MiniTower case  82440BX chip set  512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS  100MB lomega Zip drive  DVD-ROM drive and PCI decoder card  3.5\" floppy drive 32X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive  Real 3D Starfighter 1740, SMB AGP graphics 64-voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound Advent AV009 stereo speakers  3 Com/U.S. Robotics 56K WinModem**  104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse Microsoft Windows 98  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition  5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Qa9 | $76/mo' Consumer Lease $2,749 $109/mo Consumer Lease $109/mo FOR HARDCORE GAMERS. MICRON ECTRONICS boot! EPC WORLD RIER ass! 9000 Windows Windows 98 Call 888-669-0969 or www.micronpc.com/cgw Go to #100 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Millennia Xu SIR '97 Millennia Xiu Mu'98 Millennia X , Finalist Dic '97 Millennia 350 Millennia 400 Jut 98 Aus \"98 Monthly payment amounts for consumer leases are based on a 30-month lease. Consumer leasing is arranged by an independent third-party leasing company to qualilied customers. All monthly consumer lease payments listed above exclude taxes which may vary, but do include applicable shipping costs, in addition, a security deposit equivalent to one or two monthly payments and a documentation fee of $50 is required, and all consumer leases are subject to credit approval and availability. Al consumer lease end, equipment can be purchased for an amount equal to 15% of the original amount financed, plus applicable sales tax. Lease fetis subject to change without notice, "


"REVIEW ADS TECHNOLOGIES USB PCI CARD ...And USB for All USB Porto Add 2 USB Ports to your PC! GAMING EDITORS CHOICE HARDWAR. AUS . by Dave Salvator SB is what gamers have been waiting for. USB will solve all your controller problems. USB will let you connect your weedwhacker to your PC, USB will...blah, blah, blah. With champions like Intel and COMPUTER GAMING Microsoft, USB has been the victim of marketing hype run amok. The one sober question about USB is, \"When the hell is it going to really work?\" Well, it would seem the answer is: Now. Having already taken the better part of two years and seen the arrival of one operating system and several versions of DirectX, it would appear that USB is finally something worth paying attention to. But what if your current rig doesn't have USB ports? Are you left out in the cold? Not necessarily. ADS Technologies has come up with a PCI card that adds a USB hub and root controller (with two ports) to your existing system. Unfortunately, there's a catch: You need to buy a rather large USB utility called Windows 98 before it will work. The ADS folks wrestled with trying to make this device Windows 95-compatible (OSR 2.1 with USB WORLD ***** supplement) but ultimately abandoned the effort in favor of a single Windows 98 version. The thing you'll probably notice immediately after you open the box is what's missing: a driver disk. The card's drivers are already on the Windows 98 install CD, and after we installed the card and powered up the system, Windows 98 asked for its CD and installed the driver. One reboot later our Pentium MMX 233MHz test system had two USB ports. To put the ports through their paces, we hooked up Logitech's new WingMan Force joystick, which can run over USB. The stick, by way of the USB card, ran flawlessly in WARBIRDS, with smooth input and all of WARBIRDS' force effects coming back down to the stick. We even hooked up ADS' four-port USB hub and ran the Wing Man Force through it, and again, all components played nice together. If you're wanting to get in on USB, and your current system lacks USB ports, ADS' card will get the job done, provided you've got Windows 98. You need to decide if USB functionality is worth an operating system upgrade, but if you were planning to make the move anyway, then ADS has a cool way for you to add USB without a motherboard swap. CGW APPEAL: Gamers with slightly older rigs looking to ride the USB bus. PROS: Brings USB to the USBchallenged; inexpensive; stupid-simple installation CONS: No Windows 95 support. Price: $49.95 Manufacturer: ADS Technologies (562) 926-1928 photo: Michael Falconer www.adstech.com REVIEW ADS TECHNOLOGIES USB HUB Reach-Around: Just Say No by Dave Salvator SB will.whoops wrong review. Yet another offering from ADS Technologies is its four-port USB hub. Given the current dearth of USB gaming USB Hub COMPUTER GAMING devices available, a four-port hub may seem like overkill. But if you've got a USB mouse and another USB device, there's no room at the inn for a third device. ADS to the rescue. The other purpose this hub serves is to put USB ports where they belong: in the front of your system instead in the back. ADS' four-port hub looks like a small external modem, and includes power and individual port LEDs, though these port LEDs don't seem to serve any purpose other than to add a little color to an otherwise unexciting box. They don't indicate whether a device is connected (say, by changing color), and they don't show any bus traffic from each connected device. Installation is truly plug and (install driver) play. The unit ships with one of those adorable wallwart power supplies we've all come to know and loathe. So, after sacrificing almost an entire electrical socket, 1 tested this hub on two systems: one with Windows 95 (OSR 2.1 with USB supplement) and the other with Windows 98. In both instances, the unit was recognized by the OS, and after each found its respective driver for a generic USB hub, the unit was good to go. Because each OS includes this driver, the hub doesn't ship with a driver disk. However, it would have been handy if ADS Technologies had included the Windows 95 USB supplement for Windows 95 users, although it is available on Microsoft's Web site. I then ran Logitech's Wing Man Force joystick through the hub, and it performed without a hitch. A flyAPPEAL: Gamers with a full-blown USB jones. PROS: Adds four USB ports to your existing setup; easy installation; makes USB ports accessible in front of your system; price. CONS: Brain-dead LEDs for each port: no bus traffic indicator, wall-wart power supply. Price: 589 Manufacturer: ADS Technologies (562) 926-1928 www.adstech.com through of WARBIRDS went smoothly, both for joystick input, and force information coming back down to the stick. If you're getting into USB, and you're tired of reaching around to the back of your rig every time you want to swap devices, then check out this hub. You'll get the added bonus of being able to hang more USB devices on your system as they become available. CGW photo: Michael Falconer 212 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"MICROSOFT SIDEWINDER FREESTYLE PRO REVIEW Every Which Way but Loose HARDWAR by Dave Salvator ame-claw. You sports guys and Bruce Lee wanna-bes know what it is. After a long gaming session, you can barely move your left thumb and wrist because you've been digging into your COMPUTER GAMING * * WORLD gamepad's D\"tail\" on it, so you pad for two can track the and a half controller's hours. Sure, movements. In you've got your the Config gaming jones to Activator/ feed, but you Editor, you don't want can change acute arthrigame configs, tis by the and set the movement time you're 35. sensitivity. You can also set MSWhat to do? The DOS emulation (CH Flightstick or bad boys in Redmond ThrustMaster) for driving DOS titles may have an answer: Make the within Windows 95. But there's no whole controller the D-pad. Using native MS-DOS support. motion-sensor technology, Micro The Freestyle ships with Microsoft's new SideWinder Freestyle Prosoft's new MOTOCROSS MADNESS, lets you drive, fly, run, and steer by where the free-wheeling Freestyle moving the whole controller. is a lot of fun for turning or jumpThe controller installs painlessly, ing your bike. In FIFA ROAD TO and has an activator/config editor WORLD CUP 98 and NBA LIVE 98, it that makes it easy to create gameworked well, but was somewhat specific configs. When you bring up more unwieldy. A button on the the Freestyle's control panel applet, device disables the motion sensor, the D-pad position indicator has a and you can then use its traditional D-pad. But because of Freestyle's Batarang shape, using its traditional D-pad wasn't very comfortable. And while hard-core fly-boys would scoff at using the Freestyle to go aloft, it controlled WARBIRDS reasonably well, with controls for throttle, joystick and view-hat. The Freestyle has one major shortcoming: You can't daisy-chain multiple controllers, although you can connect two controllers to your USB ports. But if you don't have USB, so much for hot-seating. Still, it brings something new to the market, and it works. Whether it's a gimmick or a game-enhancer will depend on what you want to control. For arcade-type driving titles, it's a good fit; for sports, it's okay, and it's even a passable flight-sim controller. But it's not the most comfortable traditional gamepad, and if you use it traditionally, you may get game-claw. CGW APPEAL: Gamers looking for a different kind of gamepad. PROS: Cool motion-sensor technology: easy programmability. CONS: No daisy-chaining: no native MS-DOS support; somewhat unwieldy for sports titles. Price: $64.95 Manufacturer: Microsoft (425) 882-8080 www.microsoft.com/products/hardware/sidewinder/sidewinder.htm photo: Michael Falconer ANCHOR CHIPS EZ-LINK USB  REVIEW Instant LAN LUPIN  by Dave Salvator magine having true Plug-andPlay networking. Come on, quit laughing. Plug in a device, and the networking is live. We've all been waiting to put those USB ports on our systems to good use, and Anchor Chips may well have COMPUTER WORLD something that kills two stones with one bird: a USB-based peer-to-peer network. And because USB devices are hot-swappable by design, if you unplug the connected machines the networking function ality disables itself gracefully. Now here's the cool part: When you reconnect, EZ-Link dynamically restores networking sans reboot. We hooked up EZ-Link between two machines: one running Windows 95 (OSR 2.1 with the latest USB supplement) and the other running Windows 98. In both systems, EZ-Link was immediately recognized when we plugged it into the system. And once we fed the machines a driver disc and each operating system's disc, which loads standard networking protocol drivers-and then rebooted—the networking was live. The EZ-Link device looks like a network adapter to the Os, and you can bind IPX, TCP/IP, and NetBEUI, though you have to manuall y configure the TCP/IP protocol which can be a little daunting to the uninitiated. While running a QUAKE Il multiplayer DeathMatch across EZ-Link, we saw ping times just a little higher than those found on an Ethernet LAN; they were generally in the 30-40ms range. Lower ping times mean smoother gameplay, and overall gameplay was smooth between the two test systems. EZ-Link's topology can be in either daisychain or star formation, with all machines connected to a USB hub, though each machine on the wire needs an EZ-Link device. According to Anchor Chips, EZ-Link can achieve only 2-3Mbits/sec-or 256-384KB/sec-versus 10-Base Ethernet, which usually clocks around 6-8Mbits/sec, or about 1MB/sec. Doing a quick file-transfer test of a 2MB file, EZ-Link achieved a throughput of about 1.75Mbits/sec. To be honest, EZ-Link isn't doing anything new here, it's just making it much faster to set up and break down. The \"instant network\" factor of being able to quickly connect and disconnect machines is very cool, though its slow throughput is somewhat disappointing. But for sheer ease of use, EZ-Link is hard to beat, and for gamers looking to connect a few machines for an afternoon of multiplayer mayhem, EZ-Link will do the trick. CGW APPEAL: Gamers looking for an easy. quick way to network several rigs. PROS: Delivers ping times nearly comparable to an Ethernet LAN; easy setup. CONS: Slow throughput relative to Ethernet; you still need to know a bit about networking to set up TCP/IP. Price: $79.95 (street, includes a 10 USB cable) Manufacturer: Anchor Chips (619) 676-6815 photo: Michael Falconer www.ezlinkusb.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 213 "


"IMMORTALITY gameshark ABUSE If you were immortal, you could tempt fate, take dares, and defy danger. With GameShark, you could be an eternal annoyance to your enemies. Computer game enhancement lets you be anything you want. Fastest, richest, strongest, best. Achieve what you first thought impossible. Live your life as one big risk. As if tomorrow was your last day. Even though it's not. THE INSIGHT DE ASE POWER PERPETUA: CASH ISI augala REMEDY windows 95/98 nintendo 64 sega saturn playstation game boy pocket/game boy "


"For Windows 95/98 Soon Coming Obtain the latest codes, cheats and hints from www.gamestik.com. Coming soon for Windows 95/98. 1998 Interact Accessories, Inc. A RECOTON COMPANY. All rights reserved. INTERACE "


"runswick Youire in the 10th frame, there's a bucket of sweat dripping off your brow and this shot is worth way too much money Brun AUTEURS Easterr Mutt AY IS IT REAL OR IS IT... el \"Amazingly Fun!\"  Brand new Brunswick Skins Game format  Intelligent bowler and crowd reactions Brunswick  Multi-player up to 6 players State-of-the-art physics engine for unbelievably real pin action 13 Brunswick ProStaff Bowlers CIRGUT  Cosmic Bowling Coming in September Body www.thq.com www.brunswickbowling.com THOES WINDOWS *95 Adrenalin. PlayStation Go to #152 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Brunswick is a registered trademark of Brunswick Corporation, Cosmic Bowling and ProStatt are trademarks of Brunswick Bowing and Billiards Corporation, Buswick Cutout Pro Bowing is a trademark of THO INC 01938 IMQ INC PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainm "


"THE MOST TRUSTED REVIEWS FOR 16 YEARS DESCENT FREESPACE 233 *** Finally, a Challenger to WING COMMANDER DOMINION ** 284 This Month CGw Editors' Choice Games Are Indicated in Red GAME RATING PAGE Addiction Pinball *** ** 233 Beast Wars: Transformers *** ** Castrol Honda Superbike World Champions * ** * 250 Cyberstorm 2 * * * * * 270 270 Descent: Freespace-The Great War * *** * 236 Dominion: Storm Over Gift 3 * * * * * 280 Fox Sports Soccer '99 * * * * * 264 Incubation: The Wilderness Missions ** *** Insurrection: Campaigns for StarCraft *** ** 284 Jazz Jackrabbit 2 * * * * * 233 Leisure Suit Larry's Casino ** * ** 287 MAX 2 * * * * * 276 MechCommander * * * * 267 Medieval * * * 282 Mega Solitaire 290 Microsoft Baseball 3D * *** * 252 Microsoft Golf 98 ** *** 260 Rampage World Tour ***** 230 Redneck Rampage Rides Again * * * * * 230 Terra: Battle for the Outland * * * * * 230 Tribal Rage *** ** Vangers * * 224 X-COM Interceptor * * * Ion Storm's First Launch is Three Years in the Making-and It Looks It MECHCOMMANDER 284 Can Big Bots Travel the Real-time Strategy Route? Coaster of the Month FOX SPORTS SOCCER '99 The Game Genres Our reviews are Classics/Puzzle Classics are old standbys such as Chess and categorized by genre. MONOPOLY. Puzzle games emphaNot every game fits size problem-solving without neatly into a single requiring gamers to follow a story. Role-Playing A subset of genre, but here's how adventure games, these stress we define the catecharacter development through attributes. The gameworld tends gories in general: to be large; the plot less linear. Action Games that emphasize Simulations Highly realistic fast gameplay over story or games from a first-person per strategy spective, including flight sims and Adventure Games that require space simulations. you to solve puzzles to move Sports A broad genre encom through a story line passing action sports games, such as NBA LIVE; strategic sports games, such as FPS FOOTBALL: and even driving games, such as CART PRECISION RACING. Strategy Problem-solving and planning are the keys here. These games emphasize resource and risk-management. Includes conflict-based sci-fi and fantasy games as well as construction programs like SIMCITY. Wargames A subset of strategy games, these re-create historical conflicts from a command perspective. They may be tactical, operational, or strategic. \"It's gonna take a whole lotta soccer game to dethrone FIFA 98, and FOX SPORTS SOCCER '99 doesn't even come close.\" Joe Vallina How Do We Rate? We review only finished products, not prerelease versions. The ratings are as follows: * * * * * Outstanding The rare game that gets it all right. A must-play experience. * * * * * Very Good Worthy of your time and money, but there are drawbacks. * * * * * Average Either an ambitious design with major flaws, or simply vanilla. * * * * * Weak Seriously lacking in play value, poorly conceived, or just another clone. * * * * * Abysmal The rare game that gets it all wrong. Pathetic. Coaster material. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 217 "


"AdvenCURE Jaming "


"10S1uec encere Che best-selling adventure series ever is back. Roberta Williams brings you the 3D magic OF King's Quest: Mask of Eternity. Explore the world of Daventry as it's never been seen, and, 1 you Re AT? lucky, return to tell about it. Seven worlds, three dimensions, one indescribable adventure. coming chis Fall MALING PENDING RP ATERRA STUDIOS ESATE All images are actual gameplay. 01998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. "


"Gimension MASK OF ETERNIT adventure gaming. born again. www.sierrastudios.com Go to #151 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"CGW Reviews Index These Are the Games We Have Reviewed in the Last Three Months Game Publisher Month Page 229 CGW Rating ***** September August August 174 July July ACTION Army Men Die by the Sword Forsaken Grand Theft Auto Hexen It: Portal Of Praevus Monster Truck Madness 2 Outwars Quake II: The Reckoning Shadow Master Spec Ops: Rangers Lead the Way Ultimate Race Pro Unreal 3DO Interplay Acclaim ASC Games Activision Microsoft Microsoft id Software Psygnosis Ripcord MicroProse GT Interactive osallis ***** 224 September August September July September July September 146 225 144 220 **** ADVENTURE Black Dahlia Might & Magic VI Sanitarium Starship Titanic The X-Files Interplay 3DO ASC Games Simon and Schuster Fox Interactive July August September September September 154 180 238 236 230 *** 224 224 224 * * ** * ** * * \"Znd/SOISSVD Bridge Deluxe II with Omar Sharif Kuba Mastermind Monopoly World Cup '98 Sorry Ultimate 3D Puzzle Ultimate IQ Test Interplay Patch Hasbro Hasbro Hasbro GlobalStar Software Virtual Entertainment August August August September September September September 266 ***** 267 247 247 Aerowinx/High Flight Novalogic Jane's/EA Infogrames/DID Interactive Magic MicroProse 747-400 Precision Simulator Comanche Gold F-15 F-22 ADF Red Sea Operations iF-22 Persian Gulf v5.0 M-1 Tank Platoon 11 Panzer Commander Team Apache 247 XXXX SIMS September September July September July August August September * * ** ** * ** SSI 194 240 Mindscape * Deer Hunter F1 Racing Simulation Front Page Sports Ski Racing Game, Net & Match HardBall 6 High Heat The Golf Pro Triple Play 99 World Cup 98 SPORTS WizardWorks/GT Ubi Soft Sierra BlueByte Accolade 3DO Empire EA Sports EA Sports 166 164 214 264 208 204 July August September August August August August t 202 August August July July 6 184 261 STRATEGY/WARGAMES Chronx Genetic Anomalies Dark Reign Expansion: Rise of the Shadowhand Activision Dragoon Art of War East Front Campaign CD 1 TalonSoft Extreme Tactics Piranha Great Battles of Julius Caesar Interactive Magic Industry Giant Interactive Magic Operational Art of War TalonSoft Soldiers at War StarCraft Blizzard Star Wars Rebellion LucasArts Total Annihilation: Core Contingency Cave Dog WarBreeds Red Orb Warhammer: Dark Omen EA uasballs. July September July September September August July July August SSI 168 172 217 189 178 XXXX July July www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 221 "


"i wo worlas colli  Ripcord Games.  Micro Forto Pty Limited. All Rights Reserved. Enemy Infestation is a trademark of Panasonic Interactive Media Company. Clockworks and Micro forto are trademarks of Micro Forte Pty Limited. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"e in the search for life. Only one will survive. Imagine the Earth. Ravaged by famine. Unable to sustain life. Reliant upon plants and minerals, harvested on a distant world. Imagine a race of vicious aliens. Hurtling through space. Desperately searching for nourishment. Willing to stop at nothing to get it. Two species. Determined to survive. Two worlds. Destine to collide. Get ready for the most intense real-time battle in the universe. Blast your way through 5 colonial bases and 50 brain-crunching scenarios-all in isometric, retina-frying 3D. Choose from 5 different types of characters, each with its own special function, and a random arsenal of weapons. Go it alone or team up with your friends over the internet. If you made it through Starcraft'\", it's time to meet the real enemy. enemy INFE Z2tion same time in Panasonic O F LATING PENDING the Go to #096 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink For ordering information call 1-888-797-5867. Pre-order at your local retailer today! CLOCKWORKS Panasonic www.ripcordgames.com RP ENTERTAINMENT ALISON OF MCPO FORTE Gipcord CONTENT RATED IT ESRB GAMES "


"REVIEW. VANGERS Mad Maxima Drive Yourself to Distraction in VANGERS' Campy Carnage by Charles Ardai ost boys are infected with a love of cars and trucks around the age of four, and for many of them, this fascination lasts long past the deterioration of their motor skills in the twilight of their adult years. While I don't drive much in real-life (preferring the equally visceral thrills of the New York subway), ! have found it tough-ever since the days of POLE POSITION—to resist the siren call of a really good racing game. And so it was that I looked forward to VANGERS, a paean to gamers who grew up collecting Hot Wheels. After you choose and outfit your VANGER mechos-allCOMPUTER GAMING **** WORLD formed the sinister bouillon of Spawn.\" And: \"Achtung! Vangers approaching!\" Achtung, indeed. In any case, you start with a low-end mechos and 500 beebs with which to buy weapons and other gear. Almost everything costs too much, especially a better vehicle, so you start taking on assignments to earn a couple of beebs here and there. Your first assignments come from rude, Jabba the Hutt-type slugs. (Eleepods) who send you on fetch-and-carry missions: from the escave (underground city) of PURPLE PROSE OF CAIRO (OR GLORX) \"A Vanger possessing this Podish you carry some nymbos thingy.\" pens the feverish writer, \"becomes completely wacky (which seems to be either an organ He can invoke some mysterious powers and horrify every next man. What he can't do, however, is postpone his dreadful or a type of excrement) to doom.\" Or ours, it would seem. Incubator; then the counselor of Incubator makes you carry some terrain vehicles that could be right order to make the game run faster. \"phlegma\" (mucus-in-a-bottle) out of Mad Max-you have the While, on the whole, I enjoyed back to Podish. On the way you pleasure of guiding it vigplaying VANGERS, I must run across other vangers, most of orously across landwarn you that it's which are bigger than you and scapes every bit often irritating. quick to pull a trigger, as well as as rugged as crawling insects-beebs!—which, those in a if collected, add credit to your bank lavishly proSinister account (don't ask). duced Jeep Bouillon commercial. An interThe Little Moreover, minable introMechos That Could the game's duction sets The main task of the game is designers have up the backgetting from one place to another, managed to crestory, and after and the reason this is difficult is ate the most techslogging through the that no path goes very long withnically realistic environannoying futurespeak out being blocked by obstacles. ment ever seen in a game like this. \"cirt,\" \"Eleepods,\" \"ghorb The detailed environment \"rememgear,\" \"macHOTine guns,\" bers\" what you do to it: bridges \"kernoboos,\" and \"beecollapse under you and stay col boorats,\" to name a lapsed; mounds of dirt wear the few-you have to wonder scars of your tire treads; everything if the writer spoke English. you see on the screen is a fully (Ed. note: He didn't. He's functional element with which you Russian./ Even the screens can interact, rather than just of text that are nominally graphics put there to catch your written in English sound eye. But, too often I found this like the work of a translamammoth achievement in simula tor whose day job is sub NO EXIT The landscapes of the 10 tion to be incidental to the game titling chop-socky films: worlds in the Great Chain are often play. Gamers with less than stellar \"...biomolecular chaos too surreal for their own good. Luckily, systems may even be tempted to erased all the original your trusty compass bug can help you turn down the level of detail in Softie and Cryspo and navigate through bizarre situations. The APPEAL: Gamers who like their driving/ combat sims detailed and dark, with really campy dialogue. PROS: Ten strange and wonderful worlds filled with alien creatures and constructs, simulated down to the dust on your tires; aggressive pricing. CONS: Confusing visuals; controls that are too-complicated, contrived futuristic vocabulary: solutions to all of the game's puzzles are in the READ.ME file. DIFFICULTY: Advanced. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 166, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 195MB harddrive space, DirectX-compatible graphics and sound, 4x CD-ROM drive. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Internet and LAN (2-8 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $29.95 Publisher: Interactive Magic Research Triangle Park, NC (919) 461-0722 www.imagicgames.com 224 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"INTERNET GAMING ZONEM PLAY IT ON ZONE.COM 1998 Red Storm Entertainment, Brown paperwork. them in Or just drown drown them. Mplayer is a registered trademark of Mpath Interactive, Inc. The Mplayer logo and mplayer.com are trademarks of Mpath Interactive. Inc. Internet Gaming Zone is either a registered trademark or a trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. ruth Tom Clancy's lleca.com Tom Clancy's ruthless.com, the simultaneous turn-based strategy game that lets you build a corporation atop the bodies of your competition. Use thugs. hackers or the occasional lawyer to get what you want, the way you want. It's your empire. You decide. FREE late play www.tomclancysruthless.com Red Storm Go to #147 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  VANGERS ALCUTULON * WRONG! ALIEN ARCHIPELAGO The wild terrain layout forces you to think while moving and shooting, but your mechos' controls aren't always up to the task. Go back to Double A and learn some fundamentals! Even as your teammate crosses the plate, the third strike ends the game. If you're gonna play VR Baseball 2000 you Your mechos can jump --quite high, in Even when you know where you're fact-but jumps use up precious energy going, though, and how to deal with the and often leave you turning end-over-end terrain, the presence of vicious enemies as you come crashing back to the planet's makes your job sometimes more difficult surface. When you're rich, you can also than it should be. There's nothing wrong buy devices that help you float on water with enemies shooting at you, because hover or fly through the air, or tunnel you can always shoot back, if you buy a through dirt and rock. If all else fails, your gun and keep it charged. What's irritatmechos is one tough little truck and, like ing is that the impact of enemy weapons the Little Engine That Could, it usually turns you around, dumps you on your grinds its way over an obstacle if you just back, or sends you running away willykeep trying long enough. nilly—which would be OK, too, except There are a number of tools to help that your mechos' controls become mysyou out, including a map and (my teriously less responsive than they favorite) a red compass bug that floats should be in situations of duress. in front of you, showing the direction The game is difficult enough to learn and distance to any location. Since it's and play—sometimes you'll feel as if the easy to get lost driving around (the visu controls require 10 fingers and a toe for als, though striking, are so strange emphasis-without making combat situlooking that it's sometimes hard to see ations overly difficult merely to artificialwhere you are and where you can go). ly extend gameplay. And even this would the compass bug is an invaluable guide. be less of a problem if the payoff for your pain was more than five more screens of trippy babbling about the \"pipetka,\" the \"zeex,\" and the \"Infinite Mind.\" Don't get me wrong: 1 have my cult film (and game) favorites like anyone else. Just be warned that it is mainly such cultists who will enjoy VANGERS, and the shame MECHOS IN MAUVE If you want to upgrade from is that the game's wonyour low-end macHOTine guns, there are several derfully rich environment unpronounceable weapons scattered in powershows you how much up fashion on most mapscomplete with purple more it really could have hexgrids to make even wargamers feel at home. been. CGW gotta have game, you're in the big leagues now. FOR THE CORRECT ANSWER, GO TO PAGE 251 V BASEBALL NEXT GENERATION OASEOALL 220 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"PREPARE TO GO DEEPER nto A MYSTICAL, MAGICAL WORLD OF FANTASY AND FURY... "


"AnnoVICING THE LORDS OF MAGIC SPECIAL EDtion: INCLUDES THE FULL ORGNAL LORDS OF MAGC GAME WHEN THE EVIL SORCERER BALKOTH THREATENS, THE PEACEFUL PEOPLE OF V RAK WITH DEATH AND Destruction, BRAVE HEROES MUST RISE up to stop THE REIGN OF TERROR LORDS OF MAGIC COMBNES TURN-BASED EXPLORATION with REAL-TITE COMBAT. ComMAID VP to, 100 FantASTICAL CREATURES AS YOU DEFEAT EVIL AND SAVE THE REALM. X ALSO INCLUDES THE LEGENDS OF VRAK OVEST PACK FEATURIIG: SELECE ONE OF EIGHT CiTiESTO. BE THE CENTER OF YOUR EMPIRE. X 24 New CREATURES V 16 Mew Buildings Multi-LEVEL CAVES AND DUNGEO125. LA ROBUST CHARACTER EDITOR 2 new ARTIFACTS AND SPELLS 2 ENHANCED MAP Editor 7 Plus FIVE EPIC QUESTS FROM VRAK'S LEGENDARY PAST: @ Quest for the EternaL FLAME DRAGON's HOARD QUEST FOR THE HOLY GRAILSIEGFRIED AND BRUIIHLDE Quest for the SCEPTRE OF THE LICH SPECIAL EDITION TORDS OF MAGIC INCLUDING (  Yo0 FRont THE ENEMY FORCES OF BALKOTH. \"zoom in\" to-, REAL-Time COMBAT: TEGENDOL LOFURAK QUEST PACK U "


"Cross into VRAK'S LEGENDARY PAST, AND RELIVE THE STORIES OF ifs, Ancient HEROES N FVE EPIC QUESTS. Registered LORDS OF MAGIC OWNERS CAN RECEIVE A $20 REBATE! DETAILS * in Box. AS YOU EXPLORE THE LAND OF VRAK, YOU'LL BATTLE IN DARK AND MYSTEROUS MULTI-LEVEL CAVES, CASTLES. AND SUBTERRANEAN DUNGEONS. N YOUR LIBRARY WIZARDS WILL RESEARCH SPELLS TO OVERPOWER JOUR ENEMIES. Deep insidE YOUR WIZARD TOWER SORCERERS PRACTICE THEIR SECRET ARTs to conjVRE MAGICAL CREATURES AND TRAIN NEW ACOLYTES. SATERRA I TEEN STUDIOS A . WWW.SIERRASTUDIOS.com Go to #181 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. Bellevue, WA 98007 All rights reserved. W7009010 Impressions  Sierra On-Line, Inc. "


"NOUT Crush, Crumble, and Chaw These Twitch-happy Titles May Sate Your Action Appetite Rampage World Tour else that's new here. What seemed funny the first time around now feels like a one-joke game. Worse, The graphics get jagged and the action slow if you play in fullscreen mode, and the picture is playing-card sized if you opt for smooth graphics and fast action. The action may be too basic for some tastes, as well. Still, RAMPAGE is suffused with all the monster movie fun that was conspicuously lacking in the recent Godzilla film. If you remember feeding quarters to these monsters way back when, you'll want to try this version at least once. -Charles Ardai Publisher: Midway Price: $39.95 www.midway.com cience tells us that nothing is ever truly lost, it's just transformed into a different state of matter or energy. This law of nature might help to explain the flood of PC conversions of arcade games of yore, of which RAMPAGE WORLD TOUR is the latest. As remakes go, it's a great idea: Who can resist playing a classic monster—a giant ape, giant lizard, or giant wolfman? You get to tear through a city stomping on cars, punching and kicking buildings, and gobbling pedestrians while all of the city's armed forces (tanks, planes, choppers, and guys throwing sticks of dynamite) try to bring you down. 20 Terra: Battle for the Outland * * * * * Publisher: Kaon Interactive Price: $9.99/month-Online only www.kaon.com for long periods of time looking for a fight. It doesn't help that there aren't many other players: I never saw more than 30 players logged on at a time. Graphics, even with 3D acceleration, are downright ugly. Kaon's Web site trumpets its attempts to beat the latency issues that plague most 100 Internet-only games. Unfortunately, the compa ny's solution is to saddle all players with slow and unresponsive controls, reasoning that if everyone's tank control sucks, then the playing field is level. On top of that, the controls are unwieldy and create battles that are dominated by long-distance missile slinging against barely visible targets. You do see your enemy up close during occasional jouststyle drive-bys, in which you both fire away in a futile attempt to hit the enemy-again, compliments of the controls. TERRA is a virtual world with few citizens and bad gameplay. Even with the free 30-day trial offer from Kaon, we can't recommend that you plan an extended visit. Robert Coffey There's no denying the ambition behind TERRA: BATTLE FOR THE OUTLAND. But there's no denying the mediocrity of it, either. TERRA is an online-only tank game that takes place in a persistent world where clans fight to control vast slabs of yet another postapocalyptic Earth. After conquering region-controlling forts, players can set up power grids, purchase defenses, and otherwise plot to extend their power. While the designers have a background designing sims for the military, they don't really have a gaming background, and it shows. The world is too large, forcing gamers to wander the wasteland the too-standard action generally has you seriously outgunned and under-supplied. Most enemies are hard to shoot since they jump around like crazy: a difficulty compounded by an occasional bug that causes your shots to make 90degree turns. Levels include swamps, rotting gambling boats, and a haunted pueblo, and all show real care in their intricate construction. Unfortunately, they quickly devolve into tiresome, backtrack-plagued key hunts once you've slaughtered the bad guys. I've never had so much trouble just getting out of a level. And I really wanted out of those levels. REDNECK RAMPAGE has never been pretty, but RIDES AGAIN really revels in that ugly palette. With those herky-jerky enemies and the generally harsh graphics developed a headache that lasted for days. Gamers now used to Windows 95 can expect another headache when they load up drivers for this game's DOS-only play. Time hasn't treated the Build engine well. It just can't compete with the graphical richness and sense of immersion generated by true 3D engines like QUAKE II and UNREAL. Even Duke Nukem, the Build poster boy, has moved to the QUAKE Il engine for his next installment. The REDNECK folks should take a hint. Robert Coffey Redneck Rampage Rides Again The wo This carnage goes on in city after city with only minimal variation, but what keeps it fresh is the animation variety. When you punch a helicopter, it usually just explodes, but if you punch its tail, it spins out of control before crashing. Grab food you find behind a broken window and you're revived, but grab an electrical appliance and you light up like a cartoon character, your skeleton showing through your monstrous hide. Gobble ordinary citizens and you're rewarded, but gobble a group of nuns and a lightning bolt strikes you. Publisher: Interplay Price: $49.95 www.interplay.com Dikers, cheerleaders, and jackDalopes make up your new foes in REDNECK RAMPAGE RIDES AGAIN, and you get to blast them from a mortar-launching hydrofoil and a machine-gun-equipped motorcycle. Problem is, there isn't a whole lot 230 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"GOT ANGER?  A Fast, Furious and Funny Dungeon Romp! In stores in September! Call our new Get Medieval www.lith.com Windows'95198 hint line 1-900-CALL-LITH* CD-ROM www.getmedieval.com PRODUCTIONS Get Medieval and the \"M\" logo are trademarks of Monolith Productions, Inc. Go to #141 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink *Avaliable when Get Medieval ships "


"Tom Clancy's RAINBOW SIX Play as if 5.7 Billion Lives Depended on it. The most revolutionary action/strategygameofitskind. Nothing comes close to offering such an exciting combination of strategy. team-building, realistic, three-dimensional graphics and true-to-life special forces action. ONE SHOT KILLS. The ultimate goal is to save yourself and the world from deadly terrorists. You must successfully complete 17 unique missions, and it you die, the game isn't over: THE WORLD IS. PLAN THE ATTACK . Photo courtesy Steven Galloway Heckler & Koch EXECUTE THE MISSION ERNET FREE IN 01998 Red Som Entertainment Inc MPLAYER.COM INTERNET GAMING ZONE SAVE THE WORLD Now Available! PLAY IT ON ZONE.COM Go to #229 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"REVIEWS Bunnies, Beasts, and Bumpers ACTION Arcade Hits and Misses, From Side-Scrollers to Pinball the game. Your character can get stuck on some objects, forcing you to reload a previous save. Sticking problems continue in multiplayer play, forcing you to either restart or wait to get killed: some choice. Lastly, while those pinball levels are kind of cool looking, they're nigh onto impossible to negotiate at times. You might overlook these things in a stronger arcade game, but JAZZ JACKRABBIT 2 just isn't that game. Robert Coffey pinball tables. Some games, such as Sierra's 3D ULTRA PINBALL series, modify pinball rather drastically for a better fit. Others, such as MicroProse's ADDICTION PINBALL, continue to pursue the pure pinball experience ADDICTION PINBALL features dead-on physics and gorgeous graphics, complete right down to the realistic reflections on the ball. The table wiggles when nudged, and you can spell your name with the flipper buttons. (If you need Beast Wars Transformers health. You recharge either by gathering power-ups or more likely, by transforming back into beast mode. Surprisingly, no matter how powerful a beast you may be rhinoceros, gorilla, even dinosaur you are powerless. While you're in beast mode, you can't bite, punch, or kick either offensively or defensively (obviously, Hasbro never saw my collection of Transformers). So, your quality beast time is spent mainly in hiding, waiting to recharge so you can play some more. Stop the fun. If you happen to die on a mission, you lose that Transformer and must finish the level with another. By picking up a special powerup, you gain access to a special, flying-rescue mission that allows you to recover lost Transformers-if you want to bother. The game's quirky autotargeting system makes targeting alternately way too easy or maddeningly difficult. Speaking of control, I love playing this style of game via the keyboard, especially when it has lots of movement options (jump, crouch, sidestep, fast-turn, and so forth). The only way I could get keyboard control to work (despite several calls to tech support) was to completely uninstall the joystick every time I played the game. What's a Maximal beast lord to do? Probably wait a short time for this game to hit the $4.99 discount bin. -Mark Clarkson Jazz Jackrabbit 2 ***** Publisher: Epic Megagames Price: $34.95 www.jazzjackrabbit.com Cide-scrolling, platform games have had a tough go making the leap from console to PC. Though not without its charms, JAZZ JACKRABBIT 2 doesn't quite have what it takes to distinguish itself from every other anthropomorphic, gem-gathering, ledgeleaping, cutesy animal hero game. Each of the episodes is packed with levels, but they're not that big, and the game's emphasis on speed makes them whiz by. Levels range in locales from Victorian towns to giant pinball machines, and they are loaded with powerups, tricky timing sequences, and secret areas. While a large variety of weapons adds some spice, the game lacks the flavor of truly original fare, such as ABE'S ODDYSEE. In a break from console tradition, JAZZ JACKRABBIT 2 will let you save at any point, and there are five multiplayer modes and a level editor to keep things hopping. Unfortunately, JAZZ JACKRABBIT 2 has problems beyond being merely an average game. Leaving a game is a tougher test in reflexes than any of the levelsyou have to bang that Y key repeatedly after hitting Quit or you'll be brought right back into Publisher: Hasbro Price: $19.95 www.hasbro-interactive.com Vou remember Transformers, I'm I sure: those versatile Warriors that could change from laser-firing robots to beasts and back again. Well, the toys were cool, but BEAST WARS TRANSFORMERS is an overthe-shoulder port from the PlayStation that has almost nothing to recommend it. You can play as either the Maximals or the Predicons, but there's so little difference between them that you can take your favorite without any worries that your choice will affect the gameplay. the gameworld is bathed in strange radiation, called energon, the poisonous effects of which build up over time, impacting your more ambience, get a friend to cuss and slap the computer next to you.) Even at maximum detail (1024x768 resolution and 32,000 colors), gameplay was as smooth as glass on my P11/266. My venerable P133 showed only the slightest hesitation running at the highest settings, and it ran perfectly when I turned the game down a notch to 800x600 graphics. You can view the pinball table at a variety of angles, including the almost hallucinogenically disorienting sideways view. Unfortunately, there are only two tables-Worms and World Rally Feverbut they are nicely laid out and fairly deep, with extra modes, missions, and games. Surprisingly, there's no multiplayer mode. The least addicting thing about this game is the headache-inducing guitar soundtrack behind World Rally Fever. Still, for pinball purists seeking the arcade experience at home, ADDICTION PINBALL is well worth putting a few coins in the old slot. --Mark Clarkson Addiction Pinball Publisher: MicroProse Price: $29.95 www.aztech.com DC pinball has always been a bit of an odd duck. For starters, short, wide computer monitors are ill-suited to displaying tall, narrow www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 233 "


"\"UNREAL IS THE SINGLE BEST ACTION GAME EVER TO APPEAR ON PC.\" NEXT GENERATION MAGAZINE PC GAMER \"AN EVOLUTIONARY STEP UP... THAT NO SHOOTER FAN SHOULD MISS.\" Tetons CHOICE. \"UNREAL IS AWESOME. FORGET QUAKE ILI... FOR ONCE, BELIEVE THE HYPE.» PC GAMER NEWSWEEK NVIRSCHO \"...IF YOU HAVE A PC AND A PULSE YOU SIMPLY MUST GET THIS GAME.» THE ADRENALNE VAULT \"IF YOU COULD HIRE INDUSTRIAL LIGHT AND MAGIC TO RENDER YOUR PERCEPTIONS, (THIS) IS HOW YOU WOULD SEE THE WORLD.\" NEW YORK TIMES \"N. IF YOU BUY ONLY ONE SHOOTER THIS YEAR, IT MUST BE UNREAL.\" NEXT GENERATION ONLINE GENERATION EDITOR'S CHOICE \"LET'S JUST SAY THAT EVERYTHING THAT YOU HEARD ABOUT THE ENGINE IS TRUE. UNREAL ROCKS\" COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"UNREAL IS THE BEST OF ITS KIND... A COMPLETELY ESSENTIAL PURCHASE.» GAME BUYER \"R.I.P. QUAKE TI.\" (E. GAMESMANIA.COM \"...UNREAL IS A MASTERPIECE GAMESLICE.COM ::OPTIMIZED FOR: AMD27 ROIS00 Environmental Audio ETEELLE won.net "


"55:3102 Actual gameplay screen shot UNTIEDE It was four years in the making. It has been the most anticipated game of all time. And it is like nothing you've ever seen or played before. Unprecedented graphics, Uncanny artificial intelligence. Unending community. Unmatched gameplay. And with Unreal level packs on the way, the Unreal universe will only get bigger ... and better. So what are you waiting for? Get Unreal. available at your local retail store Order direct at store.gtinteractive.com or call 1-800-610-GTIS. Visit unreal.gtgames.com for shareware. Downloading is believing. MATURE Coming Soon to Macintosh Macsoft NEED A HINT? 1-900-CALL-2GT WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM 2200 San GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com CONTENEBATUBE Digital Extremes www.unreal.com wa TA Stark and GTOS Testere 1993EA MASC. All Richts Reserva Cat Ek Mwand eclatuba ID ELUS. PuteRAN SU Y GT Interactin Some Our Little Sottile Corp. Microsoft Windows Applesterol dans ce caution AN ONT CON p rocere co Go to #179 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW DESCENT: FREESPACE-THE GREAT WAR SIMULATION SPACE Descent's Ascent The Tunnel Shooter Makes a Successful Transition to Deep Space n worden Enn Svange E by Thierry Nguyen on't be fooled by the title. The DESCENT moniker is on this game only because it was made by the crew who created DESCENT. This game bears no resemblance to that claustrophobic action shooter. In fact, DESCENT: FREESPACE turns out to be one of the most solid space sims of the past couple of years. While it is, at heart, a clone, this isn't some hastily put together mishmash. This guy has a lot of heart and polish. FREESPACE casts you as a rookie pilot on the Galactic Terran Destroyer Galatea. The Galactic Terran Alliance (GTA) has been locked in a brutal, 14-year war with the Vasudan Empire, another sentient alien race. But the focus of this game is a third alien race that joins the battle that of a Star Wars sim: You'll find yourself doing things ranging from defending the Galatea from asteroids to escorting bombers on a bombing run on an enemy vessel. (If you're saying \"This sounds more than a bit derivative,\" give yourself a gold star.) The missions are also scripted, which takes a bit away from replay value (you see it once, you'll see it every time you replay it). Of course, you can just use the FRED mission editor to give the game more replay value yourself. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD APPEAL: Spacesim fans looking EKEE  for a new, if not original, game. PROS: Excellent wingman Al; good pacing: great pyrotechnics; customizable HUD and controls; campaign editor. CONS: Evolutionary, not revolutionary: much-touted multiplayer needs work; campaign isn't exactly \"branching.\" DIFFICULTY: Easy. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133 with 3D accelerator (P-166 without), 32MB RAM, 210 MB hard drive space, 8x CD-ROM. 3D SUPPORT: Direct3D, Glide. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: TCP/IP, LAN (2-12 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $49.95 Publisher: Interplay Irvine, CA (800) 468-3775 www.interplay.com Descend Into Space The two strongest parts of the DOWN SHE GOES The explosions of the capital ships in DESCENT: FREESPACE are the best yet. space combat are the Al and the capital ships. FREESPACE puts you Mysterious ships suddenly in a position emerge from subspace and lay to control waste to every Vasudan and Terran up to four ship in the area. This sounds a lot wings of like WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY, fighters of course, but (surprisingly) I found (three plus these badass aliens more intriguing one reinthan the Nephilim from PROPHECY. forcement). In fact, the first contact that you Not only are have with these alien ships reveals there a varithat you can't target them and you ety of comcan't communicate with them. mands that Plus, they have shield technology, you can while you don't. GALATIC TITANIC Missions such as saving the issue, but Galatea from asteroids add some spice to the your wingstandard space-sim missions of other games. Luke, Meet Blair men are Gameplay in FREESPACE can best FREESPACE will often have multiple actually competent enough to folbe described as a combination of types of craft fulfilling different low those orders. the better elements of the Star objectives out in the field. But You can issue commands by Wars and Wing Commander series then, the HUD-only interface and navigating the menu system, or put into one game. You have a the refined wingmen command you can press a hot-key combo and nice, overarching plot, à la interface are very reminiscent of choose whom the order goes to. PROPHECY, but you don't interact the Wing Commander games. Also, The commands range from the with the pilots here. The atmo the scale of the larger, capital-class always handy\"Cover me!\" to the sphere is like a Star Wars sim, in ships is a lot closer to that of WING more specific \"Destroy targeted that you're just another pilot who COMMANDER than that of the Star subsystem\" or \"Protect target.\" gets caught up in the important Wars sims. These smart wingmen will provide part of the war. There are no After getting a Star Wars sim much-needed backup. No longer names and faces attached to you style briefing (complete with a map does it feel as if you're a superpilot or your squadmates. screen and little animated icons), and your wingmen are cannon fodThe space combat is a lot like you proceed to choose your craft der. Many times, I was able to rip that of the Star Wars sims, in that from what's available (seven ships apart a capital ship by orchestratit focuses on the fleet feel rather in the end) as well as its loadout. ing a complex assault, having difthan the dogfight. Missions in The mission style is very much like f erent ships attacking different 236 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"You control the Light Speed Capsule Drive You control the Linear Displacement Drive You control the Particle Beam Canons You control the Critical Systems Engineering COMMAND THE SHP, CONTROL THE FUTURE. It's 2268, you've been recruited to command a Dreadnought class starship in the Commonwealth Navy. Fighting an unpredictable and relentless enemy, the renegade Indies, you will need much more than your Particle Beam Canons to win the Independence War. It's time to take control of your ship, your crew, and the future in the biggest and deepest space campaign the Galaxy has ever seen. DOWNLOAD THE DEMO AT: www.independencewar.com INDEPENDENCE\" PARTICLE SYSTEMS Wales Ocean INFOGRAMES ENTERTAINMENT  EVERYONE  1998 Infogrames Entertainment Inc./Particle Systems Ltd. Go to #118 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink The Starship Simulator "


"REVIEW  DESCENT: FREESPACE—THE GREAT WAR Mission Control Here SIMULATIONZSPACE RED, the mission editor included in FREESPACE, looks a bit daunting, but it isn't that hard to use once you've spent a little time playing with it. The included RTF document makes for a decent technical reference, and it features a nice tutorial. One Web site that is valuable for FRED users to check out is Peter Drake's \"Using FRED\" at www.cs.indiana.edu/~pedrake/gamer/fred/ fred.html. You can also join the Freespace Developer's List to exchange info with other FRED users and Volition personnel (info at www.descent-freespace. com/lists/fdl/index.html). Finally, if you'd like to try out some new missions for DESCENT: FREESPACE, start your exploration at Xanadu's Freespace Mission Archive at http://xanadu.ml.org/freespacel. parts of the target (such as having Alpha 1 and 2 attack communica tions while Beta Wing attacks the engines). This was much more satisfying than other games that feature simply a generic command to \"destroy target.\" The capital ships are also superb. While they don't quite have that weird, organic look of the ships in WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY, they have the most functional appearance I've ever seen. Each subsystem that you can target affects the ship's performance when that subsystem is destroyed. Destroying communicat ions slows or stops reinforce. ments. Disabling the generalweapons systems lessens their accuracy and the use of the larger guns on the ship Your reward for a good shot is incomparable. In other space sims, I was always disappointed with the explosions, which at best can be described as \"many fireball sprites and the ship is gone.\" FREESPACE starts with electrical currents running through, then smaller explosions emerging, followed by a mas. sive explosion plus shockwave that rips the ship apart and looks as if it's straight out of a scifi movie. The explosion is so strong it can actually dam. age your ship substantially (a first in my experience), and it's even better when using a force feedback joystick. The only flaw is that the capital ships aren't quite as big as the advertising makes them LAG KILLED THE PILOT Multiplayer out to be. FREESPACE on the Net is hampered by lag, as seen in the upper right Lost in the Void corner and the flashing \"net\" icon near the center What is unfortunate is that one of the biggest attractions to the game doesn't work quite so well. Multiplayer is only decentif you play over a network or a fast connection. There have already been two patches released to make Internet gaming playable, and it could still use some help. Using a 33.6Kbps modem with a rel LOCK AND LOAD The technology atively low ping time, I was pacing is nice, doling out more able to play some Internet ships and weapons to choose from every so often. games. At times, the ping time soared and I found myself firing seconds after pulling the trigger, all while enemy ships warped all around me. While online multiplayer isn't totally broken, and Volition is rushing to patch improvements into the code, don't expect an optimal flySOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY ing experience unless you COMES The capital ships, while have a great connection. impressive overall, aren't quite as What was also disconcerting big as the game's ads suggest. was reading the READ.ME file, which stated that the pure an earlier mission, it remains free-for-all dogfight option that's destroyed in later missions. mentioned in the manual was no Overall, FREESPACE is simply a longer supported. very solid clone. It doesn't quite Also, beware of the branching push the entire genre forward, but campaign moniker. This isn't like the it's a great challenge to the WING branching plot trees in WING COMMANDER and Star Wars franCOMMANDER. What changes here chises. Clones of all types are easy is how much technology you get to find, but a clone that is done this The better you perform in missions, well is hard to find. Combine its the sooner that better technology solid gameplay with its customizarrives, and in larger quantities. The ability and you have a great packmissions themselves are relatively age. It's too bad its multiplayer isn't unaffected; here, it's more about all it could be, and that the camhow much firepower you and the paign and the ships aren't quite as enemy are packing. One nice touch good as the ads would have you is that if a ship gets destroyed in believe. CGW COLORS OF THE RAINBOW The graphic effects, such as the firing of this defensive swarming missile, are nicely done. 238 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"SAME GREAT STICK * NOW WITH 40% FAT! MORE UNDER $45 TOP GUN PLATINUM Best selling joystick, totally redesigned with a very serious throttle and a big, fat base. THRUSTMASTER POTIUNE PLATINUM \" www.thrustmaster.com (503) 615-3200 ,&O 1996 Paramount Pictures. Al rights reserved. TOP GUN is a trademark of Paramount Pictures. TOP GUN is licensed through Viacom Consumer Products, the licensing division for Paramount Pictures, Paramount Television and Simon and Schuster as well as third-party properties Go to #239 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AWACS 4. Du fre Master the world of Total Air War, from Strategic Mission Planner to AWACS Commander to frant line Combat Pilat. PLAN Groundbreaking dynamic campaigns, including surprise scramble missions and shifting political alliances, provide virtually unlimited player action in real-time. Cutting-edge flight simulation based on the award-winning F-22 Air Dominance Fighter. Instant mission generator, detailed mission planner and comprehensive weapon loadouts provide you with unlimited play options. sy in (veed to COMMAND 60 highly detailed planes, 36 weapons models, and 4.5 million square kilometers of detailed terrain set in the politically turbulent Middle East. Dease Sante Gay DonateCon Score Depp WOO'Sn-P!p'MMM AIR WAR FLY From the strategic complexities of the planning room to the heart-pounding rush of air-to-air combat, Total Air War envelopes you in the most complete simulation cean of modern air combat ever created. With a ground-breaking dynamic warfare system, you will face the ultimate challenge, a realistic war with missions and objectives that are never scripted and reflect your ongoing performance. Total Air War Air Force s Commanders know both the command center and the cockpit. Dia Go to #117 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink  1998 Infogrames Entertainment Inc. / Digital Image Design Ltd. Special upgrade offer for previous owners of F22 ADF. Details on marked boxes of Total Air War. INTOGRAMUS "


"X-COM INTERCEPTOR . REVIEW Identity Crisis This Split-Personality X-COM Can't Match the Magic of Its Predecessors SIMULATION SPACE EAT LASERS, SECTOIDS TO wipe out the aliens, you'll engage in many brief, average flight missions. There are more dull dogfights than base attacks. PERTE FASES THE STRATEGIC HUD You'll spend a fair amount of time in X-COM INTERCEPTOR monitoring UFO activity and managing your bases and ships from this screen. A MURKY BLEND The latest X-COM game blends equal parts of strategy and first-person space combat. But it's a mix that's not too successful. COMPUTER GAMING **** WORLD section because it's billed as a space sim with X-COM strategy elements. That's a pretty fair assessment of the game. But is it a good space sim? Not really. In fact, the best part of this game is the classic X-COM strategic gameplay. APPEAL: For X COM fans who COM don't mind fre quent interruptions for space combat. PROS: Decent strategy gameplay. CONS: Repetitive and boring missions, strategy gets in the way if you want to flyflying gets in the way if you want to play strategically: 3D acceleration barely improves graphics. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 166 or P-133 with 3D accelerator, Win 95, 16MB RAM. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial cable (2 players), LAN (up to 8 players): 1 CD per player. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx, Direct3D. Price: $49.95 Publisher: MicroProse Alameda, CA (800) 695-4263 by Elliott Chin here are few strategy games more respected or well-remembered than XCOM: UFO DEFENSE, a DEFENSE, a smart strategy game with global strategic gameplay and tactical squad-based combat. It was an addictive combination that earned it CGW's Game of the Year Award in 1995. Since then, three additional X-COM games have come on the scene: X-COM TERROR FROM THE DEEP, X-COM APOCALYPSE, and X-COM INTERCEPTOR. Of all these, the least satisfying is INTERCEPTOR. True, none of the successive XCOMs has been able to match UFO DEFENSE, but at least the other games knew what they were trying to do. X-COM INTERCEPTOR tries to be two games at once, and succeeds at neither. We're reviewing INTERCEPTOR in the simulations The Belly of the Beast INTERCEPTOR takes place between TERROR FROM THE DEEP and APOCALYPSE (a good move on MicroProse's part because the APOCALYPSE storyline was definitely lacking). After stabilizing the situation on Earth, X-COM has taken the fight into deep space and the heart of alien territory. As the XCOM commander, you start the game with a single base randomly placed on the map. At this stage, with only three starting fighters and limited technology, you can realistically defend only a small area of space. Your ultimate goal, though, is to take over this sector of space and eradicate the alien stronghold. You'll need to expand your reach by building more bases, and then beef up your fleet by researching better technology and buying more interceptors and weapons. To do that, of course, you need money Accompanying the X-COM forces into the deepest reaches of space are rich mining corporations. If you've played other X-COMs you know the drill. These corporations pay out \"protection money.\" if you defend them against UFOs, they'll graciously fill your coffers. If you fail to protect them, these corporations will either get stingy or shut down business, depriving you of their money. Protecting these corporate outposts is vital because they're your only real source of ONLINE www.microprose.com For help with this game and more check out www.gameguides.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 241 "


"RANGER TEAM BRAVO! Look for «Spec Ops Ranger Team Bravo,\" the add-on pack with MULTI-PLAYER NETWORK COMBAT capabilities and 3 NEW MISSIONS. \"Spec Ops: Ranger Team Bravo\" commences operations this October! RANGERS NEVER GO IT ALONE JOIN THE RANGERS SEE THE WORLD A second Ranger goes where you go, watching your back, following your commands and trusting you with his life. SpecOps: Rangers Lead the Way takes you from snowy Korean forests to steamy South American jungles. RANGERS ALWAYS SWEAT THE DETAILS From uniforms and Yehicles to the foreign languages spoken by eemy soldiers, everything is authentic. Like the U.S. Army Rangers. SpecOps: Rangers Lead the way isn't for lightweights. It's intensely real, with motion-capture technology. photorealistic textures, stunning outdoor 30 environments and actual ambient and weapons sounds. Your missions range from blowing up SCUD bases in North Korea to rescuing hostages in Afghanistan. You might even receive a medal. But that's not why you signed up. You joined to uphold the honor of the Rangers and your country. So let's go, soldier. Your country needs you. "


"AMERICA AIN'T GET TO BE THE Cipcord most powerful nation on earth Robile BY ASKING NICELY. www.ripcordgames.com Highly skilled and expertly trained, The U.S. Army Rangers are the most revered and feared fighting unit in the world. 1998 Ripcord Games reserved. Distributed by Panasonic For ordering information please call 888)707-5887 of Zombie. Al other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. All rights 1998 Zomble Specops: Rangers Lead the Way is a trademark Now you can put it all on the line and be one of them. SPEC OPS Rangers Lead the way Your COUNTRY. Your HONOR. Your TURN. Ginta #1095 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  X-COM INTERCEPTOR LATIILONZSPACE income for running the expensive X-COM operation. As you expand by building more bases, you'll be able to cover more area. As your reach grows, more companies will pop up and establish outposts under your umbrella. Laser CO X-Winder Missilo: 3 ALIEN SAUCERI Sectoid DISABLED FLYING SAUCERS The graphics in INTERCEPTOR aren't bad, but even with 3D acceleration they don't match the visual quality of other space sims. THE LURE OF TECHNOLOGY As in other X-COM games, you'll need to research new alien technology to defeat the alien menace. The Wheat and the Chaff INTERCEPTOR is divided into two styles of gameplay. The first one to greet you when you start the game is the strategy portion. The main galaxy screen shows your currently selected region of space and menus for accessing your bases, ships, research, and equipment. At the Bases screen you'll build new bases, add modules to your existing bases, view the interceptors and equipment at the currently selected base, or call up status reports on your bases. Each base can support several modules such as hangars, crew housing, download modules for downloading new technology, pilot training modules, and defensive laser turrets. Your initial base and each subsequent base you build-starts with only the bare minimum of modules, so you'll need to build more as you find the cash. In the Research screen, you'll engage in an X-COM hallmark: researching alien technology. Every time you engage alien ships in the space-sim portion of the game, you'll scrounge some new alien technology from the debris. Once you return to base with these new technologies, they become available for research. While you might have that new alien plasma cannon in your cargo hold, you won't be able to use it until your scientists tell you how it works. INTERCEPTOR handles research a bit differently from other X-COM games. Instead of employing your own labs and scientists, you send captured technology back to Earth, where scientists do the dirty work for you. It's then a simple matter of downloading the research. The more advanced the technology, the longer the download. Of course, you can speed things up by building more download modules at your base. Each base can download a different technology, so you can download multiple technologies at a time. Research is important not only for weapons and ship advancements, but also for deciphering alien messages. The Ships screen is one you won't visit often in the beginning of the game. But once you acquire more technology, you'll come here to swap out old components from your interceptors and put in new equipment. You'll also assign and train pilots from this screen. This is one area in which the game isn't clear. The manual (which is barely adequate) says that pilots improve as they stay in training, but there isn't enough onscreen feedback to tell you how the pilot training is progressing. Still, at the rate the aliens pop up to harass you, you won't have much time to spend on excessive training, anyway. One screen in which you'll spend a lot more time is Equipment, where you purchase your interceptors, weapons, and ship components, such as cloaks, ECM, and targeting systems. Where's the Space Sim? By now, if you're a strategy fan, you're probably into the aforementioned features, but if you are a space-sim fan, you may think that all this strategy just gets in the way of what you want: space combat. In previous X-COMs, once you encountered the aliens, you'd switch to tactical squad combat; in INTERCEPTOR, you jump into sim mode. The game clock can progress at any of six speeds (5 seconds, 1 minute, 5 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, or 24 hours). I usually set it to 24 hours and let the UFO encoun ters rack up. Once you get a warning of an alien presence, you can launch a mission to interceptor just ignore it. When you choose to intercept, you select the number of ships you want to send out (up to a maximum of five) from any bases in the vicinity. These encounters occur with plenty of frequency, so if combat is what you want, combat is what you'll get. But be careful what you wish for, because the space combat is boring. Each mission is pretty much the same. You engage in dogfights with three to six UFOs—ad nauseum. Sometimes there might be a tug ora probe, but for the most part, it's the same thing over and over again. Even worse than the repetitive missions are the wingman's taunts, which get old fast. While space combat occurs frequently, it's by far the most boring part of the game. I found myself having the most fun when I was building and researching. And every time I set the game clock to 24 hours to accelerate my building and research, I was always crossing my fingers that I wouldn't get an encounter. so, MicroProse has succeeded in creating a strategy/space-combat hybrid, but both types of gameplay suffer for it. The strategic gameplay isn't as engaging as in previous XCOMs, and if you are playing the game for the strategy, you have to contend with numerous interruptions in the form of the space combat. The best feature this game could have had is an automatic resolution for combat so that if you didn't want to fly a mission, you could just tell the computer to resolve the fight instantly and let you get back to the fun part. The space combat isn't terrible, but it just can't compare to X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER, WING COMMANDER PROPHECY, or DESCENT: FREESPACE. Only the end mission, which takes you into the heart of the aliens' stronghold, is memorable. Graphically, the space-combat portions also suffer in comparison to those other games. Even when it was running with 3D acceleration, 1 didn't see an appreciable increase in visual quality. INTERCEPTOR does have multiplayer support, but the game falls down even there, offering only deathmatch between interceptors. Why can't we fly alien UFOs in a deathmatch? Sadly, the space simulation turns out to be the least successful portion of the game. If you want to see an overall enjoyable, balanced X-COM design, better to unearth a copy of UFO DEFENSE. CGW 244 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ONE UNIVERSE JKINUS TWO "


"MACHINE VS. MACHINE. 2829. Coming this fall. A whole new universe of 3D combat sim. What OGR.com calls\"...the frontrunner in the coming industrywide mech war...\" Hostilities break out on Mars and Venus. The emperor at last unleashes, the Imperial fleet to deal with the rebellions, The Cybrids see their opportunity and launch a massive invasion armada, bypassing Titan. The Starsiege begins. STARS MORE THAN 45 SINGLEPLAYER MISSIONS ON 7 PLANETARY LANDSCAPES UNPRECEDENTED MULTIPLAY — CAPTURE THE FLAG, DEATHMATCH, TEAM COOPERATIVE, AND OBJECTIVE MISSION SCENARIOS "


"MORE THAN 25 CUSTOMIZABLE VEHICLES INCLUDING TANKS AND HERCS MORE THAN 40 FUTURISTIC WEAPONS TO CHOOSE FROM 3D-ACCELERATED GRAPHICS: OPEN GL AND FULL SUPPORT FOR ALL 3DFX CARDS SIEGE ACTUAL UNRETOUCHED SCREENSHOTS INTERACTIVE 3D MISSION EDITOR FOR ADVANCED PLAYERS NEW TERRAIN ENGINE WITH UNMATCHED VISIBLE DISTANCE PLAY THE FREE TECHNOLOGY RELEASE NOW! WWW.STARSIEGE.COM FULLY-INTEGRATED INDOOR AND OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS Dynamix A SIERRA COMPANY Go to #174 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 1988 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. and TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. "


"TRUE TERRAIN LANDSCAPES. YES. VIRGINIA. THERE'S A SINFULLY REAL WORLD OUT THERE. EVEN WEATHER! NO DO MULTIPLAYER FOCUS. THE FIRST 3D SHOOTER DESIGNED FROM THE BOTTOM UP TO MAXIMIZE FULL-SQUAD, TOTAL-IMMERSION MULTIWARRIOR GAMING. STARSIEGE CHE BOSS LE2 DEDICATED COMMANDER. ONE LEADER PER TRIBE, SCOPING THE NASTIES, DEPLOYING THE TROOPS, CALLING THE SHOTS LIKE A TRUE COMMANDER AND CONQUERER. ZOOM SCOPE. TO FAR TO SHOOT? ZOOM IN FOR THE EXTREME CLOSE-UP. 1988 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved and TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc "


"10TION CAPTURE ANIMATION. KELETAL ANIMATION? NO. FLUID, FULLMOTION BODY MOVEMENTS? YEP. JET PACKS? WHY TRUDGE WHEN YOU CAN FLY OR TRANSPORT BUDDIES IN SCOUT FLYERS AND ARMORED PERSONNEL CARRIERS. IBES ACTUAL UNRETOUCHED SCREENSHOTS MAN VS. MAN. 3940. Coming this fall. The ultimate in first-person squad warfare. PC Gamer says \"... Tribes seems set to conquer all. A revolutionary first-person shooter with just enough single-player missions to get your boots wet then it's all teamwork. Because no man is an island. Dynamix A AIERRA COMPANY Go to #178 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PLAY THE FREE TECHNOLOGY RELEASE NOWI WWW.STARSIEGE.COM "


"REVIEW  CASTROL HONDA SUPERBIKE WORLD CHAMPIONS SPORTS Lean Into It SUPERBIKE Is the First Ever Realistic Motorcycle Racer and It's Good LAD 2/3 Snapon By Gordon Goble hat would a PC bike racing game be without flying fists and chains, implausibly monstrous jumps, and physics that don't make you feel like you're either a) on rails or b) in a zero-gravity environment? Why, it'd be CASTROL HONDA SUPERBIKE WORLD CHAMPIONS, the first-ever quality computerized attempt at simulated real-world motorcycle racing. And a tasty little morsel it is. Designed by England's Intense Entertainment Interactive (POWER F1), SUPERBIKE is a speed-soaked look at bike racing's World 38 2365 COMPUTER WORLD * * * ** She's a Looker 0:04.7 1:54.8 Visually, SUPERBIKE rules. From 1:54.8 your first-person perspective, you'll soak up incredible 3D-accelerated --graphics that bring to mind such recent racing beauties as Ubisoft's F1 RACING SIMULATION. Awesome lighting and shadow effects, transparent fog, tire marks, and riders who move independently upon their mounts add even more oomph to the extremely high resolutions on display. The replay in particular, utilizing fixed and BEHIND. R PANCHI. 1.55 mobile camera positions, resembles a television broadcast. HOW LOW CAN YOU GO? Two unique approaches to the same Audio, meanwhile, consists of corner-guess who had to back off? some truly lovely engine, tranny, Championship level, essentially the an amalgamation of technical and tire sounds from your own equivalent of auto racing's Formula \"thru-the-street\" circuit, GP road bike, though your opponents emit 1. From the saddle of the machine course, and high-speed oval; and just an ad-hoc collection of roars that won the 1997 World Chamall demand total concentration and and whines. This means it's tough pionship the 190-MPH, 160-HP snappy hand-eye coordination. to tell if the immediate competition Honda RVF-RC45—you're asked to Lean too far into a turn and you'll is well behind you or right frigging negotiate the 10 tracks that make find yourself in a wheels-first slide there, a situation compounded by up the game's virtual season.\" to ignominy. There's just one catch: It's really, As for the bikes, let's really hard. just say that they are almost inordinately fast Not Easy Rider when you get them up As a matter of fact, at the high to speed, slowed only est difficulty levels, you're gonna should you thrash the find it nearly impossible to win a thing through undue race, never mind an entire champicare and attention, onship. Fortunately, SUPERBIKE smack an obstacle, or comes with difficulty settings more come in contact with appropriate for us mere mortals, a TRIPLE THE FUN Amid the lovely tropical one of the none-toovegetation and amazing lighting effects, bevy of rookie driving aids (braking evasive Al opponents. three riders vie for sixth place. assistance, best racing line, and the They're less nimble like), unlimited practice opportuni t han expected from a dead stop or the lack of rear-view mirrors. ties, a setup shop, and a consistent at anything less than 50 MPH, with Granted, they don't have rear and impressive driving model-all poor acceleration off the mark and views in the real world, but this is of which conspire to keep interest a big looping turning radius. a game, and I'd have preferred mirhigh, even for newcomers. In the garage, the game lets you rors to the temporary yet disorientThe game doesn't, however, adjust tire compounds and overall ing full-screen reverse perspective. equip you with better reflexes, and individual gear settings, each I found myself lamenting the something you'll need in abun of which has an appreciable and absence of a restart key, opponents dance if you wish to be at all suc believable impact on the track. You who crash, and a victory celebracessful. Pieced together from digican save only two bike settings per tion worthy of the accomplishtally re-created footage of real track at a time, meaning you may m ent. Nevertheless, SUPERBIKE is a tracks (except for Honda's test have to break out the note paper strong first entry in this daredevil track, Motegi, which appears in its should you want to create setups sport-one worthy of close examientirety), SUPERBIKE's courses are for various distances or lap records. nation by race fans. CGW APPEAL: Speed freaks, simulation and arcade racers, SUPERBIKE and anyone who's been drooling over the prospect of a semirealistic motorcycle racing game. PROS: TV-quality graphics; dynamic tracks; a strong sense of being on just two wheels, the first true motorcycle racing sim. CONS: Most courses are a bit too technical for bikes designed with high speeds and fast corners in mind; opponent engine sounds not indicative of their positioning, no race restart key and incredibly tough upper difficulty levels. DIFFICULTY: Hard. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90 with 3D card or Pentium 133 without, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 30MB hard-drive space, DirectX 5-supported SVGA video and sound cards, 4x CD-ROM drive. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN, modem (2 players): 1 CD per player. PRICE: $49.95 PUBLISHER: Intense Entertainment Interactive Towson, MD (888) 240-6172 www.intense-games.com 250 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"TM V BASEBALL 0007 NEXT GENERATION BASEBALL CORRECT! Congratulations, the answer is False. You obviously know your baseball and are exactly the kind of fan we made VR Baseball 2000 for. Complete in-game experience with heckling fans, PA announcer and players talking smack to one another. Here's the game baseball fans always wanted.  Powered by Shiny Entertainments exclusive \"Messiah technology.  Near photo-realistic detail. See muscles flex and jersey's stretch using player models with up to 3,000 polygons. The most current rosters and statistics for the 1999 season and the ability to download new stats so that you have the most current baseball game. First game out for the 1999 season. varme or for the 1990 season T S ROONIES Check it out at: www.vrsports.com Available Summer of 1998 Loaded with stats and simulation features. Everything a baseball purist wants. RATING PENDING Designed for R 0 1 1 RP 1998 Interplay Productions. VR Sports, VR Sports logo, VR Baseball and You Gotta Have Game are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Major League Baseball trademarks and copyrights are used with permission of Major League Baseball Properties, Inc. O MLBPA Official Licensee Major League Baseball Players Association. Windows and the Windows 95 logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation SPORTS Microsoft Windows'95 www.vrsports.com www.majorleaguebaseball.com www.bigleaguers.com Go to #164 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D 1998 EDITION SPORT Billy Ball MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D Doesn't Quite Get Out of the Park 3 By Scott May icrosoft's active interest with the coin-op industry appears to be taking shape at home, not at the arcades. Judged only by appearance and performance, MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D is, without doubt, the fastest, best-looking arcade baseball game that's available for the home computer. Like Interplay's recent VR BASEBALL, Microsoft's version of hardball was designed solely for 3D-hardware-accelerated machines. Featuring graphics and camera techniques that mimic real life, BASEBALL 3D is geared primarily for the action crowd those who get a bigger kick out of being on the field than in the front office. However, the game is not completely devoid of depth, as even og OUTTA HERE! Griffey whacks another one out of the park in MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D, probably the best arcade baseball game in this very thin year. What struck me as most impressive, however, were the little touches, such as the hesitant half-step infielders take before throwing the ball. Or the subtle routine of new batters-tapping the plate, adjusting their grip, and so on. It all adds up to a very realistic experience, made even more lifelike by the game's consistently smooth frame rate. From some angles, especially during instant replays, you'll swear you're watching a televised game, I ran the game on a Pentium 233MMX machine with 64MB RAM, using a 12MB Diamond Monster 3D II (Voodoo2) card. Believe it or not, this is one of those rare games that almost runs too fast on a PC beyond the recommended system (a P166). On offense, speed is great; on defense, it can spell trouble. Manual fielding is incredibly fast, hampered further by the odd angles provided by the game's automatic camera system. On a typical hit to the deep outfield, the view might change six times before the play ends. Sure, the transitions are razor-sharp, but it's easy to lose your bearings, not to mention a few easy outs, as the camera moves and spins. Very MTV, but not very practical. COMPUTER disembodied face of your favorite baseball star stretched like some rubber skin onto the angular torso of a computerized character. Digital art has entered a truly bizarre new realm: synthetic, genetic sculpting Scary stuff. Creepiness aside, player graphics and animation are both cutting edge. The developers, WizBang, claim to have used 500 motioncaptured moves to create the incredibly lifelike animation, from leaping catches to base sliding. GAMING stat hounds might enjoy the game's separate General Manager application (see sidebar). Designed for one or two players, the game offers three modes of play: single game, season play. or playoffs. Microsoft secured the necessary licenses to include all MLB players, teams, and ballparks using lineups and stats from the 1997 season. A standard set of options lets you select the number of innings played, designated hitters, weather, and difficulty level (rookie, veteran, or all-star). Unlike most arcade-flavored baseball games, there's no sideline diversions like Home Run Derby. There's not even a practice mode. WORLD **** APPEAL: Arcade style-baseball fans. PROS: Drop-dead 3D graphics; exceptionally fast and Basebolo fluid animation; nice stand-alone general manager app CONS: No multiplayer options, nonassisted fielding is a nightmare; annoy. ing automatic view camera; shallow Al. DIFFICULTY: Easy REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, Windows 95/98, 16MB RAM, 30MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, 2MB 3Daccelerated video card, 16-bit sound card, 28.8Kbps modem. 3D SUPPORT: Direct 3D. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: To be announced. Price: 554.95 Publisher: Microsoft Corporation Redmond, WA (425) 882-8080 Murderer's Row As we've come to expect from native 3D-accelerated games, the graphics in BASEBALL 3D are sensational without doubt the best yet created for PC baseball. On-screen characters are purely polygonal, texture mapped in some cases) with the digitized face of the actual MLB player. Where no specific likeness is available, a generic face fits the bill. It's wonderfully surreal, if not downright creepy, to see the FIELD OF NIGHTMARES With overly confusing camera work at play, manual fielding in MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D is dizzying and, at times, next to impossible. www.microsoft.com/games 252 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Special Advertising Section GEAR UP FOR TOP PERFORMANCE NORION DE INSTALL LITES W UNINS ORTON NOR RASHGUARD SERVICES NORTON CRASU NORTON SYMANTEC. "


"Special Advertising Section Norton System Works: The smartest way to keep your computer working Whether you're an experienced PC user or new to the world of computing, you need utilities. Your computer needs constant maintenance from optimizing your system to keeping your hard drive clean It needs protection against viruses and infections. And ways to safely remove programs and files you no longer want, prevent crashes and resolve conflicts. That's a lot of utilities. So many that they duplicate functions, sucking up system memory and precious space on your hard drive. Sometimes they even conflict with each other! Of course, computers ought to function well these days. But since they sometimes don't, you need a single, comprehensive solution that will keep your computer working. A solution that's affordable. A solution that's easy to use. That solution is Norton System Works. Because it has the very best and most current version of everything you need, Norton SystemWorks is the smartest way to keep your computer working. And Norton System Works is Windows 95 and Windows 98 compatible. What makes Norton System Works the best? Norton Utilities the #1 problem-solving software for over 15 years and the industry leader in detecting, repairing and preventing major and minor computer problems. Offering unrivaled power and control, it optimizes your computer to run at peak efficiency, detecting Windows problems in the background and solving them with intelligent repair capability Norton AntiVirus the #1 anti-virus program in the U.S. and in the world, recommended by users more frequently than any other product of its kind. It updates itself automatically and works in the background to eliminate today's and tomorrow's viruses, no matter where they come from. Norton Uninstall\" the safest way to remove programs and files you no longer need. It automatically cleans up your hard drive every time you start your PC and it maintains your custom settings and preferences when you copy or move programs. Norton CrashGuardautomatic protection against PC crashes and screen freezes SYMANTEC. Ox NORTON SystemWorks Norton AntiVirus NORTON Utilities NORTON AntiVirus NORTON Uninstall The #1 anti-virus software in the world Automatically protects against all viruses Protects you against malicious ActiveX code and Java Applets Quarantines infected files before they damage your system Provides help with suspected infections directly from Symantec researchers Automatically updates virus definitions NORTON CrashGuard NORTON Web Services LiveUpdate Help About Five award-winning Norton products integrated to work as one. For more information visit us on the web at "


"Special Advertising Section SYMANTEC. NORTON SystemWorks Install NORTON System Works View Product Videos that's three times as effective as any other program. Using award-winning Norton technology to find and solve your disk problems, Norton System Works includes software that detects and solves software problems behind the scenes without slowing you down. Norton Web Services a web service that locates and helps you install any hardware drivers and software updates specific to your system. It detects the software and hardware installed on your computer, then uses the power of the Internet to check your needs against Symantec's up-to-the-minute database containing thousands of patches, drivers and application add-ons. Browse CD Exit Easy to install with the CD Start screen. Norton System Works is integrated Only Norton System Works offers you an award-winning, best-of-breed collection of utilities covering all the major utility categories and you can click it all into action from a single, integrated Norton SystemWorks screen. Because Norton System Works Norton System Works can is so tightly integrated, it's accommodate your needs. easy to install and easy to Norton SystemWorks can be launch. All the utilities included customized for the perfect in Norton System Works are fit between you and your designed to work compatibly computer. with each other and duplicate And if you're already using functionality has been elimi other Norton products, it's nated. Moving from one easy and affordable to move utility to another say, from up to Norton System Works. Norton AntiVirus to Norton Uninstall — is as simple as clicking a button on your Norton System Works screen. What's more, Norton is an excellent value SystemWorks features like Just one purchase buys CD Start and Launch Pad you all the functionality you make it exceptionally easy need for system problemto use. solving and optimization, virus protection, maintenance and crash protection. Norton System Works Nothing beats Norton runs the way you SystemWorks. It's a convenient, want it to one-box solution with all of Whether you want it to the most current and effective work automatically in the PC utilities. background or you want to Norton System Works. The customize it to adapt to smartest way to keep your your level of expertise, computer working. Just one purchase buys you all the functionality you need for system problemsolving and optimization, virus protection, maintenance and crash protection. www.symantec.com/promos/nsw_ads SYMANTEC. "


"SYMANTEC os NORTON NORTON SystemWorks SystemWorks The smartest way to keep your computer working. Cat Complete varios Antes Us Uit De on Cras Card  NONTON Web Service Utilities NORTON AntiVirus NORTON Uninstall NORTON CrashGuard NORTON Web Services One Suite Way to Gear Up for Top Performance. Introducing Norton System Works. Complete versions of all the latest award-winning utilities for Windows 95 and Windows 98 from Symantec Corporation now available for the first time ever in a single integrated suite. Geared to work together, they eliminate the confusion of choosing from all the different utilities on the shelf. Just shift up to Norton SystemWorks and you have everything you need. The smartest way to keep your computer working. Norton SystemWorks protects, maintains, fixes and fine-tunes your system. Easily customized, you can choose whether you want Norton SystemWorks to run automatically in the background, or personalize it to suit the way you prefer to manage and maintain your system. And not only is Norton System Works easy to use, it's very easy to install. Just click on one CD and five utilities install automatically, immediately working together to rid your system of viruses and software problems. So you can use your computer the way you want. An incredible value. Over $200 worth of software for just $99.95* More than 30 million customers have relied on Norton to protect their computers. And at this price, shouldn't you? Gear up for top performance. Go to your local reseller to get five award-winning utilities for one amazing price just $99.95! *Manufacturer's suggested retail price. SYMANTEC) Symanteo, the Symantec logo. Norton AntiVirus, and Norton Utilities are registered U.S. trademarks of Symantec Corporation Norton Norton Uninstall Norton Crash Guard, and Norton Web Services are trademarks of Symantec Corporation Windows, and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All other brand names or trademarks are the property of their respective owners. O 1998 Symantec Corporation. All rights reserved. "


"SPORTS NL Deng Rok: 2 Pan Canto NL Over Rank 1 Dund Record 0.0 Hone Lot Angelo * C   Name Pau AIMARIA Rogs Cadero OF B NDX OF R 2000 Won GO 22 2314 Todd Hold OF L 207 31 Thomas Howard OF L 247 22 Enc Kang 18 R 236 31 104 Paul Konado 10 R Rad Mondes OF R Plichen DWUS FRA Im Brude Daren Dreilor Mak Guthre R ) 22 non Martinez R10 50 Hadna Nomo R 14 12 0 Antora Owne R 0219 Tel.ge Loker Burl 3D GENERAL MANAGER     he developers of BASEBALL 3D Dam have designed one outstanding game feature that should be NL Pictug Park 2 included in all sports games: General Manager, a stand-alone application Large Nions Law Wed that runs independently from the game program. By not packaging it inside the game itself, the designers have kept 1 Base Puring 5 ] the game lean and mean, while allowPAS B 1 ing would-be managers to conduct Loty plitto Sub 4 1 front-office duties behind the scenes. Open Saw The General Manager loads entirely from your hard drive, so there's no need to stance, batting grip, and facial appearance, have the game CD handy. The main screen The General Manager also lets you add displays both team and individual player stats players from a list of free agents, conduct and ratings, based on either the 1997 MLB trades, change starting lineups, and adjust season or current BASEBALL 3D season. Here your team's propensity for bunts, steals, subyou can modify player stats and attributes, stitutes, and innings played before pulling such as height, weight, position, endurance, your starting pitcher. Presumably, Microsoft power, aim, and accuracy. You can even tweak has the ability to make team and player the player model—as he appears in digital updates available, to be plugged into the form-regarding physical build, batting General Manager program. game site, although none was available at the time of this writing. Let's hope so, because this game's computer Al runs on the shallow side. Here's another, unexpected gripe. Joystick controls are set up in the traditional diamond pattern, looking toward the outfield: press down to throw home, right for first, up for second, and left for third. Unfortunately, with today's zoom-bang 3D graphics, our play perspective is now free to roam the field from any angle. Looks great, but unfortunately, the joystick controls remain fixed. So from an outfielder's perspective, throwing the ball to what visually feels like second base (down) will actually send it sailing home. Admittedly, it might be tricky to swap joystick coordinates in a blink of an eye, but as you can see, all this gee-whiz camera movement has its downside. and MIP mapping, as well as a variety of sound off/on switches. Give Microsoft and WizBang credit--they've done a remarkable job delivering both killer g raphics and nimble performance. Whether you've got a fast machine or one just barely cranking along, the game provides several options to help you speed up or slow down gameplay. Depending on your monitor and video card, you can change screen resolutions and refresh ratesower (512x384) for slowpokes, and higher (1024x768) for speed demons. Other 3D graphic options can be toggled or adjusted, including three levels of player detail, shadows, triple buffering, Pitchout Despite having spent an extra year in development, the game has its share of audio-visual quirks. Several times while I was playing, the crowd noise appeared to be stuck in an endless loopas luck JOSE, CAN'T YOU SEE? Jose Canseco shows what getting old is all about, as the former superstar whiffs yet another one. would have it, during a round of loud, ecstatic cheering—that wouldn't stop until the inning was over. That's annoying. I also made the mistake of changing the offensive batting view, from umpire (default) to catcher. Unfortunately, despite my repeated tries, the game refused to let me change it back, deciding on its own to use the skybox view instead. I had to quit and restart the game to swat this little bug. The game can be played using the keyboard, gamepad, or joystick (analog or digital). Just for fun (read: gimmick) the game also supports force-feedback joysticks. plugged in a CH Force FX to get a feel for the game. The feedback feature works as advertised, producing a sharp little whack when bat meets ball. Or a painful thud when the base runner slides into home plate and into the catcher. New force-feedback slogan: Feel the shame. The biggest drag is that, despite optimistic efforts from Microsoft, BASEBALL 3D failed to ship with multiplayer mode in place. As is, only two players can compete at the same PC. Reportedly, Microsoft will post a multiplayer patch on its Ball physics are something of a mixed bag. Though pitches and hits appear true to life, the accelerated nature of the game causes outfield balls to rocket outward, then quickly drop, as if the forces of gravity increase the further you get from home plate. Given the slow response and bass-ackward nature of fielding, it's mighty disconcerting. Batting .500 The problems with MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D can't be ignored or dismissed. But then again, neither can its considerable strengths. If you're dying for a high-flash baseball title that puts your 3D card through its paces, this is the game to get in this disappointing baseball season. CGW 89 mph CLONE BALL Is it Omar Vizquel or some kind of freak genetic mutation? The game's 3D graphics are awesome, but someone needs to figure out a way to make the faces less creepy. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 257 "


"Em LUCKY FOR YOU OURS COMES WITH A RESET BUTTON "


"TEAM Los FINALLY. A REMOTE CONTROL CAR NOT EVEN YOUR BROTHER CAN BREAK. COMPLETE WITH 16 REMOTE CONTROL CARS AND 15 PULSE-POUNDING TRACKS, THIS GAME LETS YOU DODGE, WEAVE. AND SOAA THROUGH RICH TROPICAL JUNGLES. SUN-DRENCHED BEACHES, AND MURKY SWAMPS. EVEN IF YOU DON'T FEEL LIKE RACING, THERE ARE DOZENS OF HIDDEN PATHS AND SECRET FEATURES FOR YOU TO EXPLORE. ALONE. WITH A FRIEND. OR AGAINST THE COMPUTER. THIS GAME WILL SEND YOU THROUGH DOZENS OF COURSES -NOT BATTERIES. AVAILABLE ON WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM AND PLAYSTATION GAME CONSOLE EVERYONE 01998 Gremlin Interactive Ltd. Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive Ltd. All Rights Reserved.  Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation, Inc. All Rights Reserved. \"Twentieth Century Fox,\" \"Fox and their associated logos are the property of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. PlayStation and PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc, ESS ESRB  "


"REVIEW MICROSOFT GOLF 1998 EDITION SPORTS Swing Time! Microsoft Steps Out of LINKS Shadow With a Decent New Golf Game etaull look as if they were cut-and-pasted onto the screen. Not here. by Scott A. May ell-presented, but inherently uninspired, the MICROSOFT GOLF series has never provided much cause for celebration. Licensed from Access Software, versions 1-3 were essentially LINKS LITE, sporting crippled renditions of that title's now-moldy game engine. But times change, and so has Microsoft's franchise. The latest entry, 1998 EDITION, shows that MICROSOFT GOLF is worthy to step out on its own. Completely redesigned from the ground up by Friendly Software, MICROSOFT GOLF 1998 retains the polished, user-friendly feel of previous editions, but little else. Thank COMPUTER SWING YOUR WAY MICROSOFT GOLF 1998 features four unique ways to hit the ball, including the all-new Natural Swing, which uses mouse movement to simulate tactile club control. WORLD Long Range One of the first new options you'll see is pin placement, an exciting feature that few other games offer. This option lets you choose from 10 variations of pin (hole) placement, including moderate, challenging, hard, or random. In a nutshell, changing the pin location on the green has a tremendous effect on approach and putting strategies. Almost as good as getting a free set of new courses, this option alone increases the game's long-term playability tenfold. By far the most impressive new options, however, are in the area of player swing control. Not content with just a few variations, GOLF 1998 gives us four--the most of any golf game. The first two are old school twitch and click: 2or 3click swing meters. The third style, Natural Swing, is an exciting departure from tradition, using mouse movement to simulate the backswing and follow-through of a real club swing. Best of all, this feature lets you move the mouse the way you want vertically, horizontally, or even diagonally. Natural Swing requires practice to master; but if you take the time, it provides the most tactile control I've felt in a golf sim. The fourth method of swing control is a total departure. Called the Sim Swing, this method requires no player interaction at all. Instead, the computer handles the swing, based on attributes you assign in the pregame setup. To my knowledge, this managerial approach has never before been applied to a golf sim. Overall, designer Friendly Software's total revamping of MICROSOFT GOLF keeps the series alive and vital in this increasingly competitive genre. CGW GOLE 1998 goodness. Veteran fans of the available to previous versions, series will be surprised both by the including a sizeable chunk of the game's new look and by its play LINKS course library and control options. Meanwhile, Five game styles include Stroke, those who shunned the early ver Match, Skins, Scramble, and Bingo sions for its lack of depth finally Bango Bongo. Up to four players have reason to take another look. can compete, using any combination of human/computer control Of Course including remote multiplayer Three 18-hole courses ship with modes via modem, LAN, or Microthe game: The Links and Teeth of soft's Internet Gaming Zone. The the Dog at Casa de Campo in the only missing option is the ability to Dominican Republic; and Bay play against previously recorded Harbor Golf Club on the shores of games, which can be both chalLake Michigan. A bonus 9-hole lenging and instructional, when course, The Preserve 9 at Bay played against yourself or a friend. Harbor, completes the unique lineThe game's graphics are clean up. Unfortunately, the downside to and photorealistic, combined with Microsoft's new game engine is its an excellent physics model that inability to use the myriad courses incorporates terrain elevation and user-defined weather NEM ROUND effects. Despite the recent trend (backward) toward polygonal players, Friendly uses video captured golfer animations that are clean and smooth. Most remarkable is how the video golfers PIN HEAD MICROSOFT GOLF 1998's new blend seamlessly into variable pin placement dramatically the foreground. Many increases the challenge and strategies titles that use videoneeded for championship putting. captured animation APPEAL: Golf Microsoft nuts wary of just another version of LINKS LITE. PROS: Dynamic new engine; clean interface; deep customization; four swing options CONS: No printed manual; can't use courses from previous versions; superflu. ous commentary DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95/98/NT 4.0, 16MB RAM (24MB for NT), 55MB hard-drive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, SVGA graphics, 16-bit sound card, 28.8Kbps modem. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem (2 players): IPX or TCP/IP (2-4 players): 1 CD per player. DESIGNER: Friendly Software Price: $54.95 Publisher: Microsoft Redmond, WA (425) 882-8080 edit player www.microsoft.com/games 200 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Green Arnold Palmer's Bay Hill Club & Lodge St Andrews Links Old Course Links LS 1999 Edition Where Technology Meets Tradition The New Links LS '99 Edition features St Andrews Links Old Course, the birthplace of golf. . Now with 3 swing options  NEW real-time voice chat over the Internet  NEW mode of play editor  NEW speciality shots . NEW caddy book St Andrews Announcing the latest in the Links LS lineup-Links LS 1999 Edition. This NEW golf sim is packed with over 25 new and exciting features. Here are a few: St Andrews Links Old Course, Bay Hill Club & Lodge, Latrobe C.C. and Entrada ar Snow Canyon.  NEW Tournament Mode-play in front of crowds of onlookers  NEW 3D objects for more Entrada at Snow Canyon realistic play ACCESS LinksLS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED Links 1-800-800-4880 www.AccessSoftware.com 1999 Go to #079 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"In 1968, they changed the rules of Grand Prix racing to cut down on driver fatalities. GRAND PRIX LEGEND S Powered by PAPYRUS W W W.sierrasnaTIS.com 01998 Sierra On-Line Ina nnd designate trademarks ol or licensed to, Sierra On-Line, Ino, Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. Papyrus\" and the Papyrus logo are trademarks of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners and are used under permission. "


"AVERRA PET die suur Welcome to 1967. Pulling out of a power slide. The g-forces throwing you around the cockpit. You realize, you're sitting behind the truest 3D engine ever built. Racing the likes of Jack Brabham and Jim Clark. At Monza, Spa and Nurburgring. 1967 was a historic turning point in Formula One racing. Welcome to Grand Prix Legends Racing sims will never be the same. CHAWAON Go to #135 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW FOX SPORTS SOCCER '99 SPORTS Way, Way Off the Mark Fox Sports' Shot Doesn't Trouble the FIFA 98 Keeper WAZO by Joe Vallina t's gonna take a whole lotta soccer game to dethrone FIFA ROAD TO WORLD CUP 98, and FOX SPORTS SOCCER '99 doesn't even come close. Where to begin? The crappy graphics? The horrible announcing Al? The unrealistic player animations, perhaps? No, let's start with one of the most touted \"features\" in the game: the speeded-up gameplay. Faster Better Fox Sports has apparently de cided that realistic soccer action is boring. So, in the interest of pumping some life into the game, the SOCCER '99 designers have purposely speeded up the gameplay. Well, I hate to break it to them, but the people who are in the market for soccer games like soccer action just the way it is in real life, thank you very much. Whereas, when CALE OPERAZIL 1 BMN playing FIFA 98, I sometimes felt as if I were actually watching a match on TV; when playing SOCCER '99, 1 always felt as if were playing a bad PlayStation port of an even worse PlayStation soccer game. SOCCER '99's faster, unrealistic gameplay, weird camera angles; and lack of player control make the game incredibly frustrating to play. The faster action also makes it very difficult to mark the opposing side. The players move so fast that many times they run right past the opposing player or the ball. Amazingly, I found that the best FACT CHECK MUCH? Fox doesn't seem to know that Chile wears way to defend was to set the diffired, white, and blue uniforms, not yellow. culty level to amateur (in which you are assisted by the Al) and just Player control in SOCCER '99 is and avoid the defenders at the let go of the controller until the minimal. You know all those crazy same time. Ugh. opposing offensive player comes moves you can do with different close enough that your Al player button combos in FIFA 98? Forget But Wait, There's More steals the ball. You have no control about them. Heck, SOCCER '99 Did I mention the fact that no as to which of your players you will doesn't even use all of the players' names are correct? At control at any given moment. gamepad buttons. Your control least let us edit the players to add Instead, you always control who options are limited to passes, slide the correct names ourselves! And ever is closest to the ball. This finds tackles, the one-two pass, shoot there is no excuse for not having you switching players right as you speed burst, and the catch-all \"one the correct team colors on the unigo in for a slide tackle. touch\" moves. The \"one-touch\" forms. What about the crashes or The problem is, if your previously moves are headers-on-goal, volleys, the fact that the play stops for a controlled man was going in the and the bicycle kick, of course, the second every time the announcer opposite direction of the man you computer decides when you can do wants to (ridiculously) call a ficnow control, by the time you've these, and it automatically chooses tional player's name? realized that the change has taken one for you when you press the The only semi-cool thing in the place, you've already run to the shoot button. Thanks a lot. No, whole game is the scenarios option wrong side of the pitch. really, Mr. Pentium, I'll just watch. that lets you play in certain situaAnd there's tions. For example: France 1, USA another annoy 0,20 minutes left, and the French ing control hor have a corner. Can you come back? ror: When you But even considering this one approach the bright point, I could go on for days goal and try to about how bad this game is when take a shot, you compared to FIFA 98, and some have to watch a may criticize me for the comparigolf-game-style son. But, here's the deal: FIFA 98 MALCOILDO power meter for has raised the bar in soccer PC PASENG KEY your shot. Of titles—and that bar is high, folks. WHO THE HELL ARE YOU? I don't know who course, the So unless you at least come close, this blocky-looking guy is just that he plays faster gameplay don't even bother. FOX SPORTS for Madrid. But wait...is it Atletico Madrid or makes it nearly SOCCER '99 isn't as realistic, cool, Real Madrid? Neither is realistically repre impossible for or least of all, fun as FIFA 98. And sented, so why bother? you to do this that means it's doomed. CGW COMPUTER WORLD GAMING ***** (RO SPORTS SOCCER APPEAL: Those who don't like realistic, fun soccer games PROS: Scenarios idea is kind of cool. CONS: Gameplay is too fast and unrealistic no player editing, bad camera angles; occasional crashes; jerky gameplay. Shall I go on? DIFFICULTY: Easy REQUIREMENTS: 120Mhz Pentium, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 87MB harddrive space, Windows 95-compatible graphics card, 4x CD-ROM. 3D SUPPORT: Direct3D, 3Dfx. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: IPX,TCP/IP, serial, modem, (2-8 players). Price: $59.95 Publisher: Fox Sports Interactive Sterling, CO (900) CALL4FOX www.foxsportsgames.com SSSTBO 264 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Racing In Your Blood? OFFICIALLY LICENSED Gentelmen, Start Your PC's Introducing the NASCAR SPRINT. The best value in its class from the world leader in computer racing wheels. ULINASCAR PAINT. Under $70 THRUSTMASTER MOTORSPORTS See our entire line of NASCAR racing wheels at www.thrustmaster.com (503) 615-3200 ThrustMaster and SPRINT by Thrustmaster are registered trademarks of Thrust Master, Inc. NASCAR and the NASCAR mark are registered trademarks of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Go to #102 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Immersive Gameplay! FREES TRACK WEMA AGAMA Gulag al Hpios Athens Golden Tee Gulden Team You'll Be Hooked! Now available at a store near you! INCREDIBLE 29 | TECHNOLOGIES AFFILIATE PARTNERSHIP Award Winning, Arcade Style Game Play A Wide Selection of Three 18 Hole Courses in Multiplayer Options a Variety of Environments Go to #114 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Ekonoha TrackSwing Technology: Natural Mouse Swing "


"REVIEW  MECHCOMMANDER One Small Step for MechKind Despite Flaws, MECHCOMMANDER Adds to BattleTech Universe STRATEGYZWAR by Loyd Case er uniform was soaked with perspiration as though she were in the overheated cockpit of the Mad Cat itself. The lumbering behemoth lurched and stumbled, its lasers melting through the tarmac like an oxyacetylene torch through PVC pipe. In frustration, she frantically ordered up support as her pilot ejected from the heavy Mech. \"It was easier doing it myself,\" she sighed, hoping for a miracle. MECHCOMMANDER offers a unique perspective in the BattleTech universe, a fictional world in which far-future chevaliers pilot 10-metertall walking tanks called BattleMechs. The BattleTech paper games are still hugely popular, as is the MECHWARRIOR series of BattleMech sims. MECHCOMMANDER is a real-time strategy game in which, as in the film Aliens, you monitor the progress of your platoon on video screens. In MECHCOMMANDER, you are both the eyes and the voice in the sky as you direct the actions of your 1-12 Mech units. The single-player game consists of 30 missions, grouped into five separate operations. The campaign focuses on liberating the planet Port Arthur from Clan occupation. Think of the Clans as a high-tech Mongol horde sweeping over a more civilized, but crumbling, society going through a dark age, and you'll have a good feel for the game's back-story: The mission briefing presents strategy genre. The lack of an inyou with a somewhat abstract mission save feature, however, is a map that has enough detail to give bigger problem, especially since so you a good idea of the lay of the many of the missions are timeland. It's here that you assign dependent. Deep into a mission, Mechs to different force groups. it's a real disincentive to try anyThese aren't the same as the lance thing different or new: If you screw units from the board gameup, it's back to the beginning. they're more flexible. You'll often The game, similarly, has no wayhave more force group slots than points, which would have added Mechs, so you can configure differimmensely to your tactical flexibilient groups for different tasks (a ty. You could set waypoints for a \"heavy hitter\" group coupled with force group to make a big pincer a \"fast mover\" group, for exammovement as the hammer to an ple). Then you launch into the mis anvil force you move up to distract sion, and it's there that the incon the enemy. In fact, the opening cutsistencies begin showing up. scene makes a big deal out of setting waypoints, making the omisThe Forlorn Hope sion all the more glaring. The first thing that you notice on the tactical board is the shroud, despite the fact that you had a map during the mission briefing. While found this a bit silly, it's hard to criticize the RED AND GREEN AND SCORCHED ALL OVER designers for This screen shows how the nicely sculpted kowtowing to trees, missile trails, bursts of gunfire, and use the conventions of terrain all showcase MECHCOMMANDER'S of the real-time terrific engine and graphics. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD **** 30 APPEAL: BattleTech fans and anyone looking for a different style of real-time COMMANDER strategy PROS: Unit management adds depth; multiple solutions for victory, good pacing; well-designed interface; fabulous Mech feel. CONS: Some missions are artificially difficult no in-game save; no waypoints. DIFFICULTY: Advanced. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, Windows 95, 16MB RAM (32MB for multiplayer), 150MB hard drive space, 2MB VRAM SVGA graphics, 4x CD-ROM, DirectX-compatible sound. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN, Internet (2-6 players each); Modem and serial (2 each); 1 CD per player. Price: $59.95 Publisher: MicroProse Alameda, CA (800) 695-4263 Into the Breach The opening cut-scene-one of the best I've seen in any game revs you up and sets the mood. Each operation opens with a video briefing from your CO. In the first mission, you have only three Mechs, but you do have a few components. The interface for modifying Mechs is pretty simple, and as you obtain more hardware throughout the game, it only gets more fun trying to figure out ideal loadouts for different Mechs. Some of the conventions of the paper game have been simplified. For example, MECHCOMMANDER abstracts heat generation, factoring it into the cycle time of the various weapons: So, you never have to deal with heat sinks, as you did in MECHWARRIOR 2 As you get more resource points for successful missions, you can spend them in the purchasing area on new Mechs, components, vehicles, and pilots. In the Mech Bay, you lock and load weapons and assign pilots. This is almost a subgame in itself. On the surface, resource points are a little silly in the context of a professional military unit, but it works pretty well. MOTOMOTO SEE PRESSURE TANKS See pressure tanks blow up. See enemy Mechs go down like bowling pins. www.mechcommander.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 267 "


"REVIEW  MECHCOMMANDER 32 FORT CROCIE DOR 10 Man M . O MAIN MENU BRIEFING/DEPLOYMENT PURCHASING D ECH BAY STRATEGY WAR SJAA meme TOCARBURAN PLATA I Homomo Tome GUESS I'LL TAKE THE SUBWAY As shown by blowing this critical bridge, proper use of artillery often makes the difference. I'M NOT ASKING FOR DIRECTIONS Study the mission briefing map carefully. You won't see it again. TAGALHESSALON SEE LOOP, ENDLESSLY Get used to this failure screen, because you're likely to see it often. THARACELERAS E STA 1997 MOMO DOCK OF THE MECHBAY Get instant repairs here no waiting. CHECK OUT THOSE SHINY, TWIN LASERS You can have a great time configuring your Mechs before you ever fire a missile in anger, and the process is a lot easier than in MECHWARRIOR 2. times—all without any clue as to where you should be. Easily the most frustrating mission was Operation 4, Mission 5. You have to keep several large forces of enemy Mechs from exiting the board. Of course, you're heavily outnumbered and the enemy comes at you from several different directions. And you're doing this in the dark. All but the most dedicated gamers would probably just throw up their hands in despair and give up. heavier weapons while Mechs with heavy autocannons keep it upclose-and-personal. Combat takes so long that you can actually maneuver-another advantage of a low unit-count. Moving a Mech to attack the rear of a busily engaged enemy was quite satisfying. It was also easy to vary orders by telling units to attack from the current position, or to change ranges. There's also an engaging, though limited, role-playing element in managing the pilots. The pilots do improve over time, but they can also be injured. Do you take that elite pilot who's down two damage points or do you give him a break and take along the healthy rookie? And losing a pilot is a real tragedy. Most missions allow more than one solution. For instance, I won the farm defense mission without a minelayer, an uncommon tactic. In fact, most of the game is fun and quite immersive, but that also made the occasional insanely difficult mission and other flaws stand out all the more. After playing MECHCOMMANDER through, you feel relieved, exhilarated, and exhausted, because of and despite all of the game's flaws. MECHCOMMANDER is a very good game that could have been a great one, but it's a welcome addition to the BattleTech universe nonetheless. MECHCOMMANDER II, anyone? CGW disposal, you must carefully husband your resources—you can't win by simply outbuilding your opponent. the game also rewards prudent tactics. Rushing in even if you know the map-is almost always a recipe for disaster. Since there were relatively few units, I was able to move them using bounding overwatch tactics to prevent marching willy-nilly into disaster. (You do have to be careful not to let overwatch distances get too great due to the limited weapons range.) The use of sensor probes is a clever touch, although there's never enough of them. Finally, when you get into combat, it's quite an adrenaline rush. The Mechs themselves behave relatively intelligently, so you see Mechs with long-range firepower moving back to engage with their There's also a lack of a strategic Al. The individual enemy units seem to have relatively good tactical-combat Al, but all the events in the mission seem to be triggerbased or preprogrammed. There's none of the unpredictability you get with, say, CLOSE COMBAT: A BRIDGE TOO FAR. Some of MECHCOMMANDER'S missions are incredibly difficult, throwing enemies at you from disparate directions or forcing you to be at certain locations at certain Honor and Glory All of these factors may make MECHCOMMANDER seem like an exercise in drudgery, but they actually offer a considerable amount of freshness. For example, there's none of the \"erect a base, build an army, and rush the enemy\" routine. Because of the limited units at your 268 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Mplayer is a registered trademark of Mpath Interactive, Inc. The Mplayer logo and mplayer.com are trademarks of Mpath Interactive, Inc. ERNET GAME FREE RECIES MPLAYIR.COM www. His movements are so realistic, the faster he runs, the harder he rams his head. [We said realistic, not bright.] Inf A new breed of real-time strategy gaming. 27,000 square miles of 3D alien landscape. A true day/night cycle. 27 species in total, head-ramming 3D. Single and multiplayer games but whichever you choose, you're always an alien. And humans are just something else for your trophy case. Dominant Species. Who rules your world? INTERNET GAMING ZONEM www.redstorm.com PLAY IT ON ZONE.COM Go to #274 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Red Stord xinle Internal Gaming Zone is either a ranistered trademark or trademark of Microco Comprar Ini Sinon nndlar olhar noun "


"REVIEW  CYBERSTORM 2 Split Personality STRATEGYZWAR CYBERSTORM 2 Isn't Fulfilling, Whether Real-time or Turn-Based VENICHE FACILITY Kuntos SYSTEMS Dh 200 0100 Shild st ) CARE 143184 COST OF 0100 by Tim Carter nother day, another half-baked sequel. Why. with the virtually unlimited array of potential game topics and game designs out there, do publishers keep return ing to the same old well-worn concepts? And whywhen they do revisit a concept don't they use their experience to at least make better games? HAROPOS WP SSGM  T Wespe som weapoli INTERIALS COST PC but that's never stopped computer game publishers before, has it? CYBERSTORM 2 also purports to offer a choice between real-time and turn-based play. Reality, as is so often the case, doesn't quite live up to this marketing. Instead, the game delivers a real-time engine with a few stop-action parameters that give the cursory illusion of a turn-based game. Besides, Interplay's MAX really did offer both turn-based and real-time strategy play a year ago (see our MAX 2 review elsewhere in this month's strategy section). The real-time play works as you'd expect, though it's pretty 000 DEVICECOM ECH Byd 20 162451 O ng CM TotaP NUTE pot modic D Newsro, MARTE W Pure ig Credits P 50.000 TACE MAIL-ORDER HERC Designing your mechs is more interesting than actually playing the game. Corporate Gaming In CYBERSTORM 2, you take control of the military forces of one of eight interstellar corporations. Using a limited number of powered fighting vehicles called HERCS (which translates roughly as \"Somebody Else Has the Copyright to 'Mechs\"), you must dominate a solar system, defeat your competitors, and capture the all-important jump gate. It's hardly original, COMPUTER IS IT REALTIME? Or turnbased? Actually, when you play the computer, it can be both at the same time! GAMING ***  WORLD APPEAL: Mech fanatics, maybe. PROS: Mech building and tac tical real-time combat are okay, CONS: Strategic aspects are dull; flawed turnbased component; no new ideas. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133,Win 95, 24MB RAM, 50MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 4x CD-ROM; supports Windows-compatible sound cards. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: IPX (2-8 players), modem, serial (1-2 each): supports won.net.; 1 CD per player. dull. If you elect for turn-based play, however, be prepared for things to get a little strange. You see, while you are moving your units turn by turn, the computer still moves and fires all of its units in realtime until all Al units have expended their movement and energy available for that turn. This isn't always a problem, but it is annoying to be playing a different game from your opponent. For example, one of my assignments from my corporate masters was to raid a defensive platform. The platform, unfortunately, didn't know that it was part of a turnbased game and fired continuously throughout my move as well as throughout its own. Also, you can \"outrun\" opportunity fire in turn-based combat, just as you would do during real-time particular enemy-and then go play, by ordering your units back as about the same old battles. the projectiles come in. It's also Tactical combat is more fun, possible to override opportunity although I can't help feeling that fire by moving within range and the odds in a single-player camthen quickly firing all of your paign are so stacked against the weapons, thus taking out the humans that many players will defender before it has a chance to quickly become frustrated. To win, finish firing. players must tailor their units to the environment (some weapons Where's the Beef, work better than others in some HERC? environments, and different types CYBERSTORM 2 is divided into a of locations offer more chance for strategic game of base manage shortor long-range combat). You ment, investment, and construc must also take advantage of tertion; and a tactical game in which rain, particularly when faced with your HERCs fight it out over vari superior forces. The trick is often to ous randomly generated battle lure your enemy into an ambush by fields. The strategic component of using cover to ensure that all of CYBERSTORM 2 is essentially static. your units take on your attackers You can upgrade your buildings piecemeal. Fortunately, the comand units and tweak your spendingputer is quite aggressive, and the on research. Yet nothing much real. Al will walk straight into prepared ly changes, and the entire system ambushes. calls for little or no creativity. All in all, CYBERSTORM 2 isn't an The one area where a little planawful game; it just doesn't offer ning could be fun is HERC design. anything that's new or different. Yet here, too, the wealth of options Unless you happen to suffer from simply doesn't translate into addicchronic mech addiction, I really tive or even enjoyable gameplay. can't see any reason to spend It's too easy to buy the best equipgood money or time on it. For an ment available occasionally cus alternative to this game, check out tomizing your units to fight in a our MECHCOMMANDER review in particular environment or against a this issue. CGW Price: $39.95 Publisher: Sierra Bellevue, WA (800) 757-7707 www.sierra.com 270 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Recreated for the new millennium the classic Dune Il returns ALL THE FAVORITE UNITS FROM THE ORIGINAL NEW STRATEGIES, SPECIAL EFFECTS, AND MUSIC OVER 40 MISSIONS AND FULL MOTION VIDEO BRIEFINGS. DUNE 2000 um DUNE 2000 LONG LIVO THE FIGHTERSI DUNE 2000 NEW HIGH COLOR GRAPHICS IN 8 AND 16 BIT. CHALLENGE YOUR FRIENDS TO MULTIPLAY. Available At Retailers Everywhere Or Call 1-800-874-4607 Westwood WWW.Westwood.com DUNE and O1998 Dino De Laurentiis Corporation Licensed by Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.  Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved Go to #249 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"CENTURION THINGS TO DO TODAY This fruit basket looks absolutely delicious! It's awfully nice of you to have me deliver it to your arch rival. I thought you hated each other? I wonder if anyone would notice an apple missing...? I. ROUND UP PEOPLE FOR THE LION PITS. II. PRACTICE WAVING TO THE PEOPLE (IN ADORING FASHION). ILL. HIRE VOICE COACH TO HELP PRACTICE EVIL LAUGHTER. PIG FARMER IV. SEND RIVALA BASKET a POISONED FRUIT. Gotta wash the stench of horse manure out of my clothes in time for church! There will be a lot of single ladies at Venus' temple tonight. Rumor has it the priest is going to denounce birth control! V. RAISE TALES TO FUND MORE TAX COLLECTORS. VI. HIRE MORE VIGILS TO PATROL THE SLUMS. VII. MEET CLEOPATRA FOR DINNER (THIS MIGHT BE THE NIGHT), VIII. ABSOLUTELY DON'T FORGET TO... PRIEST Dedicating the temple to Venus was a smart_move. Church attendance, hasn't been this high in years! Then again, neither has the city's population. "


"Racing Towards the 1st Century. "


"LLLL LLLLLLLLLLL Red Team Wins! In Caesar Ill\" by Sema Studios, you constrict temples to various gods of the Roman Pantheon and witness the clients on your city You also get Visual feedback: The real-time cllexis of the player's actions are immediately visible on screen R111 ESAR CAES MARCUS, SVON Sons 7.994694474949499564754 SAW THE CHARIOT RACES IN THE CIRCUS MAXIMUS TODAY! MAN, CAN THOSE GUYS BOOK! ONE OF THE CHARIOTS LOST A WHEEL, OVERTURNED AND WIPED OUT INTO THREE OTHER HORSES IT WAS so cool! THEY'LL BE WIPING THE BLOOD OFF THE SIDEWALLS FOR WEEKS. ANYWAY, JUST WANTED TO LET YOU KNOW THAT I PICKED UP THAT CLAY POT YOU FELL IN LOVE WITH LAST TIME WE WERE HERE, AND WILL HEAD HOME AFTER THE GLADIATORS DISEMBOWEL EACH OTHER IN THE MORNING SEE YOU Soon! Love, PC 20 Circus Maximus Rome, Italy MARCUS OF CALIGULA c/o West FORUM CALIGULA, ITALY 00002  ATERRA Impressions ATHENA www.sierrastudios.com Photo: A. Caesar 1998 Sierra Online, Inc and/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to, Sierra On-Line, Inc. Hellevue, WA 98007. All Rights Reserved "


"SIMILE LISTEN TO YOUR PEOPLE! . LION TAMER Tipping the vigil off to arrest plebs for loitering was ingenious! Its much cheaper to feed my lions prisoners, than the meat from that farmer. We'll see how long those gladiators last against my boys now! Build, rule and battle on one screen-no more switching between city, province and battle screens!  Visual feedback: The real-time effects of the player's actions are immediately visible on screen. INDI VIGIL Various terrain sets include deserts, forests, mountains and multiple elevations. I'm being transferred back to the slums for riot control the Lion Tamer tipped me a gold piece to round up some fresh meat for his pets. Construct temples to various gods of the Roman Pantheon and witness the effects on your city. TAX COLLECTOR If you are planning to build a new Colosseum as I suspect, you'll need a lot more money, and a lot more guys like me to gather it. People who think taking candy from a baby is wrong just haven't bothered to try it. More progressive career structure and intuitive interface mean more exciting, longer lasting gameplay. www.sierrastudios.com EVERYONE » CAESAR SIAM E A TERRA Impressions. ESAR Build a Better Rome 021998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. w and/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to. Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All Rights Reserved. Go to #133 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MAX 2 MAX Factor STRATEGYZWAR MAX 2 Tries Hard, but It Isn't an Improvement Unit Status Screen Mk VIII Improved Scout Scouts are the basic exploration unit of the Humans. They are very fast, Amphibious faster on land than on water) and have a good internal scauner. Unfortunately, the Scout has almost no armor and the mam armament was once described as A peashooter\" by an anonymous Karen. An individual Scout has very weak combat capabilities. almost nonfunctional. Interplay quickly issued not one, but two patches within two weeks of the game's release. These didn't solve all the problems, however. A third patch was in the works as this review was being written. Die by Patrick Miller 'll never forget my first 10speed bicycle-a sporty, golden-yellow Italian model. I liked the bike so much that I started adding improvements. First, there was a water bottle, then a tire pump, a rack, a speedometer, a light, and a saddle pack filled with tools and emergency gear. Before long, I had transformed my lightweight speed bike into a weighted-down, run-of-the-mill hardware store special. With MAX 2, Interplay has succeeded in doing to MAX (MECHANIZED ASSAULT AND EXPLORATION) what I did to my bike-and giving the sequel a flat tire to boot. MAX 2 tries too hard to be all things to all gamers, and it also suffers greatly from rushedout-the-door syndrome. sage XXXXXXXXX Doner SCOUT IT OUT The advantage of a scout unit is its ability to move fast and see far. Variations in unit strengths and weaknesses make combined-arms tactics a necessity. COMPUTER WORLD GAMING ***** MAX2 Not So Timely The most significant new feature in MAX 2 is the inclusion of realtime mode, in addition to the turnbased and simultaneous-turn modes. The downside of adding this feature is that some of the depth and complexity of the original game has been sacrificed. Specialized surveying units are no longer needed because all units are capable of spotting material and gold resources. Fuel resources, ammunition resupply, and the need to maintain connections between facilities are also gone. On the plus side, the rendered, 16-bit color maps are a big improvement over the mostly flat, relatively featureless terrain of the original game. It's too bad that this graphic improvement doesn't extend to the game's units and buildings, which, even in the enhanced graphics mode requiring 32 MB of memory, are less detailed and more difficult to identify than the 256-color versions in MAX. Other significant improvements to MAX 2 include a spy camera that enables you to quickly view the action from up to eight units or locations using a display window. Unlimited movement waypoints, building queues for engineer and constructor units, the ability to issue orders while the game is paused, indigenous alien life-forms, and a scenario editor are also new features in MAX 2. BRASSA MAX Flashback The original MAX was notable for avoiding the typical real-time strategy game formula employed by many COMMAND & CONQUER clones. MAX had a good concept, a decent storyline, FOREST FOR ALIEN TREES MAX 2's rendered nice graphics, maps are superior to those in the original depth, and intergame, but the lack of detail in the units esting gameplay. leaves much to be desired, sometimes makIt also offered the ing it difficult for you to tell the difference option of tradibetween units. tional turn-based play or play using simultaneous turns. Unfortunately, the game's multiplayer problems were never completely remedied, leaving some gamers feeling cheated. Based on that experience, you might think that Interplay would be sure to deliver a complete prodPICK A MAP MAX 2 features uct the second time around. But 27 unique terrain maps that that's not the case: MAX 2 has a can be used for custom-made disturbing tendency to crash, disscenarios, skirmish games, plays annoying graphical glitches, and multiplayer games. and its multiplay features are APPEAL: Strategy gamers who want the option of turn based, simultane. ous turns, or realtime play. PROS: Three styles of play, a wide variety of options, scenario editor, rewards combined-arms tactics. CONS: Frequent game crashes: poor multiplayer support; weak Al. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 80MB harddrive space, 2x CD-ROM drive, DirectXcompatible sound and video. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN or Internet (6 players), hotseat, serial, modem (2 players); 1 CD per player. Price: $49.95 Publisher: Interplay Irvine, CA (800) 468-3775 www.interplay.com Options Not Optional One of MAX 2's strong points is that the game provides players with a wealth of options. There are 276 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Honor KAVedas ENTITAIT A GT Interactive Company www.cavedog.com Go to #172 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MAX 2 Race Relations, MAX 2-Style Bad Bug STRATEGYZWAR c75275 he sci-fi storyline in MAX 2 focuses on the Concord and human races, which are in the process of genetically bonding, and the Sheevat alien race, which is out to destroy them. During the campaign, you play the Concord side. But in some of the single scenarios and in skirmish games, you can play the Sheevat side. Here's the scoop on races represented in MAX 2. The Shecvat view Concord efforts to genetically bond with other races as a threat to the purity of their DNA. Concord Cousins FLY SHEEVAT AIR Although air units are expensive, when used effectively, they do the job of many naval and ground units and can inflict enough damage to easily justify their cost. The red area shows the range of the aerial weapons. Concord Friendly aliens who represent an organization of most intelligent life forms in the galaxy. Because different Concord races are bonding with various human races, the humans can There are eight races making up build and use Concord assault the alliance between the guns, gunboats, and attack airConcord and humans, each with craft. These powerful, organic unique characteristics. units are self-repairing and gain experience through combat. Concord races bonding with humans are the following: Aven are pilots who produce superior air units. Aspen excel at fixed defenses. Aven Aspen Fen are sailors who Beaker are engineers build superior sea who quickly build units. factories. Fen Beaker\" Cloaks are an intelliPhemer specialize in gence-gathering race producing missilethat excels at espiarmed units. Phemer cloaks onage. Kamren possess exper Skilled at avoidance tise in manufacturing and defense, Elan armored vehicles and produce vehicles with Kamren gun defenses. Elan superior speed. construct buildings, and gold, land, an effective mix of units which is used to purchase unit would be scouts for reconnaisupgrades. The more than 50 air, sance, tanks for their ability to take naval, and land units are rated for punishment, and missile crawlers armor strength, hits to destroy for long-range firepower. At sea, a attack capability, sighting and group of antisubmarine corvettes, weapon range, speed, shots fired antiaircraft escorts, long-range misper turn, and the power needed to sile cruisers, and rugged gunboats operate. These capabilities can be provides a nearly unbeatable comupgraded through research and bination. In the air, several fighters then bought with gold credits. backed by a couple of ground Constructors exist to build mines, attack aircraft and AWACS can cut research centers, repair facilities, a wide swath of destruction. and factories that produce heavy Like most games in its crowded and light ground units, air units, genre, MAX 2's artificial intelligence and sea units. Engineers build is adequate, but nothing out of the power plants, storage units, radar ordinary. The Al tends to be timid towers, bridges, roads, sea plat and often refuses to attack, even forms, and static defensive struc when the odds are clearly in its tures such as gun, missile, and anti favor. In the scripted campaign misaircraft turrets. Bulldozers and mine sions and single scenarios, the Al layers are also part of the game. can be challenging at the higher levels of difficulty. It is weakest in The Big MAX Combo skirmish games, just as it was in MAX 2 rewards players who the original MAX. employ combined-arms tactics. On As a single player game, MAX 2 is capable of providing hours of entertainment value. As long as you remember to save often, you can play through most of the scenarios and campaign missions. However, for those gamers who are looking for something new and different in the realm of real-time strategy gaming, REPORT CARD The reports option MAX 2 comes with so few enables players to do a quick sta innovations and has so many tus check on their units' health problems that it almost seems and their force's casualties. superfluous. CGW Sheevat Believing that their pure and ancient race is threatened by the Concord alliance, the Sheevat are out to destroy it. Their organically based units and buildings have shields rather than armor, are self-repairing, and gain experience from attacking. NE The Sheevat possess unique weapons, such as biobombs, lightning cannons, and shock tanks. Sheevat SASABB 23 stand-alone scenarios and four linear campaigns, each with nine missions. Also included is a custom scenario creator that enables you to engage in skirmish games against multiple opponents on any of the game's 27 maps. The multiplayer options include hotseat, serial, modem, LAN, and Internet capability for up to 6 players in network games. All of these options would be great, if only they worked. The game's two resources are raw materials, which are mined to provide power and materials so you can manufacture units and 718 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Vengeance KAVE 49 INTEYTAI MEHT A GT Interactive Company www.cavedog.com Go to #172 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW DOMINION: STORM OVER GIFT 3 Dominion Over None STRATEGYZWAR lon Storm's First Launch Lands With a Resounding Thud Exposed Plot There are so many holes in the plot that it's hard to know where to begin. Our four space-faring races are fighting over the Messiah, a mysterious device that will evidently grant unlimited wealth, power, and the unlisted (bad metallurgy, bad karma, whatever), but they manage to colonize space, build a lot of units quickly, and fight everyone else to a standstill. I could go on, but suffice it to say that after by Terry Coleman here's little question that the folks at lon Storm have assembled some of the finest talent in the gaming industry. Tom Hall's ANACHRONOX RPG looks quite clever, and John \"QUAKE\" Romero's DAIKATANA has reached near-legendary status-despite the fact that neither title is anywhere close to shipping. So, let's just accept that lon Storm is a bona fide supergroup, with the fame, fortune, and ridiculously inflated fan expectations that such stardom entails. Still, if the company's first release, DOMINION, is any indication, Ion Storm has a long way to go before it becomes the Beatles-or even the Sex Pistols of the interactive entertainment industry. COMPUTER ALERT ALERT The main screen is DOMINION; the inset is RED ALERT. If you can't tell a lot of difference, well, we couldn't either. Total Dark Star Reign Oe'r Me DOMINION has been in development for about three years—first at 7th Level, then at lon Stormand, unfortunately, it looks it. While DOMINION supports higher resolutions (1024x768 is probably most practical), you don't gain that much by using them. The grass/ground/rough textures are hardly up to RED ALERT standards, much less those of STARCRAFT, with no apparent 3D, à la TOTAL ANNIHILATION. The graphic deadwood would be somewhat tolerable if the gameplay wasn't so derivative of every other real-time strategy game. Oh, sure, there's a more involved interface, but if anything, that just gets in the way. DOMINION does try to add some depth: You can set your soldiers on patrol, order them to stand fast, and the like, but games such as DARK REIGN and TOTAL ANNIHILATION managed all this far better more than a year ago. And DOMINION'S overhyped Al, for my money, is nowhere near as challenging as that of STARCRAFT. Mostly, DOMINION comes down to speed. If I can build more things faster than you can, I'll almost always beat you, and the design so overemphasizes frenetic play that it makes WARCRAFT 11 and AGE OF EMPIRES seem turnbased. The variety of weapons and races seems impressive, but most lack unique qualities: The Scorps are uncreepy crawlers; defensive specialists Darken are dull; and the humans, more flat than balanced, are pretty much a snooze. About the only thing in the game that's really clever is the Merc widowmaker, which can remotely control an enemy vehicle; problem is, this isn't much different from Porter's botjacking twist in G-NOME. GAMING ***** WORLD HRNERENA WORLD'S END The arbitrary placement of map edges limits the maneuvering in scenarios and forces play into predictable lineswhich helps out the Al. APPEAL: Collectors of bad Sci-fi strategy MOMENTONE games. PROS: Four campaigns: 60 multiplayer maps pass. able Al. CONS: Frenzied pace can't hide lack of depth; woefully dated, slow engine; incredibly derivative DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 166 (P200 strongly recommended), Windows 95/NT, 32MB RAM (64MB strongly recommended), 140MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 4x CD-ROM; supports Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: TCP/IP and IPX (2-8 players each, 1 CD per player): modem and direct serial; MPlayer support. Price: 559.95 Publisher: Eidos San Francisco, CA (800) 617-8737 www.eidosinteractive.com the wonderful back-stories of games like STARCRAFT, there is no reason to put up with this mindless drivel. There aren't many technical glitches-provided you have a Sound Blaster-compatible card but DOMINION's engine staggers like a turtle through a briar patch. On systems with a \"mere\" 32MB of RAM, scrolling is visibly slow: Needing 64MB to adequately play a dated game like this is a joke. There's nothing wrong with paying homage to greater works that have come before. DOMINION, however, lifts shamelessly from TOTAL ANNIHILATION, RED ALERT DARK REIGN, and STARCRAFTwithout capturing any of their innovation, elegance, or excitement. Let's just hope that lon Storm learns from this experience before its next game ships, or its legacy may be closer to Blind Faith's than the Beatles'. CGW phone numbers of all galactic supermodels. This higher power will stand by and watch, of course, while the lesser races beat each other senseless. You have to build your infrastructure from scratch, ostensibly because a stalemate in orbit means that only small craft with minimal equipment can make it to the planet's surface. The Scorps are supposedly behind in technology 280 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Hope KAVEDA INTITAIT A GT Interactive Company www.cavedog.com Go to #172 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MEDIEVAL Mailed Men Just Ring Once TRATEGIYAWAR MEDIEVAL Sheds a Little Light on the Dark Ages by Jim Cobb o many action, fantasy, and RPG games use pseudomedieval themes that you could almost believe that the Dark Ages were filled with dragons and wizards. MEDIEVAL strives to realistically portray this period with a mostly standard turn-based flavor, at a scale of 25 yards/hex and 25 men/unit. Units are rated for morale, fatigue, status, formation, armor, defensive values, and weapon types. The weapons are a treat, running the gamut from pikes to longbows, with missile weapons having limited ammunition-a nice touch in a game on this scale. Formations are typical of the era: column, skirmish, square, and shield wall (for Battle of Hastings fans). Each formation adds capability at the expense of another; for example, a square improves Battle of Hastings scenario editor. The map editor While the normal battle covers most terrain types, view lets you see although the absence of the variety of stakes is regrettable. infantry, With such fine cavalry, details and concepts, and it's a shame that missile troops at MEDIEVAL fails on a the battle. few points. The unit-byYou can also unit control makes hancreate more This overview of Hastings looks a lot > dling an army of more than troop types with the 40 units a real pain. This is espelike a map from a historical text on handy editor. the period... cially tedious when one side stays on defense: If you play the Saxons defense, but limits mobility. Unit Combat ability is enhanced at Hastings, plan on waiting up to efficiency depends on morale and when the activated unit is in its 15 minutes before doing anything. combat type, and ranges from leader's command range. Combat Worse, the game system allows peasant levies (rated at 30 points) results include defender or attacker an ahistorical ability to concentrate to heroes (120 points). Leaders retreat, destruction, surrender, or attacks on a single specific unit rally disrupted or routed units-a stalemate. If their morale holds, from many troops grouped in a big deal when your peasants face units can evade enemy charges. line-an order option to advance an army of professional soldiers. After all units have taken action, wings or battle lines could fix this. the computer checks for deserters. Another flaw is the lack of missile We're Going reaction fire. At Agincourt, the Where, Sire? Too Many French came under English longMEDIEVAL shows that moving an Troops, Milord bow fire from the minute they army around in the Middle Ages MEDIEVAL features 10 historical came within range. In MEDIEVAL, was a lot more difficult than it battles that span the early 1000s some units may take four volleys appears in any Hollywood movie to the late 1400s (one fantasy bat before they hit the stakes. on the period. Movement and tle with Robin Hood is tossed in as It's easy to quibble about other casualties tend to lower morale, a tutorial), with a bias toward late aspects, such as the lack of any causing desertions and even sur medieval, Northern European advance after combat, but none of render-there's no fighting to the battles. You can set Al style and these flaws is, by itself, huge. The last man here. On the other hand, army morale level, which add to main problem is that MEDIEVAL high morale will ease formation replayability, as does the powerful doesn't rise above its quirks to be changes and initiate berserkers and the definitive game countercharges. on its subject. For afiAutomatic rally attempts start cionados of the period each turn, with failed units moving (or those wanting to away from the front line. After a keep themselves busy rally, clicking on a unit shows its while they wait for movement areas and brings up a AGE OF EMPIRES II). command window showing orders MEDIEVAL—especially for facing, missile fire, formation the smaller battles changes, resupply, and charges. m aplers is still worthwhile. The Clicking on a hex moves the unit THE DRACULA WARS Here, Vlad the rest of us will likely there, and clicking on an adjacent Impaler (the historical basis for the legreturn to CUSTER'S enemy leads to melee. Missile units endary vampire) tries some more down LAST COMMAND, ZULU have possible target hexes outlined to-earth bloodletting. But Vlad will have WAR! and REMEMBER when the fire button is pressed considerable trouble pursuing enemy THE ALAMO-games and they may fire twice per turn at infantry because of the spiked caltrops that earned Incredible the risk of depleting ammunition. on the perimeter-a nasty impediment Simulations its All in all, it's pretty simple. to horses' hooves. moniker. CGW COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ***** ng ce APPEAL: Gamers interested in medieval tactics. PROS: Plenty of period flavor and lots of detail on a neglected subject: medieval great weapons selection. CONS: Tedious movement system: Northern European bias; not up to standard set by ZULU WAR! and CUSTER'S LAST COMMAND. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 4.5MB harddrive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Email: 1 player per CD. Price: $39.95 Publisher: Incredible Simulations Chicago, IL (408) 554-8381 www.incrediblesimulations.com echos 202 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Terror AVEA ENTERTAINMENT A GT Interactive Company www.cavedog.com Go to #172 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEWS Star-Cross'd Rage Incubates STRATEGYZWARE More Reviews for the Strategically Inclined Insurrection: Campaigns for StarCraft Publisher: Aztech New Media Price: $24.95 www.aztech.com f what you truly desire is more of I a good thing, that's what you'll get-nothing more, nothing lessin INSURRECTION: CAMPAIGNS FOR STARCRAFT. This expansion disc adds 30 new campaign missions and a whopping 102 new multiplayer missions. select individual missions in sequence (T1, T2, T3 (for the Terrans), and so on) from the Play Custom menu. This has the disadvantage (or advantage, depending on your point of view) of not forcing you to complete a mission before moving onto the next. Many of the multiplayer maps are interesting, as many feature choke points that require unique strategies. Overall, the missions are well designed. The biggest problem here is that there are none of the extras people expect with expansion discs—no new terrain tiles, units, or Al features -just more of the classic STARCRAFT gameplay. It's a shame that the developers couldn't at least wrap an interface around the campaign; it feels kludgy, to put it mildly, to have to select the individual messages from a directory that doesn't even display them in order. -Denny Atkin cannon on top. Think your Cyberpunk takes damage too easily? Beef up his armor. There are a few warts, such as the uninspired tactical play, which doesn't do anything to distinguish itself from the rest of the real-time crowd. The pathfinding Al is one of the worst I've seen, as units routine ly get hung up only a couple of pixels to one side of an obvious path. Units do have limited ammo, so you have to pull them back to reload, or you risk losing all of them—a nice touch. The mix of races is varied and occasionally hilarious, which helps liven up the otherwise bland play. Still, when the unit editor is more fun than the game, you're in trouble. -Loyd Case doubt some other sci-fi film or game I've forgotten. Our good friend Sgt. Bratt is back from the original INCUBATION, and his soldiers get to face some new alien enemies (big surprise). There is the usual mix of more intelligent aliens, along with the valetlike aliens that generously shower you with acid even in their death throes, and others that I'd swear were pissed-off refugees from SIMANT. Some of the 39 new scenario maps are interesting, but too many of them resemble the industrial confines of the parent game. The computer opponent still has trouble coordinating combinedIncubation: The Wilderness Missions The campaign missions are set during the time of the Terran campaign in the original game. As in STARCRAFT, they're broken into three campaigns of 10 missions each: one campaign each for the Terrans, Zerg, and Protoss. The missions focus around an insurrection against the Confederacy, led by a splinter group called the Fist of Redemption. Don't even think of trying to tackle these until you've completed STARCRAFT's built-in campaigns, though. These are designed for experienced players, and you'll often find yourself facing overwhelming odds. Each mission opens with an animated briefing sequence, just as in the original game (some of the voice acting here is good, but not as good as that in the original). What's missing here, however, is the rest of the framework. There are no gala 3D-animated sequences midway through campaigns, and a shell doesn't tie the missions together. To play through the campaign, you Tribal Rage ***** Publisher: TalonSoft Price: $39.95 www.talonsoft.com The thought of TalonSoft—that bastion of realistic, turn-based Wargames-publishing a real-time strategy game, is a bit scary. Yet, if you dig below the surface, TRIBAL RAGE has some nice twists. TRIBAL RAGE's campaign plays much like that of JAGGED ALLIANCE. Areas you've conquered earlier may be contested later, and you can even go back into areas you've captured and build new mines to increase the rate of money collection. In addition to the usual map editor, you can also customize units-even in the campaign game. As you buy technologies, you can create units from basic types that incorporate the new weaponry. Don't like the default missile van? Create one with a 75mm Publisher: BlueByte Price: $19.95 www.bluebyte.com Vour mission and you have no choice but to accept it—is to take a new (and green) team of galactic marines into the creepy confines of Scay-Hallwa and return with a container of raw materials. Of course, what you end up having to do is fight a bunch of critters that shoot at you, try to eat you, and generally make for bad neighbors. THE WILDERNESS MISSIONS are more of BlueByte's homage to XCOM, Aliens, Predator, and no arms assaults, and the designers try to make up for this in many scenarios by hurling lots of bodies at you. As a result, the now-longer INCUBATION campaign that all of us wished for is more repetitious than fun. The new editor is cool, though. This game tries to be \"X-COM Lite,\" but is much more complicated than X-COM, and less fulfilling. Why, with so many buttons on the interface, you can't permanently set snap fire, is beyond me. And it still bugs me that a turnbased engine that supports 3D can't do more graphically: If it's dour the artists were striving for, they nailed it. All in all, this addon just goes to show that being turn-based is no guarantee you'll have depth, replayability, or addictiveness. Terry Coleman 284 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"TOTAL ANNIHI LATIO INGDOMS All the elements come together this March Begin now at www.cavedog.com KAVedas en TEPTAIN ETT A GT Interactive Company Go to #172 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 01998 Humongous Entertainment, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Total Annihilation: Kingdoms, Cavedog Entertainment and the Cavedog Entertainment logo are trademarks of Humongous Entertainment, Inc. "


"ALLISON IS HAVING THE ULTIMATE BAD HARE DAY. XIMO A para subir ledar day STOGISOWapads Sales pod Bobto of doud as KA MUST DIE! She music available on: 0000 Opcord Panasonic WWW.SPACEBUNNIES.COM WWW.RIPCORDGAMES.COM llir Go 104282@ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"LEISURE SUIT LARRY'S CASINO  REVIEW Sim Vegas It's Not the Casino Games, It's the Camaraderie CLASSICS PUZZLES stop Airtel There is a dark side to all this, as some people become so enamored of the audio codes that they go around shouting them in others' ears. The comedy club is supposed to be full of people making each other laugh, but when I visited players were just voting for each other to fill their wallets, and no one was telling any jokes at all. by Charles Ardai s many casino games as Sierra foists on the public, you'd think the company was based in Las Vegas. LEISURE SUIT LARRY'S CASINO gives us slots, poker, blackjack, roulette, and craps, along with the customary neon-streaked glitz, plus a new betting interface. Once again you're folding hands, standing pat on 17, and dropping simulated quarters into simulated coin slots. If that were all this game con tained, it would be well worth a yawn. If it added only a bit of patented LEISURE SUIT LARRY smut to season the mix, it might be worth a chuckle. But what makes COMPUTER GAMING ***** WORL Have a C-note Still, take away the hard-core casino gamers, the nuts who spend WE'RE ALL WET If you get your jollies from Sierra's hours working all the angles to renderings of 2D babes, there are plenty from which to choose, complete with secret audio enhancements. squeeze more Larrybucks out of the system, the children (mental or LARRY'S CASINO It's the chat that makes this chronological) for whom fun is a worth playing is game that and the variety of smutty backslapping exchange, that it really isn't a casino game tools the designers have put at the and you'll find some genuinely at all. It's a casino. chatters' disposal. You not only getn ice, intelligent, interesting folks. to type sentences back and forth to One of these, C-Note100, showed Up All Night each other, you get to use facial me the ropes and even gave me Through its relationship with expressions (make your bosomy $2 million Larrybucks to make sure WON.net, Sierra has turned a bud sexpot stick her tongue out at the could get into all the cool rooms. ding retread into a dynamic, frowning hunk next to her!) and C-Note and I will surely never intriguing, and occasionally dis audio codes (make your peers' meet. Yet for one Sunday night it turbing experiment in communal computers erupt with disco music was as if we had barhopped our behavior. You see, while all the or lusty moaning!) way to a slightly soused but gencasino games can be played While all players have the same wine bond. LEISURE SUIT LARRY'S offline, all the other parts of Larry's expressions at their disposal, the CASINO is at times crude and casino-the restaurants, bars, comaudio codes are secret. Since the clumsy, especially when it trades edy clubs, gift shops, and wedding only way to learn them is by word in embarrassing retro stereotypes, chapel-can be accessed only via of mouth, and since Sierra keeps and it's often technologically the Internet adding more, there are plenty of weak, but it's our future staring us These online casino games give Easter eggs to find and trade with in the face. People will come back you Larrybucks, which you can use your newfound friends. for hour after addictive hour: It's to buy virtual goodies for you or not all that difyour fellow players; you can buy ferent than the such things as a better hotel room, real Vegas, actua fur coat, or the right to visit some ally. Long after of the casino's ritzier pleasure the tired poker spots. Lose your money online and SHOOTERS and blackjack you can win a fresh stake by havsimulations are ing your punch lines or pickup lines finally put out voted the funniest by your peers in of their misery the casino's clubs. Even if you don't games like care about money, you can just LARRY'S CASINO, hang out by the slot machines or BALL IN HAND Whether you play pool com based on the pool tables, chatting your head petitively, or simply choose to chat with your personal comoff in realtime with folks from virtual buddies, there's plenty to do in munication, are California, New York, Arizona, LARRY'S CASINO. And, no, Charles Ardai doesn't going to be Georgia, and parts unknown. always carry his briefcase online. huge. CGW APPEAL: Those who want LARRY style raunch with their online fun. PROS: Rich, wellpopulated gaming/chat environment with plenty to do. CONS: Retro sex humor notwithstanding, online casino games are as old as the Intemet. DIFFICULTY: Easy. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 120MB harddrive space, 2x CD-ROM; supports Windows-compatible sound cards with DAC. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: WON.net (which is free, but requires that you have Internet access) LARRY'S Price: $39.95 Publisher: Sierra Bellevue, WA (800) 757-7707 www.sierra.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 281 "


"Have You Driven An Urban Assault Vehicle Lately? GUNLMETAL NA JHL-61ILL HEADLIGHTS En "


"SECURE CONTROL SYSTEM with realtime fractal encryption keeps your datalink untraceable and unbreakable. Drive with confidence. FLAMETHROWER 2X RADAR GUIDED MISSILE LAUNCHER FUSION POWER PLANT delivers smooth running power at temperatures up to 700 degrees Kelvin FUSIONBEAM ARMOR FACINGS of renewable ceramic polymers protect your vehicle from adverse conditions such as plasma bolts and autocannon fire. ELECTROMAGNETIC REPULSOR DRIVE with gyrostabilization and inertial dampers goes from 0 to 180km/h in 0.0014 seconds The Argus Overlord Armor Trend netmagazine's 2219 Assault Vehicle of the Year TEEN T CONTENT RATED BY ROCNE DAHA NEONILLU SUARP Mice VIRAL ACN1 TO THAITE STRADAR P All Nataka Remotely Piloted Vehicles ship with version 56.9 of BattleHelper, Nataka's award-winning operating system. Some vehicles not exactly as shown. All performance specifications given for unencumbered vehicles in 1 G of gravitational force and 101.9 kPa of barometric pressure unless otherwise indicated. Battle Helper is a registered product of the Nataka Corporate Empire. Unauthorized use of the Battle Helper name is a violation of applicable treaties and will be met with military force. Gunmetal and Mad Genius Software are trademarks of Mad Genius Software Ltd. MAD GENIUS Go to #130 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MEGA SOLITAIRE Sentimental Journey LASSICS/PUZZL MEGA SOLITAIRE Is First-class Fare Eyes North  challenges. Other tournaments have looser themes, like royalty and women's names. Some are merely grouped together by difficulty level. If you don't like the default tournaments, the game allows you to design your own. teto MAR Middlesbrohen Layburn Scarborough Douglas. Kingston Blackpool Brdalerd Trish Sea Thorpedo P s hotela Helyhead  Chak stok.com O Norwich by Wyatt Lee f MEGA SOLITAIRE was only an anthology of 200-plus solitaire games, it wouldn't be the addictive must-have puzzle game that it actually is. Not only does this spiritual descendant of the late, lamented QQP's SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY (both games were designed by Andrew Visscher) give the largest selection of solitaire variants to date, but, like its ancestor, it also provides a rationale for playing them. It offers three different kinds of campaign games: journeying across England or Colorado, playing tic-tac-toe by using different solitaire games, and playing a series of similarlystyled solitaire games for combination high scores. 'covery Barmahan y Merlineta o komende Hors Stratto di con Aroma TRAINSPOTTING A successful trip in MEGA SOLITAIRE requires a strategy for route, time, and money. Jade @ Doa Play List MEGA SOLITAIRE has dozens of new games that its ancestor and most existing anthologies do not have. Some of the most interesting are Casket, Cicely, Citadel, Courtyard, Fort, General's Patience, Imperial Guards, and King Tut. Further, MEGA SOLITAIRE has advanced on the playability of the interface over Visscher's previous game. Now, you simply doubleclick and the chosen card will automatically fly to the most appropriate foundation. In some games, such as Eagle Wings, a mere single-click does the trick. This makes each game play more quickly and efficiently. Plus, there is provision for tournament play over AT&T's WorldNet Service. MEGA SOLITAIRE is an ideal game for brief interludes between meatier fare. Not only does it provide a pleasant diversion for road warriors, but it offers intriguing campaigns for traditional strategy gamers as well. CGW Campaign Swings Gamers who remember the concept underlying SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY will understand that you EAGLE EYES The double-click interface makes new games like Eagle Wing easy to play. COMPUTER GAMING ***** WORLD begin your trips at one end of a map with a set amount of money. Each city on the map has three different tournaments for you to enter, with a target score to hit in each tournament (you don't have to win every time in order to be successful). You pay the entry fee and proceed from city to city. MEGA SOLITAIRE goes its ancestor one better. Not only do you have the same kind of money management and tournament entry strategy as in SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY, but you can also choose between slow and fast transportation (everything from handcars to rocket trains) according to your financial success. Naturally, faster trains equal a faster trip time so you're not only competing against your funds, but trying to chalk up the shortest times for the entire trip, as well. Merely reaching your destination, as you did in the earlier game, is not enough. The Tic-Tac-Solitaire campaign is particularly difficult. The games have been divided into nine progressively more stringent difficulty levels. There is one tic-tac-toe grid for each difficulty level and each square of the grid has three possible solitaire games listed. Match or beat the target goal for one of those games and you get the \"X\" for the square. Get three in a row and you move to the next level. The tournaments are thematic, with some tournaments consisting entirely of \"spider\" variants. \"siege\" style solitaire games (which I particularly like), or \"golf\" APPEAL: The last solitaire game you'll ever need. PROS: Incredible selection of addictive games, challenging campaigns; a steal at this price. Po CONS: It's still solitaire on the computer. DIFFICULTY: Easy. REQUIREMENTS: 486/66, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 40MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM, 8-bit sound card. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Internet tournaments via AT&T WorldNet. Price: $14.99 Publisher: Palladium Interactive San Rafael, CA (888) 891-1919 www.palladium.net 01516 TIC-TAC-WOE Each level of Tic-Tac-Solitaire gets progressively more difficult to win. 290 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"OVER CHESSMASTER MILLION SOLD 6000 . For Play against your choice of 64 life-like opponents, each with their own unique personality and playing style, or create your own the ultimate experience, challenge the Chessmaster. you are r of the Master of the WWW.Che9SISTOT.COM GAMITE with Chessmaster 6000 More powerful and easier to use than ever! Listen and watch as Josh Waitzkin replays his favorite games. Consult the new 300,000 game interactive database to check your play against grandmasters past and present, or ask Chessmaster to analyze and critique your own games. alyze and critiques your play against grandmasoo,000 MINDSCAPE Learn chess from the best Innovative new tutorials from renowned chess coach Bruce Pandolfini explore chess from the inside out. A wide selection of teaching displays and layouts benefits players of all skill levels. GAME A SOLD Free Internet on CHESSMASTER LIVE For more information and the name of your local retailer, call 1 800 234 3088 CHESSMASTER 6000 05 , CHESSMASTE \"Chessmaster 6000 is truly impressive. It's comfortable, fun, instructive and a competitive outlet for all ages and skill levels. But most importantly, Chessmaster will teach you about the human side of the game... how to grow within the beauty of this great art form.\" 6000 Josh Waitzkin, International Chess Master Go to #193 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY. CHEATS  WALKTHROUGHS StarCraft The Zerg: Secrets of the Overmind ONLINE against zealots. Zerglings also can't attack air units. Later in the game, they become less useful against units and become building killers and cannon fodder. They will always succumb to firebats and zealots unless they grossly outnumber them. your enemy's base is located. Later on, the zerglings are best in specialized roles. They are great against heavy units like reavers, dragoons, and siege tanks (they attack swiftly but are so small and numerous that the heavy unit can't hope to kill them all in time). They are also perfect against sunken colonies and photon cannons, which fall with laughable ease to zerglings. Make sure you upgrade their movement speed as early as possible, as well as the attack rate upgrade when you gain a hive. Zerglings are always great for taking down buildings quickly. by Elliott Chin n our ongoing attempt to grant you mastery of the STARCRAFT universe, we now dissect the hordes of the Overmind. For many, the Zerg are the easiest race to play: Unlike with the Terrans or Protoss you can often get by building just one or two Zerg units, the hydralisk or mutalisk. While your Terran opponent is trying to coordinate a tank-marine-goliath formation and your Protoss foe is attempting to get his reavers, high templars, zealots, and dragoons in line, you can simply counter with a numerically superior force of hydras or mutas. If you want to play the Zerg well against superior opposition, however, you'll have to do more than hurl hordes at your opponents. As we did last month with the Terrans, we'll break down each unit and study how to use it in both traditional and nontraditional roles. When you're checking out a particular unit's usefulness, make sure you take into account the type of damage it inflicts on the enemy, as well as its target classification. For help with this game and more check out www.gameguides.com drop a dozen hydras on an unsuspecting enemy base. Only the best STARCRAFT players, or those who plan specifically for this attack, can thwart it. If the enemy spends time building toward a hydra drop defense on island maps, he leaves himself wide open to an air denial strategy of scourges and mutalisks. HYDRALISK Strengths: Hydralisks are the workhorses of the Zerg army. They have among the fastest firing rates and can attack air and ground targets. Although they do only half damage to small targets, their range and firing rate mean they should always serve as the backbone of a Zerg force no matter what enemy you're facing. Hydralisks make great ground support for guardians, and they can take down any wraiths or scouts that try to attack the guardians. On island maps, get to hydralisks and overlord ventral sacs quickly so you can Weaknesses: The closest thing to a weakness that Hydralisks have is their tendency to bunch together. Because of this, beware of siege tanks, reavers, and high templars: Always target these units to eliminate their area effect attacks. If tough melee units such as zealots and ultralisks manage to get in close, hydralisks will succumb to their superior melee attack. Weaknesses: Zerglings have few hit points, so they don't last ULTRALISK Strengths: Ultralisks are resilient juggernauts. They are especially deadly versus Terran units, as the Terrans have no melee unit to muster against these gargantuan insects (firebats do only quarter damage to ultralisks). They are great against buildings and siege tanks in siege mode. Ultralisks covered by hydralisk fire and a defiler's dark swarm will wreak serious havoc on any enemy fortification. Because of their huge size, they shrug off attacks by firebats, vultures, and ghosts. ZERGLING Strengths: Very early in the game, zerglings are great rush units. You can crank out six right away (two per egg) and rush the enemy base. However, this is good only on small maps. And you better know where MENU De  :: @ See the Review JULY ISSUE. 5 STARS BUG OUT Zerg players have a relatively easy time with the versatile hydralisk and mutalisk, but there are even more potent weapons in the Overmind's arsenal. 292 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 CONTE "


"STARCRAFT Queen armor, and cannot have its attack strength upgraded Strengths: Queens possess some very important abilities. They can serve as excellent scouts by using their parasite ability, neutralize large ground targets with their broodling ability, and slow down large forces with their ensnare ability. They are fast enough to flee enemy mutalisks and wraiths. Parasite: The queen begins with this ability also. When used, it lobs a parasite at any unit, enabling you to see what that unit sees. Every unit in the game is a legal target, even crit ters. In fact, since other players rarely click on critters, parasiting critters is a perfect way to scout an enemy without alerting him to your reconnaissance. Parasites can be dislodged only by killing the host. Although a parasite will keep you abreast of your enemy's situation, beware of wise players who might use the parasite to confuse you. These players might send the parasited unit as a diversion while they attack you from another front. GAMERUSLEDGE Weaknesses: Queens have no attack, so they can't defend against attackers. They have few hit points, so have mutalisk or hydralisk escorts. Without an energy upgrade, queens will spend a lot of time replenishing their energy. Queens may be weak and defenseless, but they are essential: The ensnare ability is a great way to neutralize cloaked enemies. Queen Abilities Infest Terran Command Center: The queen begins with this ability. A queen can take over a Terran command center if it is below 50 percent hit points (the queen automatically infests if near the command center, otherwise you need to issue a command). The infestation takes a while, but once finished, the command center becomes a Zerg building (you can still move this building like other Terran structures). You can then build infested terrans from inside. However, you must use building queues for infested terrans as you would any Terran or Protoss unit. Se Infested terrans are kamikaze warriors that explode on contact with their target, dealing 500 damage to all ground targets within w range. The infested terran has 60 hit points, 0 Spawn Broodling: This targets any organic ground target and kills it instantly by spawning two broodlings from its dying body. Probes, reavers, and archons are the ground units immune to this ability. By attaching several queens to your Zerg attack forces, you can gain an instant advantage against enemy ground forces by neutralizing their heavy support units like goliaths, siege tanks, ultralisks, and dragoons. A broodling can also be used to eliminate a player's peon force; not only do you kill several peons, but you also spawn broodlings that can be used to attack the remaining peons. Broodlings have 30 hit points, 0 armor, and a 4-damage ground melee attack. They count as small targets. Broodlings die after one minute, even with all hit points intact. Ensnare: A net of green goop that covers all units in its effect area. The substance slows the afflicted units to half speed and slows their attack rate (not quite to half rate). This can make the difference when two opposing Zerg players throw like numbers of units at each other. It can also be used to slow air units that are soon to be attacked by scourges. Send one or two queens with your attack force and ensnare your enemy's forces just before you attack to gain an immediate advantage Ensnare can be used also to uncover cloaked units. Any cloaked units covered by ensnare are not only slowed down but are also rendered visible. Cast this where you see a shimmer if you don't have overlords around. If you manage to get the right area, the cloaked wraiths will be caught. Multiple castings of ensnare on a unit will not have cumulative effects. Weaknesses: Ultralisks are an ultralisk's target. Ultralisks can expensive and susceptible to multinot attack air units so provide ple zealots and archons. Protoss your ultralisk army with hydralisk players aren't as vulnerable to escort. Ultralisks are a pretty lateultralisks as Terran players are. Be game unit, so don't be in a rush to wary of Terran players who cast acquire them. (In most instances, defensive matrix and irradiate on you can simply employ hydralisks and mutalisks to good effect until you determine that you really require ultralisks.) And although ultralisks do considerable damage, guardians will do the job better in most cases, because of their range. Ultralisks are the only zerg ground unit that cannot burrow. HYDRALISK If a Protoss opponent builds too many dragoons in anticipa MUTALISK tion of a mutalisk rush, he leaves himStrengths: Along with self wide open for a hydralisk rush. the hydralisks, mutalisks compose the core of most Zerg deal explosive damage (such as armies. They are so cheap and goliaths, wraiths, scouts, and draquick to produce that you can have goons). Mutalisks should be used a large pack up and running in in conjunction with the defiler's very little time. They can attack plague ability, which reduces ground and air units and have sec afflicted units to 1 hit point. Units ondary and tertiary attacks. While that are plaqued can then be the first strike of a mutalisk's glave wurm attack deals 9 damage, the second hit ricochets to a new target for 3 damage, and the third hit ricochets to another victim for 1 damage. Mutalisks are great against wraiths and marines that haven't been upgraded. Because they are conZERGLING Even after you start building sidered small targets, more advanced units, zerglings are still mutalisks take only half useful, especially since photon cannon damage from units that are useless against them. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 293 "


"Serious Fishing... MARKUITEN \"By far the best bass fishing game we've seen!\"  The only fishing game with completely 3D lakes and underwater views BE BASS Network play for up to 6 tournament anglers -competitive online fishing at its best MASTERS Classic The ONLY  Tips from the sport's best, real U.S. lakes and thousands of lures to choose from TOURNAMENT EDITION A tutorial and multiple difficulty settings-fun for the whole family Fishing Game! THOE Completely 3D DEWI DI WIL DURA DOSIETE Available September THE OFFICIAL CALE OF EVERYONE B.A.S.S. www.THQ.COM WWW.BASS MASTER.COM T HIL WINDOWS WINDOWS 95 CONTUT PAIDE M PACS ANDLERS SPORTSMAN SOCIETY THING THO THONG Bars Vestes Classid Bass Angles Sport Society've stered trademarks DASS BES T THING Go to #107 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"STARCRAFT The Generation of Extreme Control GAME RES_EDGE MUTALISK Cheap, easily produced, and versatile, mutalisks are the mainstays of the Zerg forces. Early Game Combo attacked by mutalisks and decimated by their multiple attacks. Mutalisks should be grouped into hit-and-run packs that roam the map looking for lightly defended outposts to attack. When playing against Terrans, attach an overlord or two to each mutalisk group to watch for cloaked wraiths. Weaknesses: Mutalisks take full damage from both battlecruisers and carriers. Mutalisks bunch up when attacking, so they are vulnerable to the science vessel's irradiate and the high templar's psionic storm. Both can reduce a mutalisk pack to ruins in a very short time. Watch out for those two units. PITCH 37 SPORT You've been gaming ever since you got weaned on Pong as a kid. Now you want a stick that'll do it all. Programmable. Digital. Analog. Comfortable. Cool. Different. New. GenX 700 by QuickShot is all that and more. This programmable stick comes complete with switches to move between digital and analog modes for the HAT, rudder, handle fire buttons and X & Y axes. Plus a 3D rotational handle and a multiview HAT switch. This stick's superergonomic with a contoured BioThrottle complete with extra fire buttons. And the GenX 700 is a really cool metallic purple color — sure to look perfect anywhere. Don't forget to check out our streamlined GenX 500 and 500L -the world's first joystick made for lefties! Punish yourself no more. Enter the generation of extreme control. GET THIS STICK! Gees GUARDIAN Strengths: For a reasonable price, mutalisks can be mutated into guardian aspects. Guardians have a devastating airto-ground attack that does as much damage as an ultralisk's claws (20 damage when not upgraded). Guardians also have the longest range of any zerg unit and the longest air-to-ground range of any race's unit. Because they are air units, they are perfect for dismantling bunches of siege tanks or reavers. A nearly unbeatable zerg combination is a quardian force escorted by a like number of mutalisks and double the number of hydralisks. The guardians will destroy any large ground units that threaten the hydralisks, while the hydralisks will tear apart any air units that attack the Here's a smart though counterintuitive way to organize a combined attack. Send in hydralisks first and follow up with zerglings. The enemy will autoacquire the hydralisks, leaving the zerglings free to sneak into melee range, where they become deadly and tough to shake. If the enemy reorients its targeting, the hydralisks can fire with impunity. and the second QuickShot www.quickshot.com 1999 Stection GEN X Series WWWU UM COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998_295 Go to #260 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"STARCRAFT 750 20700 a /s GAMER'S EDGE a guardian fleet in seconds. Because of their slow speed, guardians simply can't evade a psionic storm. Target any templars within guardian range. Also beware of the science vessel's irradiate ability. SCOURGE Strengths: Scourges are the perfect counter against heavy air units such as carriers and battlecruisers. They are also good for eliminating incoming transports quickly. For a small sum you can mutate two scourges per larva. Each does 100 damage and can outrun any air unit except an upgraded scout. Set them up on patrol around your base or the enemy base to take down any transports or scouting aircraft in the area. On island maps, you can set up these patrols to deny your foe any chance of expanding to other islands. Don't group a bunch of scourges and send them to the same target; they'll all converge on that target and selfdestruct. For example, if you send a group of six to destroy one wraith, you'll have wasted four scourges. Scourges are good against Protoss spacecraft because the only units that can attack them either do half damage (scouts and dragoons) or are simply too slow to muster an attack in time (carriers). Weaknesses: Scourges can be taken down quickly by marines so watch for any Terran ships escorted by marines. Also, Protoss players can cast a psionic storm in front of charging scourges and destroy your flock. Scourges can be cut down quickly by battlecruisers and are less effective when sent against large fleets, where there are multiple targets to confuse scourges and multiple enemies to shoot them down. GUARDIAN Guardians are the Zerg tactical air units, with a great range and super ground attack. Make sure to have hydralisks nearby to protect your guardians from enemy air units. quardians. The mutalisks can then chase any stray science vessels or high templars. Weaknesses: Guardians cannot attack air units so they are highly vulnerable to any air-to-air attackers. Always escort guardians with hydralisks and/or mutalisks. Beware of high templars and psionic storm, which can destroy OVERLORD Strengths: The overlord not only provides you with control to spawn more units, but it also serves as a cloak detector and a transport. Keep overlords around your base to spot cloaked attackers and near your mutalisks to detect cloaked wraiths. You need to research the ventral sacs upgrade at the lair in order to enable their transport ability. Like all transports, they have eight slots. Zerglings and drones take one slot, hydralisks take two, and ultralisks take four. THUNDERSEAT www.thunderseat.net 1-800-8-Thunder Be practical Weaknesses: Overlords have no attack and count as large targets, making them vulnerable to most antiair units like wraiths, scouts, and goliaths. They are also incredibly slow, so you must research their speed upgrade if you want to use them as effective scouts and transports. Crushing Enemies The temptation when playing the Zerg is to react-an easy enough trap to fall into, considering the ease with which you can win a game (or bail yourself out of a jam) with just the hydralisk or mutalisk. Granted, a hydra ... or take a ride on the wild side! www. guten .com Go to #185 www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"STARCRAFT COMPUTER GAMING PC Game Magwalne W ORLD or muta rush is tough to beat, and such tactics can often win games against a lesser-skilled player. Experienced opponents, however, will know how to pick apart such a one-dimensional horde. It is only by mastering the fascinating and terrible secrets of all the Overmind's children that you will be able to brutally crush your enemies with the full might of the Swarm. Join us next month, when we conclude our STARCRAFT strategy series with that most durable of spacefaring races, the Protoss. CGW GAMER'S EDGE Fry Defiler Zero Daftar Strengths: Defilers have two great abilities-dark swarm and plague-that practically giftwrap the victory for a Zerg player. They are also fairly cheap, so it's a good idea to keep several around. Burrow them in the ground to replenish their energy and when they recharge, pop them out, cast their spells, and then burrow them for safety. Your Brain. Vogo 761250 After reducing your enemies to a single hit point with the defiler's plague ability, send in your mutalisks to mop up. 2 AT Weaknesses: Defilers have very few hit points. Be wary of siege tanks in siege mode, which can bombard a defiler before it can get within range to cast its spells. Irradiate is a handy way of disposing of defilers so watch for science vessels. Their medium size classification makes them vulnerable targets to nearly all units. Also, because their abilities are so expensive in terms of energy, you'll be waiting around to replenish energy unless you research consume and the energy upgrade. They have a slow movement rate so unless you have burrow or escorts, enemy units will catch up to defilers and kill them. swarm has a long range. Consume: This researched ability costs no energy to use. A defiler can \"consume\" any friendly Zerg unit, which kills the targeted zerg but gives the defiler 50 energy. This is a quick way to replenish a defiler's energy. With this ability, a defiler could constantly regenerate energy and cast multiple dark swarms and plagues. Keep several zerglings near your defilers (just right click a group of zerglings on the defiler and they will always follow it) so you can consume them as needed. Consuming larger zerg units is a waste of precious resources. Critters cannot be consumed. Consume must be cast next to the target. 5 Issues Free! Save 42% $27.94 One Year/12 issues. Like getting 5 issues FREE! Defiler Abilities Dark Swarm: Defilers automatically start with this ability. Dark swarm affects a large area and makes all ranged fire into that area ineffective. Any units inside the swarm cannot be harmed by ranged attacks from within or without. Only melee attacks can harm your units inside a dark swarm. This ability is extremely effective when used with the ultralisk. Just keep in mind that units can fire out of a dark swarm, but not into it. The dark swarm is stationary and does not move. Although it also provides protection against air units, air units within the swarm are not protected (they hover over the swarm). Dark Plague: Plague drains up to 299 hit points in 30 seconds to any units caught in its area of effect. It cannot kill a unit, so units with less than 300 hit points will remain with 1 hit point. Plague, like ensnare, is an area effect spell that will also uncover cloaked units. After you plague enemy units, send in mutalisks, who have multiple stage attacks that will tear apart plagued units. Plague works extremely well against Terran units because once a plague brings a Terran building into the red, the building will continue to deteriorate until it explodes. A unit cannot be affected by more than one plague at a time. Save 48% $27.94 Two Years24 issues. Like getting 11 issues FREE! Call (800) 827-4450 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 "


"Sanitarium Part 1 SEDGE ME Find Your Way out of Madness With Our Roadmap to Sanity by Robert Coffey oing insane trying to make your way through SANITARIUM? This nofrills guide picks up where the first chapter walk-through in the manual leaves off and takes you through the game's first half. A warning: This guide leaves very little to the imagination. Also, at any opportunity, you should talk to everyone about everything. We'll conclude our SANITARIUM guide next month. tic-tac-toe and to the girl jumping rope near the school. Now you can pump everyone for information and play a rousing game of tic-tac-toe. Head south and talk to the boy fishing near the shore. Ring the church bell by hitting it with a nearby rock. Go back to the shore and snatch Timothy's discarded fishing rod. Back in town, ride the spring pig in the playground, take it, then head north to the bridge. Fish the cross out of the river. Head to the cemetery and get the crowbar from the maintenance shed to rip open the schoolhouse door. Back in the boneyard, talk to all the kids, beginning and ending with Dennis, the kid by the gate. Accept his hide-and-seek challenge. Kids can be found in the barrels by the fishhouse, in the church, in the school, up a tree behind the church, and under the bed in the house across the bridge Still, Dennis won't give you your prize if you don't find the secret weapon. Borrow the shovel from the little girl near the feet of the statue, then dig up Carol in the graveyard. Get the keys from Dennis, open the General Store, and grab the gas can. Use the spring pig to bounce over the collapsed bridge, talk to Maria, and open the lock on the gate (remember that psalm?). Take the scythe and work your way to the pumpkin patch, killing crows along the way. In the patch, take care to avoid Pumpkinhead and slice up the circle of pumpkins. Once they're destroyed one mighty hack should take the bad guy down. Open the gate, get the jumper cables from the tractor, then enter the barn for a long talk with Mother. When you're done, get the tool and use it to get the hose from the pool near the town hall. Siphon gas from the car with the hose and gas can. Fuel up the generator near the barn, attach the cables, and power it up. Stick the cross into the meteorite, then attach the cables. With Mother gone, it's time to leave town. the gem The Innocent Abandoned Clear up your identity problem by talking to the two kids playing SMASHING PUMPKINS You can whack away at the pumpkin-headed scarecrow all day, but he won't die unless you first destroy that ring of pumpkins. HELLO, CREEPY Yeah, so pretty much everyone in SANITARIUM is hideous, but you'll have to make a point to talk to everyone if you're going to make any progress in the game. DROPPED BALL Opening the laboratory gate is just a matter of figuring out how to release the clamps on this enormous ball. A simple, methodical approach will release it in no time, See the Review SEPTEMBER ISSUE. 4.5 STARS 298 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 "


"ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ww.AccessSoftware.com -800-800-4880 Tudel Links E EXTREME AC ADVISORY SUITABLE FOR ALL AUDIENCES Go to #076 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink COMING FALL '98! "


"SANITARIUM EDG THE CHALKBOARD PUZZLES GAMER aced with the chaos and carnage of the laboratory, your character begins to wonder if he's the only madman in the asylum. While the scribbling on the chalkboards may at first seem incoherent, the words hold the key to both your nemesis' motives and the door out of the room. Clicking the first letter of each sentence drops it to the bottom of the board where you must unscramble it to form the words in these screenshots. When you've done that, access the security box by the exit door, speak the phrase, \"Youth hides the key to salvation,\" and you're on your way to Chapter Six. SHOCKING BEHAVIOR To finally leave the \"Children of the Corn\" small town, you'll have to introduce Mother's meteorite to the space-age benefits of high-voltage electricity. search in von for Inc els solution 10 this.most Intrigung puzzle [vodegoue he way o mouse does a wcale source of mail Tempidden from.me Dartin Onesto mi nije to bone, and back 09on to the oriress of the 13 EVRems to ora mantan ons tee shead of me. How can trop your way. Avoid the falling stalactites by watching for the spray of pebbles that precedes them. When you find the Squid Boy, stand just around the corner from him and note the pattern of his deadly squid spit. After a triple-spit, dart around the corner, move in close, and burn him three times on the giant eye. The hidden monster com The Courtyard and the Chapel Talk to everyone. Inside the church, Preacher Bob will give you a quest. Go to the record room and play Belladonna in A Flat. The lunatic in the tutu will dance, revealing the cross. Bring it to Bob, then use the broom he gives you to open the control box. Manipulate the controls so only the third pipe fills with water. Yank the chain and then look in the fountain. p actor, younge mbes Tissue from The insane REY HEDES TO uvavanda Sholl Venture for to m wear shouldersacxing and eneo direction have indivolio wenighs 100 steps of those who walked before me. Valiant though mr intentions mor have been wo powerless 16 stem the de The Mansion Leave the basement and get the brass key from the second-floor bedroom. Unlock the downstairs clock and set it for dinner time. Take the video and key from the nowopened study upstairs to watch the tape and unlock the attic door. Search the bear, use the trampoline to hop over the boxes, then unlock the chest. Follow the ghost downstairs and give the doll to Sarah. Conservatives cued on the method Theme for is necessary. Outside of the mainstream, WIN Calpe hand and hope in my heart, pow prepare to trepo on the brain soil of the mind No Tonger bound by The orchaic Standards of traditional medicine. I feel rebom. SALVATION periments one of two were complete failures Unexpected complications during exploration into the brains of the test subiects regral cost them iner ves. The loss of a few Ives N egligible when compared 10 the beneins that a cure may bring dovoly was in ar when nought the rool 01 Nave lowane rechless P The Circus of Fools Look through the binoculars, then talk to the ringmaster. Talk to the tattoo artist on your way to the midway. Use your Squid Squash pass, then play all the other games, collecting a bowling pin and at least 10 tickets. Cross the bridge, meet the O'Leary family, and snatch their oil can. At the Big Top, talk to everyone and receive a ball from the juggler. Return to the tattoo wagon and get the needle and rubbing alcohol. Now Inferno will teach you fire. breathing and give you a baton. Enter the freak show, use the needle to free Timber, then walk to the carousel. Oil the carousel lever and enjoy a ride. Use the ball on the clown and you may enter the House of Horrors. You'll find a piece of mirror before exiting. After your fortune is told, you'll be teleported to the Big Top. Return to the O'Leary family, cari. Timho 'hole the im THE YOUTH The Laboratory Make your way to the cupola office and investigate the portrait on the wall. Take the pipe valve and go outside and up the stairs to the machine. Insert the valve in the hole in the wall and turn it. To release the ball, turn the wheel so the electrode without a contact is in the 12 o'clock position. Pull the handle, then turn the electrode one position clockwise before pulling the handle again. Do this for every position around the wheel until the ball drops and opens the lab door. Inside the lab, listen to the tape recorder on he desk. Solve the chalkboard puzzles (see sidebar) then enter the code in the security panel next to the door. Open the door and continue your journey through madness. CGW Salvation Hides Ercode The Cave Use the mirror on the twigs to light the cave and your fire baton. Move slowly through the water, burning the tentacles on 1300 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www. "


"Software Tired of waiting for your turn to get on the Internet? Computer Gaming World CD-ROM Included on the SHOPPING ONLINE Join EarthLink Network GET OUT OF AOL FREE CHO NO MORE BUSY SIGNALS DON'T TAKE A CHANCE CHATS & BUDDIES START PAGE PERSONAL STOCK QUOTES OD 20 EMAIL NOT JUNKMAIL ON AOL JAIL HERE'S YOUR CHANCE TO GET OUT OF AOL FREE. Switch to EarthLink and get your email, news, stock quotes, sports scores, entertainment, shopping, chat, and an instant messaging program-all the things people like about AOL-without the busy signals, failed connections, junk mail, lost mail, and endless commercial messages you're forced to click NO THANKS to. And we're still just $19.95 per month for unlimited access. Playing the Internet game should be fun! So, what are you waiting for? Call now 1-888-QUIT AOL, ext. 3961 7 8 4 8 2 6 5 FOR JUST $19.95 PER MONTH, YOU GET: Unlimited Internet usage Complete software for Nationwide access Windows and Mac Over 1,300 local dialup #'s Personal Start Page Choice of browsers Email Earth Link Network Free 6MB Web site Free Internet user guide Bi-monthly newsletter Toll-free 24-hour help  EDITORS CHOICE September 9, 1997 Internet Access Provider or visit us at: www.earthlink.net/quitaol/ Computing Class It's your Internet.\"  Earth Link Network, Inc. Trademarks are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved. February 8. 1998 Internet Service Provider Go to #087 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Unreal AMER'S EDGE Must-have Cheats and Map Shortcuts 09 ONLINE by Terry Coleman hile UNREAL certainly has its detractors (partic ularly with regard to its multiplay), the game has gained a huge and well-deserved following for single player action. Even so, a lot of the weapons are less than intuitive for those of us raised on DOOM and QUAKE. So, here are some quick-and-dirty For help with this game and more check out www.gameguides.com codes to get you into the heart of the game, where you can drool over the sumptuous graphics to your trigger finger's content: WHO NEEDS A TRAVEL AGENCY? Checking out an area is as easy as typing in ISVKRAN32. The Summoning In addition to the usual cheat codes, you can hit Tilde (-), then type summon, along with the name of an item, and get just about anything you want. For example, if you type summon flakcannon, the result is pretty obvious. But if you're bored, you could also type summon Skaarjwarrior, and that enemy would appear instantly. A good way to improve your shooting skills in a hurry is to enter god mode, summon an enemy, and blast it with a variety of your weapons. Real Cheats To activate cheat, hit Tilde (-), then type one of the following entries: Cheat Code Effect Comment allammo Gives you 999 ammo for all your weapons Overkill, but good when learning the game behindview1 Puts you in third-person view Compare this to TOMB RAIDER, I dare you behindviewo Resets to first-person view Flipping between views makes for a good slide show flush Cleans up garbage graphics on walls and creatures Helpful on slower machines Lets you fly around With UNREAL's dangerous Al, this can get you into trouble god God mode Don't tell me you're surprised this works Invisible Turns you invisible Sometimes the (cheating) Al finds you anyway killpawns Kills all monsters Doesn't help your chess game much playersonly Freezes time Press again to resume time passage walk Use this to stop flying A good idea in areas where you can't easily hide Open Sesame (or Whatever) To reach this map hit Tilde (-) and type open and ..dig If you are impatient or stuck on a level, remember this: 1) Usually, killing the last creature on a level magically opens a door (irritating, but true); 2) UNREAL is hardly as subtle as it first appears, and you'll usually find that you've just overlooked something; 3) You can always map the level with pencil and paper. For those of us who don't wish to return to the days of text adventures (the automap function was invented for a reason), there is a solution. Once again, hit Tilde (--), then type open and the name of the map (where the designers' betray their fondness for ancient arcade games). To get to the Chizra-Nali Water God map, for example, you would hit, then type open chizra. We are proud to offer the following map names and codes for your greater See the Review blasting SEPTEMBER ISSUE. 4 STARS pleasure: Bluff Eversmoking..............bluff Cellars at Dasa Pass.........dasacellars Ceremonial Chambers........ceremony Chizra-Nali Water God........chizra Dark Arena...... ..dark The Darkening...... ...extremedark Dasa Mountain Pass.. .dasapass Demonlord's Lair ... .nalilord Demon Crater ........ ...dcrater . Depths of Rrajigar.. De ..dug Ending Sequence................endgame Gateway to Na Pali.. ....skycaves Harobed Village ..harobed Illumination.... extremedgen Isu-Kran deck 1...... .isvdeck 1 Isv-Kran decks 3 & 2. ..isvkran32 Isv-Kran deck 4.... ...isvkran4 Mothership Basement. extremebeg MotherShip Core. .. ..extremecore MotherShip Lab. ... extremelab Nali Castle ........ ............ nalic Na Pali Haven skytown Noork's Elbow ..noork NyLeve's Falls. ...nyleve Outpost 3J........ skybase Rrajigar Mine........... Sacred Passage...... ....passage Serpent Canyon ..... ..... naliboat Skaarj Generator............extremegen The Source Antechamber...extremeend The Source.. ..queenend Spire Village .. ....... ... ..spirevillage The Sunspire............... ...thesunspire Temple of Vandora. ruins Terraniux Underground......terralift Terraniux.... ...terraniux The Trench ............ .trench Velora Pass.... ..veloraend Vortex Rikers .. .........vortex2 302 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 WS "


"REAL-TIME STRATEGY WITH ONE MISSION: SAVING RESCUE FIGHTERS FOR LIFE.. Face to face with your worst nightmares. CHEMICAL SPILLS, TORNADOES, EARTHQUAKES, TERRORIST ATTACKS AND PROTESTS GONE AWRY. In Emergency: Fighters for Life rescue units, police cars and fire engines are deployed at your command. Mobilize your units of highly specialized medical and police personnel, controlling the crews in their constant battle to save your fellow human beings. Hilis Run to your favorite retailer or call 1-800-229-2714 Go to #222 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink TOTINERAL BE WIZARDWorks INTERACTIVE 01998 Topware Interactive AGT INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE COMPANY PLYMOUTH, MN 55441 "


"YOUR OFFICE YOU Features 3D accelerated graphics for 3Dfx and Power VR. Choose from 20 action-soaked single missions or the exhilarating desert campaign. Immersive game world with real vehicle graphics and real audio samples. Stellar multiplayer mode allows battling over modem, LAN or the Internet. Competitive gameplay for novice through hard-core players. Powerful mission editor for endless replayability.  3Dfx Interactive, Inc. The 3D1x Interactive logo, Voodoo Graphics, Voodoo2 and Voodoo Rush are trademarks of 3Dix Interactive, Inc. All rights reserved. Spearhead is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. 1998 Interactive Magic, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"YOUR CO-WORKERS GOTO WORK SPEARHEAD SPEARHEAD 0 Oom Dmou WAG It's you, your tank, and the U.S. Army going to war in the heat soaked deserts of Tunisia. Spearhead puts you in charge of the Army's best armored weapon, the M1A2, immersing you in intense battles with state-of the-art graphics and innovative adrenaline-pumping gameplay. Stop playing around, it's time to go to work. Zombie INTERACTIVE www.imagicgames.com MAK Go to #086 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Combio Make MACC www MAGIC "


"GAMER'S EDGE Classics & Puzzles CHEAT CODES HINTS WALKTHROUGHS Simulation/Space MEGA SOLITAIRE Ithough most people don't need any help with solitaire, two of the variants in MEGA SOLITAIRE require a slightly different strategy than most. In Casket, there are three points that can lead to more frequent victories. First, remember that the key to winning is clearing off the lid (the reserve) at the top of the casket's \"U.\" Try to move as many of the cards from the lid down into the casket. Second, whenever you deplete a stack in the body of the casket itself, the top card of the reserve automatically fills that space. So, remove a full stack only when there is a card on top of the reserve that will enable you to move another card down from the casket lid. Third, note that there are three waste piles. It is good to divide these numerically so that one pile handles deuces through fours, another fives through eights, and another nines through kings. In Senate, you'll want to use the four tableau spaces as often as possible. Instead of building down from the highest cards in your reserve stacks, as you would in most games, try building from the middle of the suit down. In this way, you'll blow through the stacks faster and have more options. -Wyatt Lee Mega DESCENT: FREESPACE aving trouble warding off wave after wave of marauding Vesudan attack wings? Fortunately, help is at hand even though GTA HQ knows nothing of it. The final version of DESCENT: FREESPACE still contains debug cheat codes that'll improve your odds in battle and teach the aliens a thing or two about a good Terran butt kicking. To activate this special cheat mode, first type www.volition-inc.com. Then simultaneously hold down the tilde key I-1 along with one of the following: Code Effect C Send message to enemies Shift C Toggle availability of countermeasures for all ships K Kill target Alt Shift K Apply approx. 10 percent damage to target Shift K Destroy selected subsystem on target. Alt K Apply approx. 10 percent damage to yourself Toggle invulnerability for you Shift! Toggle invulnerability for target 0 Toggle DESCENT-style physics Shift W Infinite weapons for all ships (including yours) W Infinite weapons for your ship G Mark all primary goals as complete Shift G Mark all secondary goals as complete Alt G Mark all bonus goals as complete 9 Scroll forward through all secondary weapons Shift 9 Scroll backward through all secondary weapons 0 Scroll forward through all primary weapons Shifto Scroll backward through all primary weapons R issue a rearm request for target Repeat the keystroke combination to disable the cheat.-Marc Dultz OM:02 MONA TEAM APACHE f like a lot of fixed-wing air jockeys, you feel that choppers are unsafe enough skirting the laws of aerodynamics as they do, here are a few tidbits to keep you flying safe and sound: 1) Never approach known enemy force concentrations at high speed. You need to have time to slow down early so you can pick the bad guys off from the perimeter and then work your way in. If you go charging ahead at full speed, you may end up surrounded by tracer-spitting enemies by the time your copilot/gunner (CP/G) spots his first target, which will put you in a world of hurt. 2) Always fire Hellfire missiles in LOAL (lock-on after launch) mode. This lets you launch before you get a solid lock, improving your response time and fire rate. For targets less than 2 km away, wait about two to three seconds after your CP/G designates it until you fire to be sure the missile has time to lock on and guide. Beyond 3 km, you can launch as soon as a target is found. Be sure to order your CP/G to track your Hellfire's target before you pull the trigger. This will minimize the chances of your CP/G switching to a different target and spoiling the shot. 3) High-explosive rockets are your best bets against enemy infantry. Their blast effect can turn a near miss into a hard kill. Reduce the salvo size to just one rocket and you should still be able to take out one soldier per shot as long as you hold fire until you are within about 650 meters. -Robin Kim 306 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 "


"Action Adventure/RPG OUTWARS A little frustrated with Microsoft's latest blast-fest? These cheats are more A fun than functional, but they'll still spice up your sci-fi gaming experience: GAMER'S EDGE LAM na MENU WATCH COSAW. Bush X-FILES t's hard to fight the future with a lack of hard evidence, but it's even worse when you have to strugThe X gle with only three save-game slots. In true Lone Gunman fashion, however, there is a workaround hack: On the menu screen, click on either Save or Load while holding down the Shift key. Instead of seeing the normal Save/Load screen, you should get a standard Windows Save-As or Load screen. When saving, this method will automatically put in the right file extension, which you can later load at your leisure. Now you can go back to finding the truth. Thierry Nguyen Code Effect Phantom Spy on creatures using F11 and F12 keys Bigears Toggles placeholder sounds Framerate Frame counter Weaponcam Weapon Optics Display -Follows fired rounds, like a smart bomb camera. Strategy/War MECHCOMMANDER hile you're learning and trying to develop your tactical style, be mindful that MECHCOMMANDER differs in many ways from the standard real-time strategy game. Here are some tips to get you started: W develo Sometimes firing at something other than the enemy gets a better result. Some of the maps in MECHCOMMANDER are littered with fuel tanks and explosives storage. Luring enemy units into one of these, then setting them off is immensely satisfying. Just remember that the same can happen to you. If at any time you see an aerospace spotter, start running-and kill the spotter quickly. Enemy close air support is often devastating. Husband your artillery strikes until you really need to use them. Get the hang of timing artillery strikes against moving targets; it's often the difference between victory and defeat Your units tend to move around in combat based on the range of their weapons. Mechs with long-range weaponseven if those happen to be lasers-will try to back up to fire. Take these effects into account when planning your force mix. Use refit trucks and Mech repair bays to repair armor and resupply ammo. In some of the missions, a refit truck is worth more than two Mechs. Whether you use minelayers a lot depends mostly on personal taste; I got through most of the missions without one. The minesweeper is relatively useless, however. And don't waste valuable resource points on tanks. Avoid the rush to melee found in most realtime strategy games. Armed with long-range weapons, your Mechs can support their melee brethren without worry, because there's no friendly fire in this game! Loyd Case del sdu sdu sdil soll sdu sdin sama DR. OPIS EXTREME TACTICS Run from pods. If they only high-tech weapons on get next to your units ... its MCC. Losing the relays they aren't your units any will make it a sitting duck more. The extra time you or whimpering puppy. gain by moving away gives Lots of small, fast, and you an extra couple of cheap units can overwhelm shots to take them out. bigger, slower, and more  Make weapon and shield powerful ones. relays your primary targets. Always give your MCC Often the enemy will put ground/air weapons. Never go in the front door. Explore your enemy's flanks. Often there are unguarded paths. Many weapons can fire beyond your LOS. Deploy sensors so you can use weapons to hit \"unseen\" targets without getting hit back. --Lance Larka COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 307 "


"Upon further reflection, QUEST GLORY JEST GLORY \"Dragon Fire will raise the bar for RPG/ Adventure games.\" GameCenter \"Sierra pulled out all the stops for this beautiful game.\" PCFan TEEN YOSEMITE Entertainment 01998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. () and/or TM designate trademarks of or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. CONTENT RATED BY ESRB "


"maybe you Explore the depths of Atlantis. There lies the answer to an ancient prophecy and the key to the kingdom. don't Come face to face with Hydras, Minotaurs and a myriad of creatures magically brought to life. want to 11.11 Prepare to use sword, dagger, axe, and bare fists to defend the realm and your life. King. QUES for GLORY DRAGON FIRE SIERRAFX  Over 25 spectacular  100's of hours of gameplay spells and 70 unique in exquisite 16-bit color characters to face in multiplayer or solo challenges  CD surround sound and fully orchestrated score in  Over 100 exotic stereo locations to explore with many sub-quests  Available on PC & Mac Go to #077 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Original music soundtrack album also available Free preview at www.QG5.com. Orders 1.800.757.7707 "


"COMPUTER ZD, JNC. GAMNG Chairman and CEO Eric Hippeau Chief Financial Officer Timothy O'Brien The N1 PC Game Magazine W O F MAL ORDER Presidents ZD Publishing Claude P. Sheer ZD Market Intelligence Bob Brown ZD Comdex and Forums Jason Chudnofsky ZD Brand and Market Services Teri Holbrooke ZD Internet Productions Dan Rosensweig ZD Education William Rosenthal ZD Television Larry W. Wangberg Senior Vice Presidents Rayna Brown (Human Resources) Daryl R. Otte (Planning and Development) MALL Vice Presidents Steve Gladyszewski (Information Services) J. Malcolm Morris (General Counsel and Secretary) Mark Moyer (Controller) Tracy Nadi (Human Resources, Operations) Treasurer Thomas L. Wright Corporate Sales Joe Gillespie (Executive Vice President) Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone! ZD Media Network Jeff Bruce (Executive Director) Scott Murphy (Executive Director) Rita Burke (Managing Director) Local Stores don't always have the games you're looking for or the expert advice you need. Take a few minutes to browse the next few pages and shop with the courteous experienced salespeople in Computer Gaming World's Mail Order Mall! ZD Brand and Market Services Brooke Correll (Vice President, ZD Brand Marketing) Michael Perkowski (Vice President, Client Marketing) Elda Vale (Vice President, Corporate Research) Herb Stern (Vice President ZD Brand Management) Gregory Jarboe (Director, Corporate Relations) ZD PUBLISHING President Claude P. Sheer Executive Vice Presidents Don Byrnes Chris Dobbrow Jack Dolce Al DIGuido Thomas McGrade Michael J. Miller Are You Ready? Senior Vice President Nancy Newman Millenium Vice Presidents Bob Bader John Dodge Kathleen Goodwin Roger Herrmann Jonathan Lane Eric Lundquist Jim Manning Charles Mast James F. Ramaley Paul Somerson Mark Van Name Sam Whitmore Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director, Benchmark Operations Bill Catchings Director, ZD Labs Lauren Black Editorial Director, New Products Bill Machrone GAMES M The Best Games... The Best Prices HUGE SELECTIONS Your Very Own-B.B. Tips  Reviews  Previews The New Is Here!!! MILLENIUMGAMES.COM 1.877.204.1634 PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by ZD, Inc. Copyright  1998 ZD, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. If you want to quote from an article write to Chantal Tucker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5802, or fax 212-503-5420. ZIFF-DAVIS 150FIBANK Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. Computer Gaming Reprints For reprints, please call ZD, Inc. reprints at (800) 825-4237. ABC AUDITED Audit Bureau of Circulations Member Go to #198 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.computergaming.com "


"\"MEET YOUR GAMING SYSTEM ENGINEERS\" \"PERFORMANCE WAS SIMPLY STUNNING\" Appeal: Gamers looking for the fastest most reasonably priced gaming system -Computer Garning World, July, 1998 PC GAMER EDITORS' \"BOTTOM LINE: IF YOU'VE GOT THE MONEY TO SPEND THIS IS THE GAMING SYSTEM TO OWN\" CHOICE -PC Gamer, January, 1998 CHOICE boot FAST, PACKED, AND STACKED T ELL \"The Area51 set new records in our CPU/Motherboard SISS. and hard drive tests, completely crushing anything PRODUCT We've seen to date\" -BOOT Magazine. July, 1998 .IIIIIIII OPTIQUEST \"The GREY\" Intel Pentium II 300MHz MMX Intel 440BX Motherboard 512KB AAVID Cooling System 64MB SDRAM (PC-100) 3.5\" Floppy Drive Hercules SAVAGE 3D Beast W/8MB AGP 2X TV-OUT Hercules Stingray2 Voodoo II w/12MB 8.4GB Ultra-ATA Hard Drive XITEL Storm VX A3D 64-Voice Sound Altec Lansing ACS45 Subwoofer & Speaker System Toshiba 32X CD-ROM ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt Power Supply (Dual-Fans) KoolMaxx Video Cooling System 104-Enhanced Keyboard Microsoft 2-Button Mouse US Robotics 56 V.90 Fax/Modem Windows 98 Operating System Latest Drivers Installed Free Installation & Configuration of Favorite Games PRICE: $1,899.00 \"The HIVE-MIND\" Intel Pentium II 400MHz MMX Intel 440BX Motherboard 512KB AAVID Cooling System 64MB SDRAM (PC-100) 3.5\" Floppy Drive Hercules SAVAGE 3D Beast w/BMB AGP 2X TV-OUT Hercules Stingray2 Voodoo Il w/12MB 11.5GB Ultra-ATA Hard Drive XITEL Storm VX A3D 64-Voice Sound Altec Lansing ACS48 Powercube Subwoofer & Speaker System Hitachi 2nd Generation DVD Player ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt Power Supply (Dual-Fans) KoolMaxx Video Cooling System 104-Enhanced Keyboard Microsoft 2-Button Mouse US Robotics 56 V.90 Fax/Modem Microsoft Sidewinder Precision Pro Windows 98 Operating System Latest Drivers Installed Free Installation & Configuration of Favorite Games PRICE: $2,799.00 \"The AREA-51\" Intel Pentium II 450MHz MMX Intel 440BX Motherboard 512KB AAVID Cooling System 128MB SDRAM (PC-100) 3.5\" Floppy Drive Matrox Millenium G200 w/16MB AGP 2X Dual-Hercules Stingray2 Voodoo Il 24MB Scan-Line Interleave 11.5GB Ultra-ATA Hard Drive Iomega Internal Zip Drive 100MB XITEL Storm VX A3D 64-Voice Sound W/DOS Legacy Support INTENSOR Sensory Gaming Chair Subwoofer/Speaker Sytem Hitachi 2nd Generation DVD Player ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt Power Supply (Dual-Fans) KoolMaxx Video Cooling System 104-Enhanced Keyboard Microsoft 2-Button Mouse US Robotics 56 V.90 Fax/Modem Microsoft Sidewinder Precision Pro Microsoft Sidewinder Gampad Windows 98 Operating System Latest Drivers Installed Free Installation & Configuration of Favorite Games PRICE: $3,699.00 \"New\"Intensor Gaming Chair Included ALIENWARE PC Systems Toll Free: 1-800-494-3382 WWW.ALIENWARE-PC.COM Quality Monitors 17\" Viowsonic V773.26DP add: $325.00 19\" Viewsonic V95 .26DP add: $595.00 13396 Southwest 128 Street Miami, Florida 33186 Customize your own dream machine 21\" Viewsonic P810.25DP add: $1,050.00 Product names used in this publication are trademarks of their companies. Go to #105 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"CHIPS & BITSINC. Monster Di Huge Selection POB 234 DEPT 11053 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Great Prices AMOND FREE IHSIDS! DIAMOND MONSTER 3D II' This 3D add-on card works with your existing 2D/3D graphics card. Using the 3DFX Voodoo2 chipset, it blows away every previous performance standard Includes texturing & over 60 frames/sec! Includes free games (8meo): Sp.Ed. Star Wars Game Pack, Heavy Gear Full Version, Tomb Raider 2 Sp. Edition, & lots of demos! Diamond (Hardware) o megs: $ 169.99 after $50 manuRelease: NOW facturer's rebate 12 megs: $219.99 (explres 10/31/98) PC TITLE REPADE PROF 1943 Euro Air War 09/93 $45.99 3D Naval Battles 11/98 $49.99 AH-64D Longbow 2 12/97 $38.99 ATF 98 08/98 $46.99 Aces: X-Fighters 10/98 $49.99 Air Warrior 3 12/97 $36.99 Apache Havoc 11/98 $39.99 Babylon 5 09/98 348.99 Baja 1000 Racing 12/98 $45.99 Castrol Honda Superbike 05/98 $39.99 Comanche Gold 05/98 $45.99 Confirmed kill 09/98 $39.99 Cyberstrike 2 09/98 $42.99 Dawn of Aces 11/98 $44.99 F-15 03/98 $38.99 F-16 Agressor 10/95 $42.99 F-16 Viper 09/98 $45.99 F-22 ADF/ Red Sea Bndi 06/98 $44.99 F1 '98 03/99 $35.99 T ILE RELEASE PRE Super Touring Cars 09/98 $43. Superbike World Champ 10/98 $39. TOCA Touring Car Chmp 09/98 545. Tank! 04/99 548. Top Gun 2 Hornets Nest 09/98 $48. Trans-Am Racing 68-72 11/98 $36. V-Rally 12/98 $44 WA.P.Israell Air Fr 09/98 $44 Warbirds 3D 11/98 $44. Wing Comm 5: Prophcy 12/97 $38. Wings of Destiny 04/99 $39. X-Com Interceptor 06/98 $39. X-Wing Collector's Srs 06/98 $29. X-Wng V Tie W Binc Pwr 09/98 $39. Xenocracy 09/95 $39. A-10 Warthog 09/93 $43. F-22 v5.0 03/98 $35. F/A-18 CSF 07/98 $38. Panzer 44 04/98 $27 'CONFIRMED KILL'Choose from a wide range of historically-accurate missions & hypothetical scenarios. Parameters (such as: flight, damage, & gunnery models, red outs/black outs, sun blind spots, mid-air collisions, ammunition loads, & fuel consumption) are adjustable for each scenario. Intuitive interface & virtual cockpit maximize situational awareness during battle. Eldos(Simulation) Release: 9/98 $39.99 PC CD CH EXL 500 Racing Set 09/98 $99.99 12/96 $95.99 CH Gamestick 14 12/97 $59.99 CH Gamestick 3D Jystck 09/98 $45.99 CH Joystick Switchbox 11/97 $24.99 CH Pro Pedals 12/94 $79.99 CH Racno WH W Pedal 10/97 $85.99 Gravis Xterminatr Gm Pd 07/98 $43.99 MS SideWinder FF Wh 09/98 $149.99 MS SidWndr FrSu Pro Pd 09/98 $89.99 COMPUTER GAMES: SIMULATION I LE RELEASE PRICE TITLE RILLABI PRO F16 Fighting Falcon 09/97 $19.00 Luftwaffe Commander 11/98 $49.99 F22 Total Air War 07/98 $48.99 M1 Tank Platoon 2 04/98 $29.99 FLY! 12/98 $46.99 MS Combat Flight Sim 08/98 548.99 Falcon 4.0 10/98 $54.99 MechWarrior 3 12/93 $52.99 Falcon 4.0: MiG 29 12/98 $30.99 MiG 29 10/98 546.99 Fighter Duel 2 12/98 $48.99 Monster Truck Madnss 2 07/98 $46.99 Fighter Legends 11/98 $47.99 Moto Racer GP 2 09/98 $44.99 Fighter Pilot 09/98 $19.99 Motocross Madness 09/98 $44.99 Flight Unlimited 3 11/98 $45.99 Nascar Racing 3 12/98 $47.99 Flying Corps Gold 02/98 $19.99 Need for Speed 3 09/98 $44.99 Flying Nightmares 2 10/98 $39.99 Panzer Commander 05/98 $34.99 Flying Tigers 09/98 $48.99 Professional Sprtsar Rong 10/98 $42.99 Formula 1 CE 09/98 $39.99 SU-27 Flanker 2 11/98 $49.99 FrontLine Fighters 08/98 $48.99 Screamer 3 09/98 544.99 Gunmetal 08/98 $42.99 Scrmn Demons Europe 11/98 547.99 Gunship 3 11/98 $48.99 Silent Hunter 2 03/99 $46.99 Independence War 08/98 $46.99 Skies 09/98 $42.99 Inertia 04/99 $43.99 Spearhead 11/98 $45.99 Interceptor 03/99 $26.99 Starsiege 09/98 $45.99 COMPUTER GAMES: HARDWARE Mad Ctz Andrtti Reng Whi08/98 $109.99 Space Orb 360 10/96 $42.99 Mad Catz Panther XL 01/98 $62.99 TM Attack Throttle 04/98 $49.99 Mad Catz Pnthr LS Dig 06/98 $69.99 TM F22 Pro 10/96 S129.99 Quickshot Master Pilot 98 04/98 $37.99 TM Fist Fighter 10/98 $58.99 Quickshot Mstr Pilt Val 03/98 $59.99 TM Nascar Racna WM 11/97 $118.99 Quickshot Mst Plt Prog 04/98 $25.99 TM Nscr Fro GT Rco WWI 10/98 $169,99 Saitek Cyborg 3D Jstk 09/98 $52.99 TM Nscr Spr Sprt Rcg WI 09/98 $116.99 Saitek Cyborg 3D Pad 08/98 $38.99 TM Nser Sprint Reno WH 09/98 $54.99 Saitek R4 Fre Fdok W 10/98 $169.99 Tchmedia 3D Zone Mastr 02/98 $64.99 Saitek X-36 Cont Sys 05/98 $107.99 Thom Ent TSW 2 Wheel 06/98 $219.00 COMPUTER GAMES: ACTION Duke Nukm 3D Atomic 01/97 $19.99 Prey 12/98 $49.99 Esoteria 11/98 $46.99 Quake 2 12/97 $39.99 Giants 12/98 $48.99 Quake 2 Mission Pk 1-2 ea 06/98 $24.99 Heavy Gear 2 02/99 $48.99 Requiem 11/98 $46.99 Heretic 2 12/98 $49.99 Ricochet 03/99 $35.99 Interstate 76 Arsenal 03/98 $38.99 Shadowman 11/98 $49.99 Interstate 82 04/99 $48.99 Sin 08/98 $48.99 Max Payne 11/98 $47.99 Star Trek Klingon Acadmy 10/98 $48.99 Messiah 09/98 $48.99 Starship Troopers 12/98 $46.99 0.D.T. 10/98 $39.99 Starsiege: Tribes 10/98 $43.99 COMPUTER GAMES: SPORTS Modems Omd SprXp 561 SP V90 04/98 S107 Omd SpraXprs 561 V.901 04/98 589 USR 56k V.90 DF Int 03/98 5139 Video Cards A Open PA 2000 16MB 07/98 $299 ATI Xprt@ply BMB AGP2X 04/98 $249. Canopus Pure 3D 2 12MB 06/98 $299. Omnd Mnstr 30 II 12MB 06/98 $269 ELSA Erazor 11 APG 16MB 08/98 $269 TOMB 12/98 $45. TOMB RAIDER III' Lara's off to even more exotic locations this time around, from the blistering deserts of India to the lush islands of the South Pacific. Now you can choose your own destiny by selecting the order in which you play each of the four different adventures. Revamped game engine, new reflection system, vastly improved Al, new special effects (rain, snow, fire, & more), Eidos (Action) Release: 11/98 PC CD $39.99 Battlezone Beneath Blood 2 DF Jedi Knight W/ Sith Daikatana Descent 3 Descent Freespace Drakan Duality Duke Nukem Forever 03/98 $39.99 02/99 $48.99 10/98 $39.99 09/98 $48.99 11/98 $39.99 12/96 $48.99 06/98 $29.99 01/99 $39.99 10/98 $46.99 12/98 $48.99 System Shock 2 Tomb Raider 3 Tomb Raider Gold Tomorrow Never Dies Trespassr Jrssic Park Unreal Urban Assault Vigilance Wrath X-Com Allance 11/98 $39. 03/98 $19. 12/98 $48. 09/98 $48 06/98 $39 10/98 $47. 09/98 $42. 12/98 $48 12/98 $47. \"MESSIAH' Bob, the cherub, comes to Earth to cleanse it of its vile sinners. He can jump into inhabitants' bodies, using their weapons & strength. As Bob. you control over 20 characters, throw a knife & spear, & kill your enemies. Seamless skin effect, morphing environments, amazing lighting & particle effects, streaming real video, & multiple solutions Interplay (Action) 3D Ultra Mini Golf Dlx 07/98 $39.99 Baseball Mogul 99 0 8/98 $28.99 Bass Masters Cissc TE 10/98 $42.99 Browning's Duck Hunter 05/98 $15.99 08/98 $17.99 Expert Pool 02/99 $35.99 FOX Sports Golf 99 06/98 $39.99 FOX Sports Soccer 99 06/98 $39.99 FPS Football 99 11/93 $42.99 FPS Skiing 99 10/98 $39.99 Remngth Upind Brd Hntr 08/98 $17. SS Basketball Pro 99 11/98 546 SS Golf Pro 99 09/98 $39 SS Pro Football 99 10/98 $46. Tiger 99 08/98 544 Triple Play 99 03/98 $44 Trophy Buck 11/98 $39 VR Baseball 2000 04/99 544 Virtual Pool 2 DVD 05/98 $45 World Cup 98 05/98 $44 Release: 10/98 $48.99 PC CD Abe's Exodus Badlands Beavis & Butthead Beyond Time Crime Killer Curse of Monkey Isle Dark Side of Moon Dead Unity Demon Isle Enemy Zero 11/93 $39.99 10/98 $48.00 11/98 $25.99 09/98 $44.99 1098 $39.99 11/97 $35.99 12/98 $48.99 10/98 $45.99 01/99 $48.00 Small Soldiers Sqd Cmdr 06/98 $28 SoulBringer 11/98 547 Space Circus 12/98 $44 Star Trek Birth Fed 10/98 552 Star Trek Kling Hnr Grd 09/98 $47 Star Trek SFA DVD 07/98 $44 Str Trk Sert Vicn Fry 08/93 $48. Wheel of Time 12/98 $46 X-Files Adventure Game 06/98 $46 Zork Grand Ingstr DVD 12/98 547 NGO \"GRIM FANDANGO' You control Manny Calavera, who as travel agent for the Department of the Dead brings people to the Land of the Dead. Characters come to life as folk-art style skeletons in this adventure story of embezzlement & redemption. Inspired by film noir & Mexican folklore, the game features wildly exaggerated hot rods, more than 50 mysterious characters, & 90 locations, all in stunning 3-D Lucas Arts (Adventure) Release: 9/98 PC CD $48.99 Game, Net & Match 07/98 $38.99 Madden NFL 99 09/98 $44.99 Golden Tee Golf 98 08/98 $39.99 NBA Live 99 11/93 $44.99 Hardball 6 04/93 $44.99 NCAA Football 99 09/93 $44.99 High Heat Baseball 04/98 $22.99 NFL Gameday 99 09/93 $42.99 Jmmy Hsins Bss Trn USA 06/98 $19.99 NFL OB Club 99 09/98 $44.99 Knockout Kings 09/98 $44.99 NHL Hockey 99 09/98 $44.99 Links Extreme 10/98 $39.99 NHL Powerplay 99 09/98 $44.99 Links LS 99 09/98 $48.99 PBA Bowling 2 10/98 $35.00 MS Baseball 3D 06/98 $44.99 Pro 18 World Tour Golt 11/98 $39.99 MS Golf 98 05/98 $48.00 Redneck Deer Huntin 07/98 $19.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ADVENTURE Gabriel Knight 3 09/98 $48.99 Nocturne 12/98 $46.99 Grim Fandango 09/98 $39.99 Omikron 01/99 $39.99 Gruesome Castle 10/98 $48.00 Prince of Persia 3D 05/99 $48.99 Heart of Darkness 07/98 $42.99 Quest for Glory 5 07/98 $48.00 Indy Jones Infrni Mchne 02/99 $48.99 Red Jack 09/98 $44.99 Jack Orlando 01/99 $43.99 Redguard 03/99 $52.99 Journeyman Proct 3 DVD 08/98 $39.99 Respect, Inc 02/99 $44.99 KQ8 Mask of Eternity 12/98 $48.99 Return to Krondor 12/98 $45.99 Morpheus 09/98 $44.99 Sanitarium 05/98 $39.99 $39.99 Siege of Stormhaven 10/98 $48.99 HINT BOOKS Role-Playing Simulation Diablo 02/97 $15.99 F-15 05/98 $15.99 Elder Scrolls 2 10/96 $11.99 Falcon 4.0 09/98 $16.99 Land Lore 2 12/97 $13.99 Mechwarrior 3 09/98 $16.99 Might & Magic 6 05/98 $16.99 Starsiege 09/98 $16.99 Revenant 09/98 $16.99 Stralopy Thief Dark Project 10/98 $16.99 Alpha Centauri 0B/98 $16.99 Ultima 9:Ascension 12/98 $16.99 Caesar 3 OB/98 $16.99 Ultima Collection 02/98 $16.99 Commandos 09/98 $18.99 Ultima Online 10/97 $16.99 Dawn of War 11/98 $17.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ROLEPLAYING Elder Scrolls 2 09/96 $39.00 Lands Lore Grans Dst 10/97 $28.99 Eldr Scrils Mrrowind 03/99 $54.00 Lands of Lore 3 11/98 $44.99 EverOuest 11/98 $44.99 Might & Magic 6 04/98 $39.95 FR Descent Undermtn 01/98 $29.00 Might & Magic 6 LE 05/98 $54.99 Fallout 10/97 $29.99 Mordor 2 12/98 $42.99 Fallout 2 11/98 $48.99 Mortalus 08/98 $44.00 Final Fantasy VII 06/98 $39.99 Nox 12/98 $47.99 Good & Evil 06/99 $48.00 Rage of Mages 10/98 $44.99 Gothica 09/98 $48.00 Revenant 10/98 $29.99 Hexplore 09/98 $39.99 Septerra Core 08/98 $48.00 CRIME CORRUPTION Sin Action Dalkatana 08/98 $13.99 Half Lite 06/98 $16.99 05/98 $13.99 Unreal 06/98 $15.99 Adventure Curse of Monkey Isle 01/98 $15.99 Gabriel Knight 3 09/98 $17.99 King's Quest 8 08/98 $16.99 Quest for Glory 5 06/98 $16.99 Dune 2000 Heroes M&M 3 Homeworld Populous 3 SWAT 2 SimCity 3000 StarCon Starcraft Warlords 3 X-COM: Apocalypse 06/98 $17 11/98 $16 08/98 $16 10/98 S16 06/98 $16 09/98 $16 09/98 $17 05/98 $12 09/97 $14 09/97 $14 middle of realistic Wwill action! AYIS Altes \"AXIS & ALLIES' puts you in the middle of realistic WWII action! Spearheading your country's military drive, you decide where & when to strike, & whether you make a strategic bombing raid, Sneak sub attack, infantry attack, or anti-aircraft barrage. Buy armaments, develop secret weapons, & take over territory Solo play or up to 5 players over LAN, modem, or Internet Hasbro (Strategy) AD&D Collector's Ed. Anachronox Baldur's Gate Battlespite Betrayal in Antara Blade Celtica Diablo Diablo 2 Diablo Hellfire 07/98 $15.99 05/99 $48.99 09/98 $46.99 12/97 $32.99 07/97 $34.99 11/98 $45.99 09/98 344.00 01/97 $29.99 03/99 548.99 12/97 $17.99 Starship Diplomacy 05/99 548 Swords & Sorcery 09/98 $48 Swords of Heroes 10/98 $4G Thief: The Dark Prict 10/98 $29 Third World 05/99 $48 Ultima 9 Ascension 12/98 $52 Ultima Online 09/97 $49 Ultima Online Gold 09/98 $52 Vampire: The Masquerade 11/99 848 Wizardry 8 11/98 549 1995 CHIPS & BITS. Release: 9/98 $39.99 PC CD CW10981 "


"New Releases Order Online www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 Source Code 11053 \"BALDUR'S GATE' is set in the legendary Forgotten Realms campaign world. It features a transparent interface and gameplay that uses a real-time modification of the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules system. There are over 60 monsters to fight, you control a party of six each with unique abilities and personas. Batoors te $20 Rebate! Interplay (Roleplaying) Release: 9/98 PC CD Price Before Rebate $ 46,99 CBI Instant Rebate $ 20.00 Price Alter Rebate $26.99** COMMAND TITLE RELEASE PRICE 10 SL 09/98 $42.99 AD&D Birthright 07/97 $27.99 Age Empires Finl Congst 07/98 $18.99 Age of Empires 10/07 $41.99 Age of Empires 2 0 5/99 $48.99 Age of Emprs Rise Rme 11/98 $29.99 Age of Wonders 08/98 $46.99 Alpha Centauri 12/98 $47.99 Ancient Conquest 09/98 $39.99 Army Men 05/98 $32.99 Axis & Alles 09/98 $39.99 Battlecruiser 3000 2 12/98 $44.99 Bartlezone Exp Pack 10/98 $24.99 Black & White 04/99 $48.99 Blackstone Chroncles 11/98 $44.99 C&C 09/95 $12.99 C&C 2: Tiberian Sun 10/93 $48.99 C & C Gold W95 02/97 $18.99 C&C RA Altermath 10/97 $19.99 C&C Red Alert 11/96 $25.99 Caesar 3 12/98 $48.99 Capitalism Plus 05/97 $29.99 Civ 2 Multiplayer Gold Ed 08/98 $46.99 Clv 2 Test of Time 04/99 $48.99 Civilization 2 03/96 $19.99 Civilization 2 Scen 11/96 $23.99 Civilization Test Tme 12/98 $48.99 Civilztn Call to Powr 02/99 $48.99 Commandos 08/98 $34.99 Conflict of Nations 11/98 $46.99 Creatures 2 08/98 $35.99 COMPUTER GAMES: STRATEGY TITLE RELEASE PRICE TME RELEASE PRICE Dark Omen 03/98 $39.99 Lemmings Paintball Pk 06/98 $29.99 Dark Reign MP 1-2e3 04/98 $26.99 Lords Realm 2 1 1/96 $19.99 Dawn of War 08/98 $39.99 Lords of Magic SE 09/98 $39.99 Dominant Species 10/98 545.99 MAX 2 06/98 $44.99 Dominion Storm 06/98 $29.99 MTG Duels Planeswalker 02/98 $26.99 Duel. Mage Wars 10/98 $39.99 Malkari 11/98 44.00 Dune 2000 09/98 $39.99 Master of Magic 12/94 $18.99 Dungeon Keeper 2 12/98 $45.99 Master of Onion 2 11/96 $24.99 Dungeon Keeper Gold 04/98 $39.99 MechCommander 07/98 $39.99 Emergency 08/98 $19.99 MechCommander Exp Pck 12/98 $29.99 Extreme Tactics 08/98 $48.99 Missn Fec:Cybrstrm 2 06/98 $36.99 Extreme Wartare 08/98 $48.99 Myth 2 11/98 $43.99 Force Commander 11/98 $49.99 Plague 09/98 $42.99 Freedom in Galaxy 03/99 $42.99 Populous 3 10/98 $45.99 Galilean Conflict 02/99 $35.99 Ralfroad Tycoon 2 12/98 $48.99 Gangsters 11/98 $35.99 Rainbow Six 08/98 $44.99 Global Domination 09/98 $39.99 Reach for Stars 2 04/99 $48.99 Golgotha 10/98 $48.99 Rebel Moon Revolution 11/98 $36.99 Heroes M&M 2 11/96 $25.99 Rebellion W/ Strat Gde 09/98 $46.99 Heroes M&M 3 11/98 $44.99 Revolution 09/98 $44.99 Hollywood Mogul 12/97 $39.99 RoboRumble 10/98 $46.99 Homeworld 08/98 $48.99 Ruthless.com 11/98 $47.99 Imperialism 2 11/98 $44.99 SWAT 2 07/98 $42.99 incubation 10/97 $38.99 Sentinel Returns 08/98 $26.99 Incubation Wilderness 05/98 $19.99 Settlers 3 10/98 $43.99 Industry Giant 04/98 $36.99 Seven Kingdoms 2 11/98 $39 99 Jaggd Alinc Odly Game 09/96 $14.99 Shadow Company 04/99 $42.99 Jagged Alliance 2 09/98 544.99 Shadowpact 02/99 $43.99 KKND 2 09/98 $34.99 Siege 05/99 $35.99 LED Wars 10/98 $41.99 SimCity 3000 09/98 $54.99 Legend of the Five Rings 12/99 $42.99 SimSatari 03/98 $26.99 COMPUTER GAMES: WAR Great Battles Caesar 03/98 $34.99 People's General 09/98 $42.99 Guadalcanal 04/99 $39.99 Prelude to Waterloo 10/97 $19.99 Harpoon 4 07/99 $46.99 Road to Moscow 09/98 $42.99 Medieval 07/98 $32.99 Semper Ft 02/98 $32 99 Napoleon 1813 10/98 $42.99 Sid Meier's Gettysbry 10/97 $22.99 North Vs. South 10/98 $42.99 Steel Panthers 2 11/96 $19.99 Oper Art War Ex Pk 1-2 a 08/98 $22.99 Steel Panthers 3 11/97 $26.99 Opertionl Art of War 06/98 $39.99 Steel Panthers Arsenal 05/98 $36.99 Pacific Tide 08/98 $45.99 Steel Pnths 2 Cmp 1 04/97 $14.99 Panzer General 2 10/97 $33.99 Stl Pothers Cmp 1-2ea 08/96 $14.99 BOARD GAMES TITLE RELEASE PRICE Soldiers at War 05/98 $35.99 Star Trek Startit Comm 12/98 548.00 StarCon 01/99 $44.99 Starcraft 04/98 $36.99 Starcraft Expansion 08/98 $29.99 Starcraft Insurrection 07/98 $26.99 Starcraft Retaliation 09/98 $19.99 Starcraft Silir Forces 05/98 $18.99 Stars Twinpack 06/98 $27.99 Tartan Army 11.95 $41.99 Theocracy 12/98 $42.99 Total Annin War Chest 09/98 $47.99 Total Annihilation 10.97 $19.99 Total Annihilation 2 1298 $48.99 Total Annlin Cr Cigcy 0 4/98 $19.99 Totl Annhit Birl Tctcs 07/98 $19.99 Transport Tycoon Dix Uprising 2 11/98 $46.99 War of the Worlds 10/98 $36.99 Wat Breeds 03/98 $19.99 Warcraft 2 Platinum 09/98 $39.99 Wargames 07/98 $39.99 Wathmmr 40k Chs Gate 11/98 $45.99 Warlords 2 Dix 09/95 $39.99 Warlords 3 Add-On 08/98 $34.99 Warlords 4 06/99 $48.99 Worldcraft 2 06/98 $26.99 Worms 2 01/98 $24.99 X-Com Apocalypse 08/97 $26.99 X-Com Terr frm Deep 03/95 $16.99 Yoot's Tower 10/98 $39.99 CONQUER 'COMMAND & CONQUER 2 once again pits the GDI against the Brotherhood of NOD. Real-time strategy with all new engine, improved controls, dynamic 3D terrain, realistic physics, & fully reactive environment. Multiple levels of warfare allow players to get up close or fight from afar Travel under, over, or on terrain. Support for 8 LAN players or oneon-one via the Internet Virgin (Strategy) $48.99 Release: 10/98 PC CD 101st Airborne Normandy 08/98 $39.99 Afrika Korps 04/99 $42.99 Aide de Camp 2 01/98 $44.99 Battle of Britain 1940 11/98 $44.99 Battlegrnd Mid East 09/98 $42.99 Close Combat 2 11/97 $42.99 Close Combat 3 12/98 $48.99 Dragons in the Mist 0 5/98 $23.99 East Front 11/97 $39.99 East Front Camp 03/98 $24.99 Storm in the West TACOPS 98 Third Reich Tides of War V Victory Bundle V Victory Utah Bch War Along the Mohawk War in Europe Wargme CS 3 w West Front 04/98 $33.99 02/99 $35.99 10/96 $29.99 09/98 $36.99 11/95 $27.99 02/95 $9.99 07/98 $28.99 09/98 $39.99 06/97 $19.99 09/98 $44.99 SAITEK CYBORG 3D STICK This unique stick not only sports an incredible array of functions, but is also completely configurable. By using the Cyborg adjustment tool, the Cyborg 3D Stick can be configured to fit your hand, whatever your hand-size, & whether you are right or left-handed. Features precise 3D twist function. Ratio digital technology. Up to 24 programmable actions. Saitek (Hardware) $52.99 Release: 9/98 St Andrews JATHA CITY \"LINKS LS 1999' Features Arnold Palmer & others at St Andrews Links Old Course, a new tourament environment, 3D objects internet voice chat, and over 25 new play modes. New options for Internet play include spectator mode and real-time voice chat. The more than 25 available addon courses will still be compatible with Links LS 1999. Includes a new mouse swing \"powerstroke Access (Sports) inks 1999 $52.99 Release: 9/98 ACCESS 2.99 PC CD PC CD -Watt 1830 RR & Rohr Brons 12/94 $23.99 Campaign to Stalingrd 01/95 $29.99 Hobbit Adventure 06/95 $32.99 Saratoga 06/98 $24.99 6th Fleet 01/95 $39.99 Chancellorsville 12/94 $32.99 Krieg! 08/96 $36.99 Serenissima 04/98 $42.99 Across 5 Aprils 12/94 $23.99 Circus Maximus 12/94 $11.99 Lionheart 10/97 $35.99 Third Reich 12/94 $19.99 Advanced Civilization 12/94 $25.99 Colonial Diplomacy 01/95 $42.99 Longstreet's Assault 01/95 $24.99 Typhoon! 1941 11/95 $37.99 Advanced Squad Leader 12/94 $37.99 Condottiere 05/98 $38.99 Michway 12/94 $19.99 Victory in Normandy 02/95 $11.99 Africa 1880 04/93 $52.99 Desert Fox Deluxe 12/96 $29.99 Napoleon's Battles 12/94 $24.99 War at Sea 12/94 $24.99 Ancient Empires 01/95 $29.99 Die Hanse 11/96 $36.99 On To Richmond 0B/98 $34.99 War of 1812 01/95 $34.99 Axos & Allies 11/94 $42.99 EmpireBuilder 03/96 $28.99 Pacific War 12/94 $39.99 Warhammer 40K 11/94 $59.99 Battles Anc. World 2 05/96 $32.99 Empires in Arms 12/94 $27.99 Pax Britannica 12/94 $18.99 Warhammer Fantasy 10/96 $66.99 Battletech 4th Ed. 12/94 $21.99 Europe at War 2nd Ed. 09/96 $41.99 Rebels & Redcoats 2 04/95 $25.99 Warhammer Quest 05/95 $66.99 Bells of War 05/98 $42.99 Eurorails 11/94 $24.99 Rise of Luftwaffe 01/95 $19.99 We the People 12/94 $29.99 Bitter Woods 08/98 $24.99 For The People 08/98 $43.99 Risk 03/96 $34.99 Wooden Ships Iton Men 12/94 $19.99 Britannia 12/94 $19.99 Hannibal 03/96 $32.99 Rommel's Battles 11/95 $19.99 World War One 09/95 $11.99 Caesar: Gallic Wars 06/98 $45.99 History of the World 12/94 $27.99 Samurai Swords 04/97 $39.99 World in Flames Dlx 11/96 $89.99 ROLE PLAYING GAMES AD&D DM Guide 02/95 $23.99 Cyberpunk 2020 05/95 $17.99 Heavy Gear 08.95 $25.99 Shadowrun 2nd Ed 12/94 $20.99 Alternity Player's Handbook04/98 $24.99 Deadlands Rulebook 10/97 $27.99 MERP 2 Softcover 10/95 $19.99 StarWars Revised 01/97 $27.99 Ars Magica 4th Ed 0 8/95 $25.99 99 Dragonlance 5th Age Dragonlance 5th Age 09/96 $20.99 09/96 $20.99 Pendragon 4th Ed. Pendragon 4th Ed. 05/95 $19.99 05/95 $19.99 Trinity Trinity 03/98 $26.99 Call of Cthulhu 5th Ed. 07/98 $24.99 Earthdawn 06/95 $17.99 Ritts 06/95 $21.99 Vampire 2nd Ed. 02/95 $25.99 Conspiracy X 09/96 $22.99 GURPS Rulebook 02/95 $22.99 Robotech 04/95 $11.99 Werewolf 02/95 $24.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ADULT Aladdin & City of Sin 04/98 $32.99 Nightwatch Int 3 07/96 $29.99 Busty Babes 4 11/95 $36.99 Romsolt Six Pk 2 06/96 $29.99 Spend the specified amount on any in-stock sollware and choose one free Cabin Fever 07/97 $34.99 Ropes & Chains 02/96 $19.99 IBM game from the corresponding list. Request must be made at time of Celebrity Nudes 01/95 $19.99 Sex With Jena 03/97 $42.99 order. Offer good on In-stock software only, while supplies last. Limit 2 per Deep Thrt Gris 4Pk 06/96 $49.99 Space Sirens 2 09/95 $34.99 customer. Valld through 10/6/98. Diva X: Kaoru Spend $60 11/97 $34.99 Strip Poker Pro 2 12/95 $39.99 ESPN Sports Shorts Co, Virus CD, RiddleMasterLu CD, Armed&Delirious CD Duke Screwem 12/96 $49.99 Vampire's Kiss 10/9! $34.99 Spend $100 Fantascenes 4 07/98 $39.99 Virtual Valerie 2 08/95 $32.99 Fable CD, Falcon 3.0 CO, Jagged Alliance Deadly Games CD, Temulin CD Femme Fatale 09/95 $29.99 Virtual Veronica 05/97 $48.99 Spend $200 Girlfriend Donna 12/96 $39.99 Virtually Yours 2 0 5/95 $38.99 Command&ConquerCD,Excalibur 2555CD,StarGeneralCD, Wizardry Gold CD Visa, MC & Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD $8. Price, release, availability, shipping times & offer not guaranteed & are subject to change at any time. Hardware may require added S&H. Within 10 days defectives repaired or replaced at our discretion. After 10 days the manufacturer's warrantee applies. All sales final. S&H calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The 'per order charge is charged once per order placed, the per item' charge Jis charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment charge is Standard Priority Express Express Mail To Mail TO US. Mai U.S. M charged once for each shipment we make to you. For each US order $10.00 2-19 an 22 Dec 2017 1D 407 Days 7-14 Dys will be allocated to a 12 issue subscription to Computer Games Strategy Plus. Per Shipment Per Order $1.25 Call for details. Per item $ 75 $900 S500 \"To quality for CBI Rebate, you must order Baldur's Gate between Sept. 1st, 1993 and Oct. 15th, 1998 Mail the original invoice, proof ofpurchase (original UPC code from the product box), the original rebate offer(this ad), and a self addressed stamped envelope for return mailing) to Chips & Bits Inc./Rebate Dept., PO Box 234, Rochester, VT 05767. INo copies will be accepted. All incomplete claims will be discarded. All claims must be postmarked within 30 days of the invoice date. Vold where prohibited, taxed, or restrict ed. Not valid with any other offer and limited to one rebate per name/family/address, Postage required for mail in rebate. $20 rebate will be sent in the form of a Chips & Bits Inc. Credit Voucher good towards your next purchase at Chips & Bits Inc. Please allow 8 weeks for delivery Chips & Bits Inc. is not responsible for lost, late or misdirected claims and/or credit vouchers. This offer is subject to change at anytime without notice 1999 CHIPS & BITS, INC Go to HN6A wwcomnutaroaming comlinfolink FREE GAME OFFER! \"WIZARDRY 8' brings an entire world of fantasy to life! Create characters from 11 races & 15 classes. Experience an intense new combat system, fighting 100 monsters, casting 90 animated spells, & defending against attacks from all sides. Import characters from other Wizardry games & compete against computer controlled characters with multiple beginnings & endings. SirTech (Roleplaying) PC CD $49.99 Release: 11 * I   SWORDS & SORCERY: COME DEVILS COME DARKNESS' Fully active 6 person role-playing with 10 races & 15 classes. Characters can be customized with a wide selection of clothing, armor, & magic artifacts The non-linear exploration system lets you discover multitudes of creatures allies, & artifacts as you journey through the 3D fantasy world. Turn-based or real-time combat. Virgin (Roleplaying) $48.99 Release: 9/98 PC CD COPA "


"COMPUTER virtually DIE for! GAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine other gamers would rock-bottom rate Grab the Knowledge Power 5 Free Issues! Save 42% Sur COMPUTER 10 $27.94—One Year/12 Issues Like Getting 5 Issues FREE! $49.97—Two Years/24 Issues Like Getting 11 Issues FREE! GAMING . Sim The True AGE OF Save 48% WORLD sues AGE OF LANG U EMPIRES NILA Weven Belore Seen Screenshots! Glanz & Page Preview! Call (800) 827-4450 ZD CHEN "


"believe in technology ZD FGEA! NEW THÉSCREEN SAVERS TER SPIN ericj: Censorship on the Internet? Anybody ever hear of the First Amendment77 CALL FOR HELP Like ESPN, but for geeks. Sports fans get it. 24 hours of what interests them most: sports. Everything to do with sports. Well, now it's your turn. Announcing ZDTV, a 24-hour television network dedicated to computing and the Internet. Whether you're a high-tech aficionado or just like keeping on top of technology trends, ZDTV has something for you. Want to know what's new on the Web? Tune into \"Internet Tonight.\" What are the newest toys and gadgets out there in Tech Land? Turn on \"Fresh Gear.\" Sound good? Get ZDTV and don't miss another day of the future. To order ZDTV, call your cable company or satellite provider or request online at www.zdtv.com/getzdtv. ZDTV Television about computing ZDTV is now available on DIRECTV channel 273 ZDIV LLC 1998,ZOIV is a trademark of Ziff Davis Inc Silicon Spin, Fresh Gear and Internet Tonight is a trademark of ZDTV, DIRECTV is a registered trademark of DIRECTV, Inc., a unit of Hughes Electronics Corpo Totovacion about o utinis atanistered trademark ZATV "


"TOP 100 CGW'S MONTHLY READERS' POLL ach month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of previous months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your feedback. F TOP ACTION GAMES MOT GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 . Unreal GT Interactive 8.77 2 1 Quake II Activision 8.64 4.5 3 3 Quake Pack 1: Scourge id Software/Ritual 8.58 4.5 4 2 Quake Pack 2: Dissolution id Software/Roque 8.57 5 4 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II LucasArts 8.51 4.5 6 5 Jedi Knight: Mysteries LucasArts 8.33 7 7 Quake id Software 7.97 6 Tomb Raider Eidos 7.97 9. Forsaken Acclaim 7.82 10 8 Moto Racer EA 7.82 4 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES PANDE MASS GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 1 1 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts 8.28 5 19 2 3 Blade Runner Westwood/Virgin 7.79 4.5 3 4 Twinsen's Odyssey Activision 7.68 5 |_4 10 Zork Grand Inquisitor Activision 7.58 N/R 5 5 Realms of the Haunting Interplay 7.45 4.5 67 The Neverhood DreamWorks 8 Last Express Broderbund 7.44 4.5 8 6 Rama Sierra 7.40 4.5 9 9 Circle of Blood Virgin 7.39 10 Starship Titanic Simon & Shuster 7.38 2.5 JACK LONGBOW 11 Longbow 2 EA TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES MOS LAST GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 1 You Don't Know Jack 2 Berkeley Systems 8.32 4.5 2 2 You Don't Know Jack 3 Berkeley Systems 8.13 4 3 3 You Don't Know Jack Movies Berkeley Systems 8.00 45 4 5 Smart Games Challenge 2 Smart Games Inc. 7.765 54 Worms 2 MicroProse 7 .73 6 7 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 7.64 2.5 7 6 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems 7.59 4.5 8 8 Shanghai Dynasty Activision 7.55 3 99 Power Chess Sierra 7.35 N/R 10 10 Lose Your Marbles SegaSoft 6.62 4.5 TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT S IST GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING EA 8.58 5 2 2 Wing Commander: Prophecy Origin 8.43 4.5 34 F-15 8,07 4.5 4 3 F-22 ADF DID 7.91 4.5 5 5 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 7.68 4.5 6 Fighters Anthology 7.68 3.5 78 M1 Tank Platoon MicroProse 7.60 3.5 8 Panzer Commander SSI 7.48 4 7 Flight Unlimited 2 Looking Glass 7.48 4.5 10 9 Flight Sim 98 Microsoft 7.29 3.5 EA HEROESIC COMPANY TOP SPORTS GAMES SER GAME 11 3 NHL 98 EA Sports 12 2 Links LS Access 3 1 FIFA Road to World Cup 98 EA Sports 44 NBA Live 98 EA Sports 5 6 NASCAR Racing 2 Sierra 6 5 Jack Nicklaus 5 Accolade 7. TriplePlay '99 EA Sports 8 7 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 98 NHL 97 EA Sports 10 10 NBA Live 97 EA Sportske SCORE RATING 8.62 4 8.58 5 8.43 4.5 8.35 4.5 8.15 5 8.12 8.00 2.5 7.95 7.85 7.83 4.5 1 NB! 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP STRATEGY GAMES W GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 Heroes II: Price of Loyalty New W. Computing 8.98 5 2 StarCraft Blizzard 8.89 TA: Core Contingency Cavedog 8.82 4.5 3 Heroes II New W. Computing 8.60 4 Red Alert Virgin/ Westwood 8.53 4.5 5 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood 8.25 6 Total Annihilation GT Interactive 8.23 7 Age of Empires Microsoft 8.01 4.5 8 Civ II: Scenarios MicroProse 7.92 4 9 Civ II: Fantastic Worlds MicroProse 7.91 4 4.5 GYUR OTUD SSI heMule VI TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES LAST GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 1 Might and Magic VI New W. Computing 8.92 4.5 2 2 Diablo Blizzard 8.55 4.5 3 3 Fallout Interplay 8.31 4.5 4 4 Hellfire Sierra 8.044 5 5 Daggerfall Bethesda 7.05 4.5 6 6 Shadows Over Riva Sir-Tech 6.46 NIR 7 7 Lands of Lore II Westwood 6.16 N/R 8 8 Meridian 59 5.41 3.5 9 9 Ultima Online Origin 4.82 1.5 10 10 Battlespire Bethesda 4.37 N/R TOP WARGAMES Step ST GAME COMPANY 1 1 Steel Panthers Camp. Disk SSI 2 2 Steel Panthers Il Camp. Disk SSI 3 3 Panzer General 11 4 4 Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis 5 5 Steel Panthers II SSI 6 6 Battleground: Napoleon TalonSoft 7 7 Battleground: Shiloh . TalonSoft 8 8 Battleground: Bull Run TalonSoft 9 10 Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft 10 9 Tigers on the Prowl II SCORE RATING 8.43 4 8.40 4.5 8.36 5 8.08 8.03 4.5 7.89 4.5 7.87 5 7.84 4 7.755 7.744 300 316 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Games on unnumbered lines are tied with game on line above * = Top game of genre. Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP = Role-Playing, SI = Simulation/Space Combat, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports, CP = Classic/Puzzle. Games are retired after two years and become eligible for the Hall of Fame. THIS LAST GAMECHER GAME GENRE AD SP AC CP WG AC AC WG CP SI + 8.58 8.58 AD CP 8.43 AD SP AC CP SP AC ST THIS LAST GAMEI MO. MO. PUBLISHER GAME SCUORE RATING 1 1 Heroes II: Price of Loyalty New World Computing ST 8.98 5 2 2 Might and Magic VI New World Computing RP 8.92 4.5 3 3 StarCraft Blizzard ST 8.895 4 Total Annihilation: Core Contingency Cavedog AC 8.82 45 5 Unreal GT Interactive AC 8.77 8.77 4 6 4 Quake II Activision AC 8.64 4.5 7 10 NHL 98 EA Sports 8.62 8 5 Heroes II New World Computing 8.60 9 13 Longbow 2 EA SI 9 Links LS Access 7 Quake Pack 1: Scourge id Software/Ritual AC 8.58 45 12 6 Quake Pack 2: Dissolution id Software/Rogue AC 8.57 13 11 Diablo Blizzard RP 8.55 4.5 14 12 Red Alert Virgin/Westwood ST 8.53 4.5 15 14 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II LucasArts AC 8.51 4.5 16 19 Wing Commander: Prophecy Origin SI 4.5 8 FIFA Road to the World Cup 98 EA Sports SP 8.43 45 15 Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI WG 8.43 4 19 17 Steel Panthers II Campaign Disk SSI WG 8.40 4.5 2018 Panzer General II SSI WG 8.36 5 21 21 NBA Live 98 EA Sports SP835 45 22 16 Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith LucasArts AC 8.33 4 23 20 You Don't Know Jack 2 Berkeley Systems CP 8.32 45 24 22 Fallout Interplay 25 26 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts AD 8.28 5 26 23 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood ST 8.25 4 27 24 Total Annihilation GT Interactive ST 8.23 4.5 28 29 NASCAR Racing 2 Sierra SP 8.15 29 30 You Don't Know Jack 3 Berkeley Systems CP 8.13 30 25 Jack Nicklaus 5 Accolade SP 8.12 5 31 27 Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis WG 8.08 45 32 49 F-15 EA/Origin S18.07 4.5 33 32 Hellfire Sierra RP 8.04 34 31 Steel Panthers II SSI WG 8.03 35 33 Age of Empires Microsoft ST 8.01 45 36 24 Tripleplay '99 EA Sports SP8 .00 2.5 37 You Don't Know Jack Movies Berkeley Systems CP 8.00 4.5 38 36 Quake id Software AC 7.97 7.975 34 Tomb Raider Eidos AC 7.97 7.974 40 39 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 7.95 41 38 Civilization II: Scenarios MicroProse 42 35 F-22 ADF Novalogic SI 7.91 4.5 40 Civilization II: Fantastic Worlds MicroProse 7.91 44 41 Battleground: Napoleon In Russia Talonsoft WG 7.894 5 45 42 Battleground: Shiloh Talonsoft WG 7.87 46 43 NHL 97 EA Sports SP 7.85 45 47 47 Battleground: Bull Run TalonSoft WG 7.84 48 45 NBA Live 97 EA Sports SP 7.83 4.5 49 Forsaken Acclaim AC 782 51 Moto Racer EAS EAZAC 7.82 4 at MO. MO. PUBLISHER 51 46 Blade Runner WestwoodNirgin 52 44 Diamond Mind Baseball 7.0 Diamond Mind 53 54 Tomb Raider II Eidos 54 56 Smart Games Challenge 2 Smart Games Inc. 55 50 Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft 65 Battlezone Activision 52 The Need for Speed SE EA 58 48 Tigers on the Prowl II HPS 59 53 Worms 2 MicroProse 60 55 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 59 Fighters Anthology EA 58 Twinsen's Odyssey Activision 63 63 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 57 F1 Racing Simulation Ubisoft 65 73 M1 Tank Platoon MicroProse 66 62 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems 67 87 Zork: Grand Inquisitor Activision 60 Triple Play 98 EA Sports 69 64 Crusader: No Regret EA Origin 70 79 Shanghai Dynasty Activision 71 66 Jack Nicklaus 4 Accolade Monster Truck Madness 2 Microsoft 72 Virtual Pool 2 interplay 74 67 Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech 75 Panzer Commander $51 68 Flight Unlimited 2 Looking Glass 77 70 Myth Bungie 78 69 Realms of the Haunting interplay 71 Interstate '76 Activision 80 75 The Neverhood DreamWorks 76 Last Express Red Orb 82 81 Steel Panthers III SSI 83 74 Rama Sierra 77 Dungeon Keeper EA/Bullfrog 85 78 Circle of Blood Virgin 86 74 Starship Titanic Simon & Shuster Interactive 87 85 Power Chess Sierra 88 88 Black Dahlia Interplay 80 PGA Tour Pro EA Sports 90 84 Achtung! Spitfire Avalon Hill 91 92 Baseball Mogul Infinite Monkey 92 83 Tripleplay 97 EA Sports 82 Flight Simulator 98 Microsoft 94 86 Age of Rifles Campaign Disk SSI 95 91 Broken Sword: The Smoking Mirror Virgin 96 88 MDK Playmates/Shiny 109 Dungeon Keeper Expansion 98 95 Close Combat: A Bridge Too Far Microsoft 90 Lords of the Realm 11 Sierra 100 89 X-COM: Apocalypse MicroProse 51 SL ST AD AC AD AD WG AD ST AD AD CP AD SP ST SP SP SI WG AD AC ST WG ST ST 4.5 POLL CGW SCORE RATING 7.7945 7.78 3.5 7.774 776 5 7.755 7.75 7.75 NR 7.74 4 7.73 4 7.68 4.5 7.68 3.5 7.68 5 7.64 25 7.64 7.60 3.5 7.59 45 7.58 N/R 7.58 3 7.56 7.55 3 7.53 5 7.53 3.5 7.53 45 7.514 748 4 7.48 4.5 7.474.5 7.45 4.5 745 4.5 7.444 7.44 4.5 7.43 3 7.40 45 7.40 4.5 7.394 7.38 25 735 NR 7.343 7.34 3.5 7.32 5 7.30 4 7.294 7.29 7.28 7.24 NIR 7.23 4.5 7.23 NR 7.22 45 7.22 4 7.194 225 7.92 3.5 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 317 "


"HALL OF FAME WELCOME TO THE COOPERSTOWN OF COMPUTER GAMES. Games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. Alone in the Dark (1-Motion, 1992) Lovecraftian horror goes 3D, with shifting camera angles adding to the creepy atmosphere. King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) Redefined the graphic adventure with new parser and VGA graphics. Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) WWII sim with great campaigns, realism, and many crew-member options. The Bard's Tale (EA, 1985) Pioneered three-point animation, 3D color mazes, and automapping Lemmings (Psygnosis, 1991) The lovable cartoon Lilliputians were hits on every platform TIE Fighter (LucasArts, 1994) Most satisfying Star Wars space-combat game to date, lets you live on the dark side. Battle Chess (Interplay, 1988) The Franklin Mint of computer chess games, with violent and funny animation disguising a solid chess engine. Links 386 Pro (Access Software, 1992) Topped the leader board in graphics and realism for its era. Ultima III (Origin Systems, 1983) Coherency and surprising subtlety emphasized role playing, and set the tone for later ULTIMAS. Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, 1993) As rich and imaginative as Raymond Feist's world itself. M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Realistic sim that properly focused on armored formations rather than on single vehicles, good mission designs. Ultima IV (Origin Systems, 1985) High-concept RPG explored meaning of virtue and put the role in role-playing. Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) The Cadillac of castling, it gets better with each version. Master of Magic (MicroProse, 1994) The atmosphere of Magic: THE GATHERING with the sophistication of Civ. Ultima VI (Origin Systems, 1990) RPG as morality play, replete with moral choices and realistic environs. Command & Conquer (Virgin/Westwood Studios, 1995) Moved beyond Dune Il with innovative features and multiplayer play, ushering in the current real-time strategy game explosion. Master of Orion (MicroProse, 1993) Remarkable diplomatic Al; deep and varied technology tree; aliens required radically different playing styles. Ultima Underworld (Origin Systems, 1992) The first truly 3D RPG, and still the most convincing its dungeon walls were nicely painted with texture. mapped graphics. Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts, 1993) Offbeat sequel to MANIAC MANSION; the interactive equivalent of a classic Chuck Jones cartoon Mech Brigade (SSI, 1985) Improved KAMPFGRUPPE system for modern armored battles. War in Russia (SSI, 1984) More realistic than EASTERN FRONT, it captured the essence of the largest land campaign in history. DOOM (id Software, 1993) Revolutionized PC action games and network gaming: now surpassed in technology, but not in gameplay. MechWarrior 2 (Activision, 1995) A serious treatment of Mech design and resource management, combined with complex and addictive battles, legitimized \"giant robot simulations.\" WarCraft II (Blizzard, 1996) More cerebral than most real-time strategy games, it offered deceptive depth and personality to spare. Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Trend-setting graphics, digitized stereo, and great hackand-slash from a decade ago. Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) First-person, maze-based RPG with huge environment and tough combat. Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Derived from Mike Stackpole's Mercenaries, Spies, and Private Eyes, this is the definitive postapocalyptic RPG. Earl Weaver Baseball (EA, 1986) Revolutionary physics-based baseball game pleased both action and statistics fans; still unsurpassed more than a decade later. M.U.L.E. (EA, 1983) A landmark multiplayer strategy game that had no weapons of destruction, just cutthroat competition that made economics fun. Wing Commander (Origin Systems, 1990) A hot spaceflight engine, unfolding story path, and great characters. Empire (Interstel, 1978) World War II in space, this mainframe transplant brought elegant mechanics, depth, and unending replayability to the PC. Panzer General (SSI, 1994) Entertaining wargame with an elegant interface, great campaigns, strong Al, good graphics, and impressive sound. Wing Commander II (Origin Systems, 1991) Darker story, grittier teel, sound card advances, and tougher Al made this a sequel of sequels. F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) A \"thinking man's\" sim, with great missions, in which sneaking around is as fun as dogfighting. Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) WWI air combat with great graphics, incredible realism, and a versatile replay feature. Wing Commander III (Origin Systems, 1994) Surprisingly satisfying FMV space-opera didn't lose the essence of the space-combat game. Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) Tough, detailed jet sim with ambitious Al, graphics, and connectivity to match its realism. The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts, 1990) Comedy that set new standards in writing quality and social sensitivity. Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Defined the computer RPG with maze-based viewpoint and atmospheric spell names. Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix, 1993) Physics-based system, good Al, and unmatched career play make this the ultimate in pigskin play. Sid Meier's Civilization (MicroProse, 1991) CGW's #1-rated game of all time; indescribably addictive world-conquest/exploration game. Wolfenstein 3-D (id Software, 1992) Smooth-scrolling action blastfest cleverly updated the original, and put shareware back on the map. Gettysburg: The Turning Point (SSI, 1986) First variable order of battle changed the look of all American Civil War games on the PC. Sid Meier's Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Combines pirate adventure, action, RPG, and strategy to make the most successful hybrid of all time. X-COM (MicroProse, 1994) Premier tactical squad-level engine combined with alien tech research and pop culture for a sci-fi game nearly as addictive as CIVILIZATION Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Great character continuity, R&R for fatigued pilots, and even sick leave; best chopper fare until Jane's LONGBOW. Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) SimCity meets 1830 with robber barons for emphasis. You Don't Know Jack (Berkeley Systems, 1996) Fresh and irreverent, Jack turned trivia gaming on its collective ear to become the first mainstream CD-ROM with a gleeful gameplay bite. Harpoon (360 Pacific, 1989) In-depth modern naval battles in real-time, based on the world's Cold War fears. SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Urban planning with fascinating consequences and challenges; the first great software toy. Kampfgruppe (SSI, 1985) Its WWII East Front armor battles were a success on multiple platforms. Starflight (EA, 1986) Depth, great characters, and a good sci-fi storyline set early RPG standard. Zork (Infocom, 1981) The progenitor of adventure games on the PC, its humor and challenging puzzles seem timeless. The game has since spawned a number of sequels, none of which has equaled the original. 318 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ON THE WEB GameSpot and CGW Online Plug In for the Latest News, Reviews, Demos, and Strategies For the best in gaming, turn to the experts at GameSpot and CGW Online. You'll find a wealth of news, reviews, and previews, as well as cool demos and hard-core strategies for all of the hottest games. You'll also find un excellent technical advice and game-based hardware reviews from technical guru Loyd Case. Don't waste time or hard-earned cash—when you need accurate G A MES P information, read what the pros at GameSpot and CGW Online have to say. Computer Gaming World's site is back in action! The new design has more features than ever, with downloadable demos and up-to-the-minute news on what's hot in gaming. Check it out at www.computergaming.com. 2.2 .2.2.9.96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Age ol Empires 2 Preview such as Jane Jensen, who is embarking on her third GABRIEL KNIGHT game for Sierra On-Line, and Tim Schafer, who is working on GRIM FANDANGO for LucasArts. Tom Hall also gives GameSpot readers regular updates on his new game at ION Storm, ANACHRONOX, and Lead Designer Brian Reynolds writes about SID MEIER's ALPHA CENTAURI. Also just added: DIABLO II. kunibacoin Strategy Guides Even expert computer gamers need help with a game from time to time. That's why when we do a strategy guide we don't sell you short. For the hottest games, GameSpot's editors try to provide you with all the help you need, from start to finish. And through this commitment, GameSpot has built a solid reputation for providing the best strategy guides available anywhere on the Web-and ours are free. Now, we've taken these great strategy guides and put them under one roof. It's the only place you need to go for help with the games you play, and it's called GameGuides.com (www.gameguides.com). Through GameGuides.com, you have access to Goldeentence ER SMA CAMA . Special Features The Sid Meier Legacy It has been a long and illustrious career for the MicroProse founder. Since the early days of computer gaming, Sid Meier has never lost touch with one firm belief: The game's the thing. Go online at GameSpot and take a walk down the road of Sid's career, as Sid Meier himself recounts his experiences with each of his games. GAMEGUIDES.COM isit GameSpot for demos, hints, tips, strategy guides, and more for the games covered in CGW. Just enter www.gamespot.com into your browser to find the following gaming essentials: 1998: YEAR OF THE RPG? That's right. The grand ol' genre has been severely lacking, but this year might be the year for the long-awaited turn-around. GameSpot's RPG guru, Desslock, takes a look at all of the RPGs currently in development. Download GameSpot's library of great online strategy guides. We also took a select few of those guides, redesigned them, and made them available for download! For a mere $4.95 (through a secure transaction site) you get a book-quality guide right on your hard drive that is searchable and printable. Coming soon: a full assortment of official strategy guides. GameSpot Unofficial Game Guides STARCRAFT RIVEN: THE SEQUEL TO MYST TOMB RAIDER 11 QUAKE II Game Guides UNREAL TOMB RAIDER II SOLDIERS AT WAR RIVEN: THE SEQUEL TO MYST X-COM INTERCEPTOR QUAKE II STARCRAFT Online Demos GameSpot has the most thorough and regularly updated game demo libraries on the Web. Here you'll find demos to some of the games reviewed in this issue: MAX 2, MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D, MICROSOFT GOLF 98, BEAST WARS: TRANSFORMERS, and more. Designer Diaries Ever wonder what's going on behind the scenes while those much-anticipated games are in development? GameSpot's Designer Diaries follow the progress of game designers Also: Sybex's PANZER COMMANDER Official Secrets & Strategies Sybex's ARMY MEN Official Secrets & Strategies AND MANY MORE! www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 319 "


"ADVERTISER INDEX Order Free Product Information @ www.computergaming.com/infolink INFO# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE INFO# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE 106 169 198 120 264 76 299 261 142 238 61 105 311 94 4-5 310 164-165 291 231 121 96-97 138-139 159 161 163 194 126-127 70-71 103 295 156-157 269 91 271 177 122 68 154 208 232 87 115 277 158 NFL Blitz Millenium Games Blackstone Chronicles Chessmaster Get Medieval Rage of Mages Shogo: Mobile Armor Division Delta Force F16 Viper Mig 29 Fulcrum Novaworld USB Speakers Dead Reckoning Morpheus Global Domination Gen X Series Warlords III: Dark Rising Dominant Species Rainbow Six ruthless.com Enemy Infestation Return Fire 2 Space Bunnies Special Operations Force Feedback Plane Crazy Caesar 3 Grand Prix Legends King's Quest: Mask of Eternity Lords of Magic Special Edition Quest for Glory Red Baron Deluxe Return to Krondor StarSiege Tribes Jagged Alliance II Dark Side of the Moon Velocity 4400 Chaos Gate People's General 111 131 56-57 139 3Com Corporation 56K Modems 55 3Dfx Interactive Banshee 192 989 Studios NFL Gameday '99 172-173 Access Software Links Extreme Access Software Links LS 1999 Edition Accolade Test Drive 5 Action World GameDealer.com Activision Heretic 2 12-13 Alienware Alienware Systems ASC Games Sanitarium 168-169 ASC Games TNN Outdoors Hunter 176 ATI Technologies, Inc. ATI 201 Aureal Semiconductor ABD 191 Bethesda Softworks Red Guard 107 Bungie Software Myth II: Soulblighter 104-105 Chips & Bits www.cdmag.com/chips.html 312-313 Creative Labs, Inc. Sound Blaster Live! 183-186 Dell Computer Corp Speed Freaks C5-C8 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Monster Fusion 198-199 Earthlink Earthlink Network 301 Eidos Interactive Commandos 45-47 Eidos Interactive Final Fantasy VII 50-51 Eidos Interactive Gangsters 48-49 Eidos Interactive Tomb Raider III 52-53 Electronic Arts Madden 142-143 Electronic Arts NCAA Football 146-147 Electronic Arts Need for Speed 3 Electronic Arts Tiger Woods 144-145 empire Interactive 101st Airboume Falcon-Northwest Falcon Mach V 30-31 Fox Interactive RC Racer 258-259 Gathering of Developers Jazz Jack Rabbit 2 122-123 Gathering of Developers RailRoad Tycoon 11 14-15 Gravis Xterminator 202-203 GT Interactive Abe's Exodus 130-131 GT Interactive Blood II Q-C4, 1 GT Interactive Lode Runner 2 154 GT Interactive Total Annihilation Kingdoms 277,279 GT Interactive Total Annihilation Kingdoms 281,283,285 GT Interactive Unreal 234-235 GT Interactive War of the Worlds 180-181 Incredible Technologies Golden Tee Golf 266 Infogrames Independence War 237 Infogrames Total Air War 240 Interact Accessories Advent (Interact Accessories) 206-207 Interact Accessories Gameshark (Interact Accessories) 214-215 Interactive Magic Family Ad 18-19 Interactive Magic Road to Moscow Interactive Magic Spear Head 304-305 Interactive Magic Ultra Fighters Intergraph Computer Systems Intense 3D Interplay Baldur's Gate 137 Interplay Fallout 2 Interplay VR Baseball '99 (Correct) 197,226,251 Jane's Combat Simulations WWII Fighters 114-115 Kesmai Gamestorm LucasArts Entertainment Co. Behind the Magic: Star Wars LucasArts Entertainment Co. Grim Fandango Mad Genius Gun Metal 288-289 Micron Electronics, Inc. Millenia 210-211 MicroProse Star Trek: Klingon Honor Guard 79-81 Microsoft Age of Empires/Expansion Pack Microsoft Motocross Madness Microsoft Urban Assault 84-85,87 Microsoft WIN 98 Windows 98 76-77 Midway Home Entertainment Millenium Games Mindscape Entertainment Mindscape Home Division Monolith Monolith Monolith Novalogic Novalogic Novalogic Novalogic Phillips Media Piranha Interactive Publishing Piranha Interactive Publishing Psygnosis Quickshot Technology, Inc. Red Orb Entertainment Red Storm Entertainment Red Storm Entertainment Red Storm Entertainment Ripcord/Panasonic Ripcord/Panasonic Ripcord/Panasonic Ripcord/Panasonic SC&T SegaSoft Sierra Studios Sierra Sports Sierra Studios Sierra Studios Sierra FX Sierra/Dynamix Sierra Studios Sierra/Dynamix Sierra/Dynamix Sir-Tech SouthPeak Interactive STB Systems Strategic Simulations, Inc. Strategic Simulations, Inc. Symantec Talonsoft The 3DO CO. The 3DO CO. THQ THQ THO ThrustMaster, Inc. ThrustMaster, Inc. ThunderSeat Technologies Total Entertainment Network Ubi Soft, Inc. Virgin Interactive Entertainment Virgin Interactive Entertainment Virgin Interactive Entertainment Virgin Interactive Entertainment Westwood Studios Westwood Studios Westwood Studios WizardWorks WizardWorks WizardWorks Yamaha Corporation of America ZDTV 28 225 222-223 108-109 286 242-243 204 62-63 272-275 262-263 218-220 227-229 308-309 22-23 100-101 246-247 248-249 183 176 178 126 207 172 172 88-89 8-9 38-39 167 132 112 179 162 NCI 2 118 * . 253-256 20 149-151 117-119 294 216 83 265 239 296 152 168 247 99 86 188 72 6-7 175 163 166 92-93 164 144 Westfront ARMY Men Uprising 2 Bass Masters Classic Brunswick Bowling Red Jack Motor Sports Top Gun Platinum Thunderseat PGL Maxi Gamer Phoenix F-16 Aggressor Recoil Sportscar Swords & Sorcery C&C Tiberian Sun Dune 2000 Lands of Lore III Emergency Montezuma's Return Retaliation Waveforce Sound Card Television About Computing 196 171 134-135 205 197 160 16-17 182 25 65-68 252 125 188-189 271 42-43 130 100 224 303 95 72-73 153 209 315 320 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ON THE CG-ROM G.I. Disc The Troops Await Your Orders, Sir! 100110 . NOBEL 2002 100110 How to Use the Disc The CD is Autoplay-enabled and should begin upon I being loaded into the CD-ROM drive. Otherwise, select Run from the Start Menu in Windows 95 and type D:\\RUN-ME (where D is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) to run it straight from the CD. You may type D:\\INSTALL to create a CGW program group on your Windows desktop for future fun. Many demos require the disc to be in the CD-ROM drive in order to run; therefore, we recommend installing the demos from our disc. 696 001100110 011100 This month's demo disc features two very different ground combat experiences. The first is 3DO'S ARMY MEN, which has been among the top three best-sellers for weeks. In this exclusive first demo you'll train in boot camp and play through two of the game's scenarios. The game's mouse control is a little awkward, but it's not hard to 0 get used to. Have fun with the flamethrower! If you want a deeper challenge, you'll get it in spades with Norm Kroger's tour de force THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR. The demo on this month's disc lets you play a companylevel scenario that takes place during the Korean War. Should you tire of slogging it out on the battlefield, take to the sky in the EUROPEAN AIR WAR demo. The demo lets you fly a P-51D Mustang on a bomber escort mission or a Fw 190A-8 on an intercept mission against B-17s with P-51 escorts. Good luck, airman! Do people complain that you live in a fantasy world? Prove them right by playing MEDIEVAL Or HEROES OF MIGHT & MAGIC II. Or take a journey into the land of the living dead in GRIM FANDANGO, one of the most anticipated adventure games this year. Other demos include BRUNSWICK CIRCUIT BOWLING and the arcade racers INTERNATIONAL RALLY and MOTORHEAD. Last, but not least, check out some of the winners of the Shareware Awards. One person programming in his or her spare time can still make a good gaming experience. To Get the CD-ROM To subscribe to the CD-ROM version of the I magazine, call (303) 665-8930. If you already receive the magazine without the CD, you must wait until your current subscription expires before receiving the CD version. Please address subscription complaints to cgw@neodata.com. Neodata is a magazine fulfillment house which is not owned or operated by Ziff-Davis. October CD Titles W95 ARMY MEN PRODUCT NAME PLATFORM Army Men W95 Brunswick Circuit Bowling...W95 DirectX 5.2 W95 Earthlink opt 1 W95 Earthlink opt 2 European Air War W95 Exiles III W95 Grim Fandango W95 Heroes of M&M II W95 International Rally W95 Interstate '76 Upgrade W95 Laser Chess W95 Medieval W95 Motorhead W95 MVP Word Search W95 Op Art of War W95 Solitaire City W95 DIRECTORY/DEMOS ArmyMenDemo Thq_bowl directx earthlink 1\\win95 earthlink2\\win95 EAW Demo exiles3 Grim_demo heroes2 rally 176upgrade laserchess medieval Motorhead D mvpword TOAW Demo solitaircity EXECUTABLE setup.exe bowling.exe dxsetup.exe setup.exe setup.exe setup.exe exilet.exe grimdemo.exe h2demo.exe ral.exe i76upgrade.exe laserchss.exe setup.exe mdfox3dfxintro.exe mvpwrd.exe setup.exe scity.exe Pay tribute to the stalwart green soldiers of your youth by blowing them away in this exclusive demo. EUROPEAN AIR WAR GRIM FANDANGOS THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR 229 229 Twist me up one of them. eh lella? Sorte festival, eli? RANG I have to go. That sound makes me want to kill somebody MicroProse's follow-up to 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR finally takes flight. You'll face schemes and double-crosses as you travel the Land of the Dead in LucasArts' upcoming adventure. Hard-core grognards take note of this Norm Koger masterpiece. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1998 321 "


"Another Page of Filler chief goes along with it, I can write whatever the heck I want, no matter how stupid, and no one's going to do anything about it. Let's give it a shot: Godzilla-boy, that sure blew didn't it? Uh oh. I just wet myself! Man, was Alf a good TV show or what? Boingy boingy boingy. Yuk-what's that on my finger? You see? It doesn't matter. They'll print anything. The danger is that they'll wise up to this, and replace even more content with ads. You can see it already in these dumb fold-out ads with our copy on the back, as if the article were in the way. Or, Please Stop Reading This and Get Back to the Ads hose who profess to not gamers. Every once in a and—if we could (and some of know something while, some well-coifed sales us have probably tried)-eat about journalism, like person will venture into the games. We are geeks. Big time. those chicken-necked editorial area with a look on Monty Python, comic books, Star goobers you always his or her face somewhere Trek-the works. \"Fashion\" is a see pontificating on between fear and disgust—and matter of deciding which black shows like Nightline, ask a question like, \"VR gaming T-shirt smells the least like to talk about the BASEBALL—is that a sports bad every morning. (\"Let's see, I \"great wall\" between editorial game?\" (Actually, that's kind of wore the TOTAL ANNIHILATION shirt and advertising departments in a trick question....) yesterday, the day before, and the the media. Despite the fact that day before that—so, okay-one those people have spent their more day!\") entire adult lives in a university Actually, to digress for a and therefore know nothing, moment, there is a third division actually, they're mostly right. So, at CGW, and that would be I really don't have a gripe with Wargames Editor Terry Coleman. them. I just like calling them If you turn left off the elevator, chicken-necked goobers. go straight, and then left again, Honestly, though, here at the you'll probably find TC in his Computer Gaming World office, cubicle in authentic Civil War we have more than just a wall JEFF GREEN garb, rattling a saber, playing SID between departments—we're living on separate planets. I'm sure that if we brought in a genealogist to trace the roots of all the staff members, he might be able to find some common But even though they may not MEIER'S GETTYSBURG, and shouthuman ancestor between the know jack about gaming, they ing things like \"Take a musketsales and editorial people. Like are the golden ones in the CGW full a'that, ya yella-bellied some kind of caveman cross empire. Why? Because they are blueshirt!\" We just occasionally between an infomercial pitch \"the profit center.\" They bring in throw him some red meat and man and Urkel. the ads, which bring in the guide him to the door when it's Let's say you decide to visit money, which pleases The Suits time to go home. our office in San Francisco. in New York because it makes (Attention, psychos: Please them rich. The point is, though the edidon't really do this. There's tors have been hired by The Suits barbed wire, and we shoot on If you make a left turn off in New York to produce the magsight.) If you make a right turn the elevator, you hit the editorial azine, I often get the feeling we off the elevator, into the sales side of the office, and, well, life are more of an annoyance than department, what you'll find is couldn't be any more different. an asset to them. \"Content,\" in a very quiet, tidy, and fetchingly What's it like? Think of it as their world view, is just the filler decorated set of offices, with a M*A*S*H, but without the war, between the ads. group of sincere, professional the doctors, the martinis, the The good thing about that is people working in them. These helicopters, or anyone named that it doesn't really matter what people all very good-looking, Hot Lips. we write, because they don't dress in \"outfits,\" and have nice What you do have is a collec read it. Thus, as long as I don't complexions. They \"exercise.\" tion of slovenly arrested-develop use any swear words, and as They are, also, for the most part, ment cases who live, breathe, long as Joe the Falangist copy As long as I don't use any swear words, I can write whatever the heck I want. But don't worry. All is not lost. Even if the rest of this magazine becomes an ad catalog, you still have me. A bastion of integrity and honor in the world of gaming journalism. This space, assure you, is pure. No random product placements or shameless company plugs from me. I know which side of the wall I'm on. Nobody (Blizzard), and I mean nobody (LucasArts) tampers with Jeff (Thrust Master) Green's copy. You have my (Microsoft) word. CGW What Jeff doesn't realize is that beginning next month, this page will be replaced by a fullpage fertilizer ad. If you notice any difference, let Jeff know at jhgreen@zd.com. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by ZD Inc. One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one-year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $16.00 for surface mail. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80328.7167. Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT. Canada Post International Pub's Mail Product (Canada Distribution) Sales Agreement No. 1058649. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Printed in the U.S.A. 322 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"DVD. THE NATURAL EVOLUTION OF MULTIMEDIA. NEW DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 400MHz IG 2 WAYNID SUMMAS IK 2 TAOUT BAITUS  128MB 100MHz SDRAM  16.8GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9.5ms)  1600HS 21\" (19.8\" vis, .26dp. 1600 x 1200 max. res.) Trinitron Monitor  NEW STB nVidia ZX 8MB 3D 2X AGP Video Card  2X DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card  Turtle Beach Montego A3D Sound Card  ACS-495 Full Dolby Surround Sound Speakers with Subwoofer  56K Capable* U.S.R.V.90 x2 WinModem  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition v2.0 plus Encarta 98  NEW Microsoft Windows 98/MS IntelliMouse  Dell Comfort Key Keyboard  3-Year Limited Warranty . 1-Year On-site Service * Upgrade to 3-Year Next-Business-Day On-site Service, add $99. NGHIVAY ROADKERS A HONO OUTDATUS $3399 AS MULTIMEDIA OUTGROWS CD-ROMS. BOLDER, BIGGER DVD TAKES YOU INTO THE FUTURE. Personal Lease $127/Mo. 36 Mos Order Code #500805 BE DIRECT BE DIRECT DE LL TO ORDER TOLL-FREE With more and more next-generation multimedia software arriving on store shelves every day, it's only natural that your new PC should have DVD technology. Because you won't be able to take advantage of revolutionary features like rich, theater-quality video and Dolby digital high fidelity surround sound on a tired old dinosaur like CD-ROM. With up to 17GB of storage capacity (that's over 20 times the capacity of CD-ROMs ), DVD lets you enjoy enhanced mainstream home/business software, engrossing educational and reference titles, interactive video games and even full-length motion pictures. And, since DVD is backwards-compatible with standard CD-ROMs, your favorite software and music is safe from the dreaded digital graveyard. So give us a call for your next PC system. Because the times are changing. And you don't want to be left behind. 800-553-6039 TO ORDER ONLINE 24 HRS./DAY www.dell.com/buydell Mon-Fri 7am-11pm CT Sat-Sun 8am-8pm CT In Canada call 800-839-0148 In Mexico. call 001-800-210-7607 Keycode #88357 inside Reference the appropriate order code to receive featured configuration and pricing. Personal leasing arranged by Dell Financial Services L.P., an independent entity, to qualified customers; amount of monthly lease payments above based on 36-month lease. All above monthly lease payments exclude taxes which may vary (for example, Hartford City, IN sales tax \"$6.84/month); shipping cost due with first payment; no security deposit required; subject to credit approval and availability. Lease terms subject to change without notice. pentium II "


"DELL DIMENSION DESKTOPS NEL .64 10 M. Common features: Mini-Tower Model 512KB Integrated L2 Cache  56K Capable* U.S. Robotics V.90 x2 WinModem 3.5\" Floppy Disk Drive 2 Universal Serial Bus (USB) Ports 1-Year On-site Service Upgrade: 3-Year On-site Service, add $99 NEW DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 NEW DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 NEW DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 NEW DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 400MHz PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 400MHZ PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 400MHz PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 400MHZ PEN . 128MB 100MHz SDRAM  128MB 100MHz SDRAM  128MB 100MHz SDRAM  64MB 100MHz SDRAM  16.8GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9.5ms)  16.8GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9.5ms)  10GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9ms) 10GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9ms)  10  1600HS 21\" (19.8\" vis, 26dp. . 1200HS 19\" (17.9 vis, .26dp) Monitor 1. 1200HS 19\" (17.9\" vis, .26dp) Monitor 1000HS 17\" (16.0\" vis, .26dp) Trinitron 1600 x 1200 max. res.) Trinitron Monitor . NEW STB nVidia ZX 8MB 3D 2X AGP . NEW STB nVidia ZX 8MB 3D 2X AGP  NEW STB nVidia ZX 8MB 3D 2X AGP Video Card Video Card . NEW ATI XPERT 980 8MB 3D 2X AGP NE Video Card  2X DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card  2x DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card Video Card  2x DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card  Turtle Beach Montego A3D Sound Card Turtle Beach Montego A3D Sound Card  2X DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card . 40  Turtle Beach Montego A3D Sound Card . ACS-495 Full Dolby Surround Sound  ACS-295 Speakers with Subwoofer Turtle Beach Montego A3D Sound Card C  ACS-495 Full Dolby Surround Sound Speakers with Subwoofer  lomega Zip 100MB Internal Drive  ACS-295 Speakers with Subwoofer Speakers with Subwoofer  lomega Zip 100MB Internal Drive  Microsoft Home Essentials 98 with lomega Zip 100MB Internal Drive  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Money 98  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition v2.0 plus Encarta 98 Edition v2.0 plus Encarta 98  Dell Comfort Key Keyboard Edition v2.0 plus Encarta 98  Dell Comfort Key Keyboard  Dell Comfort Key Keyboard * Upgrade to a 16.8GB Ultra ATA Hard  Dell QuietKey Keyboard Drive (9.5ms), add $179. * 56K Capable U.S.R.X2 Modem, add $35) 20 Vic AC Uowoofer . A  ME M  DE *UL $3399 $2979 $2679 $2499 Personal Lease $127/Mo., 36 Mos. Order Code #500805 Personal Lease $111/Mo., 36 Mos. Order Code #500817 Personal Lease: $100/MO., 36 Mos. Order Code #500803 Personal Lease: $94/Mo., 36 Mos. Order Code #500816 Perse Order SURE. THESE AR IT'S THE TECHNOLOGY DELL INSPIRON NOTEBOOKS Common features: Modular 3.5\" Floppy Disk Drive 512KB Integrated L2 Cache . 128-bit Graphics Accelerator Zoom Video and USB Ports. Stereo Speakers with 3D Surround Sound and Yamaha Software Wavetable Smart Lithium Ion Battery Cardbus Ready/Fast IR1.1  NEW MS Windows 98 Touchpad Extendable 1-Year Limited Warranty NEW DELL INSPIRON 3200 D266XT | NEW DELL INSPIRON 3200 D266XT NEW DELL INSPIRON 3200 D233XT NEW DELL INSPIRON 3200 D233ST PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 266MHZ PENTIUM IL PROCESSOR AT 266MHz PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 233MHz PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 233MHz  13.3\" XGA Active Matrix TFT Display  13.3\" XGA Active Matrix TFT Display  13.3\" XGA Active Matrix TFT Display  12.1\" SVGA Active Matrix TFT Display  112MB SDRAM 96MB SDRAM  64MB SDRAM  32MB SDRAM  6.4GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive  4GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive 4GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive  2.1GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive  2X DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card  Modular 24X Max Variable  Modular 24X Max Variable  Modular 24X Max Variable  56K Capable Gold Card CD-ROM Drive CD-ROM Drive CD-ROM Drive Global Modem  56K Capable\" Modem  56K Capable\" Modem  MS Office 97 Small Business  Second Smart Lithium Ion Battery . Second Smart Lithium Ion Battery  MS Office 97 Small Business Edition v2.0  Deluxe Nylon Carrying Case  Leather Carrying Case Edition v2.0  6.4 Pounds  MS Office 97 Small Business  MS Office 97 Small Business  Deluxe Nylon Carrying Case * Upgrade to 64MB SDRAM, add $99. Edition v2.0 Edition v2.0 .6.9 Pounds* * Upgrade to a 3.2GB Ultra ATA  69 Pounds'  6.9 Pounds* * Upgrade to 80MB SDRAM, add $49. | Hard Drive, add $99. * Upgrade to 144MB SDRAM add $99. * Upgrade to 112MB SDRAM, add $49. * Second Smart Lithium Ion Battery * Deluxe Nylon Carrying Case, add $59. add $129. $3599 $2999 $2599 $1999 Personal Lease: $134/Mo., 36 Mos. Personal Lease: $112/Mo., 36 Mos. Personal Lease: $97/Mo., 36 Mos. Personal Lease $75/Mo., 36 Mos. Order Code #800801 Order Code #800802 Order Code #800803 Order Code #800804 Pricing not discountable Prices and specifications valid in U.S. only and subject to change without notice. For Reference the appropriate order code to rece complete copy of Guarantees or Limited Warranties, write Doll USALP At Warranties, One Dell Way, Round Rock TX 78682. An-site service provided pursuant to service contract with third-party provider. May not be available in certain remote areas. \"AOX Max/17X Min 32X Maw/14X Min. 24X Mawio Min Download speeds limited to Personal leasing arranged by Dell Financial Services L.P., an 53Kbps Upload speeds are less in the 30Kbps rangel and vary by modem manufacturer. Speeds also vary depending online conditions. Analog phone line and compatible server equipment required. FC Magazine, 5/3Offer good independent entity, to qualified customers. Amount of monthly lease through September 30, 1998. Limit one drobate per household. Mail incompleted rebate coupon and original or copy payments above based on 36-month lease. All above monthly lease of receipts) dated between July 7, 1998 and September 30, 1998 for all products, with purchase price(s) circled, Customer will need to submit serial number bar codes from each purchased product (Submissions must be postmarked payments exclude taxes which may vary (for example, Hartford City, no later than October 31, 1998, and received no later than November 15, 1998.) Customer will receive a S50 rebate IN sales tax \"$6.35/month). Shipping cost due with first payment. No check trom Hewlett Packard approximately 8-10 weeks after receipt of rebate materials. Rebate is payable in U.S. dollars. System weight with floppy drive, DVD-ROM or CD-ROM in options bay. The Intel Inside logo and Pentium are security deposit required; subject to credit approval and availability registered trademarks of Intel Corporation MS, Microsoft, intelliMouse and Windows are registered trademarks of Lease terms subject to change without notice. pentium II Microsoft Corporation. HP. DeskJet and LaserJet are registered trademarks of Hewlett Packard Corporation Trinitron is a registered trademark of Sony Corporation. 1998 Dell Computer Corporation. All rights reserved. inside "


"SOFTWARE DESCRIPTIONS AcAfee VirusScanNEW Microsoft Windows 98 Microsoft IntelliMouse 3-Year Limited Warranty unitor DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 NEW DELL DIMENSION XPS R350 IUM IL PROCESSOR AT 400MHZ PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 350MHz MB 100MHz SDRAM  64MB 100MHz SDRAM B Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9ms)  10GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9ms) OHS 17\" (16.0\" vis, .26dp) Trinitron 1000LS 17\" (15.9\" vis) Monitor  NEW ATI XPERT 98D 8MB 3D 2X AGP WATI XPERT 98D 8MB 3D 2X AGP Video Card eo Card  40X Max Variable CD-ROM Drive Max Variable CD-ROM Drive Crystal 3D 64V Wavetable Sound stal 3D 64V Wavetable Sound  ACS-295 Speakers with Subwoofer 5-295 Speakers with Subwoofer  lomega Zip 100MB Internal Drive crosoft Home Essentials 98 with  Microsoft Home Essentials 98 with mey 98 Money 98 I QuietKey Keyboard  Dell QuietKey Keyboard grade to a 1200HS 19\" (17.9\" vis * Upgrade to 128MB 100MHz SDRAM ip) Monitor, add $49. add $149. DELL DIMENSION XPS D300 PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 300MHz  64MB SDRAM  6.4GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9ms)  1000LS 17\" (15.9\" vis) Monitor NEW ATI XPERT 98D 8MB 3D 2X AGP Video Card  32X Max Variable CD-ROM Drive Yamaha XG 647 Wavetable Sound  ACS-90 Speakers . Iomega Zip 100MB Internal Drive  Microsoft Home Essentials 98 with Money 98  Dell QuietKey Keyboard * Upgrade to ACS-295 Speakers with Subwoofer, add $50. Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition v2.0 includes:  Word 97  Excel 97  Publisher 98  Outlook 98  Small Business Financial Mgr 98  Expedia Streets 98 Microsoft Home Essentials 98 includes:  Word 97  Encarta 98 Encyclopedia  Money 98  Works 4.5  Greetings Workshop 2.0  Puzzle Collection Featured Software:  Game Pack 1 (sold with Dell Dimension only) includes: Command & Conquer GOLD, Myst and Warcraft II, add $49. 2199 $1999 $1699 nal Lease: $83/Mo., 36 Mos. Code =500802 Personal Lease: $75/Mo., 36 Mos. Order Code #500811 Personal Lease: $64/Mo., 36 Mos. Order Code #500801 E REAL PRICES. THAT'S UNBELIEVABLE. ADD-ONS & EXTRAS Just imagine playing your favorite video games on a Dell Dimension desktop. You could sprint through corridors faster with a Pentium Il processor. Wipe out mortal enemies louder with a high-performance $249 sound card. It's a rad system you can custom configure with all the peripherals speakers, DVD, videocard you name it. Just call the number below or visit our PRINTER S50 REBATE WHEN YOU BUY ANY DELL DIMENSION DESKTOP INCLUDING MONITOR AND AN HP DESKJET 722C PRINTER HP DESKJET 722C  PC Magazinet Editors' Choice  Up to 8 pages per min. in black text  Up to 4 pages per min. in color text  Add a printer cable for $25. AFTER REBATE SCANNER HP SCANJET 5100CSE  Uses HP intelligent scanning technology Parallel port interface for fast, easy installation  300 dpi optical, 300x600 dpi hardware, 1200 dpi enhanced resolution POWER STRIP APC SURGESTATION PRO8T2  Protects your system against electrical surges  8 outlets with block spacing for 3 outlets  Includes 4-wire, 2-telephone line for protection ive featured configuration and pricing. website to rule the universe at an affordable price. $299 BE DIRECT BE DIRECT DELL $30 TO ORDER TOLL-FREE 800-553-6039 TO ORDER ONLINE 24 HRS./DAY www.dell.com/buydell ORDER ONLINE 24 HOURS A DAY ACCESS SPECIAL PROMOTIONS DESIGN YOUR IDEAL COMPUTER CHECK THE STATUS OF YOUR ORDER ACCESS 24HR ONLINE TECH SUPPORT Mon-Fri 7am-11pm CT Sat-Sun 8am-8pm CT In Canada, call 800-839-0148-In Mexico call 001-800-210-7607 GSA Contract #GS-35F-4076D Keycode #88358 "


"SPEED FREAKS, POWERMONGERS, SHOW-OFFS, YOUR COMPUTER IS READY. PENTIUM II PROCESSOR DELL DIMENSION XPS R400 PENTIUM II PROCESSOR AT 400MHz 400 DELL  128MB 100MHz SDRAM . 512KB Integrated L2 Cache  10GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive (9ms)  1000LS 17\" (15.9\" vis) Monitor  NEW ATI XPERT 98D 8MB 3D 2X AGP Video Card  2x DVD-ROM Drive and Decoder Card  Turtle Beach Montego A3D Sound Card  Altec Lansing ACS-90 Speakers  56K Capable U.S.R.x2 WinModem  Microsoft Home Essentials 98 with Money 98  NEW MS Windows 98  Dell QuietKey Keyboard  MS IntelliMouse  3-Year Limited Warranty  1-Year On-site Service * Upgrade to the NEW STB nVidia ZX 8MB 3D 2X AGP Video Card, add $29. * Upgrade to Altec Lansing ACS-295 Speakers with Subwoofer, add $50. -12 4470 -EU2777) ONEN JOCELONA Adele $2299 Personal Lease\": $86/Mo.. 36 Mos. Order Code #500809 BE DIRECT BE DIRECT DELL Yeah, we're talking to you. The one who likes to be on the edge. Correction: Make that over the edge. Which is exactly where the Dell Dimension XPS R400 is going to take you, screaming at a processor speed of 400MHz. More than just a megahertz demon, we've equipped this Intel Pentium Il processor-based system with some of the industry's fastest features around. Like 100MHz SDRAM that \"bursts\" data up to 50% faster than previous generation 66MHz SDRAM. Perfect for demanding multimedia applications. And an Ultra ATA hard drive: fast, efficient and 10GB big. Plus an 8MB AGP video card to boost graphics performance for 2D and 3D applications. So give us a call and we'll build you one of these monsters today. Then strap pentiumell yourself in for a real power trip. TO ORDER TOLL-FREE 800-553-6039 TO ORDER ONLINE 24 HRS./DAY www.dell.com/buydell Mon-Fri 7am-11pm CT Sat-Sun 8am-8pm CT In Canada' call 800-839-0148 In Mexico call 001-800-210-7607 Keycode #88356 Reference the order code listed above to receive featured configuration and pricing. Personal leasing arranged by Dell Financial Services L.P., an independent entity, to qualified customers; amount of monthly lease payments above based on 36-month lease. All above monthly lease payments exclude taxes which may vary (for example, Hartford City, IN sales tax $4.32/month); shipping cost due with first payment no security deposit required; subject to credit approval and availability. Lease terms subject to change without notice. "

