July 1992

Number 96

Features
24
Attending Mass on Earth Becomes a Plot!
New World takes their company name to the Planet's Edge
by Chris Lombardi

20
Buried Treasure for Modern Day Buccaneers
Gary Levine becomes a Sea Rogue

38
Racing by in a Blur
Wyatt Lee keeps his eye on the road
and brings Grand Prix Unlimited in focus

40
Oh, Ye Gods and Planet Engineers!
Is Populous World Editor for making a new paradise?
ask Maxwell "Eden"

42
How Deep Can a Dungeon Story Be?
Allen Greenberg echoes clearly from the depths
of Origin's Stygian Abyss

48
Roberta Williams Reveals Horror Stories at Sierra!
An exclusive interview about the new Scary Tales Series
by Russ Ceccola

68
"Hell Bent For Leather Goddesses"
Chris Lombardi attends an early launch
from the New Activision

70
Formula I With No "Short" Circuit
Microprose's World Circuit races in from the UK
as driven by Wallace "Pit Stop" Poulter

76
Computer Gaming Gurus Gather
CGW follows the sages down from their mountain tops as they gather to exchange
ideas at the 6th Annual Computer Game Developer's Conference

86
No Nukes for Lemmings!
A guided, tip-filled tour of the original Psygnosis hit
by Robert Gardner, Jr.

102
Good Gods?
Fighting for a place among the deities in Konami's Olympian arcade adventure
by Martin Bowers and David Wilson

104
Blueprints for Building Better Castles
Architectural anecdotes for medieval masons
by Omar DeWitt

110
The Nautical Nuance of Victory in the Gulf
Tim Carter goes to sea with Harpoon Battleset #4:
Indian Ocean 1 The Persian Gulf

118
From Computer Programmer to Fleet Commander
Alan Zimm relates the design evolution of both his
Action Stations and Fleet Commander from RAW Entertainment

120
Big Wars Come in Small Packages
A one-man shop releases all of World War II in Europe
in an easy-to-play format with Big Three
as reconnoitered by Alan Emrich

122
Oh, Sim-Can You See Another MBT?
This time in a Middle East setting, tactical armored combat as seen through a
player's imagination
by Joe Sherfy

126
Pranging Planes in the Pacific
Jaeger Software's Fighter Duel: Zero vs. Corsair
finds challenges from other aces
by Leah Wesolowski

Departments
8
16A (Margin of Insert)
20
32
52
56
60
64
66
66
74
96
100
106
109
113
128

Taking A Peek
Questions for the CGW Poll
Inside the Industry
Rumors
Scorpion's Tale (Treasures of the Savage Frontier)
Kids & Computers ("Edutainment" Software)
Over There (European Games Report)
The CGW Poll
PC Research/SPA Top Games
The Hall of Fame
The CGW Stock Watch (Investor News)
From the Cockpit (Flight Simulators)
Letters (We Get Letters ...)
Scorpion's View (Stygian Abyss)
Computer Wargaming World's "Broadsides & Gripeshot"
Charles S. Roberts Awards Ballot
Editorial

Taking a Peek

Abracadata
Eugene, OR
WILD WEST RAILROAD ROBBERIES:
This "expansion disk" for the Design Your
Own Railroad game may well tie nostalgic rail
fans to the computer railroad track. The program allows players six hours to accumulate
the most money possible. Certain squares require a player to draw a track news card
(which inflict random events on a player),
while occasionally a railroad car picked up
will be infested with bandits, at which time a
bandit card is drawn and the player implements its result. These two small decks of
cards are included with the disks and add
more elements of gameplay to the original
product's "construction kit" strengths. IBM
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Accolade
San Jose, CA
JACK NICKLAUS GOLF & COURSE DESIGN: SIGNATURE EDITION: There's a
"golden bear" in them thar hills in this

maxxed-out 256-color game (available to players who design their own courses using this
program), with a variety of fully digitized
male and female figures. Actually, "more, better, faster" is the motif for this product over
its predecessor, with a new tournament mode,
customizable computer opponents, capacity
for designing/saving one's own "objects" on
the course (we loved creating slopes and hills
with railroad ties) and a new "tape measure"
feature for determining distance. IBM
($69.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Access
Salt Lake City, UT
LINKS: TROON NORTH CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE: Found in Senorian desert,
this oasis-like golf course has more than
plenty of sand with which to challenge Links
owners. The Arizona view of Pinnacle Peak to
the south and Scottsdale to the west is beautiful. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
Capstone
Miami, FL

Taking a Peek

HOME ALONE and ROCK A DOODLE
COMPUTERIZED COLORING BOOKS:
These products, sold separately, are quite similar to the Fern Gully Coloring Book "peeked"
last issue. By mixing 16-color palettes, the full
range of 256 colors is available to the creative
artist and allows children to color in the
black-and-white sketches from these two popular
movies. Designed for kids ages three and
older, the simple mouse interface and the ability to print on almost any driver imaginable
makes these two solid "kidware" products.
IBM ($29.95 each). Circle Reader Service #4.
Colorado Spectrum
748 Whalers Way, E-201
Fort Collins, CO 80525
(303) 225-6929
THE MOUSE YOKE: This piece of game
support hardware enables gamers to have a
flight yoke without spending too much extra
money or having to reconnect input devices
to one's computer. Instead, one simply straps
the mouse into the yoke and flies happily
away. ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Eclipse Software Design
7565 Charmant Drive #315
San Diego, CA 92122
(619) 546-3932
BLACKJACK FOR WINDOWS: Although
this game has something of a "shareware" production quality to it, the gameplay stands up
to any of the others on the market today. Designed to run under Windows 3.0, up to four
players can participate "at the table." Many
user-defined play variations are allowed, so
that players can emulate their favorite casino's
rules; complete statistical analysis and varying
"systems" are also provided to help develop
and improve one's gameplay. Priced right for
the IBM at $29.95. Circle Reader Service #6.
Electronic Zoo
United Kingdom
UNDER PRESSURE: With the good guy
imprisoned in a robot shell and his galactic
girlfriend kidnapped by the bad guys, this
game sets up a quick-and-dirty duel to the
death. Said duel turns out to be a "meat and
potatoes" vertical-scroll-around-and-shoot-everything-that-moves game. Linguists will
find that the definitive "minimalist" rules in
four languages can only get players going
quickly. Amiga. Circle Reader Service #7.
Epyx
P.O. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
(415) 368-3200
STUDIO OF GREETINGS!: The "Godzilla" of computerized greetings supplements,
this large and heavy package features 400 new
graphics that not only work with Print Shop,
but can be exported as .PMG, .PCX and
.BMP files as well. The software also includes

the Print Magic 2.0 program, complete with
its own fonts. A huge tome with 700+ samples cards (organized by occasion) and documentation for using Print Magic and painting
custom graphics oneself. While some stationery rounds out the package, this product is
striking as the perfect gift for those who love
Print Shop. IBM ($69.96). Circle Reader Service #8.
Gametek
2999 N.E. 191st Street, Suite 800
North Miami Beach, FL 33180
(305) 935-3995
AMERICAN GLADIATORS: It was only a
matter of time before someone licensed the
tests of strength, skill and dexterity that is the
hit TV show American Gladiators. With a
"true to TV" feel to it, this package contains a
series of pressure-packed arcade games modeled after the events on the show: The Joust,
The Wall, The Assault, Human Cannonball,
Atlasphere, Powerball and The Eliminator.
Once past the handsome hulks and burly

blonde babes on the cover, the digitized
sound and 256-color VGA take players right
into the game and the documentation (complete with athlete photos and bios) plugs one
right into this snazzy little joystick buster.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
Ibis Software
San Francisco, CA
(415) 546-1917
INTERLUDES NOTEPLAY: Designed primarily for keyboard players (as opposed to
"keyboard typists"), users select skill levels and
the program "composes" exercises. Trying to
beat the clock and rack up a high score is
only the subtext to the real lessons in reading
and playing notes. Featuring melodies, intervals and chords, having a MIDI-keyboard and
compatible soundcard are recommended.
INTERLUDES RHYTHMPLAY: Billed as
an "arcade-style game with music education
in mind," players work on the basic sight-reading skill of rhythm reading in an interactive
setting. Beginning simply with rhythmic

Taking a Peek

phrases using only quarter- and half-notes in
4/4 time, difficulty progresses up through six
different levels to sixteenth notes, dots and
ties, changing meters and playing two phrases
with two hands simultaneously. Naturally, a
sound card and a MIDI-equipped keyboard
are highly recommended for use with this software. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#10.
Impressions
do Merit Software
Dallas, TX
(800) 238-4277
COHORT: This "do it yourself" ancient
battles kit pits the hypothetical red and blue
forces against each other to wage miniaturesstyle warfare. While players can recreate classic battles of antiquity, they can also design
their own tests of wills. Played in real time, armies and terrain can both be user-defined for
custom-built scenarios and casualties and morale can quickly be checked with a click of the
mouse. While gameplay was emphasized over
realism, this arcade wargame has its own sort
of charm. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
THE FINAL CONFLICT: While tacitly a
game of "power politics and global warfare,"
this is not the product that "real wargamers"
have been waiting for. A cross between a poor
man's Command HQ and the old arcade classic Missile Command it lacks much that is
"state of the art" and the quasi-legible typeface only exacerbates the problems. Clearly,
this game wasn't released. It escaped! IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
MERCHANT COLONY: Akin to the classic boardgame Imperialism, the player assumes
the role of a Liverpool financier who is out to
build a merchant empire. While one can easily amass a fortune by trading the myriad of
different goods between ports, most of the
fun is to be had by recruiting the various
types of colonists and "planting" them around
the four corners of the globe. Merchant Colony is played in real-time and features documentation closer to Punch than the Financial
Times in terms of usefulness. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.
Lucasfilm Games
San Rafael, CA
HE-162 VOLKSJAGER The third of four
"Tour of Duty" expansion disks for the Secret
Weapons of the Luftwaffe game, this aircraft
(nicknamed the "Salamander") never saw service in the actual war, but will now. This package contains the standard eleven missions
(three in flight school and eight historical), a
tour of duty and a mission builder. This is a
remarkable aircraft because it was made "on
the cheap" by the starving German economy
and designed to be flown by inexperienced pi-

lots drafted from the Hitler Youth. IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #14.
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD
GLOBAL CONQUEST: A four-player version of Command HQ meets Empire, this modem/network game was previewed in the
April issue (#93), page 76. IBM ($69.96). Circle Reader Service #15.
Miller Associates
11 Burris Avenue, Suite 200
New Canaan, CT 06840
(800) 654-5472 or
(203) 972-0777
(Products not pictured)
APBA BASEBALL STATMASTER 2.0: Designed to help the type of baseball fan who
keeps stats from the printed box scores in the
newspaper or by hand during board games,
spending a few minutes each day with this
program will keep your information organized. It not only prints out all of the tradi-

tional baseball stats for individuals and teams,
but adds some new and interesting categories
of information output derived from your data
entry. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#16.
APBA MAJOR LEAGUE PLAYERS BASEBALL: A deep, deep strategy game of pure
skill, difficulty levels can range from introductory to the complexities faced by professional
baseball managers. Players take on the role of
owner/manager/commissioner, forming
leagues, drafting teams, creating line-ups,
choosing offensive and defensive plays during
games, etc. The years of refinement with the
popular APBA Baseball boardgame show in
this computer rendition's level of statistical detail. Screens are text-based information only
and the package includes no sound support,
but supplemental disks (available separately
for $24.95 each) include the 1930 season, the
1961 season and "old timers" volume 1. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #17.
BASEBALL WIZARD 2.0: Designed to let

Taking a Peek

players not only manipulate the data for the
above game, but also tweak the performance
ratings (to suit one's own custom leagues better) and game algorithms or create entirely
new players with imported statistics. It even
lets players play a season along with the actual
professional season by creating real-time ratings. This handy tool kit for APBA fans is
available for the IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #18.
MICRO MANAGER Designed as an enhancement for the APBA Baseball game described above, this makes it an ultra-detailed,
advanced simulation designed for complex
baseball decision-making. Of course, players
can also test out even the wackiest ideas
they've ever considered as a baseball manager
and can compete against such computer-programmed personalities as Blackie Dugan or
Blaise Pascal. Custom "computer" managers
can also be created with a vast array of idiosyncrasies. The package also adds enhanced
"quick play" functions for faster play of computer-managed games during a season. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #19.
THE ORIGINAL DUERK'S ELECTRONIC BASEBALL ENCYCLOPEDIA
WITH SUPER SCOUT: This encyclopedia
(pronounced "Dirk's") gives baseball fans
masses of data presented in an easy-to-study
form. The complete career records of over
1,000 active players are presented in this electronic database, which will present the information of over 250 statistical fields in a variety of formats. While the presentation of the
information may not be instantly intuitive,
baseball statistics buffs will quickly assimilate
the information and be manipulating it with
great glee for many, many hours. IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #20.
Mindcraft

do Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
MAGIC CANDLE II: Continuing the
CGW Award-winning series, and previewed in
issue #84 (p. 16), this game features an expanded world and spell list. IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #21.
Origin
Austin, TX
ULTIMA VII: As previewed in CGW #87,
this Ultima opens the third Trilogy IBM
($79.95). Circle Reader Service #22.
Psygnosis
Liverpool, England
AGONY: In a league with Altered Beast, this
horizontal-scrolling-game-where-you-die-a-lot
offers plenty in the sound and graphics department. As a mystic owl on a fierce flight
through six savage levels of graphic gore, the
player faces horrendous hordes of hoary harbingers of doom, while seeking enough

"spells" to work a bit of timely "arcade" magic
is the key to player strategy. Amiga ($49.99).
Circle Reader Service #23.
ATOMINO: This molecule construction abstract strategy game will make any player into
a mad scientist as they are thrown atoms at
random that must fit into a molecular patter
(sort of a cross between Tetris and Dominoes).
The trick, of course, is to find atoms with a
free electron to share (fortunately, there are
"joker" atoms to help lighten the load). Over
60,000 levels should keep the puzzle solvers
out there occupied for quite a while. IBM
($49.99). Circle Reader Service #24.
RAW Entertainment, Inc.

3027 Marina Bay Drive, Suite 110
League City, TX 77573
(713) 538-3399
NAPOLEON, THE CAMPAIGNS 18051814: This low-to-moderately complex wargame offers players several individual Napoleonic "campaigns" to conduct at a strategic

level, while battles can be optionally fought
on a more tactical scale (so tactical, in fact,
that the information can be printed out so
that players can resolve battles using their favorite miniatures rules, with the battle results
input back into the program). Four campaigns are included (although none covers the
entire 20 years of the Napoleonic era) for one
or two players to enjoy. Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #25.
Realism Entertainment
6N522 Pine Street
Bensenville, IL 60106
(708) 595-7487
VIKINGS: While formally entitled Kingdoms of England II, Vikings: Fields of Conquest,
this strategy boardgame on a disk is highly
reminiscent of Avalon Hill's boardgame Britannia The 1-6 players maneuver a map of
199 territories, incorporating them into their
expanding empires over the British Isles. Flotillas, armies, catapults and castle building underscore the basic maneuvers of the seven dif-

Taking a Peek

ferent troop types, while battle results are tallied before a commander's eyes. These newcomers have put in sufficient style and panache in this, their first major effort, and have
created a quality strategy wargame that is well
worth looting and pillaging to get (except in
Los Angeles, please). Amiga ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #26.
21st Century Enterprises, Limited
P.O. Box 415
Webster, NY 14580
(716) 739-0998
PINBALL DREAMS: A typically European
import, this "pinball simulator" will really put
a player's Amiga through some paces before
his body "tilts" and he calls it a night. With
all the quality sound and graphics of a British
Amiga import as a high standard to start
from, Pinball Dreams has taken this a step further with 50 frames/second scrolling. The effect gives a dizzying, yet compellingly watchable, game screen that sports a an addictive little arcade delight. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #27.
SoftStream International, Inc.
10 Twin Ponds Drive
S. Dartmouth, MA 02748-116
(508) 991-4011
CLASSIC TRILOGY: Like most game trilogies, this one includes three products (grin).
The first game is 22nd Street Whist Tutor (described below). Cribbage Tutor II (also described below) makes up the second game,
while Hearts rounds out the package. The latter game is the one unique game in this package, offering Backward or Nullo variations (in
which one wins by losing), plus player-programmed variations. Each game supports full
on-line tutorial help for beginners. Macintosh
($79.95). Circle Reader Service #28.
CRIBBAGE TUTOR II: Everything for the
computer cribbage player, this game features
three levels of play with extensive on-line help
for beginners. As an interesting feature, the
computer players may occasionally "miscount" their score (as a human opponent
might), so you can practice catching "cheaters." Complete with running statistical scores
and advice, this is a game worth "pegging."
Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#29.
FAMILY CARD GAMES: This game features as its center point SoftStream's
MacRummy program (Described below).
Added to the package are three solitaire card
games that comprise their Solitaire DA product (described below) plus the classic War
card game, among others. A montage of
mix-and-match computerized card games, it is an
interesting assortment with a strong tutorial
element just made for beginners. Macintosh
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #30.
GALACTIC FRONTIERS: The pick of the

SoftStream litter, this one, at least, is not a
card game! A strategic space conquest game of
the Reach for the Stars ilk, Galactic Frontiers offers a venue in which two to four human or
computer players can compete. Players will appreciate the easy-to-use interface and simple
economic model that give this game a Est
pace and plenty of replay value for those who
enjoy a good "challenge lite." Macintosh
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #31.
MACRUMMY: As a basic computer
rummy game (not to be confused with a computer game for "rummies"), MacRummy allows players to play two variations of rummy:
straight rummy and gin rummy. The clearly
written rules and on-line tutorial help will
ease beginners into this popular card game
(just don't play the computer for money).
Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#32.
SOLITAIRE DA: Three popular solitaire
card games, Boston, Klondike and Pyramid,
are available to pop up for a quick solitaire

"fix," even while running other programs.
Plenty of "cheats" like undo moves and peeking ahead are available for unscrupulous players. Macintosh ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #33.
22nd STREET WHIST TUTOR: Whist is
a 400-year-old card game that is the ancestor
of modern contract bridge. This particular
variation of whist is named after a street in
Hermosa Beach, California, where surfers
used to play this fast-action, all-or-nothing
card game. The program is a gentle teacher,
with optional advice and user-defined preferences. Quaint, with a good dose of addictive
replayability, hopefully this game will find a
greater niche than its pasteboard counterpart.
Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#34.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
CARRIER STRIKE: An evolutionary step
from Carrier Command and Carriers at War,

Taking a Peek

this is veteran game designer Gary Grigsby's
masterful redesign of all his Pacific theater
wargames. Gary has taken the interface from
his "Front" game system (Second Front,
Western Front) and taken it to sea. With a halfdozen scenarios, all of which can be extended
into full, Pacific-theater campaign games, this
is the fist SSI wargame to really punch up the
sound and graphics end of the package. A superior job was done on the 120+ page documentation book and the gameplay was designed to be kept fast and lively. This is no
drill — Carrier Strike is on target! IBM
($69.95). Circle Reader Service #35.
CONFLICT: KOREA: This, the second in
the Conflict: series (the first being Conflict:
Middle East), is an operational- level, hex-grid
wargame of the forgotten war fought in 195051 (as seen on all of those M.A.S.H. episodes
on TV). Four scenarios include two campaign
games (one for the mobile part of the 1950s
conflict and one for a hypothetical 1990s scenario) and two shorter "phases" of the police
action, the Inchon landings and the Chinese
Yalu River counterattack. Plenty of special
rules cover the unique aspects of the geography, climate and divergent armies involved.
IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #36.
TREASURES OF THE SAVAGE FRONTIER: After walking through the Gateway of
the Savage Frontier, players will want to know
what "Treasurer await. Another in the highly
successful "gold box" series of AD&D computer games from SSI, this time the Heroes of
Azure are off on another jaunt to stop malevolent evil and recover an ancient magical artifact. Weather plays an important (and unpredictable) part in play, and 5th+ level characters from Gateway can be transferred over
(money and items intact). Interaction with
NPCs has been expanded, too (with romantic
involvement rearing its, er, head during play).
See the Scorpion's Tale in this issue. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #37.
Synergy, Inc.
Japan
L ZONE: A "busy-bath" style software toy
for Macintosh users, players explore a world
rendered entirely in 3-D by using nothing
more than their mouse. What appears to be a
huge underground industrial complex becomes, in effect, Manhole for adults with a
color Macintosh. CD-ROM. Circle Reader
Service #38.
U.S. Gold
San Jose, CA
THE GODFATHER: With five levels depicting five scenes from the three Godfather
movies, this arcade game is another attractive
"scroll around and shoot" product imported
from overseas. With a heavy licensing tie-in as

its major selling point, some "upgunned" bitmap graphics and digitized sound effects add
an extra measure of quality in a game that is,
essentially, a contrived "Easter Egg" hunt that
might have been better left sleeping with the
fishes. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#39.
Virtual Reality Laboratories, Inc.
2341 Ganador Court
San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
(805) 545-8515
DISTANT SUNS WINDOWS: An electronic "stargazing" toy, this program, using
Windows, creates a view of the night sky anywhere on Earth from 4173 B.C. to 10,000
A.D. More than just an electronic planetarium with plenty of features with zooming
camera views, it is also part galactic encyclopedia that the user can update by adding thousands of custom objects. Eclipses can be "de-

signed" and maps can be printed to provide
custom star charts. As Spock would say, "Fascinating...." IBM ($129.95). Circle Reader
Service #40.
VISTAPRO: This "electronic camera" allows one to take "pictures" (capture screens)
of all sorts of interesting landscapes. Using a
point-and-click interface, 256-color VGA
screens can be user-defined to vary in resolutions from 320 x 200 to (for those with
VESA graphics drivers) 1024 x 768. Using a
3-D projection system to move polygons and
supporting a floating point co-processor
(which is not required), lighting, shading, focus, zoom and every other camera trick in the
book can be fiddled with. IBM ($129.95).
Circle Reader Service #41.

Industry News

Inside The Industry
Accolade Gets Reprieve in Sega
Decision
When Sega Enterprises, Ltd. filed a lawsuit against Accolade, Inc. on October
31, 1991, observers believed that it was
over an issue of monopolistic marketing
practices vs. marketing chutzpah. Accolade's principals, having been shut out of
the lucrative Nintendo 8-bit market, did
not want to miss out on the videogame
bandwagon again. Hence, they made the
decision to rear-engineer their products
and avoid the bureaucratic entanglement
of becoming a licensee of another Japanese videogame company. During the
first week of April, 1992, U.S. District
Court Judge Barbara Caulfield enjoined
Accolade from further sale and manufacture of unlicensed Sega Genesis games.
Since videogame sales allegedly account
for 40% of Accolade's revenue, the decision could be significantly disastrous.
Originally, the injunction was not expected to affect product which was already in the marketplace, but Judge Caulfield followed up her original decision by
ordering , on April 13, 1992, an immediate halt of the sale of Accolade's Genesis
products and recalling existing stock
from the channel. Fortunately, Accolade
won a stay of the recall provision of the
injunction almost immediately from a
federal appeals court. One well-placed
source told CGW that the source believed Judge Caulfield had a fundamental
misunderstanding of what rear-engineering actually was.
Accolade has received welcome support
throughout the trial process from the
American Committee for Interoperable
Systems (ACIS) which filed a amicus curiae on the litigation. Peter Choy, Chairman of ACIS, stated, "The life blood of
the computer industry is the ability of
any competitor to make and distribute interoperable software and hardware." The
final outcome of the case will depend on
how much stock the legal system puts
into that thesis.

The Learning
Company Goes
Public
The Learning
Company (NASDAQ symbol LRNG) announced its initial public offering on
April 29, 1992. The offered price on the
2,000,000 shares was $11 per share and
the IPO was fully subscribed (i.e. sold
out) at that level. At press time, the per
share price had increased to $13.25 per
share. The Learning Company, publishers of the veerable Reader Rabbit and Super Solvers series of games, has recently
moved toward putting more entertainment value in their product line with
their Ancient
Empires and Operation Neptune edutainment products. The company expects
to use the working capital generated by
the IPO for developing products for the
educational/consumer marketplace by using emerging technologies.

Microprose Fencing Team Edges
Johns Hopkins
In February, the Microprose Strike
Eagles made their fencing debut in a trimeet between Salle Palasz and Johns
Hopkins. The fencing team (from left to
right in the picture) of Tim Train
(playtester), Lawrence Schick (designer of
Sword of the Samurai), B. C. Milligan (designer on
F-117A
team)
and
Doug
Whatley
(programmer) lost
their initial
match to
Salle
Palasz by

a 10-6 score, but managed to edge Johns
Hopkins 9-7 for their first victory as a
club team. Though Milligan and Train
are experienced competitive fencers and
managed to garner the majority of points
for the team, all were impressed with the
performances by Whatley (fencing in his
first team event) and Schick (fencing in
his first competitive bout, ever).

Sega and L.A. Radio Station
Raise $250,000 in AIDS Benefit
As part of a joint fundraiser between
Los Angeles' radio station MIS-FM and
Sega of America, the two companies
sponsored a charity auction and a concert
(KIIS and UNITE). At the auction, a guitar autographed by U-2 went for
$10,000, Sting's motorcycle raised
$7,500, a gold record from Michael Jackson net $4,500. The funds will be donated to Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
Artists participating in the concert included: Richard Marx, Amy Grant,
Luther Vandross, Keith Sweat, Color Me
and
Badd,
Wilson
Kenny G., Eddie Money,

Carmen Sandiego Becomes a
Board Game
Broderbund Software has entered
into a licensing agreement with University Games in which the latter
company will develop and market a
board game based on the popular
computer game character. The game
will be designed for two-to-six players and will be targeted at children
aged 10 and older. The expected retail price of the game, to be entitled
Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego? will be $19.99.

t

Review

Have You Seen Me?
M

ments discovered throughout the game
space. These elements must either be
mined from appropriate planets or traded
for with alien merchants. A substantial
portion of the game, then, involves
searching the game space for the necessary elements, gathering them together in
sufficient quantity, and stirring up that
technological magic to create Items of
Great Power.

issing: A 4 billion year old bluegreen planet of medium build,
slightly bulging about the midriff. Last wearing dainty white caps about
her top and underside and one small,
nondescript gray moon. Home to several
billion ape-descended life forms (and a
near equal complement of digital
watches). Answers to the name of 'Gaia'.
Last seen: Orbiting Sol at approximately 93 million miles conversing with
an alien machine of unknown origin and
purpose.

Thus is the stage set for New World
Computing's space opera Planet's Edge,
and yet another of mankind's classic
quests to save itself and its planet. As one
can gather from the ad above, the Earth
is missing...in an odd sort of way. It
seems an alien artifact of unknown origin
has somehow removed the earth's mass,
leaving behind the other (usually) concomitant properties of matter. Also
spared was the Earth's orbiting (what?)
moon, which now becomes the base
from which role-players lead a group of
four humans in a "Save The Planet" rescue mission of epic scale.
In Planet's Edge, the New World design team, most noted for their Might &
Magic role-playing series, has transporting their role-playing talents from the fantasy setting to a futuristic venue, bringing
with them their penchant for huge game
environments and challenging puzzles. A
quick peek at the game map, which beautifully displays 100+ star systems of up to
10 planets divided into an eight part pie
graph of space, reveals just how big this
game is. The player will end up visiting
each of these estimated 500+ planets in
gathering the chunks of the Penultimate
Puzzle that will lead to the recovery of
Earth's missing mass to its proper location in space-time.
As players follow the game's trail of
crumbs, they find themselves involved in
a series of planet-side mini-adventures re-

sembling StarTrek episodes in style, and
MegaTraveller or Ultima V in graphic
look and feel. Each inhabited planet has
its own story to tell (which, of course,
ties more or less with the overarching
plot), is populated by different alien
races, and sports a distinctive graphic
style and theme music. These well-written and designed scenarios form the core
of the game. For the most part, solving
these sub-adventures is a matter of object
juggling (get the Fnord Converter from
this alien and give it to another in exchange for the Frobozz), though there are
several more interesting puzzles involving
cryptograms, logical deductions, and
other original teasers, some of which are
quite challenging. Combining the level of
these puzzles with the daunting number
of objects to be swapped around, and
one can safely predict that the average
gamer will need an adventurer's support
group, a clue book or a friendly QA person (in my case), to complete the game.
Though the bulk of the game is made
of these mini-adventures, there's more to
Planet's Edge than the 3/4 perspective,
over-head adventuring. This space opera
has several other parts that serve to connect and round out the whole. One
such,is an element of exploration and
trade. Players must build their own spacecraft, ship weapons, armor and hand
weapons using a number of basic ele-

While traveling throughout the stars,
one often encounters various alien ships
of differing dispositions. Some aliens are
friendly and will offer to trade goods or
information; others will attack the player
on principle. If attacked, the player's ship
enters an action sequence closely resembling that of Starflight or Star Control in
which the opposing ships dodge and
weave in a furious exchange of lasers
shots, missiles and other pointy-ended
projectiles. Though essentially a twitch
and flex system (there are auto-pilot and
auto-firing mechanisms available, though
they are pretty useless) there is actual
quite a bit of strategy involved in both
the player's battle style against different
enemies, and in the outfitting of the
player's ship for different circumstances.
All of these game elements come together to create a tight, engaging balance.
The adventure packets are neatly separated by periods of exploration,
ship-to-ship combat action, and trade, creating a
playable, flowing rhythm.

Under The Hood
Looking at the nuts and bolts of the
game's 'role-playing' mechanics one finds
familiar guts with a few added subtleties
that bear the mark of design minds with
a rich pen and paper RPing history. Players are given four pre-made characters
with preset names, personalities, basic
characteristic ratings and a set of skills.
The lack of personalized characters was a
bit disappointing at first though I grew
into this design decision as I played
along. The preset characters allowed the
design to create rich character histories
Continued on pg. 28

Review

(fleshed out in character dossiers in the
documentation), and took away some emphasis from the numerical aspects of a
character in favor of his or her personality. Besides, I soon discovered that the
'roll'-playing aspect was still present in
the game's cloning system. Should a character happen to die, he or she can be
'cloned', wherein his or her basic stats
and skills are re-shuffled. Characters can
be cloned continually until he or she has
the scats and skills the player desires.
The character skills range from weapon
skills, to space craft skills, to leadership
and diplomacy, and each has an interesting effect on game play. These effects are
not mentioning in the documentation
and are subtle enough that they would
have remained hidden from me if I did
not have a New World QA person explain them to me. For instance, the Leadership rating will add 1-10% to each
characters "to hit" percentage if the
Leader is heading the party prior to corn-

bat. If the pilot has an Astrogation skill
of 90+ then 1 point is added to the
ship's top speed. Communication skills
aid in negotiating with alien traders.
Computers can be useful in several of the
planet-side adventures. More obvious, is
the fact that the pilot's ship weapon skills
and each individual's weapons training effects their 'to hit' rating in combat. In
fact, a character using a weapon for
which he or she is not trained can be
more dangerous to their own party than
the enemies they are firing at. Again,
these things are not mentioned in the
documentation and would have, for the
most part, gone overlooked if they had
not been pointed out.
The design also does some interesting
things with armor and weapons. Whereas
in most CRPG's weapons all do a general
amount of damage, and armor generally
protects against all forms of attack, in
Planet's Edge things are a bit more interesting. There are several different types of

weapons one can use and corresponding
armor types to protect against them.
Thus, when enters a battle, it is necessary
to discern what the enemy is using
against the party and re-outfit the characters for the occasion. Unfortunately, players must guess at the effectiveness of a
piece or armor or weapon as, again, the
documentation is lacking. (Guess no
more! See the nifty charts included with
this article).

The Dark Side of The Moon
Unfortunately, Planet's Edge is not one
of the smoothest rides I've taken around
the western arm of our galaxy. The game
contains a number of hitches, glitches,
and bumps without which it could have
been considered a stellar effort in more
than the immediate sense. Though not fatal, in any sense, these 'irregularities' jar
one just enough to draw attention away
from the scenery and onto the road.
Looking back now, these little nui-

Review

sances come to quite a list. For one, there
are a number of typos, grammatical errors, and small inconsistencies in game
text, which are perhaps understandable
with a body of text so large, though they
tend to leap right out and prod at a
player whose eye is trained four such
screwtiny grin. There are problems with
the ship's auto pilot mechanism which
often cause the ship to clumsily miss its
target and occasionally vibrate madly as if
vacillating between one direction and another. More important is the problem
with the Commander's messages at the
moonbase, which often flash by before
the player can read them. These messages
are the game's primary method of guiding players through the 'optimal' game
path. Of the more irritating variety are
the problems with doors which may slam
upon a character and lock him or her inescapably into room, or the fact that a
friendly NPC will often turn against the
player's party if accidentally caught in the
middle of a battle with other hostile
NPC's, leaving one no choice but to

blast it (this can be especially distressing
if that formerly friendly (and formerly
alive) NPC was the source of an important clue). Finally, when making contact
with an alien ship there is no option to
flee/retreat from an engagement, even if
the alien simply warns one to leave the
sector. There are only two types of aliens,
good and bad, and the player is forced to
always attack the bad.
As I've said, these knocks and pings
aren't so bad as to sink this game but are
bothersome enough to mention. This
product could have really shone, but for
a little extra QA effort.

Final Countdown
Stepping back and viewing the entire
package I see a solid, charming game
with a few lumps in the dough. Though
I did find a thing or two to grouse about
and few things that I had to 'learn to live
with', I enjoyed the game quite a bit.
The graphics aren't state of the art
(though they may have been 2 years ago

when this project was started), and the interface is not the cleanest, yet the colorful
sub-plots and variety of game elements,
along with the nuances in the game mechanics seem to save it from its untidiness. There's a rich story, good play balance and many hours of game play here.
CRPG'ers should find a lot to like.

Industry News
tures added. The new incarnation of the
game will be featured in Villa Crespo
Software's Coffee Break Series, the new
budget-priced line mentioned in last issue's "Rumors."

Impressions, the British software company, is planning to release Conquest (( Japan in the U.S. during August. The wargame features their miniature-level system and allows players to conquer the
main island of Honshu.
Mindcraft is planning to publish Mark
Baldwin's Legions of Krella, a planetary invasion game similar to the sections of Interstel's Star Fleet II that were impossible
for most players to access.

On Columbus Day, commemorating
the 500th Anniversary of Columbus' journey, a brand new Seven Cities of Gold will
be released with a new interface and gorgeous new graphics.

The successor to Strategic Simulations,
Inc.'s Gold Box series will take place in
TSR's Dark Sun universe. The graphics
and animation present an entirely new
look for the role-playing series. Rather
than trying to emulate their successful
Black Box series, the design team has
opted to create a game with the traditional overhead perspective which offers
plenty of graphic chrome in beautiful tile
sets for the terrain and intriguingly animated monsters for the animation. The
new game is expected to be more skillbased than the earlier Gold Box series.

Casino Craps, the popular Shareware
program has been reworked with new fea-

Fans of Accolade's Winter Challenge,
the multiple event action game based on
the Winter Olympics, will be interested
in Summer Challenge, the anticipated sequel based on, of course, the Summer
Olympics.

Three-Sixty Pacific is alleged to have
scrapped the original storyline/campaign
for Megafortress II. The story, based
mainly on espionage and international
crime, was absolutely so implausible that
the publisher ordered the design team to
start over. The good news is that players
will be able to fly accurate flight/performance models of B-1 Bombers that were
designed, but never manufactured. ThreeSixty is working closely with the defense
contractor to develop the most accurate
possible simulation based on unclassified
materials.

Review

Diving for Dollars
Micoplay's Sea Rogue
TITLE
:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:

Wh

Sea Rogue
IBM
Solitaire only
$49.95
Document Look-Up
James R. Jones III

ether one is from the Sea Hunt
or Jacques Cousteau generation,
he siren song of ocean depths
lures our imaginations into mysterious
realms that are out of most of our
"leagues." Sea Rogue, published by Microplay, makes available to the would-be
fortune hunter over 270 actual shipwrecks spanning ten centuries. Gold, silver, jewels and the like can be reaped
from wrecks ranging from Viking ships
and Spanish galleons like the Maravilla
to the modern day Bismarck and Titanic.
As captain of a crew of six, the computer
gamer assumes overall responsibility for
such tasks as researching, searching, surveying, recovering and actually identifying shipwrecks during the treasure hunting process. Sea Rogues allows players to
sail the high seas from the Gulf of Mexico to the Carribean Sea and across the
Atlantic Ocean. Over 18 ports of call include Dublin, Lisbon, Casablanca,
Dakar, Boston, Miami, Bermuda, etc.

Charting the Course (Mechanics)
The path to glory begins with the
player assuming command of a rickety
trawler, an inexperienced crew and a minute amount of funds. The crew (with gender choice) consists of weapons/diving,
sensor, navigator, communication and engineering officers. All have various functions and a point system that rewards the
player/commander for successful finds.
With these experience points, one can improve each crewman's skills at training
centers in port. Then the dollars accumulated from sale of treasure enables one to
trade in for a research vessel and, ultimately, buy the high-tech deep water submarine for which the game is named, the
Sea Rogue. Depending on port locale, optional wreck hunting, diving, weapon
and high-tech black market equipment
can also be purchased. Ever important
clues and treasure maps for locating
wrecks can be found in libraries, research

by Gary Jay Levine

centers and the seafarer's favorite, the local tavern.
Naturally, diving for wrecks is the main
thrust of the game and the most interesting facet of the game. When searching
old wrecks in shallow water, one is allowed to control four divers individually,
as well as the equipment they carry. This
gear includes magnetometers, trowels,
sand suckers and, as one would hope,
knives/spear guns for ever present sharks.
Mindful of the remaining oxygen supply, players are afforded the opportunity
to fully maneuver their divers on three
axes. Divers can search through five layers per ocean "square" uncovering cannon, coin, chests and — be forewarned
— the occasional mine. It is also possible
to grab or hoist and position flag markers
to mark one's path for the ensuing trips
below. A detailed map overlay can be
brought to view to give the player a layout of any wreck sites, diver locations
and uncovered items that have been revealed to the team at any given time. For
modern wrecks in deep waters, the Sea
Rogue's underwater probe (remotely controlled by the player) moves through various levels, stairs and rooms. With the attached claw, one can torch safes open or
attempt to "crack" the lock. At the same
time, the wise player will remain aware of
the currents, battery drain and potential
for being closed in by cave-ins. The

probe searches are the best part of the
game.
In game terms, players choose one of
three options to set the tone of the salvage operation. These range from rapid
(automatic grab-all) to painstaking
(manually searching square by square).
The player's choice will not only affect
the value of the haul, but international relations and the ship's bell identity clue, as
well. Wise players will remember that
identification of wrecks, not dollars
gained, leads to the highest overall scores.
There are three levels of difficulty in
the game. No matter which level one
chooses, however, one must compete
with up to five other hunters to locate/identify wrecks and recover treasure.
"Newspaper" articles announce the success of the computer-controlled competitors. These levels are mainly defined by
how much combat the player is likely to
encounter from seagoing traffic. Such traffic includes military forces, drug and pirate vessels, as well as "Evil Eddy's" ships,one's toughest competitor. This occasional combat ranges from ship gun engagements to full - blown sub combat.
For those who don't desire this combat
action, the novice level offers the complete game without it and all wrecks available for salvage/recovery.
Other game features include detailed
area maps with zoom, variable weather,
fine interface, save game and an editable
Captain's logbook. In addition, for ease of - play, the game offers the purchase of
automatic wreck and treasure map identification, instant safecracking and encoded
message deciphering. Players wishing for

more realism and challenge should "pass"
when given the option of purchasing
these goods.

Marker Buoys (Documentation)

Review

The 160 page manual is split into two
parts. One is a decent description of
game play/tips. However, the explanation
of skill and experience points is confusing
along with the probe screen. Tip: the
"lightning" icon for the claw control of
the probe does nothing. It was originally
intended to zap deep sea monsters but,
thankfully, the publisher demanded their
removal. The other half starts with actual
documentation of wreck hunting procedures. This is followed by the "Historical
Wreck Manual." This painstaking effort
is a fairly accurate representative picture
of all the shipwrecks in the game. These
are categorized by country with ship
name, date of sinking, manifests and a
brief history. Aside from its obvious importance to the game, its a worthy educational experience as well.

Scavenged Wrecks (Disappointments)
Unfortunately, one does come up with
a few empty chests in overall play. Sea
Rogue attempts to be a jack of many genres in simulation, role-playing and ac-

tion/arcade. Sadly, it masters none, resulting in insufficient variety for repetitive
play. Role-playing interaction in all ports
is reduced to check this and buy that. In
addition, the simulation of shallow diving operations lacks sophistication, the
search and recovery phase should have
dollar costs attached so that each would
have become more of a financial risk.
The lack of balance engendered by the
latter becomes apparent when players discover that one good find enables them to
purchase virtually everything in the game.
Combat action turns the mini-sub into
a quasi Los Angeles class attack sub with
ADCAP torpedoes and decoys. While

combat may provide an enjoyable interlude, purists would certainly wish for
more depth in role-play and simulation
aspects. At times, one wonders where the
size of the game went to (8+ megs hard
drive space) with its somewhat simplistic
graphics, animations and sound effects.
One gets the feel of a late '80s style game
released in 1992.

Newspaper Clipping (Conclusion)
As it stands, this game may not appeal
to those who demand current state-of-the
art in their gaming nor to those seeking
the definitive Jacques Cousteau-style underwater recovery simulation. That stated
however, there is enough offered to attract those who would enjoy the lure of
the deep, the challenge of finding sunken
wrecks and the thrill of recovering buried
treasure. In the tradition of the famed
Starflight series, Sea Rogue provides
do-as-you-wish game play choice in its vast
open-ended underwater world. Software
Sorcery, in their first design effort, offers
long term play value in a fascinating subject area.

Sneak Preview

as they flew over one particular
(and oft complained about) bump at
the end of one straightaway. As turbines whined and the blurs of color
passed my position, I wondered if
those drivers felt suspended in time,
captured in a cocoon of speed that
would thrust them newborn into a
hostile environment as the comfort
of the straightaway blended into the
horrifying (but stimulating) danger
of the next curve.

At first, Formula I sounds like it
has more to do with chemistry than
automobile racing, but Formula I racing is, simultaneously, the glamorous international showcase circuit of
the jet set and the glorious exposition of cutting-edge automobile technology. It features the deception of
placing high-powered, four-wheeled
technological analogs to high-performance aircraft on ordinary city
streets (only this time, the wings are
to hold the vehicles to the ground instead of lifting them from it), cruelly
allowing mere mortals such as our-

selves to identify with the world's
finest drivers as they play the ultimate game of chicken with curves,
walls, hay bales and rival vehicles.
The last time I attended a Formula
I event, I saw Nigel Mansell and
Niki Lauda move from deep in the
grid (order of start, based on qualifying times) up to a first and second
place finish, respectively. I watched
the world's greatest drivers trying to
hold the best lines as they pushed
their machines to the edge and
shook my head in stupefied wonder
as some cars were set so low to the
ground that they generated sparks

The last time I experienced Formula I was when I accelerated over
a hill during the Italian Grand Prix
at Imola and looked down at the
double "S" curve I was plunging toward. Well, it was a vicarious experience in Accolade's Road & Track
Presents Grand Prix Unlimited
(GPU), but it was an exhilarating experience nonetheless. Tom Loughry
(the man who first put us inside an
Ml Abrams tank in Steel Thunder,
took us back to Vietnam in Gunboat and, finally, allowed us to get
off the road in Test Drive III) has created a program that lets players experience Formula I from the simple
level of a Pole Position to a complexity level closer to Indianapolis 500:
The Simulation. Drivers can let the
program keep them basically on the
track and automatically provide the
shifting or drivers can shift manually
and cut cross-country (albeit at a significant reduction in speed and acceleration of damage). Players can use
default car settings or customize
their cars (and save them to disk)
with regard to high/low driver's
view, braking pressure, steering radius, wing angle and tires. One can
choose to race the courses as they
currently exist, challenge historical
circuits or create custom courses
with the course architect (similar to
the
one in Jack Nicklaus Signature
Golf).

In The Pits
Five major automotible manufacturers are represented in GPU: Benetton Ford, Tyrrell, McLaren Honda,
Ferrari or Williams Renault. These
come with default settings and the
player/driver can be competitive in
any of them. Nevertheless, like
many of the better automobile rac-

Sneak Preview

justment in the late stages of a
race. We can even save different
set-ups of the same model and
experience how much difference
there may be in the way they
handle.

On The Track
Of course, the real action takes
place on the track. Once the car
is selected, set-up and ready to
go, the player still has to qualify,
ing games of the last decade,
GPU allows the player to see
part of the invisible sphere of
automobile racing and set-up the
car. When the player selects the
"Car Adjustments" menu, he/she
is admitted into the "mystery religion" of automobile mechanics.
Not only is there an option for
adjusting the driver's viewpoint
to a high or low perspective using a five point scale, but the
game explains on-screen (with
visual cues) exactly what the
driver will see. Not only is there a
five point scale for adjusting the
brakes, but the on-screen description tells the player whether a
shorter or more lengthy stopping distance is better for the type of
weather in which the race is being
run (shorter is for dry and longer is
for wet). Players can opt for slowing
their top speed and using a high
wing angle to hold the car on the
track during high speed cornering
or they can take it easy on the corners, while setting the wing angle
low and blowing by the competition
on the straightaways. The "Car Adjustments" screen even explains
when to use slick tires and when to
use tires with tread.
In short, setting up the car in GPU
is a painless. We are not usually
privy to the exact reason that Arvyn
Senna is able to corner at a faster
pace than Nelson Piquet in a given
race or why Nigel Mansell makes up
so much time on the straightaways.
Now, we'll have a better idea of
why the winner of a given race
spends so much time in the Winner's Circle talking about his team
setting up the car for a particular
temperature or making a critical ad-

There are no digitized voices whispering "Prepare to Qualify" as in
the coin-op classic of yesteryear,
but there is a familiar "Christmas
Tree" to handle the start and the
player finds himself or herself
ready to use either keyboard or
joystick to guide the car over the
course and into the starting grid.
Naturally, as in real life, the qualifying times determine the positions on the grid. Also, as in real
life, the most dangerous moments of the race tend to be at
the start. In one race, I found
that six out of seven of us were
wiped out in a starting collision.
Those who opt for a realistic approach to the path to a World Driving Championship in Formula I will
need to memorize the courses
through fly-bys (just like in televised
golf coverage) and numerous practice runs. Those who are more casual in their approach can opt for a
window on the screen that shows
every twist and turn of the course
plus the current position of every
car on the course. Those of the latter who wish to rationalize can
point out that those positions are
often radioed to the drivers from
their teams in the pits. Nevertheless,

this option is another player-friendly
touch that will make it easier for casual garners to master this simulation.
The scenery-specific courses can
be adjusted to detail levels that allow for either satisfaction or speed.
The pre-release version offered detailed scenery for two different years
of World Driving Championship competition. The scenery is very nice,
but one will need a faster machine
in order to be able to see it without
slowing the races down to a crawl.
Finally, there must be a caveat
with regard to the artificial opponents. In the version that I previewed, the opponents were toned
down and did not have cars with
anywhere near the performance
specifications of the player's car and
they did not seem to have any specific competitive style programmed
for the famous drivers. Computer
Mansell, for example, didn't drive
his car harder than computer-"sponsored" Capelli. M routines based on

the actual driving styles of famous
drivers, would be most welcome. Of
course, licensing fees may yet prohibit having the actual names of
leading drivers in the program.

The Winner's Circle
At press time, Accolade was nearing the finish line with Road &

Track Presents Grand Prix Unlimited. The qualifying runs looked
very smooth, but the actual race
isn't run until the play balance is adjusted and the customers fill the
stands. At least, from this Formula I
fan's perspective, it looks like it's going to be an exciting race.

Review

The World According To
opulous fans who are fascinated with beTITLE:
Populous World Editor
SYSTEM:
Amiga
hind-the-scenes computer game wizREQUIRED:
Populous (The game)
ardry have good cause to conjure up a
PROTECTION: None
PRICE:
$19.95
celebration. A hands-on magical mystery
DESIGNERS:
Alexander Kochann & Oliver Reiff
DEVELOPER:
Bullfrog Productions Ltd.
tour called the Populous World Editor (PWE)
Electronic Arts
PUBLISHER:
San
Mateo, CA
is coming soon to selected floppy disk drives
everywhere. Modifying worlds goes back to
as Water.
the original Populous, in which players could, to a limited degree,
The
game alexperiment by rearranging existing graphic elements and game paternately
rameters, such as placing good and evil walkers, enabling or dispaints the
abling deity powers, adding or removing trees and rocks and inwater
areas
creasing or decreasing manna supply.
on a world
PWE is light-years beyond the elementary custom option mamap with imnipulations available with the original game. Players using the
ages of water
Editor may alter the appearance of the people, settlements and
1 and water 2
terrain to design a world with a unique look and character for
to create the illusion of lapping waves. Whatever images are put
either custom-mode play or as part of a conquest series. In the
into these cells will act as a two-part animation sequence that beprocess of learning PWE, nifty animation secrets and the conhaves like water. In the Ash terrain worlds on original Populous,
quest series world name passwords used by Populous are revealed.
lava images were drawn into the two water cells. That's why lava
With the Editor's help, players can gain insight into how Popuis lapping the land instead of water.
lous does so much with so little.
An image performs according to how Populous interprets the
The Editor not only excels in its clearly defined intent, but procell's predefined use for that object in the game. If a player crevides an intriguing duality in purpose of its own. Some can have
ates Humpty Dumpty World and paints an egg inside house cell
fun by simply changing things around and others may choose to
1 of the land set, the image will function as the smallest settlego further and pick up a gauntlet of sorts. As part of its implied
ment in the game. People will enter and depart from the egg, enpurpose, PWE sparks a good-natured dare for players to outdo,
emy knights will destroy and burn the egg (would over easy be
or at least rival, the graphics and gameplay balance that made the
asking too much?), plus all other activities associated with primioriginal Populous a brilliant piece of work, an observation players
tive settlements will take place with the egg dwelling, thereby
will come to appreciate as they try their hand at the world creamaintaining the underlying logic of the game.
tion business.
When a set is selected and loaded, all the images in that set are
displayed in cells on the edit screen. Highlighting a cell calls up a
Image Consultant
Paintbox editing screen that features only the chosen image,
PWE provides access to the graphic elements, the images, used
which can now be replaced or manipulated in various ways using
by Populous to construct a world. Populous worlds are made up of
an on-screen toolbox. From the Paintbox screen, players can adtwo distinct image groups called Land sets and Sprite sets. Land
just the level data that regulates gameplay on the different worlds
sets make up the terrain and are composed of primarily static imlinked together in the conquest series. Level data information inages such as earth, rocks, grass, trees, houses and castles. Sprites
cludes landscape type, opponent's intelligence, computer reaction
are images that create the illusion of movement: examples include
speed, starting populations, deity powers and other settings used
walkers, knights, flags, good man fighting evil man and fire.
in a particular level.
A set can be thought of as a special template containing a collection of images inside cells, or frames, that Populous recognizes. A
land set is made up of roughly 60 images, and each image is
stored within its individual cell. A sprite set has about 70 cells,
each containing 2 to 4 images used to produce a particular animation sequence. Original Populous utilizes one sprite set with four
varying land sets. The world look is medieval with characters
dressed to complement the era. The four terrain types (or land
sets), however, alternate throughout the conquest series of games:
Greenery, Sand, Ice and Ash.
The Editor can modify any existing image or create new ones
within a cell. Each cell, however, has a fixed descriptive name
and an unalterable purpose that has nothing to do with what's
drawn inside the cell. For example, there are two cells designated

Certain images have adjustable settings (not merely on or off
but variable) associated with them that affect both good and evil
sides. All house and castle cells have parameters that control
death and birth rates, intelligence of the people and the amount
of manna generated by specific settlements. Hill, Plain and Water
images have parameters that affect the color of the image in the
Book of Worlds and what sprite set Populous will load with a
land set. Players can set parameters globally from applicable land
or sprite images.
To demonstrate a jumping-off point for experimentation, PWE
comes with five land and sprite sets that combine to create five
complete worlds: Original Populous Green, French Revolution,
Space, Fast Food, Wild West, plus a generic abstract land set template for further exploration. Existing sets on the disk can be ed-

Review

. . . Max

Electronic Arts' Populous World Editor
by Maxwell Eden
ited, but new sets can't be added
since the floppy is full. Players
can, however, make copies of
PWE to create and save more
worlds.
A creative exercise might include changing the good or evil
(depending on a player's orientation) ankh in Space World to
look like the mysterious monolith from 2001. Carrying the
theme further, walkers could be
apes until converted to knights
who are, in turn, transformed
into people.

Although Populous World Editor isn't difficult to use, understanding how to operate the system requires some effort. In this
case, the technologically meek will definitely not inherit the
earth. The load, edit and save screens are thoughtfully laid out
and all commands are mouse point-and-click or have keyboard
equivalents. While the interface is simple, getting the most out of
this program requires basic knowledge of Amiga's Command
Line Interface (CLI), specifically to check directories, copy files
and make data-only disks (worlds without the Editor on them),
an inherently more efficient way to play new Populous worlds.
Those needing help with the CLI can refer to their Amiga manual or get a quick and efficient fix by obtaining Directory Opus,
a superb, easy-to-use utility program (one meg memory required)
that handles all the necessary AmigaDOS tasks transparently.

Manual Overdrive
Overall, the PWE manual does a decent job of explaining the editing process. The following tips and
observations are provided to clarify potential gray areas players may encounter while learning the Editor.
In addition to the sprite and land sets on PWE, the
Editor can edit sets from the copy-protected Populous
and The Promised Lands disks. To avoid the mishap
of forever altering the original, load a selected set
from these disks into the Editor's convenient default
buffer, make the desired changes, then save to a data
disk — not the copy-protected disks, which should
be write-protected as a matter of habit. The default
buffer is also a convenient window where players can
create interesting combinations by swapping cells between different land or sprite sets.
Advanced Amiga users can import images from
more sophisticated paint programs, as long as the image is drawn within the pixel (pixels are the building
blocks of all sprite and land images) limits and cell
boundaries of a pre-saved Populous set template.
Hard disk users should follow the install steps in

the manual as stated. While it's not explicitly clear in the instructions, only the Editor program will be copied to the hard disk,
which is what should happen. When creating a data-only disk,
the worlds (land and sprite sets) plus the other necessary files
stated in the manual should be copied to the floppy disk, which
must also contain a "level.dat" file (available from PWE or original Populous) to play a conquest series game.

Some Sound Observations
While in perfect harmony for a medieval world, Populous sound
effects such as knights clanging in battle are annoyingly out of
synch when little space knights are duking it out in Space World.
A similar inconsistency is also graphically disrupting. The technology indicators (fist, club, sword, crossbow) displayed on the Information Shield that convey the intelligence level of a walker or a
settlement are okay visuals for primitive worlds, but stick out like
a sore thumb in others eras. A minor glitch is the ability to alter
the good and evil pointers. Though their images can be changed,
they revert to the default fickle finger of fate from original Populous. For example, in Wild West World the good pointer in the
good pointer sprite cell is an Indian Arrow. When the world is
booted, however, the old familiar hand pointer is back in play.
PWE is speedy on an Amiga 500 with two megs of memory
and a GVP HD+ hard disk. The Editor requires a minimum
512K system and one meg is necessary to hear the music. At the
very least, two floppy drives are highly recommended. No, PWE
will not work with Populous II.

The authors of PWE had a friend whose favorite computer
game was Populous. So, they wrote a small editing program that
could change the graphics of the game and presented the effort
to their fortunate comrade as a birthday
offering. Now all Populous fans wanting to
be apprentice wizards can share in the
More
magic of that gift. Populous is a great
Information
game and PWE is an ideal enhancement
that breathes new life into weary bytes.
Populous: The Promised Lands
Absolute power was never as incorruptdata disk with five new worlds:
ible, nor this creative.
Sillyland, Wild West, Blockland, Revolution Francaise and
Bit Plains. (Electronic Arts,
$14.95, Populous game required.) Wild West and Revolution Francaise are also on PWE.
Directory Opus
($59.95, one meg required)
Inovatronics
8499 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231
214-340-4991
GVP
600 Clark Ave.
King of Prussia, PA 19406
215-337-8770

Review

Abysmal Perspective
Origin's Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss
by Allen Greenberg
mong the arsenal of special effects equipment
reedy manipulate objects on the graphic screen are
TITLE:
Ultima Underworld:
The Stygian Abyss
hat became available to the film industry dur- SYSTEM:
now well-established features in the genre, and from
IBM
PRICE:
$79.95
ing the 1970s was an item called the Steadiwhat this reviewer continues to call the "gut-level inPROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
Paul Neurath
Cam. This amazingly portable device allowed a film
terface." In UTSA, however, players may discover
PUBLISHER:
Origin Systems
Austin,
director to compose uninterrupted film sequences
that the mouse is barely adequate to accommodate
that smoothly travel from one location to another.
all of the functions assigned to it, much as a good
It was the SteadiCam, for example, that carried the viewer eerily
flight combat simulation often demands a more complex input
along the nightmare encrusted hallways and garden mazes of
device.
Stephen King's imposing Overlook Hotel in Stanley Kubrick's
In fact, players will need to acquire some skills formerly associ1980 film The Shining. Settling into Ultima Underworld — The
ated only with flight or driving simulations, such as the ability to
Stygian Abyss (UTSA), one might wonder if Lord British is not
stay "on course" while moving ahead in narrow corridors. Speed
guilty of strapping one of these devices onto some unfortunate
of travel is also under the player's control, as is the ability to leap
employee from Origin Systems and depositing that person into
across chasms or jump to different heights. UTSA is certainly no
some medieval, horror-filled tunnel in order to capture some rare
arcade game, but timing and coordination are necessary tools for
motion picture footage. If this is indeed the case, that employee
survival.
apparently survived long enough to contribute a unique action
perspective to this eagerly anticipated entry into the growing field
"Power steering" has also been added to UTSA and this can
of dungeon-style role-playing programs.
cause some frustration. In other dungeons, players simply click
on a left or right arrow in order to turn 90 degrees. Here, players
Inspired, perhaps, by their own company's success in bringing
select either a clockwise or counter-clockwise turn, the degree of
depth and realism to space combat simulation with the Wing
which
is determined by the amount of time the mouse button
Commander series, the designers of UTSA have replaced the tradistays pressed. This is necessary because many hallways and opentional graph-paper design of other dungeon games with an enviings branch off at other than right angles. However, bringing the
ronment that flows past the player in a continuous stream. More
turn to a stop at the correct point can be difficult and a lot of
than this, the game presents a dungeon world in three admirably
time will likely be wasted spinning around at intersections. Playrealistic dimensions, along with occupants who are constantly in
ers also have the ability to tilt their point of view up or down.
motion. This is an ambitious project, and not without its share
With all of these robotic functions in operation, it is not long beof problems. However, it represents a significant step toward the
fore the illusion takes hold that one is actually controlling Britanelusive "conceptual world building" that some have unjustly
nia's version of R2D2 in Wonderland.
claimed to be "virtual reality."
Combat within the dungeon is yet another affair controlled by
As in most recently released dungeon adventures, UTSA is best
the mouse. Enemies can attack from all sides and seem to harbor
controlled using the mouse. This, along with the game's realvery little guilt when it comes to remaining outside the hero's
time action, an icon-based command system and the ability to di-

t

Review

limited field of vision. The player's attack
is a two-step process, in which a weapon
is first pulled back and then released. A
more powerful attack results when the
time between these two steps is lengthened. A good strategy for combat appears
to be one of constant movement, so that
players may wish to try a
move-pull-move-release pattern. Obviously, combat
in UTSA can be quite different from
other dungeon games in which the hero
remains stationary or simply turns from
one attacker to the next.
UTSA is very much a part of Richard
Garriot's Ultima universe. Sometime following the events of Ultima VI, it is revealed that Baron Almric has been personally assigned by Lord British to lead an experimental, multi-attribute
settlement on the Isle of the Avatar, directly over the former Stygian Abyss. Following a ghostly summons, the player, in the role
of the overworked, under-appreciated Avatar, is falsely accused of
kidnapping the Baron's daughter. What, then, begins as a rescue
mission to save the girl soon becomes a far more critical quest to
save Britannia from an unsuspected evil. Within the nine-level,
multi-kilometer Abyss, the Avatar will encounter such Ultima
standards as the meditation shrines and objects of virtue.
Spellcasting in UTSA also draws heavily on the system of magic

that has already been established in the
Ultima series. There is no need to gather
ingredients for spells, but players do need
to collect rune stones, each of which has
been inscribed with a letter from Britannia's alphabet. Once a letter has been
added to the hero's inventory, it may be
used an unlimited number of times in
constructing spells, most of which will be
familiar to graduates of earlier CRPGs.
The ability to cast a particular spell depends on the player's level and number
of spell points or "manna" available. As
in other games, spells may be used in
combat either to alter a player's condition or to bring about changes within a given area. One of the
more popular spells allows the hero to soar through the dungeon
like a bird. (Did someone mention "flight simulator" earlier in
this column?)
The dungeon also contains a variety of magical objects that,
upon experimentation, produce an entertaining variety of results.
Many of these objects are hidden behind puzzles while others
may be obtained from certain occupants of the dungeon. There
is a variety of puzzles and mini-quests to be solved in the game
and they range from the mechanical manipulation of levers and
switches to heeding the impassioned plea of a dead spirit. Other

Review

important questions involve the identity and relationship of Tom and Judy
as well as the gentle culinary art of preparing Rotworm Soup.
Conversation with NPCs, using only
the finest pseudo-Shakespearean English, is yet another important aspect of
UTSA. For this, the player responds to
questions and statements by selecting
phrases and responses from a menu. As
experienced Avatars are well aware, unprovoked combat or other mistreatment of innocent characters will result
in a diminution of a player's attributes.
Non-playing characters not only possess
some useful inventory, but also have quite a bit of information to
offer. It is possible to trade items with them or obtain their services in repairing inventory already owned.
Although an acknowledged Avatar, the player must enter the
dungeon with a minimum of experience. Characters from the Ultima series may not be transferred here and so the player must
first choose to be a fighter, mage, bard, tinker, druid, paladin,
ranger or shepherd. Within each class are several skills, one of
which the player must choose to excel in. To survive, however,
the player would be well advised to diversify and master as many
of these skills as possible. All classes are able to cast spells, al-

though mages have the obvious advantage. A player's skills will improve as a
result of meditation at one of several
shrines using special mantras, both of
which may be found throughout the
dungeon. The player will also enjoy an
increase in vitality as experience is
gained and a higher ranking is assigned.
The program uses a common method
for carrying and manipulating inventory, that is, clicking on a container
opens a window to reveal its contents.
From here, an object may be taken,
used or consumed. Unexplained
changes in the hero's inventory appear
to be the result of a bug in the program and Origin has already
been made aware of the problem. For now, it is important to
both examine inventory and save the game often.
There are also very definite limitations as to how much a character may carry and this amount is further reduced by the presence
of heavy protective armor. Throwing modesty to the winds, it
may help to accomplish certain tasks without clothing.
Graphically, most of UTSA's "fireworks" are in its animations
and not in its backgrounds. Most scenes are murky and dim in
appearance and objects generally lack detail. At times, certain perspectives are confusing. Chasms that appear to have been crossed
already may still prevent the player from moving forward. Similarly, certain doorways that appear to be within reach remain frustratingly unapproachable.
The game's sound effects are minimal, even with a recommended soundboard. The program does, however, feature an interesting and effective musical score. Far more impressive sounds
and pictures have been produced for other dungeon games, generally on the Amiga and Atari ST computers.
UTSA is one of the new generation of Origin games that will require high-performance computers on which to run. A minimum
configuration includes a 386 SX processor, two megabytes of
RAM and an expanded memory manager. VGA graphics capability is also required, as is a hard drive. The program will occupy
between eight and 13 megabytes on the drive, depending upon
which sound and display options are selected.
Two features of this package deserve a final special mention.
First, the program includes a powerful auto-mapping feature that
actually allows the player to permanently annotate the map as it
is displayed. An option to dump this map to a printer would
have been even more appreciated. Second, the documentation
that accompanies the program is outstandingly clear and complete, yet relatively brief.
What may be overlooked in UTSA is its enjoyable story and
well-crafted puzzles. More than that, the designers have admirably avoided overwhelming the player with an excess of any one
obstacle. Other dungeon exercises have too frequently called on
preposterous battles and endless forests of mazes to provide the
main challenge. Herein lies an enjoyable challenge with a unique
game-playing engine to back it up. To that abused employee at
Origin who carried the SteadiCam — "Nice Work!"

Designer Profile

Meet Roberta Williams,

Scryptkeeper
Tales from the Dark Side of the Sierras
by Russ Ceccola

ust as there are two sides to every story,
people have two halves that are in a constant struggle for recognition. Most of us
normally act one way, but every now and
then have to let out our inner demons and remove our inhibitions. Roberta Williams, Sierra On-Line co-founder and demure, softspoken woman, is one of the most popular
game designers in the computer game field.
Best known for her King's Quest series, MixedUp Mother Goose and Laura Bow mystery
games, one could classify the bulk of her design work as fantasy. Recently, Williams decided to purge some of her own inner demons by designing a frightening, modern-day
horror game with a female protagonist. Unnamed at press time, this adventure game will
be the first in Sierra's new line of serious horror games, tentatively dubbed Scary Tales. In a
recent interview, Williams revealed her appreciation of horror movies and fiction and offered insight into why Laura Bow 2 has such
gruesome murders and why the first Scary
Tales game will be something special.

J

ing led very deliberately, very slowly to a climactic point of terror. Anyone who writes a
good horror story tries to keep the anticipation going as long as they can, because that's
what builds the terror. That's one component. I had to think of how I could maintain
suspense in an adventure game, because most
people, as the protagonist in an adventure
game, wander around all over the place.
The person playing the game should have
the freedom to do what they want. This is
what's tricky about writing an adventure
game. You have to control them to some extent because otherwise your story means nothing. But if you control them too much, they
don't like that — they resist. It's a real fine
line. If you give them too much exploration,
your plot goes right out the window. If you
don't give them enough, then they feel confined. I had to include suspense, which is one
of the trickiest things in plotting a story.
That's from a design standpoint.

CGW: Tell us about the first Scary Tales
game. What can you tell us?
RW The horror game is true horror in
every sense of the word. It's not going to be
out until 1993. It's modern horror. I've
wanted to do horror for a long time, but
didn't think the technology in computers was
there for the game, where you could really do
horror and get away with it — in other
words, scare people.
I've been studying horror for quite some
time before deciding to do this game and I'm
trying to understand how horror and suspense
work, as well as the techniques in developing
them. Up until now or next year, the technology just hasn't been there to develop the
game. It's still going to be tricky to really pull
it off because when you see a horror movie or
read a book, suspense is the key Factor — suspense and anticipation of things to happen on
the part of the reader, watcher or player.
It's something that's drawn out for a long
time. The person experiencing the story is be-

Where the scary parts come in are situations
like opening a closet door. You lead the
player through suspenseful plot points to believing that there may be something behind
the closet door. In our games, the way that
they are now, if a person wants to open a
door, he clicks the hand on the door and the
on-screen character walks over and opens the
door. That's not very scary. In a horror story,
it's not as simple as just opening the closet
door. You have to linger at the closet door, caress the closet door. You have to show hesitation on the part of the protagonist. The person playing the game must be led to believe
that there is something terrible behind that
door. You try to keep the door from opening
as long as you can to build that anticipation. I
have to think how I can keep the player from
going over and just opening the closet door. I
have to build that anticipation.

When you do open the door, whatever happens is going to be very quick. We have to be
able to switch pictures in a split second. If
there is somebody in there that's going to
jump out at you or there's a dead person
hanging there, the computer has to bring it
up on the screen quickly. It won't be very
scary if the computer has to go to disk, etc.
The other thing that is important in horror
(which, up until now, has been hard to do) is
that, in order for a person to be afraid, they
have to be able to relate to the protagonist
and people that they see in the game. They
have to be human and look human. They
can't look like cartoon figures. You can't relate to cartoon figures as much as to characters who look just like you. We want to use
real actors, like in Police Quest III.
CGW That came across real well in the
game.
RW Only they just did it in story sequences. In the game, you still move around a
cartoon figure. I want to continue the theme
and walk around real people and not use cartoon people in the game ever. We have to figure out how to do that. As you see, there arc
some technical issues we have to confront to
be able to carry off horror and have it work.
That's why up until now, no one has done
much horror or, when they have, they have
gone the easy route with ghosts, monsters and
lots of gore.
CGW Like some of the goofier and gorier
attempts on horror like Ghostbusters or the
Elvira games, both fun, but not really horror?
RW: Exactly. My game is true horror. It's
modern and it's very real. The events happen
to a young girl who is a a real person, someone you can relate to. She's in her early 20s,
lives in Sacramento and practices as a lawyer.
She goes up to the mountains near Lake Tahoe to do some hiking. She sounds like a
semi-normal person. We're not talking about
someone that couldn't really exist. What happens to her is a nightmare, but it's portrayed
as real and possible. She desperately tries to
get out of the situation, but it gets worse and
worse and worse.
CGW That's great. Originally, we had
heard that it would be a Gothic horror game.
We were concerned that it might be more fantasy-horror, a combination of your previous
styles.
RW: Not at all. This is a real horror game,
more along the Stephen King lines. The closest you could label it would be as a psychological thriller. It's set in a small town in the
middle of nowhere in the mountains of the Sierra Nevadas. She gets lost and this town is
nearby and its citizens appear to come to her
rescue. I am a Fan of horror. Although I have

Designer Profile

done a lot of what you might call romantic
fantasy-type games. That's not really me. I
think people will be really surprised by this
game.
CGW: So now we get to see the real you!
Anyone who has met you knows how quiet
and demure you are.
RW: Yes, I guess. This game will come unexpected to many of my fans. It reveals my
other side. One thing that horror does is
touch upon taboos in society that people
don't want to talk about or admit they exist.
We're touching upon a few taboos in this
game. One is a church that may not be quite
right. There are other gruesome aspects of human nature in this game that people don't always want to talk about.
CGW: What influenced you to design this
game? You say you have an interest in horror
that goes back a long time. Is that the impetus behind the game?
RW: I have had a strange hate and love affair with horror for as long as I can remember. It started out when I was four years old.
We lived near a movie theater where they
would show horror movies every Friday night.
I remember this vividly because it had such
an impression on my life.

There were other scenes like that too. One
lady went into her bedroom and sat down at
her dresser to get ready to go to bed. She does
all the things she would normally do before
going to bed and then lays down on the bed.
The second she laid on the bed, she looked
up and saw this guy looking down at her
from a lamp over the bed. I screamed! I
wasn't prepared for that kind of shock at four
years old. I wasn't prepared that those people
could exist. He jumped down on her and cut
off her head! They showed it. I saw it, even
though I had my eyes covered. On the way
home, I got in the car and immediately put
my feet up on the chair because I was afraid
that there was someone under the seat who
would grab my legs. When I got home, I
screamed all night. I wanted to sleep with my
parents, but they wouldn't let me. I screamed
and screamed, couldn't sleep and had to sleep
with the light on and under the covers. I was
like that for the next 10 years of my life —
honestly! I still can't remember what movie
that was.

It was Friday night and we were eating spaghetti. My dad was getting ready to go out to
the horror movies. I begged to go with him.
He told me I was too young to see a horror
movie. I told him that I would be okay because, at the time, I thought horror movies
were like King Kong, with big monkeys and
the like. I said I could handle it. For whatever
reason, he changed his mind and said that I
could go to the movie.
So he took me to the movie and I was
happy because I got to go out with my dad
on a Friday night, just me and him. I was
four and felt like a big girl. I started watching
the movie and felt that something was wrong
because it wasn't like King Kong, with monkeys and things. It looked like a real movie
with real people. And then something really
horrible happened. Before the horrible scene,
the whole screen started waving and turning
funny colors. I remember turning to my dad
and asking him why the screen was doing
that. He said that something might happen. I
didn't know what might happen, but I remember one scene in particular.
This guy in the movie got a package of binoculars as a present in the mail. Just as he received it, the screen did this blurry, wavy
thing, which was really a warning to people
that something bad might be coming. He put
the binoculars up to his face, to his eyes, and
suddenly daggers came out of the binoculars
and went into his eyes.

CGW: What are the plans for the future of
the series?
RW The series will emphasize horror, but it
won't be the same as our other series, where
we have characters that go through each game
and there is continuity. Each game will be
completely separate and have its own story. I
wanted to do the first one to set the tone of
the series. People have been amazed at some
of the terrible things I put in the story because they didn't think we could do them,
that we could include such things or talk
about horror in that way. They were thinking
like you, as far as Gothic horror and ghosts. I
wanted to do the first game so others would
know it's okay to do these things.
CGW We like your approach to the design.
Do you think that its uniqueness in the game
market will make it a success?
RW Yes, I do. It is unique in this industry.
The ending is also unique. The story is done
at this point, but we still need to put in the
puzzles and work them into the story. We
know the story, but we still need to break
down what she does in the town and in the
game to allow the players to take over. The
object of the game is to escape from the town.
The player wants to get her out of there. The
townspeople obviously don't want her to
leave. We're building into the game now
things she discovers about the people and
town. She has to go places and figure out
things for herself as well as talk to people.
CGW: Are you interviewing people for the
characters at this point?

CGW So that's what you want to make people feel like after playing your game?
RW Well, it took me a long time before I
was comfortable with horror again — until I
was a teenager. I was 16 before I could watch
a horror movie or read a book, but then I really loved it. Horror had always been some
kind of strange thing in my life. I don't know
why I'm doing it now. That movie gave me
some understanding about what scares people
because I was scared so badly. This game has
very little blood and gore. There are two
places that I can remember where there is a
relatively unpleasant scene. They're over
quickly and they're very much a part of the
story. They weren't done for the sake of gore.
Gore and blood aren't the point of the game.

RW: No, not yet. We have a very established pattern of how we do these games at Sierra now. The first thing we do is figure out
the design and all the details, story line and
puzzles so that we know exactly what the
game is about. Once that's done, then we
start character sheets that describe the characters and their personalities, get the artists together and think about actors. We have been
rotoscoping people for some time and reducing normal actions down to single-frame cels.
With this game, we plan to photograph the
actors and keep them in the game as themselves. The characters will have to be a little
bigger than the ones we have now so that
they look more distinct. I wanted to do photography in real places, but the technology
can't handle that level of detail at this point.
We're going to do the most we can.
CGW: What about music and sound effects?
Certain movies like Psycho and Friday the
13th wouldn't be the same without them.
RW One of the things we're going to do a
little differently with this game is the music/sound effects part. We don't normally
think about them and cinematic scenes dur-

Designer Profile

ing the design process. With the horror game,
we're going to plan all that out in advance.
We have to plan in advance, because if we
don't do it right in every aspect, it will fall
flat on its face. I want the game to be good,
get the series off the ground and get a lot of
attention.

RW: I'm not doing it so much now, because
it's after the fact. The story is already thought
out. I did a lot of that kind of activity before
designing the game. I did quite a lot of research, perhaps too much, to the point where
I started having nightmares. All I was doing
was reading horror books and
how-to-write-horror books, as well as watching horror movies. It was getting depressing. I was looking
more for suspense tales than gore. I was reading everyone from Stephen King and Shirley
Jackson to the Oxford Book of Ghost Tales to
books on how to write horror.

was one that stood out that gave me the worst
nightmares of all. The story took place in
Canada. The characters got lost, something
happened and they were never heard from
again. They sent out search boats and they
never found them. In the past few years, they
discovered the graves of the people who died
and the corpses were perfectly preserved in
the ice. Most recently, experts discovered evidence of cannibalism on the team. I went to
bed that night and had the most horrible
dream of people eating each other in a cave in
the Arctic. I woke up and started screaming
and couldn't stop. I quit reading horror after
that. Other research I did was having people
tell me scary stories and their favorite campfire stories. What I was trying to do was dissect horror — find out what makes it tick. I
think I did.

CGW: Was there any book or movie that
stood out as really bothering you?

CGW How about your role at Sierra? Has
it changed of late?

CGW: What kind of stuff are you reading
and watching that might influence the horror
game?

RW It's funny that you ask, because there

RW Yes. Lately, I am doing a lot of projects, but not necessarily the actual design

work, more of the job of an overseer of other
people's work to get the design done correctly. Besides the horror game, I'm also finishing up Laura Bow 2, working on King's
Quest W and starting up a prehistoric game.
This will be a light comedy. You are a
clumsy Neanderthal whose job it is to watch
the fire and not let it go out. If it does, there
will be real trouble because this particular
tribe of Neanderthals don't know how to
make fire, although real ones did. During the
night, you fall asleep and the fire goes out,
but no one notices because the rest of the
tribe is still asleep. The object of one part of
the game is to find and bring back some fire.
You see lightning in the distance and go to
capture the fire it causes, but get lost along
the way and captured by Cro-Magnon men.
The game is set up in parts, with each part offering a further challenge for your character.
Roberta Williams has her work cut out for her
in the horror genre. With the right approach, as
she already has, she can start off a successful series with the first Scary Tales game. Now if anyone can figure out what movie she saw at age 4,
they can give her those same nightmares all over
again!

Game Hints

Treasures of The
Savage Frontier
Advanced Dungeons & Dragons

P

ardon me while I peek out the window. Yep, looks like summer is
here. The only good thing about
this is that it means autumn can't be too
far behind. Summer is not my favorite
time of year (bet you guessed that already). Heat, humidity, thunderstorms...bleah! Not to mention (but I
will anyway) that around this time of
year, Fred sometimes turns a little savage
(over a slow fire, of course). Treasures of
the Savage Frontier is the second in SSI's
new gold box series and sequel to Gateway to the Savage Frontier. It takes place
in pretty much the same area as the previous game, the northwestern coast of the
Forgotten Realms. However, you'll be visiting more places this time around, including fifteen towns and villages, three
islands and a mountain. If nothing else,
all that trekking will certainly keep you
in shape! As usual, the forces of evil are
up to their nefarious tricks again, and
you have to stop them in the usual
hack'n'slash extravaganza. Since this is a
sequel, you can bring your party over
from Gateway (if you played that and
have the save games) or create a brandnew one if you didn't play Gateway or
don't have the saves. I recommend transferring the party if you possibly can; they
come over with most of their equipment

intact and will give
you a better start in
the game.

Party Line (Getting Started)
Creating a new party is done along
standard gold box lines: you have your
Humans, Elves, Dwarves, Half-Elves,
Gnomes and Halflings, along with the
professions of Fighter, Ranger, Paladin,
Mage, Thief and Cleric. Be sure to read
all the tables in the back of the manual
(if you're not familiar with this system,
or to refresh your memory if it's been a
while), so you know the limits for each
race and profession. In this one, Clerics
get up to tenth level, Fighters and
Thieves up to twelfth and everyone else
can go as high as eleventh, provided they
are not restricted by race to a lower level.
There are some nasty fights near the end
of the game, where magic will be of great
help, so you should have at least two
mages in the party, and three would be
better (they don't, of course, have to be
single-class mages).Once your group is
ready, the game proper starts in the
Dwarven town of Llorkh. Your band of
hardy (foolhardy?) adventurers has been
summoned there by Amanitas (some of
you may remember him from Gateway)
to help the Dwarves in their struggle

against forces from Zhentil Keep. This
mainly involves cleaning out the stronghold in town, and is primarily a
search-and-destroy mission. After you've attended to that, you can run off to Secomber and another chat with Amanitas.He
doesn't really tell you a whole lot, but he
does give you a magical amulet. This
amulet is an invisible inventory item that
is always with you. By using the amulet
when you camp out (the option appears
automatically), Amanitas can communicate with you. That's how you know
where to go next in the game most of the
time.Much of what you'll be doing (aside
from fighting, of course) is unraveling
various enemy plots. The Zhentarim and
their friends are working hard to foment
suspicion and hatred among members of
the Lords Alliance, in various underhanded ways. Your job is to discover and
expose all their dastardly schemes, one at
a time.

Fight for the Life of Your Party
(Combat)
Combat is generally much the same as
it is in any gold box product, but a couple of new twists have been added in

Game Hints

Treasures. One of these is
weather. Bad weather (such as
snow) has an adverse affect on
fighting. Your movement rate is
reduced, and your chances to hit
are slightly altered. This is an interesting concept, but still needs
some work. It's one thing to be
affected by snowfall when trudging through town and country.
It's quite another to have it affect
you when you're underground in
a mining tunnel. They must get
some really powerful snowstorms
in the forgotten Realms. Heh.The
other new feature, however, requires your attention. This is the
use of reinforcements. There you
are, merrily mopping up the remnants of
some band of nasties when, all of a sudden, more of them pop up, apparently
from nowhere. This can be a little disconcerting, especially if you've recklessly
used up most of your better spells.
Ooops! You'll need to be a little more
conservative than usual with magic this
time around. While "extras" don't show
up for every battle, it does happen often
enough to keep you on your toes.Your
side, by the way, also gets some reinforcements of its own when the enemy is bolstered by fresh troops. Usually, you can
control some or all of the friendlies, so
you can at least keep them out of the
way while the fireballs and such are going
off. However, what you get are fighter
types, so you'll still have to depend on
your own characters for magic.One other
out-of-the-ordinary feature cropped up
during play. We rescued a fighter called
Siulajia and she joined the party (good
fighter, by the way). After awhile, usually
when we stopped at an inn, she and
Lomis, one of my Elven F/MU's, started
having private talks together. Before
long, it was pretty obvious they were falling in love with each other (all this,
mind you, being done by the program)
until the end (you can wander around after the final battles) of the game, when Siulajia, for no discernible reason, suddenly
announces she's causing too much
trouble and takes off? Perhaps that was
the best thing SSI could think of to do,
since it's unlikely you'd be allowed to
transfer an NPC into the next game.
Still, after such a big buildup, it's a very
anticlimactic letdown to have the matter
just stop in that fashion.While you can

roam around the wilderness at random,
or visit towns out of sequence, it's better
to follow the path as laid out by Amanitas. There isn't much of interest in the
outdoors here. You will come across parties of Dwarves from time to time, who
tell you about certain dungeons

It's My Party and I'll Cry If I
Want to (Victory Conditions)
This has to be the silliest part of the
game, since all you need to do is go into
a dungeon and find your way out again.
They are very small and have no treasure
nor anything else of value. At the end
(when you've been through the last one),
you get some extra experience. The reasons for dropping something of this
rather trivial nature into the middle of
the game are rather obscure. In any case,
if you never get around to doing these
odd dungeons, you haven't really missed
a lot, and you can finish Treasures without them. Of much more importance
are the mysterious "lucky papers" that
you will be coming across as part of the
loot when you defeat some enemy
groups. There are lucky papers for each
town in the game, and you must collect
one paper for each town. You don't need
more than one, but you must have at
least one. You also have to collect three
crystals. These are not so easy to come
by. Different enemy groups carry different crystals, but not all groups of a type
may have them. In fact, my own party
had gone very far into the game, right up
to the meeting with Jagearda (another
person whom you may recall from Gateway), and we had only two crystals. Fortunately, she gave us the third one. Just

as well, since you must have
both all the crystals and all the
papers before going to the big
meeting at Mirabar.The successful conclusion of this meeting
will send you on to Fireshear
and the end game. There is no
way to reach Fireshear until after
you've finished up in Mirabar.
You wouldn't want to get there
too soon, anyway, since it is
around this time that you begin
to encounter some very tough
opposition. Sort of the enemy
elite. These guys have very low
armor class (on the order of -8
or thereabouts), a nasty repertoire of spells and very good
chances of hitting you in combat. They
will not be pushovers. Past Fireshear is
your final goal, the Ice Peak.-- or rather,
the fabled dragon's hoard hidden somewhere inside the mountain. Naturally,
the bad guys are looking for it, too, and
as it turns out, they get there a little
ahead of you. This, of course, is the big
fight of the game and takes place against
the enemy elite, with reinforcements on
both sides. You may want to drop the
difficulty level down to novice for this
one. It is going to be a very hard combat,
however well-prepared you go in. Besides, there's another consideration. The
dragon's hoard isn't a fable. Neither is
the dragon.You guessed it: right after
your knock-down, drag-out battle with
the Zhentil forces, you have to take on
Mr. Scales. With no opportunity to save;
the two combats are back-to-back. So
don't use up all your good spells and/or
magic items in the first fight; keep a little
in reserve for the next one. You'll be glad
you did. You may even survive. Well, I
see by the old invisible clock on the wall
it's just about that time again. Remember, if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games
RT).By US Mail (you must enclose a selfaddressed, stamped envelope if you livein
the US): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie
Station, New York, NY 10028.Until next
time, happy adventuring!

Edutainment

CD Book. CD Book Move! Move, Book, Move!

Move over, Mom. Squeeze in closer,
Dad. Those cozy evening hours curled
up in the big chair with the kid, the cat,
and a stack of books are about to get a
whole lot cozier. Before the year is out, it
looks like you're going to have to make
some room for the computer, too. The
reason is a new kind of computer entertainment variously called "talking books"
or "living books." These are, primarily,
the old familiar kiddie literature transferred to CD and dressed up with music,
animation and real-voice narrations. Kids
can flip through the pages, clicking on
various areas to get sound effects and
short animation sequences or they can
click on words and sentences to hear
them read aloud, often in more than one
language.
Although talking books are a hot new
item on the classroom software scene
(and get glowing reports from teachers,
as you'll see in a moment) you probably
won't find more than one or two talking
book-type products on the shelves at
your local CompUSA right now. That's
about to change, however, as a large
crowd of CD developers and manufacturers are convinced that over the next few
years, as the number of CD-equipped
computers takes off, the genre will become as ubiquitous as Legos and Dr.
Suess.
After all, the notion of matching children's books to CD technology is nothing short of inspired. Quality kids' books
are short on text and pages (you'll generally find a quarter to a third the number
of scenes required for your average
graphic adventure), illustrated with lots
of colorful detail and even more charm,
and involve a small cast of well-defined
characters that kids can relate to easily.
CD's disk-access and data transfer weaknesses might give gamers fits, but the medium's strengths — beautiful pictures,
small but elaborate animations, and
breathtaking sound — can bring every detail of a beloved book to vivid life and
give the familiar characters a voice. In
short, CD has exactly what it takes to
turn a good kids' book into great theater.

Given this natural fit, it's no surprise
that you'll see talking books this year on
no fewer than four of the major CDbased platforms — MPC, Macintosh,
CD-I, and CDTV. The first big hit —
and about the only one you can buy
right now — is Mercer Mayer's Just
Grandma and Me, (Broderbund) which
will probably go down in history as the
Carmen Sandiego of the talking book
genre. (At a recent demo at the Computer Game Developers' Conference, the
mesmerized crowd — about 100 game
designers — spontaneously erupted into

enchanted choruses of "Ohhh!" and
"Ahhh!" with every turn of the page.)
Broderbund expects the Living Books division to become one of their essential businesses in the years ahead and is planning
several more products this year for both
the MPC and Mac.
An even earlier pioneer is Discis Knowledge Research of Toronto. Their 16 Mac
titles and 11 CDTV titles have already
gained widespread classroom acceptance,
and will be sold for home use starting
this fall. Because the Discis books are designed to work into the "whole language"
curriculum being used in many schools,
the company chooses books on the basis
of teacher recommendations. The Discis
products aren't as elaborately orchestrated and animated as Broderbund's efforts, but (like most education-oriented
programs) they come with lots of worthwhile teaching suggestions and ideas for
related activities.
Philips considers the talking books concept critical to the success of their CD-I
player, and is rapidly building a basic library of public domain children's classics.

Instead of licensing popular books, as
Broderbund is doing, they're placing
their bets on celebrity talent. Robin Williams doing Pecos Bill Jack Nicholson
telling Rudyard Kipling stories, with
Bobby McFerrin making the music. John
Gielgud as the voices behind The Emperor's New Clothes.
The Big Questions
Any thoughtful, computer-literate parent knows from personal experience that
once you get the computer involved in
something, the nature of the thing is going to change. Even though talking
books are nothing more than a small blip
in the market right now, the concept has
the potential to create a widespread revolution in the way kids relate to books
and to computers. Given how fundamental these relationships are, it's definitely
not too early to start asking The Big
Questions and looking for anecdotal evidence that might suggest some answers.
Big Questions #1: What does the computer bring to the experience?
The idea of talking computer books is
so obvious and simple that it's hard to
imagine that they could hold a kid's interest for very long. John Baker, the Broderbund VP in charge of Living Books, is
the first to admit that a parent who's a
gifted and animated storyteller can probably create as much involvement and
character identification as an onscreen
book. "The story is just a framework," he
observes. "The real charm of the experience is in what you do with it."
On the other hand, a tired or rushed
parent reading "Peter Rabbit" for the
827th time is not likely to deliver the
same Oscar-quality performance she did
the first 20 times around. The computer,
however, will read a story over and over,
word-by-word, in German, and backwards, if you like, for as long as the kid
wants to play. This feature alone may be
enough to send parents to the computer
stores in droves and it's also the basis for
building a good relationship with books
in general. "What the computer lacks in

Edutainment

human interaction, it makes up for in
availability," says Pat Neu, a fourth-grade
teacher who teaches computer topics in
Mountain View, CA. "Favorite books
should be revisited over and over again.
That's how kids establish a lifelong love
of reading."
Neu is also impressed with the amount
of control the Discis books give her primary-schoolers. "The best educational
software puts kids into a little world
where they're given enormous freedom to
explore new concepts on their own. With
computer books, they can push the buttons, decided when to go forward and
back, or repeat something funny as often
as they like. Most importantly, they get a
sense of being in control, of taking
charge of their own learning process."
Big Question #2: What, if anything, is
my kid learning?
There are several very tangible reading
skills that computer books reinforce like
no other medium. At the preschool and
primary levels, the most important of
these is what folks in the ed biz call
" print awareness" — the association between sound, meaning, and those little
squiggles on the page. The simple act of
highlighting the onscreen words and sentences as they're spoken encourages kids
to listen, follow along, and memorize the
word's appearance — all important parts
of learning to read. "Every time you click
a single word, it's spoken the same way,
with clear pronunciation," says Neu. "For
preschoolers, the repetitiveness is a powerful idea."
Just Grandma and Me also teaches preschoolers another important skill set —
basic computer use. At the beginning of
the story, the main character dances
around the screen and explains how to
use the mouse and where to click when
it's time to turn the page, read the words
aloud, and so on. "My three-year-old
mastered the basics of using a Mac in
two days flat," said one parent. "She
went from running the mouse around
aimlessly, to getting the program to do
everything she wanted it to do in an instant."
For kids who are already reading, talking books encourage creative wordplay.
Some of the Discis books are designed
with an on-screen dictionary where children just click on the unfamiliar word

and the program tells them what it
means. Further, they're a boon to otherwise reluctant readers — kids who can
read, but just can't be bothered unless
they're pushed. "They're very motivating," Neu smiles archly. "Even at the
sixth grade level, the kids just kill each
other to get at the computer." She's optimistic that talking books will become an
important gateway through which more
kids will learn the joys of independent
reading.
And when the kids are finally getting
bored with the story in English, they can
try it in another language. Spanish?
French? German? Japanese? Almost every
product introduced so far includes the
ability to read and hear the story in more
than one language. This capability lets
you introduce your kids to a foreign language while giving them the security of a
familiar tale; and teachers are excited
about reaching out to their non-Englishspeaking students with a story that can
be read in both languages. "In all languages, the words are well-pronounced,
with correct accents," says Neu. "The possibilities haven't even begun to be explored."
Big Question #3: Isn't there a down
side to all this?
If there is, the jury won't be in for years
yet. However, those who've spent time
with computer books have raised a couple of possible concerns to watch for.
The first one is that, as kids get used to
the extra visual and aural stimulation
computer books provide, their expectations will rise so high that they'll lose interest in printed books entirely. (This
won't sound at all far-fetched to parents
who've seen their kids swallowed whole
by a Nintendo deck.) Neu discounts this
possibility. "Sometime between fourth
and sixth grade, most students start looking for more depth and meaning in their
reading than even the most creative talking book designer can squeeze onto a
disk," she notes. (In fact, the need for
more complexity makes this a great age
to turn kids on to simple graphic adventures and fantasy role-playing games.)
"And even before that, there are plenty
of excellent beginner books that simply
don't lend themselves to CD adaptation.
In these cases, it's natural to turn to
print. After all, it would be almost impossible to put A Tale of Two Cities on disk."

Another concern is that CD books will
be used as a substitute for family readingaloud rituals. "There's a natural human
need for interaction that a computer
can't meet," continues Neu. "Even in the
classroom, kids prefer to work at the computer in pairs, because they love to talk
about what they're doing." Her observations are backed up by several parents we
talked to, who said that kids invariably
tried to drag them over to the computer
whenever they wanted to play "Just
Grandma and Me." According to one parent, "The computer can't ever compensate for a warm lap, loving arms, and
someone who will talk about the book
with you as you go."
Big Question #4: How can I help my
kid get the most from a talking book?
The parents and teachers we interviewed were fairly unanimous on the following points — many of which are simply good common-sense guidelines for
any kid using any kind of program:
Buy the book if it's not already packaged
with the CD. This gives your kid another way to interact with the story when
she's not at the computer, and helps reinforce the idea that talking books are different, but not necessarily better.
Use the computer with your child whenever possible. Or, try to set things up so
there are two or three kids using the computer together. Though the biggest
strength of computer books is that
they're available when you aren't, it's
wise not to get into a constant habit of
using the computer as a baby-sitter. Also,
your child will get more out of the experience if he has someone to share it with.
Establish a daily read-aloud time. The
family that spends fifteen to 20 minutes,
every night at bedtime, is guaranteeing
their kids' literacy. As one teacher puts it,
"The best schools and the best computer
books can never substitute for 20 minutes spent reading aloud every night.
Your kid's computer literacy can never be
as important as the time you spend reading together. It's absolutely the most important legacy you can give your child."
Of course, if it's the 827th reading of
Peter Rabbit, why not let the computer
handle it?

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Fly the Flag
by Paul Rigby

Drugs. The stuff is never out of the
news in one form or another. Now it is
the subject of a new game from Microprose UK and Vektor Grafix (creators of
Shuttle). Called ATAC, it is essentially a
strategy-based flight simulation. ATAC,
set in the near future, is about the war
against drugs with Central America as
the scenario. Microprose decided that
one way to combat the drug menace
would be to hit the drug barons financially. Microprose UK's Steve Perry explains, "You find where they are growing
the stuff — destroy it, where they are
processing the stuff — destroy it, where
they are transporting the stuff— destroy
the transport. Just keep hitting them
where it hurts until they go bust. From
that we developed the concept of, not so
much a flight simulator, but a strategy
game."
The player of the game is "... the commander of a covert force that is situated
somewhere in the jungle," commented
Perry, "at a small airstrip with a limited
number of aircraft: helicopters (a generic
type based on the Apache) and F-22
ATFs (which will be old-fashioned technology by then)."

D

eveloped by Envision for Grem-

lin, Flag returns to the times of
wizards and all that jazz. Picture a
planet operated by wizards in which the
game of Flag is used to settle all differences, employing two zombie armies to
do all of their fighting for them.
The player is an evil wizard who decides that he wants to take over the entire planet. To do so the player uses the
right to call the other wizards to play in a
game of Flag. Canny, eh?
There are 10 opponents, but one must
triumph four times (levels) over each to
win, resulting in 40 levels (there are extra
levels for special occasions). If the player
beats the 10 opponents, the planet is secured. "The objective is for one of your
men to touch the enemy flag and viceversa; the flag can be placed anywhere
you like," said Envision programmer Ian
Harling.
Flag is presented in full-screen isometric
3D and offers multi-directional scrolling.

Units are all created or 'bought' using
limited gold reserves at the start. Soldiers
are the basic unit, cannon fodder used
just for fighting with basic spears. Other
units exist, such as bombardiers who can
blow up walls erected by the player as
barriers, ninjas (handy for destroying
buildings) and a dragon who will fry soldiers. Magic completes the offensive picture. Amongst all of this is the importance of certain buildings (which provide
gold, soldiers and so on) within the stockade such as the treasury, the barracks and
the merchant's house.
"The joy of Flag is the control system,
because we have got a 'tagging multi-system,' issuing multiple commands to one
or a group of soldiers," enthused Harling.
"The multitude of possible strategies and
the need to think ahead by several moves
gives the game a 'chess' feel." Multiplayer, modem and network features may
all be included. The Amiga version of
Flag should be out now with the PC version appearing around fall.

The player has a number of pilots who,
unlike the aircraft, cannot be replaced.
One can fly four units in the air at any
time: aircraft, helicopters or a mix. In addition, there are spies on the ground,
some on the player's side and others who
may be double agents. They supply information that is collated into a folder that
can be read on-screen. On the basis of
this information, missions are decided
upon. This is a departure for Microprose,
who normally structure their flight simulations with planned missions. PC and
Amiga release is scheduled for August.
Stand by for a UK challenger to the
graphic adventure genre from Revolution
Software, via Virgin, called Lure of the
Temptress (LOT). As the unwilling hero,
the player must defeat the Enchantress
who's taking over the town. Revolution's
Charles Cecil explains how LOT came
into being. "I used to work at Activision
till its demise. While I was there we used
to ship Sierra product. It occurred to me
that the engine Sierra were using was,
and still is, outdated. They introduced it
five years ago and really haven't developed it. However, we have looked at Lu-

Foreign Correspondence

casfilm's Monkey Island programs and we
now have them in our sights."
What Revolution have developed is a
system called Virtual Theatre. Features include a 'real world' where characters wander around as if they really exist. Characters follow day-to-day routines — a
smaller, similar, version of that used in
Ultima VI.
Another principle feature of Virtual
Theatre is intelligent characters. One can
string together complicated commands using the 'Tell' feature and certain 'servant'
characters. In fact, certain puzzles require
the assistance of NPCs to solve them. Another plus for the Revolution system is
something called `autorouting'. This
means that an independent character can
walk from one point in the room to another and if somebody or something gets
in his way then he mathematically works
out the best way of walking around it using an algorithm, rather than the "tramline" system used by Lucasfilm, Sierra
and Delphine. Include a boast that LOT
has no blind alleys and that this graphic

adventure is the first to offer "true" character interaction and object manipulation, and the Amiga and ST versions
(out now) seem like "must buys."
Finishing off this month's column are
quick mentions for two new games.
Gremlin's Space Crusade (based on the
Games Workshop boardgame) has been
produced by the same developers who
produced Hero Quest. Presented in isometric and overhead viewpoints, this action/strategy game with RPG overtones is
available for IBM, Amiga and ST. Space
Crusade asks the player to control a commander and four marines through a variety of missions.
Finally, described as "Lemmings with
missions," Rookies, from Virgin, allows
the player to take control of a number of
armed soldier-units over a variety (30
plus) of missions/levels that include desert and snow-scapes. Although there are
definite tactical elements to the game, the
Lemmings atmosphere is ever-present.
Incidentally, anyone who would like to

contact this writer can do so on CompuServe (75300,1503) or by mail to 20
Malvern Road, Liverpool, England, L6
6BW. Please include three international
reply coupons for a reply.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318
Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon, Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766; fax: 01144-268-590076.
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple Street, Wolverhampton, WV2 4AN.
Telephone: 01144 902 25304; 24-hour
credit card hotline: 01144 902 25304.
All of the above telephone numbers assume one can dial direct. When encountering any trouble, contact the international operator.

-

Bestseller List

Son of "Flesh Gordon?"
Infocom's Leather Goddesses of Phobos 2
by Chris Lombardi
930. Upper Sandusky, Ohio. A lone,
despondent soul sits slouched upon
a bar stool, sipping away the worries
of a world sunk deep in economic depression and tense with precarious political
balances. Stepping into the bathroom to
answer a call from the body's nether-regions, this lone soul assumes a gender
and is whisked into a racy lampoon of
the Flash Gordon era sci-fi.

1

1950. Atom City, Nevada. Twenty years, a
world war and the nefarious acquisition and
dismantling of a Massachusetts based computer game company have passed since the
evil plans for world domination by the
Leather Goddesses of Phobos were thwarted
through the invisible efforts of a now dead
Ohian. Now, in a bizarre twist of fate that
could only be the set up to a sequel, the son
of that unsung Earthling must now finish the
job that his parent somehow left unfinished.
Yes. Miraculously resurrected from their Ultimate Defeat, those leather girded dominatrixes are once again out to capture the hard
disk space of adventure gamers in, Leather
Goddesses of Phobos 2.
Steve Meretzky's Leather Goddesses of Phobos
(LGOP) was a classic among the many text-adventure titles produced by Infocom during its
glory days in the mid 1980's. LGOP was
unique in that it was one of the first 'adult'
computer games widely distributed and was
the first to give the option of choosing between a male and a female protagonist in a
genre that had, until then, completely ignored
the female gamer. In addition, LGOP was
composed of some of Meretzky's best humor,
a challenging set of puzzles, and a funny,
bawdy, though "mature" treatment of sex.
Since then, the original owners and designers of Infocom, as well as the days of text adventures, have been cast to winds. Meanwhile,
Steve Meretzky has been keeping himself busy
authoring Legend
s1Eenr0tiaof&gmph2'c{Sdvl}uesn.
LGOP2 finds Meretzky rejoining the Infocom
label to revive his old title with a new era to
parody and a new era of adventure game technology to exploit. Unfortunately, to the disappointment of this Infocom and Meretzky fan,
the combination of author, production group,
and new technology seems to lose the entire
spirit of the original text game in the 'translation' to graphic adventure.

TITLE: Leather Goddesses of Phobos 2:
Gas Pump Girls Meet The Pulsa
ting Inconvenience From Planet
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$69.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
Steve Meretzky
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
Infocom
(label of Activision)

Similar to the original LGOP, LGOP2 can
be played from different character perspectives. In LGOP2 these include: Brad, the son
of the hero of the original game, Lydia, the
daughter of the town astronomer, or Barthgub, a pulsating inconvenience from Planet X.
With each character under their command,
players see a somewhat different side of the
story in pursuing different tasks and overcoming different obstacles. All are out to stop the
evil devices of the Leather Goddesses, and all
must romp through a rather good parody of
50's era sci-fi, which takes its shots at The
Blob and War of the Worlds, among other
xenophobic creations born on the eve of the
"Space Age".
After the title, the author and the plot, all
parallels between LGOP2 and its predecessor
come to an abrupt halt. Any resemblance between the game interface for this game and
the interface of the original, living or dead
(and which can be succinctly described in one
character, ""), is purely coincidental. Instead,
the interface has been replaced by that of a
typical graphic adventure. In the original, all
the aural stimulation one could expect was
the rapping of keys set to the beat of a computer fan, whereas LGOP2 boasts a complete
soundtrack and digitized speech — lots of digitized speech. In fact, of the ten 5.25 inch
disks the game came on, I would venture at
least three-quarters are filled with speech. All
of this is not necessarily an improvement.
The LGOP2 game environment is, like all
graphic adventures, divided into discreet locations given full graphic descriptions. The
graphics themselves are spotty - with the occasional well done piece (some very nice stuff in
the introduction), but for the most part quite
mediocre. They generally lack cohesiveness - a
quality indicative of a group effort without an
overall artistic vision. Still, as the original
LGOP proved, a game is not necessarily a
beauty contest and, even if it were, there is always the talent show. We move to the interface...
Following the trend in the genre, LGOP2
has honed down its interface to the bare essentials. All possible interactions with the game

are mediated by a happy little cursor that provides players with all the information they
need. As the player moves the cursor about
the screen, the cursor icon changes to reflect
the 'interactive potential' of that object. If the
icon is a hand or tentacle, depending on the
character one is currently playing, then that
item can be looked at or taken. If an arrow,
one can go "thataway." If a mouth, dialogue
is possible. Simply put, we have 'go', 'take',
'look', 'talk' and a combination of clicks that
amount to 'use.' An interface can't get much
tighter than that.
Now, many people like the direction adventure game interfaces are taking. The simpler
they are, the more friendly and accessible the
game becomes and the easier the game is to
design and program. While an interface like
LGOP2's is intuitive and unambiguous, it can
often seem to err a bit on the side of simplicity. With the decrease in the range of player
interactions (reduced, basically, to 'take' and
'use' in this case), it seems the range of possibilities for interesting puzzles decreases as
well. More and more, graphic adventures are
becoming Easter egg hunts where the player's
job is to run around gathering goodies and
putting them in their proper baskets. Admittedly, the balance between clarity and the expressiveness of player interaction has always
been a difficult design decision, but it seems
we may be taking the simplicity thing a bit to
far. Then again, this is the opinion of an

atavist who still thinks text parsers are a good
idea.
If the heart of an adventure game is its story
and puzzles then, frankly, LGOP2 could use a
defibrilator - stat. The storyline is rather cliche, though I suppose it would have to be as
a spoof of the 50's era 'B' sci-fi movies. Certainly, the plot elements and the characterizations are all drawn from those 'classic'
films. It certainly does a better job with the
spoof than Cinemaware did with It Came
From The Desert, though it seems to run dry
in spots and it certainly runs short. The
Leather Goddesses, for whom the game is
named, have an all-too-brief role in the game,
and the Gas Pump Girls, who were given second billing, have little to do with the plot. I
was hoping they might have been possessed
pawns of an alien mind or secret conspirators
with the CIA or, at least, the Leather Goddesses incognito, but alas, all they turn out to
be is an excuse for more bit-mapped bimbos
and a catchy subtitle.
As for puzzles, they are pretty rare creatures
in LGOP2. Playing the game as one of the humans involves a small handful of them, most
of them of the "
use-the-right-thing-on-the-right-thing variety," while the number of puzzles in the Barthgub (the alien) game can be
counted on one tentacle. Playing as Lydia the
first time through, with the digitized speech
turned on and playing at a leisurely pace, I finished that game in about 6-7 hours and
thereby, challenged the records established by
Loom and Space Quest IV. As the alien, it was
more like one hour. A member of the LGOP2
design team addressed this issue by stating
that the game was targeted toward a beginner
level gamer. I thought this odd considering
that, one, this is a Meretzky game (who is described in the documentation, in reference to
the puzzles, as having a "truly devious
mind"); two, is a sequel to a game with interesting and challenging puzzles; and three, that
nowhere on the game packaging is this fact
pointed out.
Sp..p..peach Immmmm...pediments
As mentioned earlier, LGOP2 supports a
huge amount of digitized speech in its character interactions. In fact, I would say that
LGOP2 includes the most ambitious speech
support effort ever packed into an entertainment product. The pleasantly surprising part
of it is that one need not even own a sound
board to hear this dialogue, for the game package includes an adapter, called the LifeSize
Sound Enhancer, that will pipe quality speech
through a printer port and out to amplified
speakers. The sound quality from this adapter
is very nice; it's loud and clear. Unfortunately, the actual readings of the dialogue
shoot well below par.

One would think that if a design group
were going to invest so much time and disk
space (both = money) to speech, they would
invest a little more to get decent speech talent
to do the readings. In a penny-wise pound-

foolish production decision, it appears as if
the 'front-office' people at Activision were
rounded up and given a shot at their 15-minutes of stardom. Unnatural pacing, wooden
emotion and unconvincing caricature take
part in a production strongly suggestive of mediocre amateur theatre. At its best, the speech
does not add a thing and, if I hadn't been
playing for the purpose of a review, I would
have opted to play without it after the first
few wincing minutes. I sure wish they would
have traded a couple megabytes of this stuff
for a few more hours of game play.
Es Ee Eks
I approach the issue of sex with fear and
trepidation. It's a can of worms, and no matter how I handle it, there will, without fail, be
ordnance heading my way from all camps.
Nonetheless, I think a few words here are appropriate, so I'll hunker down in my bunker
and listen for incoming.
First off, anyone who could get much titillation from a cartoonish computer game like
LGOP2 is pretty hard pressed or a very frustrated young teen (usually it's both). If one
were seeking pornography one would be well
advised to seek out another medium. Sex (as
well as vulgar language and 'adult themes') in
computer games, then, should be used to
achieve other aims. For example, one might
use these "tools" to add realism to a dramatic
storyline or as a comedic tool in a humorous
game like LGOP or Sierra's Leisure Suit Larry.
Indeed, it seems the cartoonishness of the
graphics and the silliness of character caricatures in games like these create a fertile playground upon which to dance upon taboos
and lampoon the sillier aspects of human behavior. As Steve Meretzky says in his disclaimers on his adult games, "Sex is fun" and, I
might add, is funny as well, in appropriate
contexts. I believe it was precisely this adult,
'sex is fun' treatment of the 'nasty' content in
Meretzky's earlier racy works (and in Sierra's

Larry series) that protects these game's from
, most accusations of being pornographic.
The approach to sex in the original LGOP
was silly and irreverent, and yet at the same
time, through Meretzky's particular humorous
slant, lent a 'mature attitude' to the treatment. However, the sex in LGOP2 seems to
take on a much different color. One probable
cause is the fact that Meretzky's humor does
not shine as brightly as in his others games.
In previous games, his humor is at its best in
descriptions and in witty come-backs to
player actions, whereas in LGOP2, the game's
structure eliminates much of the need for description and, for obvious reasons, places emphasis on character dialogue. Whether for lack
of inspiration or lack of opportunity, good
chuckles are sparse in LGOP2.
Perhaps this is one reason why the treatment of sex in LGOP2 seems so gratuitous,
and adolescent, and (to use a friend's favorite
adjective for pop music) insipid. The game's
'explicit' visual content is all very tame (no
more explicit than a beer commercial, really)
and, for the most part, involves rather mediocre images of women in tight shirts, garters,
or leather, most with impossibly protruding
nipples. It's the stuff of a Wally Cleaver daydream, which is appropriate to the game context, I suppose. It appears quite innocuous at
first, yet as I played along I began to sense an
underlying attitude running though it all that
can best be seen in the use of a whorehouse in
the game. When one approaches this whorehouse, one is served a menu of a dozen or so
names to choose from. Choosing a name
takes players to a harlot's room and affords
them a "look at the goods". Though loosely
integrated into the storyline, it is all too apparent that it is merely an excuse for a slide show
of more rather average drawings of women.
You have to wonder what Activision was
thinking. Do they imagine adults are turned
on or, at minimum, entertained by this stuff?
If they do, then I think they've misunderstood their market. And that must be the
case, for the only other possibility is to suggest that their real target market is actually,
and more insidiously, a younger, larger slice
of the computer game demographics pie.
If there is anything that can save LGOP2 it's
Meretzky's occasional gem of a barb or wise
crack, and his goofy spoof of old sci-fi movies. The yucks, however, are few and far between; the story is too short and the puzzles
are too weak for most gamer's blood. If you
want Meretzkian prose, take Activision up on
its $9.95 offer for the original LGOP and
bide your time with that classic, while waiting
for someone to produce an interesting 'adult'
adventure.

Review

World Circuit Microprose
by Wallace Poulter

Brooklands in 2nd and climbs back up
through the gears, 3rd, 4th, 5th through
Woodlands at 146 mph and finally up to
6th as he once again crosses the start/finish line.

Tide:
World Circuit
System:
Amiga
Protection: Look Up
Price:
$5935

crosses the start/finish line in
6th gear at 174 mph and begins his
circuit of Silverstone. The pit lane
flashes by on the right, grandstand to the
left as Sanchez downshifts to 4th for the
right hander, Copse. Then, accelerating
briskly away, Sanchez darts through
Maggots in 5th, breaking for the 2nd
gear jink of Becketts and sweeping right
into Chapel. Then, through the gears,
3rd, 4th, 5th up to 6th and 180 mph
down the Hanger Straight and under the
bridge, again breaking sharply down to
100 mph for another right hander,
Stowe. He accelerates through The Vale,
pulls back briefly into 4th before taking
the Club in 3rd and moving onto the
fastest part of the course, The Abbey
Straight, at 185 mph. 6th gear is maintained through the Farm Straight,

S

Qualifying
Formula One is the ultimate in race
driving. It is home to the greats of Racing: Fangio, Hill, Moss, Lauda, Stewart,
Brabham, Prost, McLaren, Surtees,
Senna, Piquet, Andretti, and the greatest
of them all, Jimmy Clark. There's something special about Formula One, the stories and history of men and

under a second bridge and into the slowest part of the course, the left handers,
Priority and Brooklands. Sanchez exits

machine: of Giles Villeneuve, the great
Canadian, who was blindingly quick and
was either going to be Champion or die
trying (and tragically accomplished the
latter); the heroism of James Hunt, pulling Ronnie Peterson from a starting grid
pileup; or the fighting spirit of Nigel
Mansell, pushing his fuel-less car down
the final straightaway in Dallas. The vehi-

Review

de names conjure up instant magic: Ferrari, Lotus, McLaren, and a host of others who have passed through Formula
One history. The circuits themselves provide a multitude of memories: Monte
Carlo, Silverstone, Monza and Imola.
That's a lot to live up to and World Circuit, from Microprose, is the latest in the
field and has grabbed the pole position in
qualifying.

make mistakes. The Interlagos Circuit in
Brazil is second. The long start/finish
straight allows cars at the back of the grid
to charge forward. It is an excellent
course to practice on, as qualifying mistakes can be recovered. Two words of
caution, the first corner, Curva 1, is quite
easy to spin in, and not just the player.
More than once, this reviewer was leading a race only to come upon an accident
without warning. As a result, a hearty cry

Warm Up Lap
The quality and content that we
have come to expect in Microprose
products is self-evident. A fact-filled
168 page manual is the basis of a
detailed product. Clear, concise instructions are provided, along with
full details concerning the 16 circuits featured in the game, last years
teams and driving hints. A nonChampionship Race is recommended before throwing yourself
into the fray of a 16 circuit season.
I his is a product that exudes quality. The polygon graphics and
sound are excellent. For those users using
floppy disks, disk swapping is kept to a
minimum and none are needed during
the race, even in Camera mode. World
Circuit provides five levels of play from
rookie to ace. Driver aids such as Indestructibility, Best Line, Self Righting
Spins and Auto Brakes are available. This
reviewer recommends switching off indestructibility as soon as possible, as this
only encourages "Destruction Derby"
type tactics.

The Circuits
As noted earlier, 16 circuits are provided with World Circuit. The contrasts
are enormous. Spa-Francorchamps is in
the heart of a Belgium forest, while Phoenix provides an urban jungle. Each circuit drives very differently and one's situation within a race will also determine
the "feel" of a course. Naturally, concentrating on the exhaust pipe of a driver in
front will cause one to be oblivious as the
surrounding course flies by.
Phoenix is the first course encountered
in the Championship Season. Passing opportunities are limited and speeds remain
reasonably low. It is a good course on
which to learn patience and it is hard to

World Circuit is just a little too easy, even
at Ace level. The Nigel Mansell school of
driving, foot to the floor until the car
breaks or wins, is well rewarded. While
this may be appropriate, considering
Mansell's dominance this year in Formula One this year, a more challenging
Ace level would have significantly enhanced this product.
Yet, readers are urged not to believe
that this diminishes the level of competition provided within the program. My
most enjoyable race was starting at the
back of the grid at Monaco and making
it into the points. With two laps to go,
the 6th placed car was in sight and it
took the two fastest laps of the day, and
some outrageous breaking, to catch that
car on the final corner.

Checkered Flag

of 'Ramming Speed' was the only resort
remaining. Imola comes up third, and is
just waiting for the over confident player
(and reviewer!). The most difficult section of track in the entire game resides at
Imola. The Acque Minerale chicane has a
tendency to spin out an aggressive driver
as the back end clips the curb. This corner should be taken from wide on the
left.
Each of the other 13 circuits provides
variety and spice. Monaco, demands a
good qualifying time as passing is next to
impossible (try the tunnel); the Giles Villeneuve Circuit in Montreal provides
long fast straights and sweeping corners;
Mexico City is the easiest course in the
game and allows players to race from the
back of the grid and still allow the
player should be able to win comfortably; and Adelaide has significant hills
and valleys that add to the visual delight.

Handling Problems
The options presented in the game
are too numerous to mention. Car SetUp, Tire Choice, Wet Weather and
more are available. Yet, they also presented the only negative with this product. The user does not need them.

The statistical portion of World Circuit
is also impressive. At the end of a Championship Race, a complete statistical overview of the race and the season is available. Race finishing times, fastest lap
times, driver race points, constructor race
points, driver's championship table, constructors championship and season results
are all options. No real-life drivers or
teams are named, but editing is possible.

Conclusion
Even after a number of years, Electronic Arts' Indianapolis 500: The Simulation remains the standard by which all
Auto Racing games must be judged. Certain items such as the Camera function
remain the domain of Indy 500. However, the game play of World Circuit is
without comparison. World Circuit is a
winner, going away at the finish.

Sierra On-Line Stock Outperforms
the Broader Market

The CGW Stock Watch is a graphic
look at the relative health of the computer entertainment software industry
by observing the performance of the
publicly traded players. The charts
and commentary presented on this
page are a reference point for hobbyists who might be interested in investing in these companies, but should
not be used as a primary tool for investment because of the lagging nature of the data (because of the lead
times inherent in publishing a
monthly magazine). As always, investors are advised to perform their own
diligent research prior to investing.

Sierra On-Line (NASDAQ: SIER)
was the first major computer game
company to "go public." At first observation, the Sierra chart presented
in the upper left-hand corner simply
looked incredibly volatile. Upon comparing the chart with the overall market (using the Standard & Poor's 500
as our benchmark), however, we observed that the largest decline in the
years tracked was concurrent with the
steep decline in both the SP 500 and

the more familiar Dow Jones Industrial Average (representing only 30
"blue chip" companies). We also recognized that the steep descent in mid1991 was based on disappointing
earnings news. After reporting a 94%
plunge in second quarter profits from
those of the year before, the stock
price dropped to the $13.00 per
share range. As a corporation, Sierra
On-Line proceeded to start a "buyback" program during the late summer 1991 decline. Except for those
drops, however, SIER stock significantly outperformed the overall market. The large chart was developed by
comparing the percentage gains to be
earned if an investor had placed an
equal amount of money in Sierra as
opposed to spreading the investment
over the broad market represented by
the 500 companies in the SP 500.
So, on those points where the large
chart tops the 100% mark, our hypothetical investor would have made
twice as much profit on SIER stock
as he/she would have made with the
500 S&P companies. When the line

dips below 0, the investor would
have been better off with the SP 500
"investment." Note that the strong
performance depicted on the large
graph depends on buying Sierra on
or near its lows. Purchases at higher
prices would reflect less impressive
gains. Also, because of the solid performance of secondary issues
(NASDAQ stocks, in particular) during the latter part of 1991, the performance might not be as impressive
against those companies as opposed
to the comparison with the SP 500
companies.
The axiom of investment, however,
is that "Past performance is no guarantee of future results." Potential investors will want to consider the impact of Sierra's recent (Spring 1992)
secondary offering and lower second
quarter earnings ($.05 per share, as
opposed to $.20 in 1991). Much will
depend on investor's feelings about
how well The Sierra Network will
do and the prospects for sales in the
final two quarters.

Industry News

Consensual Hallucinations and
Good Vibrations
CGW's Report on the Sixth Annual Computer Game
Developers Conference

ohn

Perry Barlow of the Electronic
Freedom Foundation is something of
a folk hero. He disarms observers and
listeners from the raw distaste one almost
innately feels for one of his profession
(an attorney) with the rugged individualist facade of his folksy frontier image (a
Colorado cattle rancher, complete with
holstered handgun at his side) and his
reputation as a rock lyricist (for the Grateful Dead). Indeed, as the featured
speaker at the annual banquet, he
claimed to be the second in Brenda Laurel's Annual Lecture Series (science fiction author Bruce Sterling spoke last
year), but he may have functioned more
as the cerebral catalyst that challenged
the brain trust of the computer game industry to think through the implications
of their work. Barlow, who has been instrumental in efforts to apply constitutional rights to the world of networks, databases and, eventually virtual reality, has
the right to ask designers and programmers to consider the impact of their
work on reality. He has fought to keep
the government from usurping the information frontier and corraling both creators and consumers into cultural reservations of legislation and law enforcement.

J

Barlow began by citing an oft-quoted
tenet of Jean Baudrillard (from a 1983
book entitled Simulation), to wit that
"The territory no longer precedes the
map, nor survives it." Resonating with
the sentiment, Barlow suggested that
many people in present society are leaving the landscape to live on the map. He
contended that information as "alienated
experience" has become a substitute for
experience. The implication being, of
course, that people would rather watch
travelogues than travel, observe sports
than participate or play computer

games/videogames rather than take
authentic risks.
The problem is likely to arise, however,
when the alienated experience
of vicarious satisfaction subconsciously melds itself to
one's perception of the real.
"Simulation," he observed,
"leaks out from behind the
screens and invades the landscape, attaching itself to the
real." Since information has
no mass, he argued, this "alienated experience" has no moral
mass. Then, once things are
extracted from the real world
and placed in the vicarious environment where one can do
"virtually" anything without
repercussion, Barlow suggests
that the disaffected citizens
who have settled for information rather than reality could
have the capacity to do anything to other human beings.
"Simulations that edit out people can make you crazy!" he asserted. Barlow followed this
line of argument with a plea
for developers to design multiplayer games so that "wasting"
an opponent would mean
something, as opposed to the
abstractions which garners
"blow away" with impunity in
many of today's games. One
wonders if Barlow has ever
played the board games: Diplomacy, Machiavelli, or Empires
at Arms (or even a play-bymail game which features diplomacy like Cosa Nostra, Starweb or Feudal Lords) where the dynamic is to conquer one's opponents even though they
happen to be real human players rather

than an artificial intelligence. CGWs editor suggested to listeners after the banquet that moral mass was best injected by

having the player face simulated consequences of his or her actions, as opposed
to simple victory conditions (Remember
Chris Crawford's refusal to put a neat

Industry News

looking mushroom cloud in Balance of
Power?).
The conclusion of the speech was stirring, however. Barlow insisted that the
creations of the people assembled within
the banquet room were going to affect,
not only the perceptions of the next generation, but also the attitudes of future
citizens within the global village. "A lot
of the work of world design is going to
be done by the people in this room. I
know that neither you nor many other
people take you seriously. But that makes
you dangerous. You can do it [create a
positive global attitude] before the powers that be know what you're doing."
@Subhead = More Movie Metaphors
(Brian Moriarty, Trinity and Loom)
Like the motion picture industry, the
computer game industry affects attitudes
and perceptions through entertainment.
Also similar to the film industry, the entertainment industry builds expensive
product, at high risk, based on intellectual properties. So, it was only natural

that the term, "New Hollywood," would
be coined to reflect the similarities. Moriarty had given a lecture during last year's
conference in which he allowed computer game developers to draw their own
caveats from the history of silent film.
He began by observing that there was a
great deal of difference between the industries, simply because the film makers
had been equipped with a relatively stable platform (the film projector) from
early on. At this year's conference, Moriarty continued his film history tour de
force with a consideration of film since
the inception of sound.
When soundtracks were first provided
for films, Warner Brothers' Vitaphone
process was the initial medium. Vitaphone was a sound system which used
metal disks and required seven pounds of
pressure on the turntable (as opposed to
the 1.5 or 2 grams used on most turntables, today). The start-up cost in the
mid-1920s was $25,000 and the disks
had to be replaced every week. The earliest hit on Vitaphone was Don Juan, di-

rected by Alan Crosland. It ran for eight
weeks in the Warner Refrigerated Theater in 1926 and was basically a score with
sound effects. The sound effects included
door knocks and a sword fight that
sounded more like sticks clunking together rather than swords clashing. Nevertheless, critics called Vitaphone "uncanny
in its excellence." It was immediately
popular enough that there were 125 Vitaphone theaters by 1927.
Crosland followed up his success in
Don Juan with The Jazz Singer. The big
improvement in the latter film was the
use of real synchronized sound, including
the undeliberate use of sound. As one
critic noted, it was the "first movie where
sound was not heard, but overheard." It
featured the first use of sound cutaways
and allowed Jolson to play to the audience within the movie. Microphone mixing was unheard of at the time, so the
sound quality was uneven, at times.
The result of successful films with
sound was that the economy of the entire
film industry was threatened. The origi-

Industry News

nal playwood studios had to be rebuilt
(to screen out ambient noise), theaters
had to be rewired (both for Warner's Vitaphone and 20th Century Fox' Movietone, a process where sound was captured
on film), film libraries became totally obsolescent, foreign translations became
more expensive and many stars became
expendable because of their poor vocal
quality. Within 18 months after The Jazz
Singer, the studios decided not to license
Vitaphone technology, but agreed to use
Movietone (largely because of the success
of the famous Movietone News Reels
shown before most features in the Movietone theaters). The result was a standardized technology that stopped Hollywood's decline and allowed the film industry to flourish during the upcoming
depression. If, however, Warner had not
introduced the technology when it did,
the chances are that the technology
would not have been brought to the public until after the depression.
Although Moriarty did not see any necessity to moralize upon his presentation,
we will not hesitate to draw the implied

lessons somewhat larger. First, while new
technologies enhance the product and
may revitalize an industry, they do not accomplish this without relearning and rebuilding. Directors had to learn to use
the sound possibilities and this meant, of
necessity, that there would be weaknesses
in some products. Studios and exhibitors
discovered that there were hidden costs
in providing state-of-the-art entertainment. In the computer game world,
sound is not always used to its most effective ends. Higher costs in terms of composition, data storage, equipment, enclosed office space (a luxury at many computer game publishers) and the like are
not immediately recouped in software
sales. Further, these problems are exacerbated by the fact that there is no sound
standard in the computer game world,
even though the film industry had a
sound standard before the Great Depression. Though great efforts have been
made in sound during the last three
years, we will not see the fruition of these
efforts until there is an actual standard.
Second, we found it curious that the

adoption of a sound standard in the film
industry brought about a crisis in terms
of snob appeal. Many were asking what
would happen to the class theaters with
orchestras and fabulous organs if any
"jerkwater" movie house could have quality music and sound on film. One wonders if there are not owners of high-tech
systems who are asking, "What will become of the computer if the CD-ROM
drives for the 16-bit game systems provide enough storage so that gamers on
those systems can have roughly equivalent experiences to what we experience?"
Moriarty continued his presentation
with a brief history of color technology.
He observed that hand tinting had been
in use for years by the time Technicolor
was founded in 1918. In 1922, the company introduced "two-strip technicolor."
Their first three-strip technicolor was a
Walt Disney picture. Technicolor held a
patent until the 1940s when anti-trust
legislation forced the company to release
the patent information to the studios.
This action eventually allowed Eastman

Industry News

Kodak's Eastman Color to supersede Technicolor as a process.
Although there are always parallels between the two industries whenever litigation is discussed, we thought it was interesting that anti-trust legislation against
Technicolor cost that company its monopoly whereas videogame manufacturers
are allowed to keep their exclusive patents during the present era. Nevertheless,
the studio's liberation from Technicolor's
monopoly set them free to reach the alltime pinnacle of Hollywood ticket sales.
In 1946, the film industry was collecting
on 100 billion tickets per week. By 1950,
the film industry was almost dead.
Moriarty cited three major factors in
the near-demise of the film industry: antitrust suits (studios were no longer allowed to own both distributors and theaters) which forced studios to divest themselves of many of their holdings; investigations by the House Committee on UnAmerican Activities (HUAC) which
brought about a plethora of both bad
publicity and creative paranoia; and the

rise of television from one million sets
prior to 1949 through ten million sets in
1951 and up to 100 million sets in 1959.
At this point, Moriarty moralized for the
only time during the lecture. His thesis
was that Hollywood's basic characteristic
was its adaptiveness. They tried to get
people back in the theaters by offering experiences which the customers couldn't
get at home. Obviously, the adaptive
strategy is something that the computer
game design community will need to
emulate in order to survive during the
transitions of the future. Though the final section of his lecture dealt with the
success of Cinerama, the most sobering
part of the presentation dealt with 3-D
films. Moriarty cited two factors which
killed 3-D films: garbage (the genre
started with Lights Out impresario Arch
Obler's B'wana Devil and didn't get any
better) and exhibitors (it cost $12,00014,000 to convert and synchronous the
two projectors required, while customers
were unwilling to pay extra for the experience). Moriarty did not draw conclusions
about the nature of "garbage" in the com-

puter game industry and declined to
speculate on the price of adding certain
features to computer games versus sales
resistance at higher prices. He did comment, however, that designers should not
go "feature crazy" or become such technophiles that they incorporate technologies
into a game whether it needs it or not.
He observed that Alfred Hitchcock was
forced by the studios to film Dial M for
Murder in 3-D. Hitchcock used it, primarily, for one memorable scene (the
hand grasping out toward the viewer in
desperation). The message was clear!

Making It Real: Story & Character (Ellen Guon, Wing Commander II , and Katherine
Lawrence, Dungeons Dragons
television series)

6.

Another session which featured an emphasis on story over technology was that
presented by two experienced television
script writers. Guon and Lawrence lectured that writing is not magic or art. Instead, they posited the thesis that writing

Review

is craft. Therefore, they urged game designers to know their market before they
start writing. They suggested that successful writers cater to the audience by designing the type of universe and story
that their audience is expecting. Designers were encouraged to develop characters, both heroes and villains, in shades of
gray. Heroes can become so in spite of
flaws and villains can become so by accident. Characters were defined as being individuals in relationships. Characters do
not stand alone. Both writers suggested
that designers give quirks to their characters and have fun with those quirks, but
cautioned that the idiosyncrasies had to
make sense.
Next, the two scripters suggested that
storylines need to have two arcs: action/plot and character development.
Without both arcs, the story is an incomplete and unsatisfying half-circle. Finally,
every story requires a payoff which must
feature emotional punch and offer reasonable explanations for all the loose ends
left unravelled by the game action. Last,
but not least, the experienced writers underscored the necessity of retaining ancillary rights. Designers were reminded that
their characters could become the next
Saturday morning cartoon hero or comic
book villain.

Art Without Losing Your Shirt
(Michael Becker, Manager of
Graphics at FA)
The cost of computer game graphics is
skyrocketing. Michael Becker shared
some of the current problems and possible solutions to the game developer's dilemma with regard to art. Becker observed that the increased storage space
available on CD-ROM and the extended
number of pixels available in SVGA or
8514 graphics only exacerbate the problem of keeping graphics costs to a reasonable level. Adding to the difficulty is the
fact that the audience of potential customers is becoming increasingly "media
savvy" and, hence, require higher production values. He estimated that it will require 120 man months (10 man years) to
fill a CD with quality art. He also observed that today's larger games spend
$100,000 plus on the graphics for a single product, but the goal should be more
around the $40,000-50,000 range.
Becker listed four major pitfalls in the

current environment for developing art
for computer games. First, he considered
the fact that most companies simply do
not estimate enough art for games at the
beginning of a project. Second, he noted
that many artists are paid via "openended" contracts where the meter keeps
running. Third, many artists are burned
out by overwork and time constraints.
Fourth, he suggested that all too often
there is a violation of copyrights where
artists use the old "scan and modify"
quick art fix.
Becker made several suggestions for improving the current environment. First,
he suggested that developers pre-plan
"downsizing" art from computer game
and CD products to cartridge products.
This would include archiving every image. Second, he recommended that companies attempt to hire "high end" artists
as opposed to hiring "cheap" artists. If
top artists are involved from the outset, it
is easier to scan and use "storyboard" art
as alpha-prototype graphics and will, of
course, keep the look consistent throughout the project. Third, he urged all design teams to visual all animations at an
early stage, since they will cost multiple
times the price at the end. Other suggestions involved the use of scanners, video
frame grabbing and building one's own
copyright-free photographic library.

Multi-Player Games (John Taylor, Air Warrior and Multi-Player
BattleTech)
John Taylor presented a list of six design considerations for multi-player
games to be featured on commercial telecommunications networks. He stated
that designers should: 1) realize that
these games exist for a social purpose, so
2) the interface must leave room for players to type their communications. Then,
he observed that: 3) games which are to
be played for years must have a broad dynamic range (so that experience players
don't immediately give the "Wand of `I
Win'" to new players and 4) the software
should be expandable (Kesmai still has
10 year old code in operation). Further,
he cautioned that: 5) the game should
not behave differently between types and
speeds of personal computers (even perceived differences will cause rumors that
can cost usage). Finally, he observed that
6) one must decide whether to have hu-

man game masters or not (Kesmai usually does not).
Taylor then moved on to what he
called "Design Issues." First, he said that
designers must figure out some business
criterion for the game (i.e. how many
players at what quantity of host time
does one need in order to make money).
Second, designers must have a plan for
keeping the game resources dynamically
restocked (with no players hogging resources and the East Coast not depleting
supplies which will he needed later in the
evening by West Coast players). Taylor
told a fascinating anecdote about businessmen discovering at what times certain artifacts were being generated and ordering their secretaries to log in during
business hours long enough to grab those
artifacts. Third, he cautioned that single
solution problems/puzzles are not a good
idea, since the first person tells a minimum of his/her buddies and the chain
continues through their buddies until everyone knows the solution. Finally, he observed that most human players do not
like to compete with each other. Even
though there are those that want to win
at any cost, there must be balance between the casual and fanatic player with
rewards at all levels of play. To this regard, he suggested that designers should
never trust anything the player's computer comes up with.
Taylor closed his presentation with
some predictions about future trends in
multi-player games via telecommunications services.
1) Games will become more graphically
intense.
2) Games will be reduced in price to $34 per hour via club rates and package
deals.
3) Flat rate services will increase if The
Sierra Network succeeds and this will
cause player demographics to shift from
adults to teenagers.
4) Higher baud connections will be implemented soon.
5) Higher development costs will cause
networks to offer more multi-player versions of successful single player games.
(Next month: More from the Sixth Annual Computer Game Developers Conference)

Strategy

Part I of Solutions to the Taxing Levels in Lemmings
by Amateur Lemicologist Robert Gardner, Jr.
begin to build from a point just about
half-way to the gap. That way, his last
bridge will end over land and the builder
will not walk back toward the trap. Go
back now and have a Lem bash through
the red column, releasing all the others.

Taxing 3: Heaven Can Wait
(We Hope!) — IBANLMFPFY
This is just one possible solution. Have
Lem #1 build from the edge and keep an
eye on him while doing the following:
Quickly make #2 a digger and, when he
is in over his head, have him build to
stop him. Catch a Lem just out of the
chute and make him dig until he is about
"Lem deep," then have him bash. He
will be digging an open trench, deep
enough to keep all the returning Lems
from climbing out of it (a contraption
known as a Lem-Pen). When he gets to
the pit dug by #2, he will stop bashing.
Catch a Lem behind the basher and have
him build a bridge that, when completed, will be short of the pit dug by #2.
Once #1 is almost to the exit, go back
and restart the bridge in the trench. That
will free all the little fellows who, thereafter, will be eternally in your debt.

Taxing 1: If at First You Don't
Succeed — MFIBAJLNFS
Make the first Lem a climber. When he
has gone over the first of the broken columns, and is about to start up the stairs
to the next, go back and catch a Lem
coming off the steps on the left and
make him dig. When he is "Lem" deep,
have him bash. When #1 reaches the top
step on the left side of the last column,
have him bash through to save time. Let
him walk down to the lower part of the
slope at the gap and build to the other
side. Once he drops off his last bridge
(you can mine to get him off faster if you
like), let him walk on up to the top of
the next set of steps and build over the
trap and to the exit. The others should
be getting there just about this time.

Taxing 2: Watch Out, There Are
Traps About — FIBIJLMOFL

Taxing 4: Lend a Helping Hand
BINLMFIQFR

Have the first Lem out of each chute
hit the ground diggin'. Make the Lem on
the left dig next to the retaining wall and
have the one on the right dig instantly.
In both cases you may lose the second
Lem from each side unless you take corrective action to save them. In both cases
you can simply have the second Lem dig
in the same hole with the first Lem.
When the hole is deep enough to contain
the other Lems (about two Lems deep is
good), then build to stop all four diggers.
Turn up the Lem flow to 99 and then
start digging again in each hole. When
your Lems are safely out, bash through
the "lumpy" column of rock on the left,
then make a climber go over to the red
column and build over the trap. After he
drops from the end of his bridge, let him

This one is really easy, but not the way
most people approach it — the way that
looks to be obvious. First, put a blocker
in front of the snare on the right. Next,
go back to the left side and make a digger of a left-moving Lem. As soon as he
is "Lem deep," make him bash. This is
the only tricky part, for he must both
bash a trench that is open on top but
deep enough to get under the wall between the two sections. With that done,
the level is won. When he digs under the
blocker, the blocker will be released, although releasing him is not critical to the
completion of the level. Now make a
blocker behind the basher. If you end up
with two or three little waifs between the
basher and the blocker, don't worry
about it, you can spare them. As soon as

Strategy

the basher emerges from the base of the
column, have him build. Let him build a
series of bridges to the column on the
right, turn and instantly build back to the
left. When his bridges run into the top
of the structure, he will turn and walk
back down his bridge — but that's OK.
When he returns to the top, he will
climb up to a point where he can bash.
Let him do that and at that point, if not
before, blow the blocker below and
watch the Lems come home. Have you
ever wondered what holds those incredibly long bridges up? I think the engineers at Georgia Tech could learn something from these little guys.

Taxing 5: The Prison —
FAJHLDHBGT
The first Lem should be assigned blocking duty on the right. The next should
build to the left, ending just at the projection at the base of the left column. Build
from the top of the projection to the area
at the top of the metal "flamethrower"
block. After building past the chute, have
a Lem block the stairs to isolate the
builder. When she reaches the metal
block, she will probably walk back down
to the blocker, back up to the block and
over the top. Have her bash through the
pipes and start building to the other side.
When she gets to the pipes on the far
right, have her bash and quickly build to
get inside the pipes. If you are good with
the F11 key, you may bash/build,
bash/build and get well inside without a
problem; if not, she will turn and head
left. In this case, build back up to the
pipes above those "flamethrowers" and
this will seal her in. The object now is to
make her dig down between the pipes un-

dl she reaches the floor, then bash to the
exit. If she should happen to fall between
the pipes, then use the F11 key to be
sure she is facing right and let her bash
through to the exit. Now all you need to
do is detonate the blocker and repair the
hole she leaves in the bridge. (Note: Assigning a sex to a Lem is a difficult process requiring a quick eye and a very large
magnifying glass.)

bash back through it. He will then run
into the blocker and head right again.
Let him walk down the rope to the tall
rock. Build over to and let him drop
onto the lower rock. From that point
build to get to the next rock. Start the
last set of stairs there to reach the exit. In
the meantime, go back and blow up the
blocker. Time it so that the mob gets
there just after the bridge is complete.

Taxing 6: Compression Method
1 — IJHLDHFCGM

Taxing 8: The Art Gallery —
HLDHFINEGS

Here's a suggestion for the best possible
score on this one. First catch the #1 Lem
out of the chute on the far right and,
when he turns to the left, have him bash
into the base of the column. (We'll get
back to him.) Go to the far left and
catch the first Lem out and let him walk
off the edge and drop twice. On the second drop, make him into a blocker. Go
back and catch your basher and while he
is under the column, have him dig until
he is just deep enough to stay in his
trench once he clears the column, in
other words, about "Lem deep" in relation to the floor. Then let him begin to
bash again. Now just sit back and watch.
All Lems will now collect behind the
blocker. When the basher and his followers are in place, detonate the blocker. All
Lems will now be in a tight little group.
You will lose no more than one to each
of the hammers, giving you a very high
percentage of Lents saved and believe me,
those little guys appreciate that. Remember, they have wives and children to go
home to after this thing is over.

This is one way to do this, but certainly
not the only way. Make Lem #2 build
right out of the chute, to slow him down
and give #1 a little head start. Make #1
bash through the first pole. To buy a little more control, make him start low, on
the ball. Then let him build across the
first two balls to be sure no Lems get
trapped in between. Bash through the second and third balls and increase the flow
to 99. Let one of the last Lems build a
bridge between the last two balls, leaving
all his little buddies trapped down below.
Bash through the last pole, build to the
exit, then have the trapped guys bash to
the right.

Taxing 7: Every Lemming for
Himself? — NHLDHFADGJ
Let the Lemmings
walk over the hill to
the right of the exit.
Make the lead Lem a
climber. When #2 is
near the one-way
hill, make him a
blocker. Let the
climber get over the
hill, then walk up to
and build into the little bump at the right
edge of the platform.
That will turn him
around and send
him back to the oneway hill. Have him

Taxing 9: Perseverance
LDHFAJLFGL
Have the first two Lemmings dig downward, side by side, at the right side of the
landing block. Whet, they have dug halfway down the block, stop them by turning them into builders. Finally, bash a
tunnel through the left side of the block,
freeing the Lemmings.

Taxing 10: Izzie Wizzie Lemmings Get Busy —
DLGIJNLGGL
This isn't the most elegant of solutions
— but it works! When the first Lemming,
hits the turf, have it build stairs to the
right. From the second platform, build to
the right. Then make all of the Lemmings builders (clicking on them as fast
as possible) so that they all make it to the
third platform. On the third platform,
build a few steps close to the right wall
(not high enough for the Lems to climb),
and then bash through that wall so that
there is a small film of "land" underneath
the basher. The Lemmings will fall to the –
fourth platform, where one Lemming can
build stairs out. They must do the

Strategy

"group build" thing again to move up to
the exit.

Taxing 11: The Ascending Pillar
Scenario — LGANNLDHGY
The first Lemming to hit the dirt must
dig down and then bash to the right, so
that there is a small film of earth covering the Lem-pen it is digging. Next have
a climber scamper out of the pen to the
left and build a stairway all the way up to
the last pillar. When in the middle of the
last pillar, the Lem must dig down halfway through the pillar, bash to the left,
then build a stairway over the small
chasm to the left. Build stairs out of the
Lem-pen to the left.

Taxing 12: Livin' on the Edge —
GINNLDLIGR
The first Lemming must begin building
stairs spanning the chasm to the right.
Next build a Lem pen by turning the
next two Lems into blockers. When the
bridge-building Lem reaches the wall on

the right, have it bash through and
build a series of stairs up to the exit.
Blow the right-hand blocker.

Taxing 13: Upsidedown
World — FAJHMDHJGM
Put a downfield blocker on the
right. Make a climber of another and,
when he is at the first "root" on the
"arrow hill," let him mine. When his
head is level (or just below level) with
the trap, make him bash. If he is at
the proper level, he will stop bashing
after going under the large mound just
prior to the second "arrow hill." Let him
walk over the hill and a very small depression will be visible just before the exit (between the second and third "roots").
Have him build in that depression and
the instant he turns, instruct him to
mine. When he is level with his first tunnel, make him bash again. Let him walk
so that when he is on the first "arrow
hill" and level with his buddies, bash
them to freedom.

Taxing 14: Hunt the Nessy.... —
IJHMDHFKGV
This one is primarily a bridge-building
marathon. Let the "point-Lem" walk to
the edge and build. Place blockers to the
left and right to contain the others. Keep
building until the long neck of the "monster" is reached. Build over to the neck
and make sure the bridge is complete,
then bash. If he should turn around,
that's all right, just let him build into
something to reverse him. Once he has
started to bash, command him to mine

Strategy

Taxing 15: What an Awesome
Level — NHMDHFALGS

and, when he breaks through, make him
dig. Allow him to dig down an inch or
so on the screen and then build again.
Let him drop off on the rock under the
"nose" and from there, build over to the
exit area. Once he has started on his last
build from this rock, go back and detonate the right side blocker, releasing the
other Lems. The well to the left of the
exit will block the Lems, so it should be
built over. This writer likes to build from
the center of the bridge, running down
from the outcropping to the surface at
the left of the well.

There is little doubt that this level
was created by a mad Lemming scientist. He wasn't crazy, just mad. Still,
what does one expect from a Ph.D.
who flunked recess? Anyway, this
gamer is almost certain that this creature is a cross between a dragon and a
caterpillar. The difficult part seems to
be getting them to mate. Anyway,
this solution is not easy to explain
due to all the little "hairs" and
"spikes" all over, but we'll give it a try.
Begin by making a blocker under the exit
and then watch the first Lem. At the exact place that he turns around, have the
next one bash. As he bashes, try to single
out one Lem and make him a blocker behind the basher. If one or two are lost
this way, don't be concerned. When the
basher breaks out, instantly make him dig
and let him go for about 6-8 scoops,
then build. If he isn't made to dig, he'll
turn back left because of the overhang.
Let him build two bridges. Let him walk

up after he makes his fall and note the
point where he turns around. Let him
come back to that point and bash. As
soon as he breaks into daylight, have him
build. When he turns left, make him
build again to turn him back to the
right. Let him walk up to the top of the
thing that looks like a caterpillar with
ears and build from the "ear" on the
other side. He may hit a blue star and
turn after the first build; if so, then just
build against the left "ear" to turn him
back again. When he drops off after the
second build, have him bash to the right
so that he emerges between the top two
large "spines." When he breaks through,
let him go over (or through) the first
spine he encounters and build from the
top of the next one. Keep building until
the top spine on the large dragon head is
reached. (He may turn once or twice
while building, but don't worry, because
he isn't going anywhere.) When he walks
up to that last spine, he will walk over it
and out the exit. At some point prior to
this, the blocker is detonated, releasing
the others.

in

0

d

Computer Flight

Part One: What Are All Those Instruments?
by Timothy Trimble

M

ost armchair pilots who climb
into the cockpit of Microsoft
Flight Simulator are familiar with
only the basic instrumentation of the
cockpit dashboard. Usually, it is just
enough to get the plane in the air, keep
the top of the plane above the bottom of
the plane and then attempt to land again
(one hopes in one piece). While there is a
lot of enjoyment to be found in this
mode of flying, there can be much more
enjoyment in learning about the rest of
those "strange" instruments.
The instrument that gains the most recognition is the Artificial Horizon (or Attitude Indicator). This instrument has the
responsibility of showing the pilot the position of the aircraft (the attitude) in relation to the natural horizon of the earth.
Normally, in clear weather, this is not
too important. When it is night, however, or the weather is so bad that the pilot can't see out of the windshield, this
becomes the most important instrument
on the dashboard. Besides showing that
the plane is pointed below or above the
horizon, it also displays, in degrees, the
amount of bank that the aircraft is using
in a turn. The arrow at the top of the instrument is called a "sky pointer." While
the aircraft is in a bank, the sky pointer
will help show the amount of bank that

the aircraft is in by pointing to one of
the outer markings on the rim of the instrument. The first set of marks (dots)
are for 10 degrees of bank, the next (second dot) for 20 degrees, the next mark
(third dot) will be 30 degrees and the last
marking (fourth dot halfway between the
last mark and the actual horizon line) is
for a 60 degree bank. Finally, for those
special gut-wrenching flights, the full vertical bank with the sky pointer on the horizon line is for 90 degrees of bank.

tor instrument also has a little ball suspended in fluid in a glass tube, called a
Slip Indicator. This shows the "quality"
of the turn. When a turn is executed
with the ball centered in the middle, the
turn is perfectly coordinated. Since most
armchair pilots fly with the ailerons and
rudder locked together, all of their turns
will be perfectly coordinated. For the
more daring, however, the Slip Indicator
will show if too much or too little rudder
is being used for the turn.

An instrument that is related to the Artificial Horizon (and can sometimes act as
a backup in case of instrument failure) is
the Turn Coordinator. This sits at the
bottom left of the instrument dashboard.
The Turn Coordinator also has a set of
markings on the outer rim of the instrument, but this time, they are below the
horizon line. The bottom of the instrument also has the words "2 MIN," meaning "two minutes." When the aircraft is
banked into an attitude that causes the
miniature aircraft's wing tips as displayed
on the instrument to touch the lower
markings, it will take the actual aircraft
two minutes to make a full 360-degree
turn (a complete circle). This will vary
with the speed of the aircraft. On most
heavy jet aircraft, the markings are for
four minute turns. The Turn Coordina-

The Airspeed Indicator speaks for itself
except that it expects everyone to think in
Knots. For those that prefer to think in
miles (statute) the calculation is 1 Knot
1.1508 miles. In addition, there is a
marking on this instrument that sometimes gets ignored. It is the thick diameter line that runs along the lower speed
section of the dial. Once the end of the
thick line is reached by the indicator, it
means that it is now safe to lift off the
runway during takeoff or that the aircraft
is about to become a rock (a rapidly falling object) while in the air.
The instrument just below the Artificial
Horizon is the Directional Gyro (also
called the Heading Indicator or DG).
While the purpose of this instrument is
simple (to show the heading of the air-

Computer Flight

craft in degrees), a certain characteristic
about the instrument is not so well
known. Since the instrument is based on
a balanced spinning gyro, it tends to drift
from the "true" heading over a period of
time. Most armchair pilots do not notice
this since Microsoft Flight Simulator defaults to having this feature turned off.
However, if "Gyro Drift" is turned on,
the armchair pilot will have to calibrate
the Directional Gyro on a periodic basis
to match it to the heading of the Magnetic Compass (adding to the realism).
A similar type of situation also occurs
with the Altimeter (on the right side of
the Artificial Horizon). This instrument
keeps track of the current altitude by
changes in the barometric pressure (i.e. as
the aircraft climbs higher, the pressure becomes less, and as the aircraft descends,
the pressure becomes greater). Of course,
altitude is not the only thing that affects
barometric pressure. Weather can have a
big effect on the current barometric pressure. By turning on the Barometer Drift
(Realism option under SIM menu) this

effect can be experienced. A good habit
of the "realistic" armchair pilot is always
to set the Altimeter before beginning a
descent or adjust it on a periodic basis
while on long flights.
The Rate of Climb Instrument is also
one of those self-explanatory instruments.
When the needle is above the 0, the aircraft is climbing, and when the needle is
below the 0, the aircraft is descending.
The numerical markings are in hundreds
of feet per minute. However, special attention can be given to this instrument if
the armchair pilot is interested in making
"textbook" approaches and takeoffs. During takeoffs, a standard rate of climb for
the type of aircraft can be used. Temperature, barometric pressure and weather
can all have an effect on the rate of climb
for the aircraft. If the plane is sitting on a
runway in the mountains (12,000 feet
up) and it is a hot summer day (80 degrees plus), the rate of climb for a Cessna
152 could be as low as 80 feet per minute. At sea level, on the other wing, it
could be 630 feet per minute. This can

make a lot of difference in trying to clear
those tall trees at the end of the runway!
A lot of flying skill can be developed by
paying closer attention to these instruments and their functions. One good test
of an armchair pilot's ability to fly by the
instruments is to have someone else (besides the pilot) set up full cloud cover
from 5000 ASL (Above Sea Level) to
15000 ASL. Place the aircraft in an unusual position at around 10,000 feet altitude, pause the simulator and then let
the pilot take over. ("Let's see, descending at 2000 feet per minute, in a spin,
means I'll hit the ground in about 5 minutes. Plenty of time to recover...." Yeah,
right!)
Till next time (Hum, altitude 3000
feet...), this is Timothy Trimble (...descending at 1400 fpm...), From the
Cockpit (...at 60 degrees of bank...), saying "Watch those instruments!" and keep
an eye out for Part Two of "What Are
All Those Instruments?" when we deal
with the navigational instruments.
(...oops, there's the ground!)

Letters

Encyclopedia CGW
I am writing for several reasons. First, simply to say how
much I enjoy CGW and, having been a continuous subscriber
for more than six years, I feel qualified to render the judgment
that it is a vital component of the computer gaming hobby at
large. Thanks for the consistent quality, reliable, dependable
publication schedule, my "money's worth," and invaluable assistance in evaluating new purchases of these very expensive
games before I "puts my foldin' money down on the barrelhead!"
Second, I also have enjoyed and benefited from your handbook publications, such as Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook and The Official Guide to Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon.

I Love "Lusi"
I have been waiting 28 years for the opportunity that you
have just provided me. I will probably never get another opportunity like this, so I intend to enjoy it to its fullest. You see,
when I was in high school, I was obliged to study Latin during
my five years there. It has been somewhat useful in an amorphous and vaguely indirect sort of way. But not visceral, or related to a personal preference like gaming.
"I came, I played, I conquered" translates into Latin as: "veni,
lusi, vici." "Ludi," although a perfectly good Latin word, is the
plural of "ludus" and means "the games" or a "public spectacle"
(which usually involved more than one game, if the lions
amongst you will humour the Christians).
The downside is that "lusi" sounds a bit wimpy to our ears,
which may be more accustomed to visceral Anglo-Saxon monosyllables. Certainly, "ludi" is more likely to be recognized.
So, what's the problem if more people are likely to understand the incorrect version? In a practical world, not much, I
suppose. However, less than adequate research in one area
suggests a predisposition for less than adequate research in
other (maybe more important) areas, too. In any event, to paraphrase Arthur C. Clarke: the willingness of people to believe in
little green men from Mars, without adequate and rigorous substantiation, benefits only the demagogue and the dictator.
John Kula
Victoria, British Columbia CANADA
All right! So we goofed. We don't suppose you would buy the
idea that it was an April issue and we were trying to fool you.
Yeah, that's it! And we were planning to publish the letter of
the first person to catch it and write in about it. Yeah! And we
have a really big prize, too! Yeah! It's a date with one of the
girls in Les Manley: Lost in L.A. — and they'll be naked. That's
the ticket! Just wait outside the Parliament building in Victoria
at 3:00 P.M. on April 1, 1993 and they'll be there. If they're not
there right away, just wait!
Seriously, we did conjugate ludo, ludere in the wrong conjugation and we will use lusi when we next feel like wearing our
classical mask. We eschew cleverness and euphony in favor of
accuracy from this moment on.

Finally, do you know if anyone publishes a comprehensive
guide to computer games, somewhat as a current encydopedia? The two-part series on computer wargames that you ran
was very helpful; however, since then, there are already many
new wargames and combat simulators out. Additionally, I am interested in sports games, some role-playing, etc. It seems to
me that if someone is not already publishing such a guide or
newsletter, there would be a ready market for one. I cannot be
the only one who sees, for example, the Chips & Bits advertisement in your magazine and wonders about the nature, quality, features, challenge, etc. of the dozens and dozens of expensive games, simply identified by title in a two-page listing. I
know that Chips is working on a catalog that will certainly help,
but it occurred to me that a comprehensive guide may already
exist and that I just haven't noticed an ad for one. It also occurred to me that perhaps Golden Empire Publications might
be prompted to fill such a deficiency in the hobby. Would it
make sense to poll the readership on the desirability of such a
publication?
Thanks once again. And congratulations. I am no publisher,
but I do know that publishing a magazine is not easy nor particularly lucrative for most venturers. Yours is obviously a great
success backed by a competent and energetic staff that emphasizes quality and meeting your deadlines. I sincerely hope
CGW is around for a long time and suspect that it will be.
Great work!
Thomas D. Ciampa
Los Angeles, CA
Thomas, there is not really any such encyclopedia or comprehensive listing on the market. The reason why publishing such
an encyclopedia is not really feasible is touched upon in your
letter. Even our paiktographies (annotated lists of games) are
often outdated a few months after we compile them. Fortunately, we plan to publish at least four or five paiktographies
per year in order to help our readers keep current. In addition
to the wargames, M. Evan Brooks is working on a strategy
game paiktography and Scorpia just finished a CRPG paiktography. We plan to offer more.
The closest book to what you are seeking is a Bantam book
called Dvorak's Guide to PC Games. The book does not pretend to be a comprehensive guide to games, but it does offer a
considerable amount of introductory material on a lot of games
in a lot of genres. Our editorial staff compiled plenty of material
for that book and, while we are not entirely convinced that the
best possible use was made of that material (writers never
want their material edited down to someone else's formula,
even if those writers are editors themselves), there is plenty of
basic material for those who want to expand their computer
game libraries.

Letters

The Last Picture Metaphor
Like many of your readers, I am disenchanted with the delays
in software these days, and I've read the articles and explanations concerning this matter. I do understand about these delays. As a matter of fact, software delays now fall into the category of things that one cannot do anything about (such as
death and taxes). We might not be able to do anything about
these things, but that doesn't mean that we can't get upset
about them.
Back in January, I bought an IBM-compatible '486 33MHz
computer with CD-ROM, mainly so that I would be able to run
the new state-of-the-art software on it. With the exception of
Falcon 3.0 and Wing Commander II, I'm still waiting. And it upsets me when I visit my local software store, and look in the
new release section, to find a company that is delaying Strike
Commander until June (1992?) has produced a trilogy of old Ultimas. Why isn't that time spent getting the new Ultimas out or
Strike Commander? Old programs are history! The advances in
software make even some programs that were released in late
1991 obsolete, and I've seen $40 programs that were released
in December marked down to $15 by February by a major software chain!
As far as sneak previews go, I'd rather not see them until the
product was at least being duplicated on disks for mass production. I can understand that you want to be the first to report the
latest and greatest. I think your magazine is great! Of all the
computer game magazines, yours is the only one I buy every
month. There is one magazine that doesn't have sneak previews per se but, when a program is reviewed, it almost always
is available already or during the month of that issue. Which
would you feel better about? A sneak preview that becomes
"dreamware" for another several months or a review of a title
that is available or available the next month after reading it? After the Earl Weaver II-Tony LaRussa comparison in a previous
issue, seeing the finished product (as opposed to an alpha or
beta) is believing.
Also in the April '92 issue is a comparison to the film industry.
When a movie is advertised to be in a theater on June 15, that
movie is there on June 15, and not delayed until July or August
or September or October, etc. The thing with movie sneak
peeks is that you know there will definitely be a set date to be
able to watch it. Whereas with software, who knows?
Michael Moniz
Smithfield, RI
Although your letter was too long to print in its entirety, we
felt that your disappointment should be addressed one more
time. First, let us reiterate the fact that software took a major
leap in production time required during the latter half of 1990
and through the 1991 calendar year. Much of this was due to
the uniform move to VGA graphics and the move beyond the
512K RAM standard. Such a leap brought unexpected problems in software management and, as a result, unexpected delays across the board. The delays are not restricted to one
company, but almost every company publishing state-of-the-art
products was hard hit by the unanticipated increase in manpower required to bring projects to fruition. We think the problems will largely work themselves out to the point that there will
be less vaporware over the next 18 months than there was in
the last 18 months.
As for working on a remake of a product to the exclusion of
working on new and long-awaited products, we simply have to
say that it's not true! Creating software involves the use of
many teams. Not all of the artists are working on one game at

all times. They may do backgrounds for one game and move
on to do characters for another game while they are waiting for
the programmers to catch up on the first game. The same is
true of sound teams and writing teams, quality assurance
teams and low-level programming teams. You can bet that Origin would not have put resources into a remake of an Ultima
trilogy that would hold up production on either Ultima VII or
Strike Commander. It was simply a matter of allocating resources efficiently while other work was being accomplished.
Again, we appreciate your comments on sneak previews, but
we still feel that it is a matter of not understanding the nature
of the beast. Sneak previews are intended to be advance looks
at exciting products without providing "buy" or "don't buy" recommendations. We enjoy writing sneak previews because they
let us be "fans" as well as critics. We are fans, too! We are interested in all aspects of getting a game from concept to market and we enjoy knowing what design teams are trying to accomplish, as well as evaluating how well they accomplished
their goals. In sneak previews, we get to focus on interesting
aspects of the games that often get overlooked in reviews (of
necessity).
Finally, the comments on film industry releases provide a
false analogy. The film industry does not require technological
advancement in order to survive. The computer game industry
does. The film industry has had a stable platform since the
early part of this century. The computer game industry is still
shooting at a moving target. The film industry can afford to
hold films in storage until the optimal release date. The computer game industry still lives largely from quarter to quarter
and sometimes its companies must ship a product right away
in order to survive until the optimal marketing season. The film
industry can purchase its most effective advertising in daily
newspapers with short lead times. The computer game industry
must purchase its most effective advertising in monthly magazines with long lead times. The film industry only has to duplicate a small number of prints in order to meet the needs of a
national opening as opposed to the tens of thousands of computer game disks to be duplicated prior to release.
In short, there may be parallels in the creative approach between the film industry and the computer game industry, but
there is no parallel between those industries in terms of product release.

Ardai The Barbarian
Regarding your review of Virgin's Conan the Cimmerian in the
February '92 issue. As the product manager, I would like to address several points made by your reviewer. First, I have no
idea when Mr. Ardai received his copy of Conan, but the update for the game has been readily available since late October, 1991. In pursuit of complete customer satisfaction, I personally have taken a number of calls for our tech support department, and have yet to find an unhappy customer once the
update was received. You might do your readers a service by
informing them that we offer updates from Virgin's On-Line
BBS, (714) 562-5030, or updated disks will be mailed (without
any charge to the customer) if the customer mails or faxes his
receipt or UPC symbol from the box.
To assist customers with the admittedly difficult task of moving Conan through the scrolling map, Virgin will mail maps for
the Shadizar underground, Zamboula and Thoth Amon's Palace to anyone who requests them (also free of charge). Customers can mail written requests to: Virgin Games, Attn: Conan
Maps, 18061 Fitch Avenue, Suite C, Irvine, CA, 92714; or can
call (714) 833-8710, Ext. 45 and leave their name and address.

Letters

Second, I must clarify the degree of error made on the manual and errata card mentioned in Mr. Ardai's review. The symbol in error is shown backwards and is not the "wrong" symbol
In fact, there is no other symbol even remotely similar. Eightyfive percent of our customers have not even noticed the mistake or had little trouble determining which symbol on the
screen it was referring to. A little embarrassing it is, but monumental it is not.
There are few to no entertainment titles that are 100% "BugFree." I am not attempting to make an excuse found in the initial shipment of Conan, but I take offense to the statement,
"Virgin is aware of them and claims to have corrected replacement disks available." There are no claims being made that are
untrue. Perhaps, Mr. Ardai was doubtful based on the fact that
it took Virgin four weeks after release to have an updated version available, much less time than most publishing companies. It is our commitment to customer satisfaction that drove
many Virgin employees to work overtime and through weekends to make the fixes as soon as humanly possible.
Cathie A. Bartz
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA
Actually, the editor inserted the phrase about Virgin claiming
to have replacement disks available. This statement was not intended to cast aspersions upon Virgin's veracity, but to indicate that we had not actually had an opportunity to see, touch,
load, boot and verify that these disks were available. We try
not to put it in writing if we haven't seen it. Very often, time is
at a premium when reviewing games. If one does not find out
about an update until nearing a deadline, there may be insufficient time to run the update through its paces. We assure the
dedicated folks in Virgin's customer support section that we
are no more suspicious of their updates than anyone else's.
We simply try not to affirm what we haven't experienced. As for
your customer support policies, let us simply state that we certainly welcome them and find them laudable, particularly in light
of policies such as those described in this month's editorial.

Gatewood's World
Computer Gaming World is the most venerable computer
gaming magazine of all computer gaming magazines. You've
been around the longest. You've seen it all. Therefore, I would
sincerely like to express my heartfelt opinion in your august
pages, if I may.
I want to state that I'd like to take my right fist and put it
through someone's face (you know from the nose to the back
of their head type of thing , crush to mush). That someone is
anyone pirating computer software games! I have nineteen
computer simulations (simulations sound so much more sophisticated than games, heh!) Not one of them is pirated! Like they
put on Empire, "pirating is just a fancy word for stealing.
Against the law, you know? If these good for nothings would
think about it, they would realize that they're cutting their own
throats. These people steal games, the company doesn't make
money and then, someone who has given us a ton of fun is out
of work.
Concluding, I'm not working for any computer companies, nor
trying to support them. I am a Texas Peace Officer, a cop who
has been with the department for over a decade. And, if I ever

catch anyone, "pirating" anything, they're going to jail, because
I'm going to arrest them for theft! This crime is not only stealing
from the companies, it is stealing from me and everyone else
in the gaming community.
Steve Gatewood
Address withheld by request
"We're not worthy!" We sure try to be worthy of the kind of
praise with which you began your letter, however. Sorry we
had to print your letter in the July issue instead of the "august"
pages [grin). We do appreciate the serious aspect of your letter
and hope "piracy" loses some of its glamor as a result.

Serial Thriller
Many of your articles mention playing "head-to-head" through
a serial cable instead of a modem. What exactly is that and
how much would it cost? I have two computers and I'd like to
play games and download files between them, but not spend
$2,000 on a big networking controller.
D. Hartl
Traverse City, MI
Here's the good news. A serial or null modem cable costs under $10 (usually) and allows one to connect two computers together via the serial ports. No modem or network controllers
are necessary. With two computers in the same room or reasonable proximity, these can provide stimulating competition between human players. We like human-vs-human games. That's
why we mention this possibility from time to time. One does not
need a network controller for this style of gaming. cow

Sneak Preview

ges ago, the gods built themselves a
resort area. As is often the case with
resort areas, the neighborhood began to decay. First came the thieves, soon
followed by other forces of darkness. Before the gods knew it, their personal playground had become a haven for every
monster imaginable. Years of idle living
had rendered the gods lethargic and lazy.
Instead of dealing with the forces of evil
themselves, they decided to find a champion. As a result, Hercules came forward
to take the challenge of disposing of the
four powerful guardians who held the
city hostage. His only request was that, if
he should be able to vanquish the guardians who controlled the city, he be allowed to join the gods as an equal.
In Gods, the Konami release that allows
the player to leap into the role of mythical hero in an adventure of Herculean
proportions, the player gets to cut a legendary swath through four major levels,
each divided into three sub-levels. Essentially, then, there are twelve levels to
work through in order to reach the
endgame, and each level is a highly confusing maze, full of trapdoors, monsters,
traps, secret passages, teleporters, treasures, bonuses and, thankfully, weapon upgrades.

A"maze"in' Place
One major strength of this game is the
unique design of each maze. Players will
have to practically memorize each individual maze as the character works through
the game. Hercules must discover the correct combination of levers to destroy
traps, reveal bonuses and open secret
rooms. The wrong combination can close
off an area that the hero must visit, turn
on monster generators or possibly, accomplish nothing immediately evident to the
player. Playing with various lever combinations provides no small amount of diversion for the battle-weary champion.

Bats File
Another strength of this game program
is the generous assortment of monsters
provided. Each monster seems to have
been designed with an exceptional
amount of imagination. There are humpbacked monsters that resemble twolegged camels, ape-like beasts and flying
creatures. Flying imps, hornets and bats
are quite troublesome. Also, players will

YE GODS
A Sneak Preview of Konami's Gods
by Martin Bowers and David Wilson

learn to beware of stone gargoyles that
come to life and attack. The most imaginative creatures in the game were the
"Slinky"-type creatures. These clever creatures move and attack like a Slinky toy.
What an outrageous concept! In addition, all monsters have a different endurance level. Solely because most ape-like
monsters die with only one attack
doesn't mean that one attack will destroy
all ape-like monsters. Some beasts are
best left alone.
At the conclusion of the third, sixth,
ninth and twelfth sections, players will encounter an enormous guardian, equivalent to the "boss monsters" found in the
world of videogame entertainment. If the
hero can defeat this awesome monster, he
receives a password that will enable him
to begin the next level. This password
will be unique to every individual machine, as it is program-generated and
saved. So no more trading passwords on
the local BBS for lazy action players who
just want to finish the game. Upon entering the password menu, the program will
display the passwords for each level the
player has completed. This feature would
best be left out, since it means that passwords will be available to players who
share a machine, whether or not they
have completed a level. This feature does,
however, grant the player freedom from

keeping track of passwords via pen and
pencil. A password cannot be lost.

Axe I, II and III
In the designer's quest for such an awesome assortment of ferocious monsters,
weapons design was not neglected one
bit. Players will easily ascertain which
weapons work best for their own personal style of combat. At intervals, Hercules will be able to pick up weapon upgrades from fallen enemies. At other
times, players will rendezvous with traders, who will sell weapon upgrades. Players will be glad that they gathered treasure and points because potential purchases are gauged by the number of
points amassed. There are many weapons
to choose from. The simplest weapons
are knives which, like all weapons, are
thrown. Also available will be fireballs,
bombs, spears and hunter missiles.
Hunter missiles (on upper levels) are
great fun because they will zero in on any
monster in the immediate area, whether
or not the player was able to aim in that
specific direction. Shields are available to
make the player temporarily invincible.
Players can then walk into traps or enemies and cause their immediate demise
without receiving any injury themselves.
In addition to encountering monsters
and traders, players will quickly discover

Sneak Preview

space. If dropped in the correct place,
items may later be retrieved.

Fire in My Bitmap

thieves. Perceptive players will soon discern that thieves can get into sites that
are inaccessible to anyone else. Heroes
can lure a thief who obtains a desirable
object or artifact. This is accomplished
by dropping one of the items in the
player's inventory. When the thief approaches the discarded item, he can be attacked and the player can snatch both
items for his own use. Even with his

great strength, Hercules can carry no
more than three items at any one time.
Due to this limitation, Hercules must
judge which items are more valuable to
him. Items that must be transported
from one location to another include
gems, jars, weapons and keys. Different
treasure chests will vary in value, so players may opt to carry only the keys to the
more valuable chests as a means of saving

The manual recommends the user's machine operate at a minimum of 12 MHz.
For this preview, the game was run at 12
MHz and 40 MHz. At both speeds the
game operated well and was quite playable. One of the previewers found the 40
MHz operating speed a little hard to handle, but only slightly. Gods offers satisfaction on several layers. One is as an action
game: The combat is fast and furious, no
matter which path is chosen. The other
layer involves exploration and puzzle-solving: There are enough variations within
the puzzles to keep even the most intuitive player guessing and there are a multitude of solutions to each world. Prometheus took fire and gave it to primitive
man to advance civilization. The Bitmap
Brothers, developers of Gods, have given
us an action-oriented romp that is sure to
advance the future of quality arcade adventures for our home computers.

Strategy

or How to Build a Home and Still Have Time for Your Barbarians
by the King's Carpenter, Omar DeWitt

C

astles is a time-consuming

game. It offers attractive
graphics and some interesting events, but things happen
very slowly and it regularly takes
many hours to build a castle. This article
should help keep the "dol" out of any
monarch's "drums" by suggesting ways to
speed things up. Of course, "speed" is,
here as in any computer game context,
purely a relative term.

The First Principle: K.I.S.S.
Before being able to speed play, one
must be willing to play the game a few
times, putting one's heart and soul into
the castle design, just to get the creative
juices out of one's system. Design, the interesting part of building a castle, turns
out to be irrelevant in game terms. A simple square castle will be just as successful
as an elaborate one with protected gates
and a strong keep. To save time, then,
the wise monarch simply plans for a simple, square castle with enough pieces to
hire an adequate army (confer with the
counselor). In fact, monarchs who spend
very much time designing elaborate castles are actually penalized. Before one can
hire enough soldiers to protect the castle
under construction, the locals arrive and
raze the castle's foundations before the
workers can raise its walls. Then it's back
to Stone #1.

Back to Work! A Foreman's Tale
Most of one's time will be spent trying
to keep the workers working. They stop
when their section of the wall is too
much higher than its neighbor and they
stop when the castle is attacked (and they
may or may not go back to work after
the attack). They stop for reasons known
only to medieval computer peasants and,
of course, they stop for winter. The
player's main function in Castles is to get
them back on the job. The workers on
towers and gates seem to be more dedicated to their work than those on walls,
so it can be useful to build a castle which
simply consists of towers. Each wall section should have two or three workers assigned on the offhand chance the
forces-that-be decide to build there. If there are
no workers assigned, of course, there will
never be any building. Yet assigning
more workers is no guarantee that building will begin. It's all left up to digital
whim.
The mix of seven types of workers will
also affect the speed of building. Finding
a "satisfactory" mix is relatively easy. A
"good" mix can be had with 80 of each
type, but 100 of each type is classified as

"satisfactory." A phone call to Interplay elicited the information
that getting an "excellent" mix is
"not easy." It seems to be mostly
a result of trial and error, but
these rough guidelines were passed along.
The numbers of Diggers and Carpenters
should be equal and "high." The number
of Masons should be a bit lower. Quarrymen, Carters and Smiths should be "medium" in number, and there should be
zero Laborers.

Covering Your Buttress (Strategic
Defense)
Another strange aspect of this game is
that the walls and towers are not there to
protect the soldiers as one might naturally expect. The goal, gamewise, is for
the soldiers to protect the walls and towers. Garners have not succeeded until the
castle is finished and, appropriately
enough, the castle isn't finished until the
walls and towers are built. Soldiers are
cheap; it doesn't cost any more to recruit
than it does to maintain the soldiers.
When the attack is announced, place the
archers on the walls and towers and the
infantry outside the walls. Together they
should be strong enough to keep the enemy from doing any damage to the castle. One should always buy the maximum number of soldiers available according to castle size and increase the number

Strategy

of infantry (or speed up recruiting) by offering them more money. The moat also
delays the enemy and should be dug immediately after the soldiers are hired and
the design completed. (Digging it before
the design is completed means that one is
likely to have a moat inside the castle as
well!)
Battle is an unnecessarily long
process — often three minutes
or more. So, if the soldiery is up
to muster, forget them and go
take care of business: levy taxes,
buy food and chat with the counselors. According to the rule
booklet, one can direct individual infantry units. Sometimes
this works. However, more often
than not, when one finally gets a
soldier's attention, he wanders
off. It is best to set them just outside the moat on the side facing
the attack and leave them be. If
placed in the moat or between
the moat and the wall, they just

stand there and watch as months of work
crumbles into heaps.

Raising the Curtain Walls
Since the walls are more of a liability in
the game than an asset, make them easy
to build and rebuild. (As if the game

were not slow enough anyway, the walls
will periodically collapse.) Make the walls
and towers as short and thin as the game
allows. Build only square towers.
Make sure that each wall and tower is
"Completed." Some that appear complete in the picture are really missing five
or six bricks. The castle isn't
complete until every unit is complete.
Castles is the best (only) game
we have on this fascinating bit of
history. Someday we may have a
game wherein we can emulate
Vauban in meaningful castle design, then test the design by defending it in the historical manner, with mobile troops, boiling
oil, the occasional sally, countermines and wall repair, or lay a
real siege with towers, ballistae,
rams and scaling ladders. We'll
look forward to Castles 2. Meanwhile, these tips should speed
things up in Interplay's Castles.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Origin's Ultima Underworld:
The Stygian Abyss
as told by Scorpia

dungeons; it was being used as far pack
as Lord British's first published game,
Akalabeth, more than ten years ago. Since
then, a number of companies, especially
FTL with Dungeon Master and SSI with
Eye Of The Beholder, have greatly refined
the point-of-view approach. Now comes
Ultima Underworld, and 3-D takes on a
whole new meaning. The key to this
breakthrough is the use of full-range
movement. In a typical point-of-view
game, if you turn left, your perspective
shifts by ninety degrees. There is no in
between; you always do a quarter-circle
turn. In Underworld, a turn goes through
a full 360 degrees, and you can stop it at
any point around the circle. Further,
walking or running in the dungeon is not
always on the usual straight line, nor is it
of the "click-step, click-step" variety. Motion is smooth and continuous, and you
can shift position as you move, including
making a complete turn.
The use of light and shadow adds another dimension of realism. Dungeons
are dark places, and torchlight doesn't go
very far. In addition, the illumination varies according to the surroundings. When
traveling through an area that has lightcolored walls and low ceilings, you see
better than when moving through open
spaces, such as the swamp, using the
same type of light source.

the game. Two of them play alternately,
one segueing into the other, as you move
around. These can be described as
"bright march" and "spooky/eerie." The
third tune, a bit frenetic, comes on only
in combat mode. The music, however, is
rather loud, and sometimes obscures the
sounds of dungeon denizens. It is generally better to have the music off to avoid
unpleasant surprises when exploring new
locations and to turn it back on when
traveling through known areas.
Auto-mapping is the best I've seen to
date. Each level of the Abyss has its own
page. filled in as you explore the level.
Along the right-hand side is an ample
margin where you can write notes, using
a nice-looking quill pen. In fact, you can
write anywhere on the map itself. The
preferred method is to number important
locations and use the margins for the actual notes. When looking at the map,
you can scroll up or down levels, too.
There are blank pages beyond eight (the
number of levels in the game) that you
can use for additional notes. There's even
an eraser in case you make a mistake or
two. The only feature lacking in this otherwise excellent mapping facility is the
ability to run off a copy on your printer.
While you can look at the map at any
time, there are moments when having a
hard copy would make life a little easier.

So, what is the Avatar doing in this hellhole, anyway? First of all, it wasn't always
a dungeon. Sir Cabirus, a knight of the
Crux Ansata (a paladin organization),
brought various groups to the Abyss and
turned it into the showplace of Britannia.
It was meant as an example of peaceful
co-existence, since the groups included
such non-humans as Goblins, Dwarves,
Lizardmen and Trolls. Everything went
along fairly well, until Cabirus died and a
few volcanic tremors shook the establishment. (Apparently the knight never
considered the possible dangers of living
inside a volcano.) These days, the survivors struggle to live on as best they can,
and the Abyss has become a dumping
ground for anyone the local baron
doesn't care for. A trip into the Abyss is
generally a one-way trip.
The Avatar has been dumped into the
dungeon to find the baron's kidnapped
daughter. The reason for this is explained
in a lengthy introduction, complete with
digitized voices. Unfortunately, this is the
only place in the game where voices are
used, which is a big disappointment.
While the digitization is very good, it's
hardly worth chewing up two meg of
disk space merely for the lead-in. Far better to have used voices throughout the
game, particularly in the dream sequences
and other special circumstances.
Character generation is reminiscent of
Ultima IV, the major difference being
that you can raise skills, instead of attributes, during the course of the game.
There are three sets of skills in the game:
one for combat, one for magic and one
for general. Different classes are given different choices for starting skills, but after
play begins, it is possible to raise any
skill. This is done by locating a shrine,
chanting the appropriate mantra and hav-

OPINION
Ultima Underworld Tips
Problems with vanishing inventory items have
been reported in the game. What usually happens is that the original items in a container disappear and are replaced by something else. This
happened to me one time when I opened a bag
and found inside only two worn hand axes
(something I hadn't even picked up anywhere at
all!), instead of the objects I was expecting to see.
To avoid these problems, make sure that no container of any kind ever holds more than seven objects at once. After I kept mine down to seven
items or less, nothing ever disappeared on me
again.
This brings us to inventory management in
general. Not counting space for armor and weapons, you have only eight slots for carrying things
around. That isn't much, so you must use the
various bags, pouches, boxes and packs that you
find to increase your carrying capacity. Even
with that, you don't want to be carrying around
too much, since you do have a weight limit
(measured in stones). This becomes important as
you find better armor, as armor and weapons
naturally count toward the limit, and chain and
plate is pretty heavy stuff What most people do
is set up caches of extra items in various safe locations (noting them on the map, of course!). Objects in this game do not disappear when left on
the ground; they stay where they are. So you can
set up equipment dumps throughout the Abyss,
leaving items behind when inventory space or
weight gets to be too much.
When you create your character, strength is the
most important statistic. Strength determines
how much you can carry and determines the
starting values of your combat skills. The higher
your strength, the better these values will be, and
combat is very important in this game. I ran two
characters through the Abyss, a Druid and a
Shepherd, with starting attributes respectively of
23/17/20 and 23/13/20 (for ST/DX/INT).
These values proved quite satisfactory. Regarding
class, I recommend that you choose one of the
three that are able to do some magic right off:
Druid, Shepherd or Mage. Runes are not difficult to find on the first level, and once you have

ing enough experience for an advancement. There are two types of mantras,
set-specific and skill-specific. A set-specific mantra raises skills randomly. For example, Summ Ra, the Combat mantra,
will raise three combat skills, usually by 13 points each. It pays to try out a shrine
now and then to see if you're ready for
another boost.
Magic is accomplished through the use
of runes. By putting together different
combinations of rune stones (as noted in
the manual), and expending the necessary
amount of mana, spells are cast. Half

them (and the rune bag), you can cast both light
and food spells. This means you don't have to
clutter up your inventory carrying light sources
or food supplies most of the time. The other
classes begin without spellcasting ability, and until at least one visit to a shrine (with enough experience), they cannot do any magic.
As an offensive weapon, magic isn't all that useful. Most offensive spells (such as lightning bolts
and fireballs) are missiles and require a lot of
space between you and the target. This room is
often hard to come by. Opponents who have no
long-distance weapons (spells or slings) will always try to close with you, so you have to keep
backing up to get your spells off. If they do have
ranged weapons, you end up in a long-distance
duel, which is not the best way to fight. This applies also to distance weapons, such as slings and
bows. They suffer from the same problems as
spells, plus you have to find ammunition for
them (slingstones or arrows), making them of
limited use at best. After a while, I dumped
ranged weapons entirely, preferring to carry an
extra hand weapon as a backup instead.
Fortunately, your opponents are bound by the
same rules you are (and a gold star to Origin for
that one). They, too, need room to get off their
distance weapons. Therefore, the best tactic
when up against goblins (who use slings), gazers
(who use magic) and fire elementals (who throw
fireballs), is generally to rush right in, get close
and stay close, swinging away all the time. When
fighting elementals, it is also a good idea to have
Sanct Flam up to provide some extra protection
(especially if there's more than one of those critters around). Against opponents who have no distance weapons, the usual tactic is to swing as you
go forward; back up quickly, readying another
blow; then dash forward again. Of course, since
they are also moving quickly, you can't always expect to fight on such a straight-line basis. However, backing up will give you a better view and
some room to maneuver, and possibly cause your
opponent to miss you.
When facing multiple opponents at once, constant movement is a life-saver. Don't stay in one

your level, rounded up, must be equal to,
or greater than, the level of the spell
you're attempting, or it won't work. You
begin with no runes; they must be found
as you make your way through the dungeon. In fact, you begin with very little:
no armor, a worn dagger and a few supplies. Everything else must be scavenged
or traded for as you make your way
down the levels.
This brings us to the point that not everyone or everything you come across will
be hostile. The enclaves set up by
Cabirus still exist, although not in their

place; smack an enemy, move to another and
keep going. By staying in motion, you make it
harder for the critters to get a bead on you, especially if they have distance weapons. However, if
you're up against a mixed bag of opponents, go
for the most dangerous first and take it out as
quickly as possible. Remember you can run away
if things are getting too tough (and there's an
exit handy). Most critters will follow you only so
far, then give up the chase. This gives you a
chance to rest, lick your wound, and try again
later. During the game, you will be running a lot
of errands for a lot of people. There is always a
quid pro quo; no one gives away something for
nothing. Take careful notes on who wants what,
so you don't forget anything. When talking to
various NPCs, keep in mind that you're the Avatar. Being polite, honest and humble will get you
further than being rude, arrogant and mendacious. A little flattery is also helpful, on occasion.
You have to keep your karma clean. That means
not attacking anything that isn't outrightly hostile. If it isn't bothering you, leave it alone. As
mentioned before, there are slugs, worms, rats,
bats and other critters who are just going along,
minding their own business. There is no need to
kill these things.
Level seven is likely to be the most difficult
one, since magic will not work there for some
time (your mana flask drains right out as soon as
you set foot on that level). Bring a light source
with you, and a couple of poison antidotes. Cast
a light spell (preferably Daylight) just before you
go down the stairs to seven. Be prepared to do a
fair amount of jumping around here, too. Make
sure you stay away from any guard posts until
you have the amulet. Most doors outside of the
massive variety can be bashed open if you don't
have the appropriate key, Lockpicking skill or
Open spell. Weapons can be used for this, but
chopping up doors is very likely to ruin them (except for the Sword of Justice, which never loses
its edge). If you must bash open a door and
don't have that sword, use your bare hand. It's a
slow process, but will get the job done and preserve your weapons. Above all, take your time going through the Abyss. It's a huge place, with
much to discover. You'll do better by exploring
carefully, taking good notes, and saving often
than by trying to rush through it. Good luck!

former glory. Any beings, even be they
ghouls or trolls, who live under the banner of the Crux Ansata (the ankh), are inclined to be friendly. It is in these places
that you pick up important information,
as well as some important items. Outside
such locations, most of what you come
across is likely to want your blood. Yet
not all critters will be hostile to you. If
something doesn't come charging your
way immediately, take a moment to look
at it. Any description other than "hostile"
means that it will leave you alone, so
long as you leave it alone.

OPINION
Still, there is a fair amount of combat
in the game, and most will find it a new,
possibly frustrating, experience. Anyone
who had problems with the "slip'n'slide"
techniques of Eye of the Beholder is likely
to have even more trouble in Underworld. In combat, the right mouse button controls your weapon. Holding
down the button draws back the weapon;
releasing the button releases the blow.
The type of blow (overhead bash, slash
or thrust) depends on the location of the
arrow cursor when the button is first
held down. However, the mouse (via the
left button) also controls your own movement. Which way you move and how
fast is, again, determined by the position
of the arrow cursor on the screen. So you
use the mouse to fight and move at the
same time. What causes the difficulties is
that your opponent is not standing still.
Unlike virtually all other games, the enemy doesn't stay toe-to-toe with you. He
(or it) is moving: back, forward, around
the side, etc., and striking at you all the
time. So you have to keep moving, too.

Trying to control both movement and
weapon with one input device in the heat
of battle is not easy. You can use the keyboard for movement, but then you have
two hands (and eight keys!) to worry
about. It's all too easy to hit the wrong
movement key and find yourself in
trouble, especially later in the game when
you face multiple opponents.
The Abyss is a large place and, in some
ways, can be thought of as a sort of vertical Martian Dreams: the game is not linear; there is much running back and
forth, up and down, between levels. Unfortunately, you will have to do it all
pretty much on foot. No easy method of
traveling long distances exists outside of
the single moonstone. You can teleport
to the moonstone from anywhere with a
Gate Travel spell or scroll, but the trip is
one-way. The one good aspect to this is
that once an area of the dungeon has
been cleared out, it stays that way. You
don't have to worry about endless battles
with regenerating critters as you trek
around the Abyss. They're gone forever,

so you can, at least, go quickly through
the passages on your various errands.
Skills are a nice idea, but not particularly well-considered or implemented.
For instance, Lockpicking was useless; almost any locked door short of "massive"
could be bashed open eventually, even if
you had no key, not to mention the Unlock spell. Appraise, supposed to be used
in trading, had no meaning at all. What
did it matter if you swapped a couple of
spare weapons and a gem, if it got you a
chainmail shirt? Search was laughable,
since most secret doors show up on the
map after you pass by their locations.
Other skills were equally of little value.
For all that, Ultima Underworld is an
impressive first product. The meticulous
construction of a real-world dungeon environment is outstanding. Despite a few
silly puzzles, the body of the game is substantial, with much to do and to explore.
Combat, while difficult to master, is generally well-balanced. Ultima Underworld
may be a dungeon trek, but it is certainly
the dungeon trek of the future.

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
"I Came, I Played, I Conquered"

by M Evan Brooks

T

his month, CGW's contributing editor

on wargames and simulations offers
his gripes from the foxhole" and
stakes his claim on being labeled a grognard.
Stupid Al Tricks: Alan Emrich, who usually
writes the material for this column, is a fan of
modem-capable games. I welcome his fervor,
but I cannot be overly sanguine as to its success. There are other types of players. I am a
product of the board wargaming hobby. The
main reason I entered the computer market
was due to a lack of human opponents. Not
that I lacked such opponents, it is just that
they could not fit in with my available time.
As I began a family, I found my marathon
War in the East 9-man week-end playing frenzies could not be maintained. Also, I learned
that my wife had little interest in determining
the appropriate combined arms tactics of the
Grand Armee at Waterloo. Hence, the computer was the answer.

110
Review: Harpoon Battleset 4
113
Awards Ballot: Charles S. Roberts
Awards
118
Designer's Notes: Fleet Commander
120
Review: Big Three

Review: Main Battle Tank Middle
East

126
Review: Zero vs. Corsair

Many people complain about the poor Al of
the computer opponent and note that nothing
can beat a human opponent. Well, even with
a modem, I find it inconvenient to set up a
definite time for a period of play. With an Al,
I can fit in a few minutes whenever I choose.
Also, I play for entertainment and learning. It
usually takes a few playings to determine the
computer's failings; hopefully, by that time, a
new release has garnered my interest. When I
return to the "oldie", it will have regained its
initial charm, because I no longer remember
how to "beat" the system. Remember, a computer never gets a headache or quits in midstream and you can rest your beer on the top
of the monitor (not a recommended action,
by the way).
The more things change: Why do computer
game companies run in cyclical patterns? Wargame releases are rare enough without having to endure umpteen releases on a certain
subject and then, have it remain untouched
for the next few years. Currently, carrier battles of World War II seem to be the rage.
SSG's Carriers at War will compete with SSI's
Carrier Strike and both will compete with
RAW's Fleet Commander, all to be released in
1992. This is not, however, an isolated incident: World War II Pacific strategy games are
also en route. SSI's opus from the prolific
Gary Grigsby, Three-Sixty's Victory at Sea
from Jim Dunnigan and Koei's Admiral's War
(formerly called PTO).
Nor is this parallel development strictly a recent event: Spectrum Holobyte's Tank, Microprose's Ml Tank Platoon, EA's Ml Abrams,

and Accolade's Steel Thunder were all released within scant months of one another.
Even more intriguing was the almost simultaneous release of Three Sixty's Blue Max, Microprose's Knights of the Skies and Dynamix's Red Baron. Do great minds think
alike? And what of the glosses-over periods.
Lately, I have returned to my Atari 800, just
to play Broadsides. Is there ever going to be
a graphically-oriented Napoleonic naval simulation for the current machines?
Looking Over the Other Guys's Shoulder:
Similar to the cyclical nature of releases, there
is an interesting phenomena of computer
game companies knowing the subject matter
of their competition's releases, but knowing little of the game itself. Knowing how many
companies produce similar titles to that of
their competition, one would think that a designated employee has been tasked to carefully examine the competition, review its features (both good and bad) and then, report
back. Instead, most companies seem to have
a general idea of their competitor's products,
but no in-depth analysis. Why? So they can
make the same mistakes?
Windows: The operating environment of the
future (according to the Gospel by Gates).
But a Windows-environment is suitable for
multi-tasking. How many times are you in the
middle of a flight simulator, setting up a
bombing run, and suddenly say, "Gee, I better switch to my word processor and send
out a thank you letter to Aunt Jane for the
gift". All the time, right? What possible reason
is there for games in windows other than to
cash in on the current yuppie
flavor-of-the-month?
User Friendliness: Why do some games ask
you for the configuration of your machine
every time you boot up? Can't they create a
file to retain such information? Why go
through the joystick corner chasing routine
every time? And finally, why do certain
games force you to reboot upon completion?
I mean, you decide your "civilization" is going nowhere fast, and quit. Why not have an
option to return to the game as opposed to
DOS?
Protection Schemes: And finally, it never
goes away. Yes, it can be frustrating to look
up the documentation when a game is new.
But try to pull out the game a year or two
later. Where is that documentation? What happened to the "Spinning Wheel"? There are certain games that I no longer play simply because I don't feel like rummaging through the
documentation pile.

Review

Harpoon Battleset #4: Indian Ocean/The Persian Gulf
by Tim Carter

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

T

Harpoon Battleset Four:
The Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf
Amiga, IBM and Macintosh
$34.95
Tim Jacobs
and Darrel Dearing
Three-Sixty Pacific
Campbell, CA

he fourth Harpoon battleset covers conflict in the Persian

Gulf and the Indian Ocean. As with each of the previous
battlesets, this means that players are provided with a new
map, new situations and a variety of new platforms. The combination of the Gulf War, the Iran-Iraq war and the various tensions within the Indian Ocean area provides the potential for an
interesting and diverse set of scenarios. The addition of new platforms, some of which have not actually been deployed yet, adds
to this potential and opens the door to a myriad of "what if" situations.

Get with the (World) Picture
However, the battleset as a whole does not quite live up to this
potential. The main problem is the selection of scenarios, which
lacks the creativity of the earlier battlesets. While the Persian
Gulf scenarios were adequate, once the Indian Ocean becomes
the scene of action, the selections available are a letdown.
Many scenarios involve Third World War-type situations between the Soviets and the United States and its allies. Such scenarios are both out of date and unnecessary, given the possibilities for conflict that actually exist in the region. (It seems amazing that no India-Pakistan war is considered, given that this is
one of the most volatile relationships in the world today.) The
battleset seems especially weak when compared with Battleset
Three, which provided legitimate alternatives that were both topical and interesting to play.

What's New?
Despite the lack of imaginative scenarios, however, the battleset
still includes much that is new and different to attract Harpoon
aficionados. Regional forces, notably the formidable Indian navy,
have been included, as well as a wide range of more familiar
NATO and Soviet platforms. Along with the old, however,
comes the new. Perhaps most interesting is the inclusion of the
Soviet Varyag class carrier. Equipped with MiG-29s and Su-27s,
this unit is second only to U.S. carriers in terms of striking power.
By virtue of new aircraft and new carriers, the power projection
capabilities of France, Great Britain and India are also improved.
V/STOL aircraft such as the Harrier II and Yak-141 provide
even small ASW carriers with viable air-to-air defenses, while the
Cochin class carrier puts India in almost the same class as the Soviet Union in terms of naval air power.

"Fast Draw" Strategy
The key to victory in most situations in Harpoon is getting in
the first accurate shot. Success depends on both the quality of
sensors and the range of the available weapons systems. In developing strategy for Harpoon in general, and the Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf battleset in particular, the comparative range of offensive and defensive weapons is the key variable.

Review

having to cover the flank and rear of the task force, as subs will
not be able to maneuver into these areas. In fact, faced with a
task force moving more than 15-17 knots, diesel subs will not be
able to maneuver much at all. Instead, they will have to rely on
luck and hope that a hostile force sails, literally, over them.
It is also a good idea to introduce a few turns or zig-zags into
the initially plotted courses of important task forces, since enemy
submarines will often be lying in wait along the original path.
Needless to say, if one is in command of diesel subs, they
should be positioned in narrow straits or other areas where there
is a high probability of interception. Keep in mind that the paths
of computer forces are pre-programmed and are often predictable. They usually move in straight lines, sometimes for a considerable period of time. Success will generally depend on first getting to the point of interception and then letting the enemy
come to one's own fleet.

Dodging Torpedoes
Players should recognize that diesel submarines present a different type of threat to surface forces than their nuclear-powered
counterparts. In many cases, diesel subs are easier to avoid than
they are to kill. For under-equipped surface forces, a close-in encounter with these units will be deadly.
When conducting an ASW campaign, use available air assets to
patrol in front of threatened surface units. Keep surface units
moving at high speeds, 19 knots if relying on ship-based sonar,
maximum speed if sufficient aircraft are available to cover the
path of the task force. By maintaining a high speed, players avoid

Strategy in the Air
When conducting air combat, again the key feature is the range
of weapons systems. The F-14 is easily the most important platform available by virtue of its long-range Phoenix missiles. These
aircraft can be effective in an offensive standoff air-to-air role
with virtually no risk to themselves. Of course, most of the scenarios included in the battleset that involve U.S. carrier groups
are pretty simple to play in the first place. So players will have to
make a major mistake in order to get into trouble anyway.
The same cannot be said for air and carrier operations involving

Review

the other nations in the battleset. When opposing a U.S. carrier
group, the best strategy is one of attrition. Due to the abysmal
handling of air assets by the computer, it is often possible to
shoot down the AWACS aircraft and thus deprive the carrier of
its greatest advantage over its smaller counterparts. Once the carrier group loses its airborne early warning capability, the surface
units can be targeted with a series of standoff attacks that pick off
the pickets one at a time until the heart of the task force is vulnerable. Patience is a virtue here.
When operating a task force that includes one of the smaller air
craft carriers, patrol aggressively whenever possible to make up
for the lack of AWACS capability. If land-based support aircraft
are available, they should be coordinated with carrier groups as
well. The combination of long-range land-based aircraft with improved aircraft carriers can make the Indian Navy a formidable
opponent indeed.
Air-to-air missiles can often be avoided by changing the altitude
of the target group as the missiles approach. Flying at high speed
directly away from incoming missiles and then diving to very low
altitude at the last minute can seriously reduce the number of aircraft lost in an otherwise even battle. When attacking with Western aircraft, remember that the F/A-I8 can fly at very low altitude without ever having to worry about crashing.

Assessment
In contemporary international politics, power projection is one
of the most important issues in the Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf
area. The United States, France and India are all pursuing serious
naval power projection capabilities that could be involved in a
war in this area in the future.
It is rumored that India is looking into purchasing the half-completed hull of the second Varyag class carrier from the Russian Republic. Including one of these units in the Indian Navy can lead
to a number of interesting scenario possibilities.
Despite the lack of creativity in the generation of scenarios, Battleset Four: The Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf is a useful addition to
the Harpoon system. Players who use the Scenario Editor will find
that the new platforms make the package worth the price. The
small carriers alone allow for dozens of situations that simply
were not possible in the previous battlesets.

a

A

Designer Notes

When Reality Impacts Simulation
A Naval Officer Details His Design Pilgrimage
by Commander Alan Zimm

C

ommander Alan Zimm is the
designer of Action Stations!, a
tremendously accurate and realistic command simulation of World
War II naval combat, extremely wellrated by our readers in spite of its
lack of graphic chrome. In this article, Alan shares the life experiences
and design considerations that led to
the development of Action Stations!
as well as his upcoming Fleet Commander. This issue, we present Part I of
Cmdr. Zimm's diary as he describes the development of Action Stations! and presents
his initial ideas fir Fleet Commander.

June 1985: USS Vinson
(CVN-70), Off the Coast of Iran
We've been underway now for over 90
days without a pit stop, waiting for the
Ayatollah's psychiatrist to sign the commitment papers. Even with the typical
104-hour work week under way, trying
to keep two nuclear reactors fit, ready
and safe, there's time to study. The topic
of the moment of the Wardroom Bull
Session is torpedo evasion: what's the
best tactic to evade a straight runner? We
have four votes for "turn into," five votes
for "turn away" and one (aviator) that
wants to put the engines emergency
astern. Somehow I discover that I've volunteered to write a "simple" computer
program that will track ships and torpedoes so we can experiment. Well, that
shouldn't take too long....

November 1985: Pier-Side,
Alameda, California
Well, the torpedo tracking program is
built, and works great. A side benefit is
that you can put in the locations, courses
and speeds of ships from WWII battles
and get chart positions at any point in
the action. With this, you get a much better feel for the ebb and flow of battle
than a static chart in a history book.
One result is that I'm learning that
many history books have a major problem: they are written by historians! Histo-

up with correct conclusions, considering that they don't have the background to interpret a ballistics
chart corrected for gun barrel wear,
and don't understand what a fire
control system considers when it decides to call for maximum or reduced rate of fire.

rians just don't understand the technical
side of the trade or appreciate the overwhelming impact of naval equipment,
training and doctrine on combat decisions. Ask a historian why the British
beat the German pocket battleship Graf
Spee and you'll get a discussion of British
naval tradition, but nothing on gunnery
fire control, relative rates of fire or the
relative merits of the 11" versus the 6"
gun. Now wouldn't it be interesting to
put in the technicalities of gunnery and
damage control into the program and really explore alternatives in a naval battle?

April 1986: Washington, D.C.
My first shore duty in too many years.
I'm getting interested in the naval program again. Several years ago, I had
worked on the problems of simulating naval gunfire control, ballistics and damage
control while at the Naval Postgraduate
School. I managed a good deal of research, with the Naval Weapons Station
at Dahlgren, Naval War College, National Archives and British War Museum
contributing to the project. Greenwich
has been very cooperative through the
mails, but thank goodness that I've had
direct access to the Washington Navy
Yard Operational Archives. There are a
few computer models on modern ship
damage that I've seen that have given me
some good ideas on how to handle damage assessment.
The biggest challenge will be to go
from data to model. Most of the information is very technical in nature, and not
easily interpreted — I can see now why
historians have so much trouble coming

I could build a simple, large-scale
model, but I believe it will be necessary to go with an exceptionally detailed, shot-by-shot, hit-by-hit construction. Why so detailed? After all, land warfare simulations hardly track every artillery shell. The problem is that naval warfare is vastly different from land warfare.
This can be demonstrated using a statistical concept called "The Law of Large
Numbers." In dealing with a system of
probabilistic occurrences (such as firing a
weapon, with a certain probability of hitting the target), this law states that as the
number of trials (shots) goes up, the
chances that you will see an overall "average" performance increases. A simple example: flip a coin 10 times, and you
could possibly see 10% "heads" and 90%
"tails." Flip the coin 10,000 times, and
the chances of seeing 10% "heads" approaches zero. With lots of "shots," the
overall result is very close to the expected
performance, and the chances of significant variance from the expected performance approach nonexistence.
In land warfare you may have thousands of men exchanging millions of
shots, with hundreds of hits. The "Law
of Large Numbers" allows us to approximate the performance of the entire unit
as an aggregate, and even assign a single
value as a measure of combat power —
the famous "Attack Factor" and "Defense
Factor." On the sea, t'ain't so. The efforts of an entire task force might culminate in getting a squadron of dive bombers over the target. You have just a few
shots to get your hits, the difference between victory and defeat. If the individual probability of hit is in the 20%
range, then you expect to get two or three
hits, but you might end up with just an

Designer Notes

aesthetically pleasing pattern of lovely,
harmless columns of water.
Another fundamental difference is the
relative fragility of the units. Put only
one or two bombs on a carrier's flight
deck and you now have a 35,000-ton
portable radio. Put five torpedoes into a
capital ship and you are three years, one
shipyard and a whole lot of the National
Treasure away from a replacement.
Conclusions? First, in naval warfare you
can expect the range of combat results to
vary greatly. Second, the combat results
are much more sensitive to details. Individual actions can make the difference of
only one hit, which could be the margin
for victory. Actual examples abound: the
Damage Control Officer on the Taiho,
who made a mistake in ventilating damaged gasoline tanks, and blew up his
ship; the two American SBD pilots on a
search mission who surprised a Japanese
carrier and single-handedly destroyed its
flight deck; the British torpedo bomber
pilot who jammed the rudder on the "unsinkable" Bismarck, which directly
led to its demise.
From the viewpoint of a wargamer, this is incredibly exciting.
The player's decisions can make a
big difference in the results. For
the game designer, it makes
things really difficult: how do you
get all the vital detail into a wargame without overwhelming the
player? Right now, there are some
significant problems. Firing rates
and hit rates are one. This involves the very delicate balance between destroyers and battleships
— allow the gun ships too many
hits at too long a range, and destroyers never get into torpedo firing range; underestimate, and the
destroyer becomes more valuable
than cruisers and battleships!
The real lessons emerging from
this simulation effort is the interrelationship between technology
and the tactical decisions of the
commander. Gun fire control systems work best when the ship is
on a steady course and a steady
speed, but that also makes the
ship very vulnerable to enemy torpedoes. Change course and speed
to duck the torpedoes, and your
gunnery accuracy dips to nothing.

Naval commanders constantly had to assess the chances of hitting versus the risk
of being hit, based on tactical decisions
and their knowledge of the performance
of their weapons systems. Capturing this
in the game will be a major challenge.

nate? How long does it burn? How often
did the ship renew the illumination?
Overestimate starshell performance and
you have the equivalent of a day battle;
underestimate it and ships tend to close
to murderously short range, affecting the
balance between torpedoes and guns.

October 1986: Washington, D.C.
I have all the major elements of the
simulation in algorithm form now. The
approach has been to build each system
independently, and in detail. If everything is right, they should all mesh to
give accurate combat results. Beginning
to do the coding now. I'd like to keep
the program under 64K. I told my wife
that it should be finished in three
months or so.

January 1987: Washington, D.C.
Well, the code is up to 154K and still
growing. I estimate I'm less than 50%
done! More problems keep popping up:
for example, what's the candlepower of a
starshell? How much area does it illumi-

March 1987: Washington, D.C.
My current assignment is at the Center
for Naval Analyses, working as a strategic
analyst. After hours, I've been doing research on Soviet military theory and command methods. The Soviets have a
unique approach to making decisions:
they have predetermined the "correct" response to the universe of combat situations. The commander determines not
what to do, but rather what situation he
is in. The relevant information is then
fed into a computer, which specifies the
optimum course of action. Some of the
combat theory that goes into these algorithms is very advanced.
I can't experiment with these concepts
using modern systems because of
security clearance problems — I
wouldn't be able to transport the
disks! However, I have the World
War II program (still under development!); I'll build a "computer
opponent" using basic combat theory and work in that environment.

April 1987: Washington,
D.C.
The main program is up and
running! It's just super. I plugged
in all the variables for the Hood
versus Bismarck, with glorious results: first sighting distance dead
on, open fire range dead on, first
hit within 120 yards of actual first
hit, ammunition expenditure
within 4%, hit rate within 10%,
shell angle of fall right on, everything just lovely. I ran several
more trials, including the damage
subroutines and a randomness
generator, with similarly good results. One of the more amusing
differences was that the Auto Warrior initially assigned Prince of
Wales to target the Prinz Eugen
—andthe
Eugen took a plunging round into her magazine and
blew up! CGW
To be continued

Review

Wargaming's Tiny Titan
Big Three Keeps WWII Simple
by Alan Emrich
simplicity, this "big, dumb" little game
manages quite easily to pack a lot of play
value.

Title:
System:
Protection:
Price:

Big Three I
IBM
None
$29.95

he average reader of this magazine
probably eschews the vast majority
of "shareware" and self-published
games because of their, ahem, uneven
quality. Wargamers, though, as devotees
of historical subjects over game quality
(as their gaming libraries invariably reveal) , are more inclined to dig a little
deeper in search of a "diamond in the
rough" that might cover their favorite
historical time period at an agreeable
scale and complexity level. Just such a
find is Big Three, self - published by
Steven D. Jones of the aptly named SDJ
Enterprises, Inc. Named after the Allied
leaders (Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt)
in Europe during World War II, Big
Three is a big game in a small package.

T

WWII in a Nutshell
For the boardgamers among our readership, Big Three can be thought of as
"Hitler's War meets Third Reich a la Axis
&, Allies." For the rest of us, it can be
seen as "Storm Across Europe made simple." In any event, Big Three is a very strategic - level wargame focusing on Europe
from 1939 to 1945. With units representing whole armies, fleets and air forces

(generically numbered, unfortunately)
and a game design philosophy stressing

The game is played over a map that
uses large squares laid out in a hexagonal
"brick" pattern to regulate movement.
The terrain scale is vast, with Denmark,
the Netherlands and Switzerland each
represented by a single "hex" and the distance from London to Paris being a mere
three hexes. Key terrain hexes include
capitals, factories (both of these have an
economic value) and ports (which are the
only places for ships to dock and for invasions to be conducted). Mountain, clear
and sea hexes round out the terrain
types, and the one - to - two hex- frontages of the North African and Italian
fronts actually plays fairly well in practice. Unfortunately, map scrolling requires disk reading and is therefore slow
to a near- maddening point.
Economic Perspective
Game turns are psuedo-seasonal, with
three turns per year.
Each year, players receive "Military
Points" (MPs) based
on the number of factories and capitols
owned at the start of
the year. Like "Basic
Resource Points"
(BRPs) in Third
Reich, they are spent
to build units, conduct offensives (per
front, again like
Third Reich) or declare war on major
powers. Unit costs
range from one for
frontal offensives,
"beachhead" conversion of captured ports
and infantry armies up to five for fleets.
Eliminated units are placed in a "force
pool" along with any reinforcements available for purchase.

Strategic bombers are available for both
sides (and the Axis player may construct
a U-boat unit). These make "economic
attacks" on the other player's MPs in the
bank, even to the point of giving an opponent a negative treasury. Interestingly,
the hexes that compose the United States
box are directly connected to the main
European map. Moving between them
has no extra movement cost, so ships and
bombers can cross the Atlantic with realitive ease.
Warring Nations
Each turn, players maneuver and engage their forces in combat, one front at
a time (using the classic Third Reich front
boundaries of western, eastern and Mediterranean). Frontal options are either offensive (costing 1 MP and allowing all
one's pieces to be used) or attrition
(which is free, but none of the moving
player's ships or planes can be used).
Pieces are moved one at a time, with no
stacking of land units allowed except for
paratroops (which may also jump onto

enemy occupied hexes, but losing the battles results in their certain death). Thus,
with a mere three hex frontage for the
western campaigns in France, moves and
battles must be carefully orchestrated.

Review

Combat occurs by attempting to move
into an enemy occupied hex. Ships,
planes and armies all fight in pretty
much the same manner, with the defending player's unit subject to all the attacks
the attacker can throw at him in a single
turn. Each attack leaves a favorable die
roll modifier for subsequent assaults by an
attacker, so escalating battles is often the
way to gain a crucial hex.
While the movement of armies, fleets
and air forces is all quite elegant, as is the
combat system and the differing combat
results tables and die roll modifiers used,
the interface itself is far from perfect.
Pounding directional keys to move a cursor to pick up units and scroll the map
just didn't cut it. Apparently, mice don't
always work with this game (mine did at
home, but not on my computer at
work), causing it to lock up if things
aren't quite compatible.
State of Computer Cave Art
Big Three supports CGA-(yes, CGA)
and EGA -level graphics. The documentation is included in a .TXT file that can
be printed out or purchased separately
in a spiral binder, along with a map card.
The 40+ pages of documentation clearly
explain the basic and advanced features
of the game, including detailed sections
on each of the 13 scenarios. The easy -toenvision combat formulas are included
and all the rules are explained quite
clearly. As for sound support, quite simply, there is none. IBM internal speaker
beeps and boops are as far as a player can
go. Still, for this game, who cares?
Scenarios Galore
One thing Big Three included that I particularly enjoyed was the plethora of scenarios. Many campaigns that only used
parts of the map with varying starting
and ending dates made for scenarios that
could be finished in a half-hour at lunch
time. Full campaign game scenarios were
available, starting during each year of the
war. There was even a scenario design feature for the truly fanatic wargame enthusiasts among us. Each scenario is presented on its own page in the manual,
complete with force pools, victory levels,
reinforcement schedules and historical
notes.
Playing Both Sides
Big Three is a game without any artifi-

cial intelligence to assume the role of
an opponent. Players will have to
either sit a "live one" down at the
same computer or "change hats" each
player turn. The latter, fortunately, is
quite easy to do, making solitaire play
practical from a difficulty standpoint.
This includes of the fact that fleets
and airforces can move in reaction
during the enemy's turn. Such "reaction moves," however, are very
straightforward and can only be conducted in the face of an enemy offensive option anyway. Consequently, reaction moves are only a niggling problem.
The Wargaming Scheme of Things
Where Big Three fits in vis -a -vis its
competitors is an interesting question.
Ruling out more advanced games on the
subject, Big Three is probably closest to
Milton Bradley's Axis & Allies. The
pieces are of a similar type, the economic
system is even easier and combat system
is just as clean, but even more exciting.
Storm Across Europe from SSI never really caught on. I would venture that, as a
"simple" WWII wargame, it simply
didn't go far enough down the complexity scale. Wargamers who like "beer and
pretzels" wargaming of the Milton
Bradley ilk will enjoy Big Three, while
partisans seeking only more complex wargames will certainly look at this "David"

size game facing a "Goliath" size marketing problem, just long enough to laugh
at it.
VE Day
On the whole, then, Big Three is a refined, evolved design that makes for a
highly playable, intriguing and enjoyable
simulation. Unfortunately, it is a game in
search of development, an artificial opponent and state of the art presentation. Is
it a good game? Is a glass half- full or
half empty? While many jaded computer
wargamers will look down upon this fine
effort at self-publishing with a "buy
cheap, get cheap" attitude, I cannot. After many hours of repeated play, I must
confess that I see Big Three more along
the lines of "good things come in small
packages." May it continue to evolve, for
every revision Big Three will be a welcome installation to my hard drive. CGW

Review

ain Battle Tank: Middle East (MBTME) is Simulations
Canada's latest offering in its line of games simulating
modern tactical armored combat. As with all of SimCan's previous simulations in this series, MBTME puts the gamer
in the shoes of a brigade commander with an order of battle, a
map and a grease pencil. (Players have to supply their own cup o'
joe and cigar.)

A Syrian

M

MBTME comes with nine scenarios and a built-in scenario design package. For each scenario, players can choose either side
against a friend or the computer. As the commander of a brigade,
the player is responsible for ordering combat units into battle and
deciphering reports from them to make decisions during battle.
The heart of the simulation is its representation of a critical element of modern combat: command and control. Command and
control is maintained via radio contact and is subject to the vagaries of enemy jamming, misinterpreted orders and enemy interception.

Your Orders, Sir (Pre-Game Set-up)
The beginning of each scenario is the player's only opportunity
to access all units at once. During this set-up phase one cannot alter deployment, but one is able to determine how often a unit reports and what specific events will cause a unit to report (sighting
the enemy, engaging the enemy, etc.). Beware, too many reports
can cause fatigue at headquarters and hinder staff performance, as
well as assisting the enemy artillery in locating the player's HQ.
At this time the player may also adjust (from pre-defined settings) each unit's rules of engagement (i.e. tell each unit how aggressive to be toward the enemy). Once these commands are
made in the set-up phase, they cannot be changed, so there is a
premium on proper planning. During this set-up phase, one can
issue orders and assign a time frame in which to carry them out.
It is especially important to plan an attack now as it may well be
too late when the shooting starts.
Once set-up is completed, the resolution phase can begin. During the resolution phase, combat units will attempt to carry out
their orders. As time elapses, the player receives unit reports containing information about the location of enemy units and any
engagements that take place. Since the game is text only, it does
a good job of simulating the atmosphere of a command post and
the fog of war. The player charts the progress of his units and the
enemy's units on the map and must make snap decisions in issuing new orders given incomplete information. The resolution
phase will not only contain unit reports but also will include a
stream of information about what those at the command post
can hear and see. Pray it's not enemy helicopters!

Commendation Recommended (The Good News)
MBTME does several things very well. It does convey the feeling of being at Command HQ with a staff of officers who are trying to follow a battle that may be raging miles away. It offers a
wide range of weapons and nationalities. The scenarios range
from a standard Syrian assault on an Israeli defensive position to
an American Marine brigade attack on Iraqi troops, including elements of the Republican Guard. Other scenarios include Egyptian and Iranian forces. The weapons represented include the
U.S. M1 and M60, as well as British Chieftain, French AMX-30s
and Israeli Merkavas. Unlike other tactical armored simulations

Simulations Canada's Main Battle
Tank: Middle East
by Joe sherfy
TITLE:

Main Battle Tank: Middle East

Review

Offense
that ignore air power, MBTME includes attack helicopters and
airstrikes. This reviewer's first attempt at leading a Syrian brigade
of T-80s against an entrenched Israeli position resulted in catastrophe when attack choppers found Syrian tanks in the open and
destroyed them in just a matter of minutes. It was a hard lesson
to learn, but very enlightening. That lesson emphasized that one
should entrench first, destroy the choppers and then advance.
Further, the simulation has a wonderful series of "post-mortem"
reports available after the conclusion of each battle that allows
the player to see what really happened. The post mortem reporting is one feature that would be a welcome addition to any wargame. It is very useful in helping the player determine what went
wrong and what might have gone right during a scenario. Finally, the scenario design system is easy to use and will allow one
to explore numerous possibilities with the multitude of units
available.

Chinks in the Armor (The Bad News)
The documentation could be better. The differences between
the various tanks, or any other forces for that matter, are nowhere addressed. No information is given on the effective ranges

of the various weapon systems. This is something that must be
learned through repeated play. Obviously, of course, this is something a brigade commander would already know.
All of the scenarios are of generic origin, so the historical value
of the simulation is limited. The information on terrain effects is
limited and must be determined through trial and error and experimentation.
The quality of the computer opponent could be stronger. It appeared during the repeated play of one scenario that the computer directed forces to play approximately the same strategy each
time (and not too well at that). Finally, although designed to accommodate play by two people, the system does seem awkward.
Delivery of unit reports requires each player to take turns looking
at the ceiling (or a magazine, or the television) while his opponent reads a unit report on the monitor. Over the course of a
long battle, this can be aggravating.

Uniquely Qualified
MBTME and its sister programs by SimCan are unique. They
are not recommended for those looking solely for "awesome
graphics." Instead, despite some shortcomings, they are recommended to those fans of traditional board wargames who remember how much fun they had playing Panzerblitz or Panzerleader.
The Main Battle Tank series, because of its use of limited intelligence and "post mortem" features, is the next step.

_

Review

go well; the player uses the mouse to accelerate the craft to take-off speed. Pulling
back on the stick gets the plane headed in
the right direction. Seconds later the plane
falls from the sky and the player must then
wait for a lengthy re-load before attempting to try again.

Of Mice and Means

Crash and Burn

On one of those rare occasions that this
reviewer was able to stay airborne for more
than a few seconds, an inadvertent click of
the mouse brought up a menu with few options: 'resume training,' 'resume combat,'
`reset' or 'quit'. How ingenious of this
game's creator to offer the player such a
wide array of choices. The problem here is
that the 'resume combat' choice does not
work.

fighter Duel: Corsair Vs. Zero
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
Amiga
# PLAYERS:
1-2 (two-player, modem only)
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up
DESIGNER:
Bill Manders
Jaeger Software
PUBLISHER:
7800 White Cliff Terrace
Rockville, MD 20855

s the invisible waves brush the sides of an aircraft carrier in
Pacific Ocean, the pilot enters the cockpit of the Corair. The dull gray of the instrument panel greets him like a
hospital room on base, a hospital room where this pilot is sure to
land if he is lucky. This reviewer has played many flight simulators and air combat war games and has never run into the difficulties in flying that Fighter Duel: Corsair Vs. Zero represents. Balancing between mouse and joystick in this non-keyboard-controlled
game takes a lot of getting used to. Playing in interlace mode
with no 'flicker fixer' is not as bad as it could be. However, on a
scale of 1-10 this reviewer would give Fighter Duel: Corsair Vs.
Zero just that, a big zero.

At he

Flight simulators are always welcome in this writer's home.
Ranking among the most played games here arc F-15 Strike Eagle
and Gunship. It would he a safe bet to place that Corsair Vs. Zero
will see lots of time on the bookshelf in the future and virtually
no time in drive df0:. This flight simulator is so difficult to fly
that the longest time in "air" for these veteran pilots is less than
five minutes. This reviewer thought she had perhaps lost her
touch, that her agility had faded at the still youthful age of 27,
that her days as an avid game player were nearing an end! Thankfully, the faith was restored when others who played Fighter Duel
had the same experience.
What happens when attempting to pilot the Corsair off the aircraft carrier and into the wild blue yonder? At first, all seems to

The mouse-controlled flight simulator is
unusual. While large keyboard overlays are
the norm, Fighter Duel has just three controls to get used to: mouse, joystick and
the fire button. Different combinations of
these three control methods produce different results. Were this flight simulator capable of flying, this reviewer would imagine
that those combinations would take a bit
of getting used to.

Combat Ready (Not!)
On the rare occasion that the Corsair did
not crash immediately after take-off, the reviewer awaited the expected enemy fire.
None came. Where are the Japs in this game anyway? The manual tells the player to expect heavy firefights yet this reviewer has,
as of yet, not laid eyes upon a Zero gunning for the Corsair's fuselage.

Fire!
A call to Jaeger Software produced no results, with the tech support guy saying, "Uh, I don't know. Maybe you just don't know
how to fly a plane!" This reviewer expects a little more from a
software company than that. Perhaps the tech support person was
having a bad day. Quite frankly, this reviewer does not care
about how well his day was going and expects that when a customer calls, the company should do its best to assist the customer
in any way possible.
While it is quite difficult to write a review based on less than
five minutes of flight time, it is not difficult to say that this flight
simulator is nearly impossible to fly. The game boasts that two
can play over a null-modem link. While that is ambitious of
them, a two-player option would only benefit this game if it were
playable. The three-control system is not a bad idea — in fact
this reviewer thinks it might be a nice change (provided it
works). The graphics, done in interlace mode, are nothing special. In a nutshell, the non-existent dogfight in Fighter Duel: Corsair Vs. Zero is a bow-wow.

Industry News

tate of the Industry: It was a busy afternoon at Computer Gaming World.
One of the editors had to reshoot a
screen shot in a hurry or we would miss
a deadline. Grabbing the box from the
shelf and opening it in one fluid motion,
the centrifugal force caused a portion of
the contents of said box to slide quickly
from the interior of the box to the floor
of the game library. Part of those contents turned out to be a "Disk Exchange
Form." Now, one of the things that editorial staff members rarely think about is
the disk format of a computer game.
Since all of the formats are at said staffer's disposal, it is merely a matter of
booting the game on the right machine
and everything is fine.

S

Naturally, this is not always the case for
the consumer. Some machines only have
a 5.25" disk drive and others only have a
3.5" disk drive. In fact, some have never
been able to upgrade to drives which handle high density disks. Now, the computer game companies know this. For a
couple of years, some of the companies
double-packed 5.25" and 3.5" disks in
the same box. Many companies still do.
Unfortunately, this procedure costs companies in more than one way: a) costing
an additional seventy to ninety cents per
disk in duplication and raw materials
costs for every disk which the consumer
does not need and b) costing additional
sales when the initial purchaser passes on
the other format to his/her friend.
So, many companies elected to package
their games in two separate SKUs (shelf
keeping units). Most retailers are understanding about this and provide space on
the shelves for both SKUs of a given title, but that space does not guarantee
that all formats will always be available at
any given time. That's where these "Disk
Exchange Forms" come into play. The

customer buys the wrong format, fills out
the form and mails a check, cashier's
check or money order for $10.00 along
with the form, the product registration
card and the original packaged disks to
the game company. In return, the game
company sends them the desired disk format and all are happy.
Well, not everyone is happy. A lot of
consumers are asking, "If the company
saves money by only placing one format
in a box, why do I have to pay an extra
$10.00? Even if they have to pay a customer support person and the mailing
fees, aren't they saving money in the long
haul?"
As usual, the answer is going to be one
of perspective. To understand something
of the game companies' perspective, let
me illustrate from personal experience. At
one time in my educational pilgrimage, I
sold cars. I remember going into the sales
manager's office on one particular afternoon and complaining to him that the
"dirty old" used car appraiser had killed
my sale by offering an insulting amount
to the customer on the potential trade-in.
"Son," said the sales manager with patronizing sympathy, "I'm sorry you lost
the sale, but every deal has to stand on
its own. We can't afford to get stuck
with a trade-in so that we can sell that
new car." It took many years before I realized where the logic rested in that position. After all, it had cost me a nice commission. Yet, unlike the unscrupulous
practices of some car dealers, his position
kept the accounting simple and the deals
on the top of the table.
Now, I don't like the fact that the companies are charging the customers for an
extra ten bucks. I think it's unfair. If they
save 70 cents per disk on eight disks that
they do not have to put in 30,000 products, it looks to me like they have a gross

savings of $168,000. Now, assuming that
even 5,000 customers need to have a disk
exchange, the company would have to
spend $28,000 on those disks, roughly
$5,000 in shipping costs and could still
pay $35,000 per year to a customer support person in order to handle those exchanges and still net a savings of
$100,000. What's the deal?
"Well, son. Every deal has to stand on
its own." It appears that the original cost
of goods, where the gross $168,000 in hypothetical savings occurs, is handled in a
different department for accounting purposes. The customer support department
cannot afford to absorb the cost of goods
on the replacement disks, the mailing
charges and the support personnel, so
they have to have the $10.00 fee in order
to break even for their accounting. What
does this say to the consumer? It says
that accounting is more important than
they are. As editor, I would like to offer
this space to the company representative
that is willing to show specific numbers
on a specific product and demonstrate
that my hypothetical accounting is wrong
and that the publishers do not both save
money and charge extra. I could be
wrong. I am not privy to the numbers
and if I'm wrong, I'll have some real facts
to present to consumers when they complain about the extra dollars.
The State of the Magazine: Computer
Gaming World is growing in both editorial and advertising page counts, staff size
and circulation. It is a very exciting time.
We are adding new departments, experimenting with new kinds of features and
evolving a new look. This issue introduces our new art director, Dawn
Thompson. We already like some of the
nice touches she's added and we are looking forward to great things in the future.

