e

January 1990

Number 67

Features
Digital Dogfights In "Air Warrior"

14

GEnie's Aerial Combat Game / Dale Archibald

Microprose's "Sword of the Samurai"

18

Action/Adventure With A New Zen / Johnny L. Wilson

Hero Wanted: Inquire Within

20
22
26
28
32

Broderbund's "Dark Heart of Uukrul" / Scorpia

"Popcorn Not Included!"

39

"Mean Streets" from Access / Charles Ardai

Hitler's Navy

43

Simulations Canada's "Kriegsmarine" / Lt. H. E. Dille

Sierra's "Hoyle's Official Book of Games"
Card Sharks and Cut-Ups / Michael C. Lasky

The Psychology of Computer Games

60

Origin's/CGW's "Omega" Tournament

62

The Secret History of "Sword of the Samurai" 84
Designers' Notes / Lawrence Schick

Lucasfilm's/CGW's "Their Finest Hour" Contest

Heart of Darkness

52

CGW Knows The Score!

Lucasfilm's "Their Finest Hour" / Russell Sipe

Win A Trip To Britain

Nobody Does It Better

A Special Report / Robinson, Thomas and Weaver

Activision's "Ghostbusters II" / David M. Wilson

Spartans In Spitfires

50

Broderbund's "Licence To Kill" / Yung Min Choi

Scorpia Offers Hints for Sierra's "Hero's Quest I" / Scorpia

What Ya' Gonna' Boot?

"Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes"
Command Simulations' Wargame / Robert A. Hottin

48

Departments
Editorial
Contest Results
Taking A Peek
Rumor Bag
Over There
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Inside The Industry
Conversions Received
Letters from Paradise
Reader Input Device

6
6
8
10
24
44
64
64
66
88

Contest

The
"Contest"
Contest
Results
In CGW #64 (October) we asked you
to come up with
ideas for contests
for your fellow
readers. Our favorite
was one submitted
by Patrick Buechner of Washington
DC. He suggested that readers write
"Taking A Peek" style reviews (i.e. one
or two short paragraphs) for a list of
fictional games. The list below includes the best of Patrick's titles along
with a number that the staff of CGW
dreamt up.

Contest #3 Rules
1. Pick five of the ten fictitious
games listed below and write a
"Taking A Peek" style review for each.
2. Keep each "review" to 100 words
or less.
3. Entries will be judged on wit and
originality.
4. Entries must be postmarked by
February 15, 1990. Winning entries
will be published in the April 1990
issue.
5. The winner will receive a three
year subscription to CGW and will, of
course, be made forever famous
within these pages.
The Games
1. Charge Card Crazies
2. Sin City
3. Microstuff Accountancy
Simulator
4. Ancient Art of War At Three
5. Noriega's Ambition
6. M1. Tank Spittoon
7. 688 Attack Tug
8. Star Trek: The Pepsi
Generation
9. Pete Rose Fever
10. Bashful Bruce III: Looking For
Love...(complete the title and
review the game).

Editorial

Coin of the Realm
A Personal Note from the New Editor
There is no such thing as bad press.
Like any axiom, there is an element of
oversimplification about that statement.
Yet, in many ways, that is a valid motto
for the way I've approached my job at
Computer Gaming World over the last
few years. Those who prefer a more
erudite rendition of the same essential
sentiment may enjoy Supreme Court Justice William Brennan Jr.'s perspective,
delivered in a 1979 speech at Rutgers
University. Justice Brennan said, "As
money is to the economy, so the press is
to our political culture: It is the medium
of circulation . . . the coin by which
public discussion may be purchased."
As the new editor of CGW, I would
amend his statement to assert that the
press is not only the coin of the realm for
public discussion to be purchased in the
political culture, but also in the broadest
understanding of culture in its entirety.
Whether one is talking about art, entertainment, business, ethics, religion,
philosophy, science or government, one
cannot discuss that which he is not cognizant of and the media is the best way of
disseminating the information necessary
to make the citizenry aware of what is
happening in any of these areas. Controversy, discussion, activism, change
and affirmation are inevitable results of
such information.

All I Need To Know,
I Haven't Learned Yet
The State of the Magazine: If I
facilitate these results, the readers and industry will inevitably have a "love/hate"
relationship with the magazine. The industry will be angry when their products
are not covered in the light they would
prefer to highlight them with and the
readers will be angry when they believe
we haven't been critical enough. Nevertheless, both audiences will keep coming
back for more because they are assured
that we call them as we see them and
they know we are trying to be accurate,
fair and stimulating. Those are easy adjectives to write and say, difficult words to
live by.
Unlike the best-selling pundit who feels,
at least as a literary device, that he
learned everything he needed to know in
kindergarten, I am still learning. CGWs
founder and my personal mentor, Russell
Sipe, has placed both a great honor and
responsibility upon my shoulders. We

share the same basic editorial vision,
work extremely well as a team, and
scrutinize every article submitted to CGW
separately and together. This will not
change. CGW will still take editorial risks
in order to cover issues like game design,
theory and psychology, as well as try to interpret one of the fastest changing industries in the history of civilization. We
will still try to offer the most up-to-date, indepth and, balanced coverage available
(and occasionally, throw in some humor).
Not everyone will like everything about
every article, but CGW will continue to
cover the entertainment software industry
with its own special spin. Both Russ and I
love that spin (We had better love it, it's
part of what makes us who we are!) and
we hope to make it better.

Future Shock
The State of the Industry: Finally, we
would like to offer a glimmer of hope to
those who thought about chucking their
personal computers out of the window
after reading about software companies
joining the ranks of dedicated game
machine supporters. Multimedia may be
one of the last bastions of hope for those
of us who prefer multi-purpose
machines. Multimedia, according to Rob
Glaser, the guru in charge of Microsoft's
special project division, will be built upon
a 286 or 386 processor and will probably
utilize both a CD-ROM drive and a Digital
Video Interactive card operating in conjunction with a VGA graphics standard.
The expanded storage capacity and
provision for "broadcast quality video" in
an interactive format should be too tempting for the software industry to resist.
The downside is that Intel Corporation
tells CGW that the DV-I card will not be
priced below $1,000 until, at least, first
quarter of 1992. Add to this the price of
a CD-ROM drive and upgrades to VGA
and that's quite a price for the average
gamer. Still, we're betting that the temptation to imagine sports games with optically stored video images of real players, adventure games with real actors, and
simulations utilizing authentic film
footage is much too tantalizing to pass
up.
The upside is that hardware prices inevitably drop and that CGW will keep you
up to date and aware of what's happening in this area. Stay tuned!

Taking A Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.,
Ste. 200
San Jose, CA 95128

THE BLUE ANGELS: This formation
flight simulator allows the player to
maneuver any one of the four F/A-18
Hornet jets that make up the Navy's
acrobatic stunt-flying team. Players start
out in basic training, practice the
maneuvers by themselves, practice with
the other team members, and finally
"strut their struts" at an actual airshow.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
HARDBALL II: Fans of the original action game will be delighted with this
much improved sequel. Along with the
hard-ball action gaming of the original,
this product offers a slew of features including: choice of playing perspectives,
adjustable levels of play, an instant
replay option, a team editor, and a
league play option. A very robust

baseball package. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.

Activision
3885 Bohannon Drive
Menlo Park, CA 94025

DEATHTRACK: Players compete
against ten 'Trackers' in a race to the
finish line, to the death, or both. Racers
begin a circuit with $10,000 which can
be spent on parts or weapons for their
car and earn additional cash by "placing"
in a race (staying alive is tough enough)
or fulfilling 'agreements' with a certain
'businessman' to take out other players.
The money management aspect makes
this as much a strategy game as a action game. The 3-D graphics system,
developed by Dynamix, is outstanding
and the action is extremely intense. This
game might prove to be quite

therapeutic for over-stressed commuters.
IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #3.

THE MANHOLE: Originally released
as a CD-ROM game, this fantasy journey
takes the player through a variety of
macro-and micro-explorations. Designed
for the younger set, the point and click
interface allows the player to examine
what goes on in a teacup, what lies at
the top of a beanstalk, or how nicely appointed a dragon's house may be. Like
Cosmic Osmo, this one is a real treat
for the whole family. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903

PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL:

This is a

(Continued on page 76)

Industry News

"It wasn't my fault," I protested to my
normally accommodating, but currently
sullen, blonde public relations assistant,
Ann. "They told me Dvorak's party was
supposed to start at the Mirage and end
up at Redd Foxx's mansion. I
didn't know the Mirage wasn't
open, yet." She floated back to
the taxi and disappeared. / had
to find another cab on the Las
Vegas Strip and that's not easy
during Comdex.
A car club drove by in
caravan. Every car had a glitzy
metallic paint job, air shocks adjusted to various incredible
angles and a sound system
blasting at the kind of decibel
levels that cause city councils
to pass nuisance laws. The
whole scene made me wonder
if California Dreams plans to
put a "woofer and tweeter
shoot-out" in their Street Rod
data disk (due early this year). I
doubt it, but I'm told it will feature some very different kinds
of races (like jumping a broken
bridge, for example).

ful than Lord British. He sold numbered
versions of the original Akalabeth at that
one Computerland store and, last I
heard, he still had numbers 12-25 in his
possession. Of course, the "published"

The
Rumor Bag

One of the car club members passed by
me slowly. "Hey," he called, "what club
wears paper bags over their heads?!" I
didn't have time to explain before he
"revved" up his engine and popped the
clutch, leaving behind enough rubber for
me to scrape it up and make my own
retread. The only time I drive like that is
at the arcade when I play Powerdrift. I
didn't even have a chance to tell him that
Activision plans to release an IBM version of the popular coin-op hit in early
1990.
Just as I was ready to give up on hailing a cab, a producer I knew from Silicon
Valley pulled up beside me. "Howard!" he
called, "what happened to the party?" At
least I wasn't the only person who didn't
know. My friend knew a lot about the industry, though. He knew that the Epyx
bankruptcy left a lot of products up in
the air. Ishido was supposed to have
been distributed by the publisher turned
developer, but Publishing International
plans to distribute the game itself. It's sort
of a novel concept, though. They plan to
sell 1,000 signed and numbered copies
of the game. The game will come packaged in a prestige box, possibly a
wooden one, and will include both the
black and white version of the game plus
the super deluxe Mac II color version. At
a projected price point of $149.99 and
available only from the company itself, it
will be interesting to see how the game
sells.
I wondered if PI would be more success-

Our eyes were assaulted by an
electronic billboard announcing the upcoming "roast" for Tommy Lasorda and
he lamented the bug in Earl Weaver
Baseball 1.5 that allows "Computer Earl"
to bring in infielders and outfielders as pitchers. I told him it
was a problem with players who
are only rated at one position.
It seems that instead of assuming the player can only play
one position, the program has
arbitrarily assigned "Pitcher" as
the secondary position. Most
people are finding a quick fix
by assigning "IF", "OF" or the
player's original position as the
second position.

I consoled him with the knowledge that
Data East is preparing to launch in computer role-playing games. He admitted it
was quite a departure for them and we
both agreed to watch further developments with interest. Then, we passed by
Las Vegas' version of Bill and Ted's
"Waterloop". As the shadows of the
waterslides flickered across our faces, I
asked him if he'd heard about Electronic
Arts' sequel to Skate or Die!. Looking
back at the amusement park, he ventured "Swim or Die?"

We passed the Bally's Grand
(formerly the M.G.M. Grand)
where Microprose founders Bill
Stealey and Sid Meier played a
videogame entitled, Red Baron,
and the idea for the company
was born. Now, there are
several World War I aviation
games in the works with, at
least, one of them (Dynamix's
Red Baron) slated to bear the
nickname of the famous von Richtofen.
There have been numerous rumors
about such a product from Microprose.
At first, several company employees
refused to either confirm or deny such a
product (although Arnold Hendrick went
so far as to suggest that the rumor was
very likely based on the videogame
machine located in the programmer's
lounge, the actual machine which inspired the company's formation). Later,
CGW was told that the company held
copyright on the title Red Baron and intends to publish the game in 1990. In addition, Cinemaware has plans to emulate the glorious days of WWI aces in
Wings and another major designer is
reputed to be considering a WWI air combat simulator using an existing game system.
We passed by an adult bookstore and
my friend pointed out a sleazy-looking fellow wearing as much gold jewelry as
Uncle Buddy in Infocom's old Hollywood Hijinx. "Guy reminds me of
'Leisure Suit Larry'", he observed. This
reminded me to tell him about Sierra's
rumored Leisure Suit Larry that's supposed to support modem play. Let's see,
would that support X-Modem?

I chuckled and explained that he was
close, but in the wrong season of the
year. "It's called Ski or Die and, naturally,
Lester is back to make sure you do the
latter." He kept trying to figure out what
an acro aerial ski jump was, but he told
me he was ready for the innertube
thrash, snowboard halfpipe, and downhill
blitz.

Walking to my room I sensed someone
was following me. I turned to see who it
was (peripheral vision doesn't exist when
you're wearing a paper bag). Before I
could make out who it was I felt a hard
smash on the side of my bag. Everything
went black (rather odd for Las Vegas)
and that's the last thing I remember until
. . . (To Be Continued Next Issue)

by
Howard
"Bugsey"
Kerkorian

version came later and sold considerably
more than 11.
He also knew that California Access,
the hardware division of Logical Design
Works, will be marketing the 500XJ Joys
tick that Epyx used to distribute. Arcade
gamers will be glad to know the joystick
will still be available, he noted. Strategy
and adventure garners won't be pleased
to know that there are rumors about a
possible Call of Cthulhu licensed
product, an adventure game that could
have tremendously advanced the art of
creating "artificial personality", and a
global environmental simulation that are
in jeopardy because of Epyx' woes.

Announcing....

Computer Gaming Worlds's

op Ad Awards
G

ood evening
ladies and
gentlemen. I
would like to welcome each of you to
the Second Annual
TOP AD Awards
being held here this
evening in the
beautiful CGW
Grand Crystal Ball
Room. We hope the
meal and wine were
to your liking. We
are gathered
together this evening to be informed
and entertained by
the best advertisements in the computer
entertainment industry. Last year's full
page winner was New World Computing.
New World topped the list of 41 advertisers with their "The Basics Elements of
Adventure" full page ad. This year the list
of competitors has grown to 48 companies.
The CGW TOP AD Awards are rapidly
becoming THE showcase for the best in
computer entertainment advertising.
Just like last year, you, our readers are

asked to serve as the judges of our contest. We want you to select which ads
deserve to win CGW's prestigious TOP
AD Awards.

As the judge of our contest you are
eligible to win $250.00 and a lifetime
subscription to CGW.

Awards will be given to three winners in
two separate categories, for a total of six
awards. Category One is for advertisements which are either full page or twopage spread sized. Category Two is for
advertisements which are less than a full
page in size.
The top vote getter in each category will
be awarded CGW's TOP AD Platinum
Award. The second place finisher will
receive CGW's TOP AD Gold Award and
the third place finisher will receive CGW'S
TOP AD Silver Award.

THE RULES
1. Use the Ballot Section of this
month Reader Input Device card located
opposite this page to cast your votes (or
a facsimile thereof).
2. In the "Full Page & Spreads"
Category vote for three different full
page and/or two-page spread ads.
3. A two page spread ad would be an
ad that appears on adjoining and facing
left and right hand pages and is one
continuous advertisement. A two-page
spread ad counts as a single ad for
voting purposes.
4. Select a first place, a second place,
and a third place ad.
5. In the "Fractional Page" Category
vote for three different ads. These are
ads which are less than full page sized.
6. On the ballot, list the company
names and page number of the ads you
are voting for. For example: to place a
first place vote for Acme Company's 1/2

page ad on page 345 write "Acme
pg.345" on the line for 1st place in the
fractional ad column.
7. The criteria for evaluation is very
simple: consider the graphics, copy,
and overall impact of the ad.
8. The votes will be weighted, added
and then averaged.
9. The reader that comes closest to
picking the final correct order of winners
will win $250.00 cash and a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World!
10. Entries must be postmarked by
February 15, 1990. No purchase in
necessary. Winners will be notified by
mail.

Review

Lost in the
Ozone Again
"Air Warrior" on GEnie
by Dale Archibald
've been playing wargames since the
early 1960s, computer games since I
bartered for my first Apple in 1980. Air
Warrior is the most exciting I've played
yet.

I

Why? Because it's real-time and interactive. It's on GEnie (General Electric Network for Information Exchange), and was
written for that organization by the Kesmai Corp., out of Charlottesville, Virginia. It first came on-line in 1984 for the
Macintosh.
Today, the field of battle is open to any
modem-connected Atari ST, Amiga, IBM
(with 640K and CGA or better graphics)
or Macintosh owner.
This is a graphic game, not the typical
interactive network game where players
type in text commands a la "Adventure."
Your computer runs the software and the
positions of the other players are
reflected on the screen. The closer you
get, the more detailed the graphic representations of your co-players.
The Air Warrior program itself is free.
You pay only for the time you spend
downloading and then, playing, the
game. Data arrives—for the PC, at least,
as ARCed files (i.e. compressed for transmission through X-Modem protocol). You
UnARC it on receipt. You'll receive the Air
Warrior program, manuals, terrain and
aircraft files in this manner.

Gentlemen, Start Your Engines
Fortunately, it is possible to practice Air
Warrior off-line. In this way, you can
learn takeoffs, landings and how various
aircraft handle. WWI and II fighters and
bombers are available. These include: the
P51 Mustang; Japanese Zero; Messerschmidt ME-262; Spitfire; Messerschmidt ME109; Fockwulf FW190;
P38J Lightning; F4U Corsair; B17 Flying
Fortress, B25, and A26 bombers. WWI
aficionados can pick from the Camel,
Spad, and Fokker.
However, you can't practice combat offline. You don't even have bombs or bullets. For that, you need to log onto
GEnie and move to the Air Warrior train-

ing section. For combat training, the best
time is Thursday night. That's when experienced pilots attend to help novices.
You can practice shooting each other
without affecting your combat rating.
Soon enough, however, you'll decide you
want to get into "real" combat. So, you'll
move to the main arena.
You begin by reserving a combat
theater, selecting a field and selecting an
aircraft.
Typing "/fly" switches you from headquarters into the cockpit. Then, the field,
as well as control panel appears. At the
left margin are three letters: A on a blue
background, B on green and C on white
(On Macs these colors appear as shades
of gray.). Under those is the letter that signifies which country you belong to. The
controls are flexible enough to use either
a joystick and mouse combination or
mouse only.

Target In Sight
So, just take off and look for bogies.
You have two views from the cockpit:
radar and "through the viewscreen".
Radar, if it hasn't been bombed out, lets
you see friends and opponents at a distance and allows you to identify them by
type and color. So, an A aircraft will be a
blue line, a B will be green, and a C displayed as white. Under the radar screen,
will be the aircraft type and its distance
from you. The viewscreen shows them in
varying ways, depending upon their distance. Beyond 5,000 yards, they show up
as dots. Within 5,000 yards, an identifying icon appears directly under the dot,
at the top of your control panel. An A
aircraft would appear as a numeral on a
blue field, a B as a numeral on a green
background, and a C as a numeral in a
white box. Don't ever shoot your fellow
countrymen!
As you get closer, the aircraft appear
more clearly. First, as text characters,
then finally assuming a full polygonal
rendering.
Fighters sport a set of crosshairs on the
nose. Within 1,000 yards, it is a simple
(Continued on page 78)

Review

Sword of the
Samurai

There, his
samurai per(SOS) comsona controls
municates the
the smallest
spirit of feudal
fief among the
Japan on
clan holdings.
many different
Next, he is inlevels. It is a
troduced to his
tapestry woven
rivals as the
of numerous
screen displays
by Johnny L. Wilson
threads of
portraits and
deliberation,
descriptions of
decisive action, determination and deseach character in an authentic-looking
tiny. It offers a carefully textured mix of acJapanese art style. The tapestried backtion, role-playing and strategy, delicately
ground behind the portraits and brush
balanced with enough artistic and historistrokes on the "paintings" themselves is
cal detail to tremendously enhance the
very effective.
total gaming experience. Evan Brooks
On the status screen, he is listed as a
has suggested that SOS is like
"disappointment" to the hatamoto, the
Nobunaga's Ambition meets Castle Woltrusted lieutenant who serves the daimyo
fenstein, but the game reflects more than
or clan leader. His task is to build wealth,
a conflation of elements from earlier
strength, honor and ability in such a way
games. It offers even more than its
that he can either succeed the hatamoto
spiritual ancestor, Pirates!
upon his death (the most honorable
method) or usurp him (the quickest, but
Zen and the Art of
least honorable, method).
At the beginning of each turn, a menu
Hatamoto Prominence
describing the player character's options
Sword of the Samurai has its own zen.
is provided. In addition to those printed
There are enough different game play opon the screen, players can access the
tions and diverging streams of destiny to
status screen and/or summary screen to
keep players coming back to the game
determine current rankings and opportime after time. This reviewer found himtunities. Also, characters currently located
self regularly saving positions, just so that
in their home fief can save or restore
he could find out what would happen if
games.
he did not marry that woman of acceptCampaign options usually appear as
able honor; if he did commit the
text descriptions printed over classical
treacherous act of assaulting his own
Japanese landscapes. Players are required
hatamoto or daimyo; if he incited a rival's
to march their armies to the hatamoto's
peasants to revolt (or assassinated him)
(or later, the daimyo's) castle and "volunor if he retired from worldly affairs or not.
teer" to do battle before the rivals can get
TITLE:
Sword
of
the
Samurai
Part of the game's beauty is that one continually
their forces there. This is accomplished by walking
SYSTEM:
IBM
finds himself puzzling over whether to choose acPRICE:
an armored samurai icon from one point on the
$54.95
DESIGNER:
Lawrence Schick
tions which may enhance: generalship over honor,
map to another. Often, the journey will be interPUBLISHER:
Microprose
swordsmanship over generalship or land (wealth)
rupted with opportunities to win honor through
Hunt Valley, MD
over any of the preceding considerations, etc.
"Melee" sequences or "Duels". If one wishes to inIn addition, one has to be impressed by the artissure that he gets to the lord's castle before his
tic detail in the game. Japanese tapestry art styles are used on
rivals, however, he will avoid these opportunities and concentrate
some screens.
on the task at
Oriental music
hand. The resulcreates just the
tant loss in honor
right emotion
will be more than
whether one is
compensated by
using the generic
the lord's gift of
IBM sounds, AdLib
land in victory and
or Roland (The
the character's imsoundboards add
provement in
significant richness,
generalship.
but the soundtrack
This reviewer
is still an impresfound the surest
sive touch without
path to hatamoto
the enhanceby building his
ments.). Subtle atarmy, drilling his
mospheric touches
troops, and taking
like the philosophievery opportunity
cal cliches ("Suspend Expectations Of Imminence", "The Tide
to serve the hatamoto (or even the other samurai) in battle. If
Hastens For No Man", and "Deliberation Is Preferable To Haste")
one is successful in battle, one is given portions of land to add to
appear between sequences and enhance the flow of the game.
one's fief. Larger fiefs represent the ability to maintain more
Play begins with the player selecting a geographical province.
(Continued on page 81)

Unsurpassable Honor
"Sword of the Samurai" from Microprose

Game Hints

H

ere we are, starting off

a new year and a new
decade of gaming!
Even Fred is feeling a little excited about that. So, draw
your chair closer to the fire,
settle in with your favorite
beverage, and we'll begin
1990 with a smile (hopefully
a good omen for the rest of
the year!). You've always
wanted to be a hero, right?

Scorpion's Tale
As Told By Scorpia

HERO'S QUEST I

Hero's Quest /, from Sieris a cute little gem that
combines role-playing and adventuring with a healthy dose
of humor to produce a game
that is extremely fun to play.
While the puzzles are, for the
most part, on the easy side,
the overall effect (even for
the experienced gamer) is
satisfying by any measure.

A stop at the Guildhall,
where you can read the
notices on the bulletin board
(some rather old...obviously,
no other heroes have ventured here for quite some
time) about who needs help
with what. As a beginner, you
probably don't want to take
on, just yet, anything like rescuing kidnapped daughters
or cleaning out a nest of
highway robbers.

ra,

Something a little simpler is
called for here. So, perhaps a
visit to the healer, just outside town, might be a good
idea. She's a kindly old soul
and will pay money for certain items she needs to make
her potions. She also has potions for sale, but they're a trifle expensive. So, don't go
buying any right away.

It is also one of the few
games that are truly replayable. This is mainly due to
the fact that there are three
character classes (Fighter,
Thief, Mage) and each can
solve various puzzles differently, as well as have experiences not available to other classes.
For instance, a thief in this
game is really a thief. He's
the one who can break into
people's houses, clean out all
their goodies, and then fence
the lot at the Guild for ready
cash (hmmm, that sure got
your attention, didn't it?
Hehe). Just watch out for the
sheriff.
You start by creating your
character, who comes with a set of basic
attributes and skills, depending on class.
Then you beef him (or her) up a bit with
50 more points you can put wherever
you like. It's possible to make a character
who is, say, a fighter/mage or a
mage/thief or fighter/thief, but it's really
more fun to play the straight character
class. Then, you can go back later and
try the game as something else.
So, now that you're a graduate of the
Famous Adventurers Correspondence
School (and you have a diploma to prove
it!), it's time to find a place to do all those
heroics you've dreamed of doing. The little town of Spielberg is a good place to
start.
Spielberg has its share of problems. A
recent avalanche has cut off the mountain pass, isolating the town until the
snow melts (good thing you made it in
before that happened!). So, lots of nasty

Some of those items, such
as cheetaur claws and troll's
beard, are best left for the
very experienced to acquire.
Mushrooms and flowers are
more your speed at the moment. Still, this does give you
a good excuse to explore the
woods (do map, or you may
get lost) and environs around
Spielberg.
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Hero's Quest I:
So You Want To Be A Hero
IBM
$59.95
Lori and Corey Cole
Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA

critters, being likewise trapped, are now
roaming the great outdoors. Ah well, no
one said a hero's life was a safe one!
In addition, as you discover during your
wanderings around Spielberg, various
citizens also have problems of their own.
The healer has lost a valuable ring and
the local Baron has lost both his son and
daughter. A band of brigands is terrorizing the vicinity, making life difficult for
the merchants in the town. There's even
an evil witch, in the person of Baba
Yaga, lurking in the background. All in
all, you have plenty of work to keep you
busy (and heroic) for some time!
The first order of business is to make a
complete circuit of the town, talking with
everyone available. Since the interface is
the standard one used in Sierra's regular
adventures, you do this by typing in such
commands as "Ask about brigands" or
"ask about baron", etc.

As you wander about, you
will, inevitably, come across
something hostile. Fortunately, unless it's very close, you
can run (and I do mean run!)
away to be heroic another
day. Even if you're a fighter,
you can't take on just anything at the start. You have
to build yourself up with easy (or as easy
as they come) encounters. A goblin now
or then is best.
This is especially true as the combat system is like nothing you have seen before
and takes some getting used to. The
combat screen shows a very detailed
close-up of your opponent from about
waist to head, straight on in front of you.
You also see yourself (as from the rear),
sword and shield in hand (if you have
'em), from about the shoulders up.
The cursor keys are used to determine
your actions, which include dodging, parrying, and, of course, striking the enemy.
In some respects, this is arcade-like, but
not really, since the action is slow, rather
than lightning-speed. Timing is more important than quick reflexes. One of the
neat features here is the expressions of
(Continued on page 56)

Review

J

ust when you
thought it was
safe to go back
to your computer .. .
You've been slimed! In
fact, when you play
Activision's

Ghostbusters II, you'll
be slimed repeatedly
and, if you're not careful, you'll probably
also find yourself straitjacketed and housed
in a rubber room in
Parkview Mental Hospital.

I STILL AIN'T
'FRAID OF NO
GHOST!
By David Wilson

This new game follows closely the storyline of the movie. A
super-evil apparition,
Vigo, scourge of Carpathia, is gathering his
forces of evil in New
York. The Big Apple is
especially susceptible
to this evil attack because evil forces live
off of negative emotions. And where else,
in all the world, are
there more negative
emotions than New
York City? After all,
even their picante
sauce is bad?
Gameplay begins in
TITLE:
the courtroom, where
SYSTEMS:
the boys are about to
PRICE:
answer for their
DESIGNER:
crimes. The judge
PUBLISHER:
fines the gang
$10,000. His negative
energy explodes a
beaker filled with negatively charged slime. This, in turn,
releases the ghosts of the infamous
Scoleri brothers whose unified goal is to
get even with the judge who sentenced
them to be executed in the electric chair
The courtroom is as good a room as
any to learn how to focus the eye of the
Proton beam weapon and avoid ghostly
fireballs. Also, a slimer-type ghost will frequently appear to toss a ball of slime at
the player character. The secret to whipping the Scoleris is to concentrate on the
fat brother first. He is a larger target and
easier to hit. Once the fat brother is captured, the skinny phantom is easily captured. Players will need to hurry because
it only takes a moment or two for a captured ghost to escape from the trap.
Losing the "Courtroom Scene" action
sequence is no big deal. The gang just
starts off $10,000 in debt. If the player
happens to win the segment, however,
the judge will suspend the sentence. It's

Ghostbusters II
IBM with 512K
(C-64 soon)
$44.95
Doug Barnett
Activision
Menlo Park, CA

a wide-open sequence where players are
free to trash the courtroom and even encouraged to blast the rude District Attorney. Enjoy the disorder in the court because you won't have to pay for damages
as you do in other ghostbusting scenes.
The central game control point is the
lab. An arrow is moved around the lab to
select game options. Players can choose
to go out and collect slime samples; go
ghostbusting to earn cash; test slime
samples with a CD player; rescue a companion from the Parkview mental ward
or, finally (after earning $55,000), take
the Statue of Liberty for a walk. If you
choose an option that doesn't make
sense (like testing slime when you have
none) a portrait of Bill Murray appears
trailing a comical thought balloon.
To collect slime, the player goes to the
abandoned train tunnel and climbs down
a rope with scoop in hand. Slime collection will be hampered by a green arm
reaching upward from the river of slime

and attempting to pull
the player's character
off the rope. Slimers
will regularly appear
and, if they slime the
on-screen character
four times, he is slated
for a gooey, slimy
swim. It's best to collect the slime sample
as quickly as possible
and then climb out.
Fortunately, should
the player be grabbed
by the green monster
lurking in the depths,
he usually will be able
to shake himself
loose. Each successive
trip, however, will find
the slimers more active and more aggressive.
Testing slime is done
by selecting the CD
player in the lab and
choosing a musical
track to play. As a
result, the slime will
either explode in the
beaker or settle down.
The player will need to
find three calming
songs out of the nine
possible musical
tracks. This has the
function of forcing
players to make
repeated forays into
the underground train
station.

Selecting the
laboratory's phone
leads to a ghostbusting job. There are three parts of town
being plagued by pestilent poltergeist:
Central Park, Northrones Department
Store and the Docks. All scenes work the
same way. One simply blasts the ghosts
until they are sucked into the ghostbuster
trap. If the player can avoid the slime
thrown by the blue slimers (six slimeballs
and you're out) and the fireballs thrown
by the ghosts (three fireballs and you're
toast) while accomplishing this, success
can be sweet. Losing either the slime collection scene or a ghostbusting job, however, will ensure one of the team a free
one-way ticket to Parkview.
In the latter case, players are given the
option of rescuing their teammate. While
scaling the walls of the loony bin, it is important to note which windows have
shadows. These shadows can be either
the hospital orderlies (who will not be
glad to see you) or your partner-in-slime.
(Continued on page 37)

Foreign Correspondence

Over

There!

by Paul Rigby

ere is the latest information on
European computer games. Mention of availability refers to the
UK market, however, they can be obtained via the addresses listed at the end
of this column.

H

Betrayal (Rainbird) is an Amiga, C-64,
IBM and Atari ST game which combines
economic, military and political variables.
The aim of the game is to fill the two rival
courts with courtiers under your personal
control in order to wrest control from a
weak king or bishop and install your own
puppet king or bishop. To reach this position, you must acquire armies, towns,
and militia; manage your resources wisely; and untangle yourself from a web of
political subterfuge. Microprose U.K.
should introduce Betrayal in Europe
before Christmas.
Mike Singleton, a respected programmer with a wealth of experience behind
him, has created Midwinter (another
product under the Rainbird label). With
assistance from his Maelstrom team, he
now offers a strategy game set in the
21st Century. A global climatic crisis has
caused chaos by turning temperate
zones into arctic conditions—an endless
winter. However, the old political structures have collapsed, leaving local communities to fend for themselves. General
Masterman is an up and coming dictatorial character, having taken control of
several regions in the south-east of the
country. Players take on the role of Captain Stark, an officer in the Free Villages
Peace Force, who must lead the fight
against the mobilized forces of Masterman. The primary goal is to capture his
HQ before he can take away all the Free
Villages' "Heat Mines". Midwinter features
solid 3-D, textured and light-sourced
graphics throughout, as well as several
real-time action sequences. It is
scheduled for pre-Christmas release on
Amiga, Atari ST and IBM formats.
Interphase is a new Imageworks game
on Amiga, Atari ST, and IBM formats. Set
in the future, it posits a world where
people live computer-controlled dreams
in order to fill their leisure time. As a
developer of the same, a professional

dreamer (if you will), the player discovers
that his employer, The Corporation, is
using the dreams to subliminally influence its users in a concerted effort to
enslave the minds of the general public.
The goal of the game becomes entering
a dream, reaching the heart of The
Corporation's giant computer mainframe,
manipulating the security tracks and
retrieving the sinister dreamtrack which is
accomplishing most of the damage. The
game features smooth filled 3-D
graphics, action sequences and logic puzzles.
The Legend of the Sword was well
received in the U.K. It mixed the standard
text/graphic adventure with a variety of interesting features applied to the computer interface, as well as intriguing character manipulation. The sequel, entitled
The Final Battle (also from Imageworks), is expected to appear before
Christmas for Amiga, Atari ST and IBM.
At the beginning of the sequel, the player
discovers that, as is a habit in this type of
game, the "Sword" has been re-stolen by
the foe, a fellow called Suzar. The
player's character must not only retake
the "Sword", but rescue his kidnapped
friends and collect six crystals in order to
completely vanquish Suzar. The Final
Battle features a weather system which affects character actions, a comprehensive
range of character statistics, improved
parser and 3-D graphics for locations.
Another Imageworks release is intriguing because it is the first role-playing
game from a team known as the Bitmap
Brothers. The brothers are famous, within
the U.K., for producing two games
(Xenon and Xenon II). They were "shoot'em-ups" which featured arcade quality
graphics with excellent sound and
gameplay. A computer role-playing game
release, therefore, is rather surprising. In
Cadaver (Amiga, Atari ST and IBM), the
player becomes a medieval sleuth whose
task is to track down and kill a mass murderer. As an earlier search party was
never heard of again, the player's character faces a challenging task. The game
should offer a detailed plot, high quality
(Continued on page 70)

Review

missions, you
can switch between pilot, bombardier, and up
to five different
gunner positions.
In addition to
actually flying in
the missions, you
get to plan the
by Russell Sipe
hakespeare
strategy for your
had no
side. As the
way of knowing that two cenBritish player, you have some advance
turies after he wrote those words, alknowledge as to the German targets for
mighty unconquerable England would
the day. You assign available aircraft to
come within a few warriors of being laid
CAP (combat air patrol) missions: aslow by a foreign conqueror. But for a
signing locations, altitudes, etc. During
few brave men, Hitler may have been
the actual flight, however, the computer
that conqueror and his statement that
will control all planes except your perthe Third Reich would "Rule for a
sonal aircraft.
thousand years" might have become
As the German player, you select what
the most memorable quote of this
type of aircraft you want for the day's
century.
mission, what target or targets you want
However, hind sight is always 20-20
to attack, and your flight plans to exvision. So, we know that Hitler failed.
ecute those attacks.
But he came close . . . so close. In early
The success or failure of your inSeptember of 1940, the Luftwaffe had
dividual mission is abstracted to affect
the RAF reeling and ready for the knockother computer controlled missions for
out blow. On September 15, the
the day. If you as a British pilot fare
Luftwaffe delivered what was to be that
well, the whole RAF fairs well and
knockout punch. As wave after wave of
vice-a-versa.
German bombers and fighters swept
The graphics are outstanding. Aircraft,
over Southern England and RAF
ships, and explosions are rendered in
fighters were pressed to the extreme,
beautiful bit-mapped graphics that are
Churchill asked Air Marshall Park "What
almost photographic in realism, while
reserves have we?" Park told him "We
terrain is created using polygon fill
have none". The last time a comgraphics. The combination of the two
mander-in-chief had been told that was
graphic systems succeeds very well.
Napoleon at Waterloo.
When you combine the graphics with
But England prevailed. In looking
the room-rumbling high fidelity sound
TITLE:
Their Finest Hour
back on the so-called "Battle of Britain", Chureffects available to AdLib Sound Board users,
The Battle of Britain
chill put the conflict into perspective with
you get a game that grabs you and holds on
SYSTEM:
IBM 512K
Coming Soon: Amiga, Atari ST
memorable statements: "Never was so much
and on and on.
PRICE:
$59.95
owed by so many to so few" and "If the British
In addition to the almost 100 training and
DESIGNER:
Lawrence Holland
PUBLISHER:
Empire and its Commonwealth last for a
Lucasfilm Games
combat missions (both individual and camSan Rafael, CA
thousand years, men will still say: 'This was their
paign), TFH has a mission building utility that
finest hour!'".
allows you to design your own missions. One
It is this awesome pivot point in our history that Lucasfilm
reason Holland included the mission building utility was to give
Games brings to us in its latest release: Their Finest Hour: The
owners of slower IBM machines a utility that would let them creBattle of Britain (TFH).
ate smaller actions. With a dozen or so planes in a battle the program can slow down considerably on slower machines (Remember, not only do the dozen aircraft need to be "flown" by the CPU,
"It's New, It's Improved"
but so do the dozens upon dozens of bullets that may be in the
TFH is built upon the award winning Battlehawks 1942 (BH),
air at any one time). With the mission builder you can create
CGW's Action Game of The Year 1989. After designing his awardsmall "skirmishes" that are less taxing on the CPU.
winning game, however, designer Larry Holland did not sit back
on his laurels. Instead, he took BH as his starting point and built
an even more amazing product. For example, the camera replay
Roll Calls Make For Role Playing
feature which was so unique in BH has been improved. Now you
can select from a variety of replay viewpoints such as cockpit
TFH keeps track of pilots' service records. You begin by giving a
view, target view, bomb's eye view (remember Slim Pickins in Dr
pilot a name and taking him through a number of individual misStrangelove?), etc. Now you can save your best replays to disk
sions to build up his rating. When you get a stable of rated flyers,
("Look honey, here's where I shot down three ME-109's in 15
you will be ready to start the campaign game. I named my pilots
seconds").
after people in our office. In the campaign game it added a touch
of involvement fun to watch my fellow cohorts fly about me,
You can fly individual missions or play in a complete campaign
some winning, some losing, some dying (so long Johnny, we
from either side. As the British player, you act as the flight leader
hardly knew ya!).
of a Hurricane or Spitfire squadron. As the German player, you
For those of you that are not patient enough to fly the dozens
can choose between flying fighters such as the ME-109 and MEof missions necessary to build a solid roster of seasoned pilots
110 (fighter/bomber) or flying a wide range of bombers (Stuka
dive bomber, Junkers 88, Dornier 17, Heinkel III). In bombing
(Continued on page 28)
"This England
never did, nor
ever shall, lie at
the proud foot of
a conqueror"
— King John V
by William
Shakespeare.

S

Spartans in Spitfires
Britain's "Thermopylae in the Sky"

(Continued from page 26)

you can cheat the system via DOS. Simply build one pilot up to a
decent score then go into DOS and duplicate and rename that
pilot's file several times. In this manner, you can take your one
veteran and create a dozen more just like him in five minutes.

various aircraft and flight tactics as well. The rulebook alone
deserves an award.

Documentation is the Finest

TFH was designed and playtested primarily using the mouse interface. While it works well with the mouse, it is not as user friendly for those of us that prefer using the joystick or keyboard. Flight
using the joystick is just fine, however getting around the preflight screens, executing the off-disk protection routines, and
operating the VCR Playback feature are tedious with anything but
the mouse. The joystick tends to be too sensitive to rapidly point
the cursor at the small screen "boxes/buttons" on the pre-flight
(Continued on page 30)

The photo-filled rulebook (nearly 200 pages) is simply the finest
I have ever seen. The 39 page historical overview gives one of
the best summaries of the Battle of Britain I have read in any
book, much less in a computer game. The 11 page Pilot Perspectives chapter gives us first hand accounts of the battle organized
by date. The actual rules are divided into pre-flight, in-flight, and
post-flight sections. There are superb sections detailing the

But Nothing is Perfect

Win A Free Trip To Britain!
In search of the best air combat simulation
player among CGW readers, Lucasfilm
Games and Computer Gaming World announce Their Finest Hour: The Battle of
Britain Competition.
Grand prize is an all-expense paid trip to
England with game designer Lawrence Holland and computer Gaming World
Editor-in-Chief Russell Sipe concurrent with the 50th
Anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Departing
September 1990, the highlight of the twoweek tour is Battle of Britain Day, September 15, 1990 and the 50th Anniversary
ceremony in London. Led by Valor Tours'
Bob Reynolds, Secretary of the Royal Air
Force Association, the trip includes the
Farnborough Air Show, numerous visits to
U.S. WW II air bases in East Anglia, extensive
museum and airfield tours, and even a
Cambridge pub notorious for its RAF patrons;
all to recreate this monumental event 50
years later.
The competition is three-tiered with players
first submitting a qualifying pilot record by
March 15, 1990. If chosen to compete at
Level Two, players submit required campaign
play records and original missions they have
created using the "Mission Builder" feature,
due by May 15, 1990. The five finalists
chosen for Level Three then play each others
original missions on or before June 15, 1990.
Top scorer is then off to England in time for
the 50th Anniversary!

COMPETITION RULES
LEVEL ONE
1. Submit a pilot record saved to disk with
the required qualifying score--a minimum of
1000 points.
• First create a pilot from the roster screen
during flight briefing. Any pilot type is acceptable. Consult page 81 of Their Finest Hour
manual for more information. All types of
pilots are eligible.
• After your qualifying pilot has reached the
minimum requirements of 1000 points, copy
your pilot file onto a 5 1/4" or 3 1/2" floppy
disk.
Note: As a pilot is named, the program
creates a DOS file name using one of the following extensions, based on type of pilot.
This file name should be used in copying.
PLANE

EXTENSION NAME

Spitfire/Hurricane

.RAF

BF 109

.109

BF 110

.110

Stuka

.J87

Ju88/He11111/Do17

.BMB

Example: For a Spitfire pilot named Joe
the file name is JOE.RAF.
2. 100 disks will be chose randomly from
those received and reviewed for qualifying requirements.
3. The qualifying pilot disk must have name

address, and phone clearly labeled on the outside and must contain only one pilot record
file. Disks with more than one file or whose
identifying label is illegible will be disqualified.
Only one entry per person.
4. Send disk to address below. Entry must
be postmarked by March 15, 1990. All disks
received during all three competition levels become property of Lucasfilm Games and cannot be returned.
Battle of Britain COMPETITION
LUCASFILM GAMES
P.O. Box 10307
San Rafael, CA 94912
5. The 100 qualifiers chosen will be notified
by mail and will receive full instructions and requirements for Level Two play at that time.
Employees, contractors, or freelancers of
Lucasfilm Ltd., Electronic Arts, or Golden Empire Publications, are not eligible to enter.
Void where prohibited.

(Continued from page 28)

and VCR screens. Consequently I find myself going to the arrow
keys to move around. Tuning the radio (a transparent off-disk
protection device) can require dozens of key strokes to accomplish. It should take a lot less.
Unfortunately the same problem exists on the otherwise excellent VCR Replay feature. The "buttons" of the VCR machine are
small and consequently hard to "hit". The ability to use the joystick to "fly" the camera (as was done in Battlehawks) is definitely
preferable to the push button approach of the new VCR. Additionally, assigning keys to functions such as "rewind" (R), "stop" (S),
"play" (P) would have been a simpler way to handle the interface.

The Secret Of Your Success
Here are some tactical suggestions from TFH designer Larry
Holland and playtester Noah Falstein.
Fighters
Approaching bombers from the rear is a constant temptation
since the trigonometry of your attack will often cause him to fly
past your line of attack and present you with his rear. Turning
onto his rear presents you with a temptingly stable target. Avoid
this when possible. Not only because a bomber's best protection
is rear facing, but also because it gives the bomber an equally
stable target - you.
Approaching from the side is better than approaching from the
rear because it takes a deflection shot to hit you.
The best approach to a bomber, however, is from his front and
45-50% above him. From this aspect you will dive through his
blind spot. None of his gunners will be able to bring you to bear.
If the target bomber is not close to dropping his bombload (i.e.
you have some time to play with him). You might try teasing one
of his gunners by dancing in and out of range in hopes that he
will fire long range low hit percentage bursts at you. The goal is
to have him run out of ammo so that you can waltz in untouched and paste him.
Bombers
There is no question that it takes practice to succeed at level
bombing. Remember to make your bomb runs from the same altitude and speed each time.
For the less than expert bombardier, letting the computer fly the
bombers while you fly escort tends to produce better results.
On campaign missions, stagger your bombers in distance, area,
and altitude (especially altitude).
Although it is not foolproof it is possible to sneak in low under
the RDF. Stay under 1000 feet.
This one takes practice. Put the nose gunner in autofire mode.
Go back to the pilot position. Slow the bomber to near stall
speed. Enemy fighters tend to zoom past you into your forward
fire zone. As the computer-controlled nose gunner fires you can
adjust his aim by adjusting your flight path and "walking" his
tracers to the target.

Conclusion
What is going to make TFH as successful in the marketplace as
it is under the critic's magnifying glass is the fact that Holland has
made a conscious effort to make TFH as appealing to the actionoriented gamer as it is to the serious wargamer. Both groups are
attracted to the game. At the time this review went to press, TFH
was compiling the highest RID (reader input device) rating of any
game in our history. TFH is headed for computer game greatness. So much so that one is tempted to say, "This is Lucasfilm
Games' finest hour".

Reynolds Reminisces
The winner
of the
LFG/CGWs
"Their Finest
Hour" Tournament will go
on a tour of
Britain during
the 50th Anniversary of
the Battle of
Britain. The
tour will be led
by Bob
Reynolds,
Secretary of
the Royal Air
Force Association. We met Bob a few months ago and talked to him about his wartime experiences.
We asked him to share his most memorable image from the war. He
told about the time he was standing outside his home near London
during a nighttime bombing raid. He looked up and saw two Junkers
88 German bombers slowly lumbering across the face of the full
moon. It was at once an awesome and fearful sight. He recalled the
sense of helplessness he felt watching the enemy flying over his
homeland preparing to bomb his people.
We asked Reynolds what was his most hair raising experience. He
told us about a time when he ran into mechanical problems while on a
bombing mission. He was forced to land his Lancaster bomber in an
open field in Belgium. After the white knuckle nighttime landing
(guided only by a few torches lit by local partisans) he got out of his
aircraft and saw that his plane had rumbled to a halt a few feet from a
huge oak tree. He was met by a French officer who directed him and
his crew to a barn where they could spend the night.
Upon awakening Reynolds heard an odd scraping sound just outside
the barn door. He sat up to investigate and saw a German soldier
sweeping leaves!!! What had happened? Had the French pulled back
during the night? Why wasn't his crew alerted? Ducking out of sight he
tried to control his racing heart and to think of options. Just then the
French officer strode into the barn to awake the crew for breakfast.
The German soldier turned out to be a prisoner recently captured
during a German withdrawal!

Review

T
T

he Dark Heart of Uukrul is your standard dunepic of "kill the
evil wizard", sprinkled with
some novel ideas and several
interesting puzzles. A stalwart
group of four characters
must penetrate deep into the
mountain stronghold of Eriosthe, find Uukrul's real heart,
destroy both it and him, and
then Eriosthe itself (which is
pretty much in the hands of
evil forces).
You begin by creating your
party of four (which always
contains one each of fighter,
mage, cleric, and paladin).
Unlike most games of this
type, however, you don't roll
dice or allocate a set number
of points for attributes. InTITLE:
stead, somewhat in the style
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
of Ultima IV, you answer a
DESIGNERS:
series of questions for each
PUBLISHER:
character and your responses
determine the character's
stats.
The questions are always
the same, although there is a different
series for each character class. Most of
them present you with a situation and a
choice of actions. For example, the
fighter comes upon a troll with a bag of
goodies and is asked if he/she wants to:
1) fight the troll, 2) make a grab for the
sack, or 3) try to trick the troll out his little treasure. How you answer will affect
various attributes. With some experimentation, you should be able to obtain the
characteristics you want. Attributes, by
the way, will gradually rise over time as
your characters achieve new levels of experience (to a maximum of 15, as high
as you can go).

You Gotta'
Have Heart!

Broderbund's
"The Dark
Heart
of Uukrul"

The Ring's The Thing (Magic)
The game's magic is of two types: that
used by mages and that used by clerics
(even though both classes cast spells
through the use of special rings). The
rings begin with iron (the weakest), and
move up through copper, silver, gold,
platinum, and finally, to crystal (the
strongest).
Mages have five groupings, or
"Arkanas", of spells: Fire, Frost, Healing,
Protection, and Knowledge. Each Arkana
has its own set of rings; a ring of silver in
Frost, for instance, will not allow you to
cast silver-level spells in any other
Arkana. You can try to cast a spell for
which you don't have the necessary ring,
but the results are likely to be less than
pleasing. Attempt this at your own risk.
Clerics operate through the use of
prayers or invocations to the four gods:
Ufthu, god of war; Golthur, god of the
physical self; Fshofth, god of the spiritual

by Scorpia
The Dark Heart of Uukrul
Apple II with 128K
$49.95
Ian Boswell and
Martin Buis
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

self; and Drutho, god of the underworld.
As with the Arkanas, each set of prayers
to a god requires its own particular rings.
However, unlike other games in the
CRPG genre, the gods here are not always amiable. At times, they will ignore
your cleric's prayers, which is bad
enough. Even worse, on occasion they
will be annoyed at being disturbed and
end up zapping the unlucky cleric that
bothered them. There is no way of telling
when this will happen, so invocations to
the gods are chancy at best. Of the four,
Ufthu seemed to be the most reliable,
but even he sent down a thunderbolt
once in awhile.
New rings are obtained by making periodic visits to the Inner Circle (for mages)
or the Hall of Temples (for clerics). If the
character is judged worthy, he or she
receives a new ring and the spells that go
along with it. This is not related to gaining levels, as a character could pick up
several new rings well before he achieves
a new level of experience, and none at all
when he does reach it.
Casting spells requires energy. For
mages, this is measured in Psychic
Points, and for clerics, in Virtue Points.
These points renew automatically over
time, with Psychic points regenerating
much faster than Virtue Points. Since you
will be relying more on your mage than
your cleric for heavy firepower, this
makes sense.

Thirteen Is The
Luckiest Number (Mechanics)
Paladins are fighters with one special
ability: they can "lay on hands" to heal

' the injuries of another character. Unfortunately, this can
only be done in combat,
which rather limits its usefulness, especially as the
paladin must give up some
of his or her own hit points
to do this type of healing.
So with your team created,
and with some understanding of what they can do,
you begin the game just inside the entrance to Eriosthe.
It's a one-way entrance; you
can't go out again, only forward. So, you're really committed from the start.
While most of the mountain
is in the hands of evil critters,
there is a small enclave of
humans who run a
marketplace (which you must
find). There you can purchase weapons, armor, food,
healing, resurrections, and
other necessities. Fortunately, this is one of the few areas
that are free of nasty beings
and you can walk around
without fear of being attacked.
Another protected area is the
Sanctuary. There are thirteen (lucky number!) of them set up throughout the
mountain. Here, a party can safely rest to
heal wounds and restore magical energy.
Equipment of any kind can be stored, as
well; each Sanctuary can hold up to
seven items in its cache for future use.
However, the most important function
of the Sanctuary is that this is the only
place in the game where you can back
up your save position. While you can
save anywhere in the game, this is a "convenience save" only. You can do a true
save (backup) only in a Sanctuary, and
it's a wise move to do this each visit.
Travelling through the mountain is
done by two methods: first is the hard
way, slogging along on foot room by
room, and the second, easier way is to
use the system of teleport stations scattered throughout the dungeon. The
catch is that you have to find these stations on foot before you can use them.
For example, the back of the manual
lists the names of all Sanctuaries. However, just knowing these names will not
allow you to pop in. Try to teleport to
one you haven't visited yet and you will
go nowhere. The same is true for the
teleporters by the Inner Circle, Hall of
Temples, etc.
This is a very good and well-conceived
feature of the game design. There is nothing players hate more than having to
fight their way out from deep in the dungeon after spending who knows how
(Continued on page 34)

(Continued from page 32)

long just to get that far in. The teleport
system bypasses that aggravation entirely
So, even if you're way out there around
Urqol and you need supplies, you
simply enter the teleporter and poof!
you're at the marketplace. Likewise,
the return trip is just as fast and easy.
You can take up exploring again almost right where you left off, without
wasting time, energy and magic to
return. I consider this to be one of the
best features in the game.
However, as I mentioned before, you
have to physically locate these oases
first and the way becomes (bet you
guessed!) progressively harder the further eastward you go. The beginning
levels are not too tough, but after that
matters rapidly become more difficult
as your opponents increase in nastiness.

Fight for the Rights
of Your Party (Combat)
Which brings us to the combat system.
Fighting takes place in a "blow-up" of the
immediate area, where each member of
the party and each attacking monster is
represented by an individual icon. Unless
you've been surprised, you may move
your characters (without fear of being
struck) into whatever positions you
desire, providing they have room to
move. This is the first half of the round.
The second half is actual fighting. Who
goes first is determined by the computer.
It may be someone on your side or one
of the enemy. Regardless, this order is
not the same every round. So, the mage
who acted last in the previous round may
well go first in the next.
Striking an opponent is a simple matter, you merely hit the (S)trike key. If only
one enemy is close enough to hit, the
program automatically targets that critter;
if there is more than one, you get your
choice of targets. Spells are handled in a
similar fashion, although being long-distance (mostly), a choice must be made
unless either (a) there is only one
monster to fight or (b) the spell is an areaeffect one, which will hit all enemies automatically.
Combat is generally to the death. On occasion, though, a monster might run
from the field. The party can also try to
escape, but this allows opponents who
are in range a free shot at anyone they
can reach (and an enemy spellcaster can
reach a lot of people).
Experience points are awarded based

on the relative helpfulness of each character per combat. Everyone will receive
some points, but those who did more will
receive more, and killing a critter usually
brings the most points. This sounds fine
in theory, but the execution of it does
leave something to be desired. For instance, Scorpia the fighter has spent
several rounds whittling down a tough
monster, who is then polished off by a

spell from Malkor the mage. Scorp did
most of the dirty work, but Malkor is the
one who will receive the lion's share of
the points.
Since just about everyone and everything outside the marketplace is hostile,
much of the game is dedicated to fighting. However, between the combats,
there are a number of puzzles to solve,
so the game is not entirely hack and
slash. Throughout the dungeon, there
are mysterious diagrams whose obscure
meanings must be figured out, as well as
inscriptions which you need spells to be
able to read. Some of the most important
ones are posted around the walls of the
Inner Circle. These tell you approximately
where the hearts can be found.
Uukrul, you see, has hidden his life
force inside an obsidian heart which, in
turn, is locked inside a chalice. These six
locks are magical and can be opened
only by six petrified human hearts. So,
part of your task is to collect these
delightful items so you can get at the
heart of Uukrul.
Warning: Hints follow. Those readers
not desiring assistance, please skip to
the section entitled "Flaws In The Ointment."

Since the designers do want you to win,
they have placed a total of eight hearts in
the dungeon, even though you need
only six. Thus, if you really can't get at
one of the hearts (can't find it or can't
get through the puzzle or whatever), you
can leave that one and go looking for
another. Sometimes, redundancy has its
good points (just remember, you only
have to pick up six of the eight!).
Unfortunately, the real puzzles don't

show up until you're almost halfway
along, beginning on the dragon level just
past sanctuary Urshas. This is also, in my
opinion, the neatest one in the game.
There is a sub-level, reached by climbing
down a pit, that turns out to be, of all
things, a puns and anagrams crossword
puzzle, with some extremely devious (but
fair) clues. Clever, that dragon.
Other puzzles wait further on, so that
the second half of the game requires
much more thought than the first, in
particular careful reading of the many
signs and diagrams. Don't neglect
them; some are very important indeed.
The one puzzle (if it is a real one and
not a red herring) that I never figured
out was the indentations covered by
different-colored stains. They are
found all over the level that contains
the obsidian heart, but I was unable to
find a connection between them and
anything else in the game.
Eventually you will find your way to
Uukrul's lair, hopefully with everything
you need. While he does not have the
usual force of cannon-fodder minions,
he turns out, alas, to be the typical
pushover so many of these "super evil
bad guys" are in the final confrontation.
However, there is still more to be done
once Uukrul has been vanquished. A sorceress must be rescued and Eriosthe itself destroyed by activating the beacon of
light. So, while Uukrul's defeat is somewhat anti-climactic, at least you are not
left with that flat feeling which comes
from the "Hurray, you defeated the evil
wizard and now the game is over" message that often shows up at these times.

All Over The Map
(User-Friendliness)
Overall, the game plays well and the
auto-mapping is an adventurer's dream.
The first feature of note is the ability to
move around the map to virtually any
place you have been. When you first call
up the map, it displays, naturally, your immediate area. From there, you use the
cursor keys to scroll around, including up
and down stairs and pits, and through
secret doors. You could, in fact, view almost the entire dungeon (when you've
gone far enough) screen by screen in
this manner.
This is immensely helpful, since each
dungeon level has several small sublevels reached through pits and stairs.
Using the "map from here" feature will
quickly show which ones you've used
and which you haven't, since you can't
map where you haven't been yet.
The second feature is the ability to label
the map. You have the letters A-Z, which
you can stick almost anywhere. You do
have to keep your own notes on what
(Continued on page 69)

(Continued from page 22)

Ghostbusters II
Players swing out away from the wall and
crash through the window of their choice.
If a room is selected that contains orderlies, they can easily be avoided by jumping out the window to the waiting rope.
(Hint: If players have difficulty timing
their jump to the rope, they should try
counting the seconds the rope is out of
sight. On my machine it was four
seconds so I counted four seconds and
jumped. I don't recommend rescuing
more than one
of your companions per
trip, because
only a certain
amount of time
is allotted to
successfully
complete the
sequence.
Players must
earn $55,000
in order to
allow Egon to
build the
needed slime
blower. Each
job pays $10,000 to $20,000, minus charges for the damages caused. Once
$55,000 is earned, Egon reports that the
slime blower is complete. If the player has
three positively charged slime samples,
he's ready to head for the endgame. If
not, he should return to the underground
train station until he has found three
good slime samples. Similarly, it will
prove advantageous to have the whole
crew out of Parkview for the big shootout
with Vigo.
Walking Lady Liberty is quite a thrill. Although, given my allegiance to the personal computer camp in regards to the
Nintendo versus Personal Computer controversy, I would have rather not seen a
Nintendo type game controller used to
guide Lady Liberty down the streets of
New York. Walking the great lady down
the streets is not easy, either. Idiots will
drive their cars right under her feet and
stepping on cars drains her energy. The
clock running at the side of the screen
goes from 11:00 P.M. to 12:00 A.M. If
you fail to reach the museum before midnight, Vigo automatically wins.
At the museum, "Libby" smashes in and
the guys slide down the ropes for the
final battle with Vigo. Hitting Vigo with
the proton beam weapons weakens him
and, as the clock strikes midnight, he is
sucked back into the painting. He still
continues to battle by hurling fireballs.
Unlike the other scenes in which players
can get hit with three fireballs, it only
takes one of Vigo's fireballs to fry a

ghostbuster. If one character is fried, the
next one moves in to continue the battle.
If all four become Carpathian Fried
Ghostbusters, the game is over and Vigo
wins!
As if Vigo weren't strong enough by
himself, he also has a hypnotized lackey
who runs back and forth, continually getting in our heroes' way. Shooting him
would be fun, except for the fact that the
proton beams bounce back towards the
player characters.
Vigo's head finally bursts from the painting, zipping
around and
shooting
rapid-fire
fireballs. At
this point, the
proton
weapons become slime
blowers.
Would-be
busters need
to be careful
at this point,
because letting the slimeblowers get
too hot allows Vigo to gain considerable
advantage.

EPA Report (Conclusion)
The graphics of Ghostbusters II are
nice, if not overly impressive. A lot of little
"cutesy" details add to the overall package. For example, blowing open the outhouse in Central Park reveals a giant
cockroach and "busters" shouldn't be unpleasantly surprised at what they find behind the dressing room door at
Northrone's. In addition, the digitized
voice tracks add to the whimsical feeling
that permeated the movie.
Still, with all Ghostbusters II has going
for it, the game must get a mixed review.
Since the game can be played in less
than an hour and players will probably
play the game, at least, fifteen times
before mastering it, some may feel that
this is less than a bargain. Nevertheless,
Ghostbusters II is well-designed and easily learned. To those who liked the movie,
prefer action games, and want humor to
be part of the mix, one can only assert
the obvious: "Bustin' will make you feel
good!"

Review

FADE IN:
INTERIOR:
MURPHY'S OFFICE
- DAY - ANGLE
FAVORING
WINDOW

be daunting. What it

should be, however, is

exhilarating. After so
many game systems
which straitjacket
players with paper-thin
TEX MURPHY, P.I.
illusions of interacsits at his desk with
tivity, Mean Streets offers a fully realized enhis feet up, a battered
fedora pulled low on
vironment and says,
his brow. A charitable
"Go to it! Explore! Go
observer would aswhere you want, do
sume he's concentratwhat you want, find
ing on his latest case.
what you can. Be
One less charitable
back by midnight or
would assume he's
take the consequensleeping. Through the
ces. It's your choice!"
window, we see the
This license, this
city's neon lights shutfreedom, is refreshingting down as the red,
ly adult. Any computer
radioactive dawn
game will necessarily
blooms.
set limits to the
by Charles Ardai
MURPHY (Voiceplayer's actions—this
over): Another day,
is the unavoidable conanother dollar, as my
sequence of limited
The POPCORN NOT INCLUDED Critical Creed:
partner used to say.
memory and
From the start, computer games have aspired to a style and a degree
This particular mornhardware—but a good
of polish best described as 'cinematic.' Only with today's most sophistiing I remember thinkgame will push these
cated techniques are significant advances being made toward this goal.
ing, I need a case
limits as far as posHowever, in adopting a cinematic mode, today's games open themselbad. Little did I know
sible, ideally so far as
ves up to criticism on a cinematic level. It is not enough to achieve
what the day would
to be out of sight.
movie-quality software; one must also achieve quality movie-software.
have in store . . .
Mean Streets is a
It is from this critical standpoint
good game. EveryTITLE:
Mean Streets
that we will consider the new genera.
thing in the game
SYSTEMS:
IBM
Play: Mean
tion of "Interactive Movies." As one
PRICE:
$59.95
revolves around
Street, U.S.A.
might
evaluate
separately
the
FuncBrent Erickson
DESIGNERS:
speeder travel, which
Brian Ferguson
tional and Aesthetic appeal of a build
Last Sunday, Dr.
Chris Jones
can be as simple or as
ing, we will evaluate separately the
PUBLISHER:
Access Software
Carl Linsky was
complex as a player
Play and the Box Office appeal of
Bountiful, UT
these names.
found floating facewants to make it. At
down in the San Franone extreme, players
cisco Bay. Prior to
can fly the craft
that, he was observed
manually, by the seat
standing on the edge
of their pants. At the
of the Golden Gate
other, players can type
Bridge. Since no one
an address into the
pushed him (and
autopilot and sit back
there was no earthquake to make him lose his footing), the
secure in the knowledge that they will end up where they want
police are calling his death a suicide.
to be.
The only person who doesn't buy this story is Sylvia Linsky,
The landing site determines the type of encounter Tex will have.
Carl's daughter. Maybe it's because suicide would void Linsky's
Sometimes, he confronts another character in a one-on-one inter$100,000 insurance policy or maybe Sylvia just wants to see jusrogation reminiscent of Accolade's Killed Until Dead. At other
tice done, but whatever the reason, she has employed Private Intimes he enters an environment to be explored in a manner
vestigator Tex Murphy to find out what really happened.
reminiscent of a Lucasfilm adventure game. In both cases, a comSo opens Mean Streets. As Tex, the player can do several
mand menu lists the player's options and eliminates the need for
things. He can fly around California in Tex's Lotus Speeder, an
a text interface. The only time text input is required is during
aircar styled by the package artists to look somewhat like Hardialogues (which is as it should be).
rison Ford's cruiser in Blade Runner. He can go bounty hunting
Such is the framework of Mean Streets: a variety of activities
for quick cash in Mad Max-style wastelands. He can buzz
and graphic environments built up around a science fiction
downtown L.A. and check out Disneyland. He can flirt with the
mystery plot. A great game would take this framework and use it
lovely Sylvia, who is not only decked out in an eye-popping VGA
to make each sequence deliciously unique, to weave the plot
tank-top but is also more than willing to trade meaningful glantightly, and to create a thoroughly and relentlessly enjoyable exces with a handsome gumshoe.
perience. Unfortunately, Mean Streets is not a great game.
Or, he can get to work earning the fee Sylvia's shelling out;
However, as noted earlier, it is a good game. It lets the player
track down leads through his secretary and street informant via a
wander all over and perform a variety of actions in any order he
videophone and on-board fax machine; visit people involved with
chooses. This is very much a step in the right direction as far as
the case and question/bribe/threaten them into giving up useful
Interactive Movies are concerned. However, within each segment,
information; search through private offices and laboratories; and
the play mechanic quickly degenerates and becomes .. .
hence, either solve the mystery of Linsky's death or die trying.
mechanical. Take, for instance, the system of interrogation. Tex
There's quite a range of options for our boy, and this variety can
flies to a location, meets a character and is given the options:

Popcorn
Not
Included
II

Access
Software's
"Mean Streets"

'Question,"Bribe,"Threaten' and 'Exit.' He has amassed a list of
names that are relevant to the case. The player selects 'Question'
and runs down the list until it's exhausted, pencilling down any
new names the suspect reveals and adding these to the list for
the next interrogation. If bribing or threatening the character
seems as though it will produce a few
more names, he tries this. Then, he
leaves.
Then, again, take the example of searching a room. Tex arrives. He walks up
to each artifact (a desk, a cabinet, a
computer terminal) and tests each available verb ('Look,"Search,"Open') on
each visible item. Then, he leaves.
This reduces adventure gaming to its
lowest level—that of list making and permutation checking—and the adventurer
to his—that of packrat and automaton.
If Mean Streets is not unduly limiting, it
is, at least, unduly repetitious. If it is endlessly varied, it is endlessly predictable
as well. Each new character (there are
more than two dozen) is interesting both in terms of digitized,
animated graphics and in terms of plot significance. At this level,
then, the player looks forward eagerly to each encounter. However, the action of each encounter is identical to that of all the
previous ones, and at this level the game is rather tedious.
The problem is that there is nothing challenging about what the
player does. It's all a matter of invoking a simple routine over and
over, asking the same questions again and again. What challenge there is comes at the trivial level of designer psychology, by
which I mean the game of second-guessing the programmer: If I
threaten So-and-so, will I get thrown out? If I stay to search this
room, will I get caught? Granted, this uncertainty creates
suspense, but it is not the sort of suspense one craves.
Occasional gun battles spice things up, but not significantly.
The game's endless insistence on the need to record clues
(paper is included for this purpose), to spell names properly and
fully, and to search everywhere and ask each character about
everything is stifling and anti-imaginative. However interesting
the plot is—and it is very interesting—the means one is given for
uncovering it are, to be blunt, boring. By the time you question
the tenth person about Gideon Enterprises, by the time you're
halfway done amassing your mountain of correlatives and crossreferences, you are fascinated by the story, but bored to tears by
the game.
Consider the analogy of a pointilist painting. The picture might
be gorgeous, but who wants to be Seurat, placing dot after dot
after dot? Or consider the life of a real detective, which is surely
as methodologically dull as Mean Streets is. Who wants to watch
that in a movie (or play it in a game)?
Part of the problem is that while the player participates in the investigation story, he only uncovers the (more interesting) murder
story. Also, Mean Streets has the problem that's becoming endemic throughout the genre (as a result of improving graphics
and sound), the game comes on six disks. This makes for lots of
swapping and everything happening very slowly for those who
don't have a hard drive. Still another is that most of the animation is spot animation (a blink, a frown), with the rest of each
screen reserved for a slideshow of static, picture-postcard backdrops.
The biggest problem, however, is that the player is given a great
deal of freedom and very little to do with it. It's like being set
loose in a store that only sells canned food. You can go down
any aisle and pick up any can you want, counting on each can
having something tasty inside it. But you sure get tired of running the can opener after a while!

Box Office: In the Mean Time . . .
So, why is Mean Streets worth one's time? After all, plenty of
flight simulators offer a grand tour of the West Coast and there
are plenty of action games out there if it's bounty hunting one
desires. If Mean Streets is so dull, why lay down the bucks, the
hours, and the energy?
Once the player accepts the fact that
the story is going to come out in dribs
and drabs and that he will have to keep
prodding it along every few seconds,
the game becomes a blast. The player
can start enjoying the content and the
language of the story.
"Mean streets" is, of course, Raymond
Chandler's term for the urban jungle he
stuck Phillip Marlowe in and Mean
Streets takes more than its title from
Chandler. From beginning to end, it
sports an authentic hardboiled attitude
and voice. ("Dolores Lightbody had the
face of a Saint," Murphy narrates. "A
Saint Bernard." Or, how about this
great line from the backstory in the instruction manual: "Her eyes
were murky like mud puddles on a wet road.")
To balance this pseudo-forties tone, the game offers elements
that are distinctively futuristic: the speeder, the videophone, a
neo-fascist underground seeking high-tech weapons for their cause, a
brain-trust of scientists who are getting picked off one by one,
and so forth. The blend of the two eras is a successful one, tasting of Blade Runner and The Big Sleep but imitating neither.
The less revealed about the story the better, because it's the
plot revelations that make Mean Streets work, but rest assured
that, after a slow start, things start happening.
The first 'thing' is that an anonymous, threatening fax arrives to
throw Tex off the case; from that point on, the game's a wonderful mix of high intrigue and lowlife in a world that's part chilling
reality and part hard-talking, dime-novel fantasy. The clincher for
me is that I'd have liked to see Mean Streets as a movie. The
story is that much fun.
As for the amenities, the quality of the sound and graphics cannot be faulted. More animation would have been nice—and
much more sound—but the game takes up six disks already,
know what I mean? Better the space should be used to hold a
great story, as it does.
The game's major new gimmick, as the package advertises, is
that a handful of lines of dialogue have been digitized and are
played back (sans extra audio hardware) during the game. This is
the software equivalent of such cinematic ploys as Sensorama
and 3-D—harmless, cute, but big deal. If the whole game had
been done this way, maybe Access would have something to advertise. As it is, we're talking a small handful of pretty trivial lines
("Watch for my fax," is one I remember.).
For the most part, however, Mean Streets is clever and visually
attractive. As with David Wolf. Secret Agent ("Popcorn Not Included," last month), the obstacles to the game's success are less
failures of creativity within the game, as weaknesses inherent in
the game system. One day, someone will hit on a system which
gives the player freedom, gives him lots to do, and doesn't fall
back on tiresome logic-puzzle/tree-search formulas. Until then,
we'll make do with what we have.

"Put Another Nickel Into . .
Playing Mean Streets is a little like watching a really good movie
on a hand-crank projector. One's wrist gets tired, but it's worth it.
To put it another way, it takes a lot of energy to eat one's way
through a bag of unshelled peanuts, but if peanuts are something one likes, the effort is worth it. Anyone who can get past
the shell of Mean Streets, will find a tasty kernel indeed.

Review

uring the period between the World
Wars, Germany suffered a period of severe
economic and political turmoil. Allied efforts to subjugate the German people
actually fostered an environment in which extremists,
such as Adolf Hitler, could
rise to power. He formed a
political rallying point for
the beleaguered German
people, but was hindered in
his ambitions by the cripby Lt. H.E. Dille
pled German economy. As
all economists know, nothTITLE:
Kriegsmarine: Tactical Naval
ing stimulates economic
Combat in the Atlantic
growth better than warfare.
1939-1945
Unfortunately for the
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Apple II,
Atari
ST or IBM
Kriegsmarine, Hitler openly
REVIEWED:
IBM
admitted an ignorance of
1-2
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
naval matters and devoted
$60.00
DESIGNERS:
James
Baker and
his attention, and funding,
Steve Newberg
almost exclusively to support a land campaign. As
such, at the outbreak of
hostilities, the German Surface Fleet was ill equipped to conduct
any form of power projection operations and opted to focus almost exclusively on commerce raiding. Admiral Doenitz, the infamous head of Germany's submarine campaign, was oft quoted
after the war as saying, "If we would have had more U-Boats we
would have won the war". This reviewer holds a somewhat
broader opinion, that if Germany had possessed a stronger surface fleet to support the interdiction efforts of the U-Boats, the
end result of the naval campaign could have indeed swayed in
Germany's favor.

D

KRIEGSMARINE

Leaving Port
Kriegsmarine is Simulations Canada's first foray into the Atlantic theatre of operations during World War II. Their previous WWII
naval simulations, Long Lance and In Harm's Way (Reviewed in
CGW #48 and #57 respectively) focused entirely on the Pacific
Theatre. Aficionados of the previous releases will find
Kriegsmarine quite similar in execution, albeit with some minor
modifications. Most of these modifications are in the pre-battle
setup options delineated below. Veterans of the SimCan operating system may skip to the next section, newly reported Ensigns
and aspiring commanders stand to for indoctrination.
The design team at Simulations Canada focuses upon accurate
historical research and detailed modeling of the perspective of the
operational level commander. To a certain extent their operating
system has accomplished for naval warfare what Strategic
Studies Group's Battlefront system has done for land conflict
[Ed: Although SSG's graphics continue to improve while SimCan chooses not to attempt any graphic representation]. Players
assume the role of the senior naval commander present for either
side. As such, they determine group assignments, plot intended
movement, assign missions, determine rules of engagement
(when and how subordinate forces should open fire), and establish the combat doctrine of their groups. The execution of these
orders is relegated to the commanding officers of the individual
ships while the player retains direct control of the formation's flagship.
The program is entirely text based. Players track force movement and positions on a laminated map, using grease pencils to
mark progress. The text messages received reflect incoming radio
traffic, such as enemy sighting reports, and those things which
may be directly observed from the flagship. Consequently,
engagements may occur unbeknownst to the force commander

or, as is more often the
case, without a clear picture of their success or
failure until the after action
report. This type of model
graphically illustrates the uncertainties inherent in warfare, and is infinitely more
realistic than omnipotent
overviews that allow the
player to control every
aspect of the game down
to the color of the captain's
knickers.

The War Room
Players may opt to play
any of nine historical
engagements provided with
the game or construct one
of their own with a highly
flexible, user friendly
scenario builder. As would
be expected, the scenario
builder allows the player to
manipulate many of the factors which are pre-set in
the historical battles, therefore a brief discussion of its features
may serve to illustrate the versatility this product contains. Next, a
brief description of the historical scenarios will be provided.
Players must initially select the type of scenario to be played
from the following list: Open Ocean Encounter, Channel Dash,
Coastal Engagement and Convoy Defense. Each of these types
contain certain basic objectives for either side other than the obvious one of engaging and destroying enemy warships. For example, if a convoy scenario is selected the British forces must escort a slow moving group of merchants from the west to the east
map edge. German forces must attempt to either sink the convoy
or force the British to scatter it in an attempt to escape. If the latter occurs, the convoy is more susceptible to air and submarine
attack. Also, those merchants which do succeed in exiting unmolested are only worth half of their original victory point value.
Prior to determining force composition, players must select a
year for the scenario, as well as whether they wish to be bound
by historical availability. The former option determines the status
of technical improvements within a class of ships (i.e: radar
capabilities etc.) while the latter excludes ships from selection
until their historical completion dates and after their actual loss
date. After forces have been selected and organized into groups,
each group must be assigned a specific mission in keeping with
the overall objective. Counter force missions are usually assigned
to major combatants to engage and destroy the enemy although,
if one expects to be outnumbered (as is often the case for the
German player) a shadow mission might be more appropriate.
Shadow missions will attempt to engage the enemy in a running
battle from long range, often an ideal position for the German
Pocket Battleships to attain. Screening missions are often assigned to light forces such as Cruisers and Destroyers to reflect
their traditional roles of protecting the flanks of the main battleline and attempting to engage major combatants with torpedoes. Two other scenario specific mission types also exist. The
Close Convoy Escort function is appropriate for British forces in a
Convoy Defense scenario, while the Break Through Enemy mission is required for German forces in the Channel Dash scenarios.
Other options include sea state determination, selecting the
time of day and assigning the degree of air superiority for both
sides. The first option determines the degree to which gunnery accuracy is affected by the weather. As to the selection of the time
of day, other than the obvious day or night choices, players may
(Continued on page 65)

Computer Gaming World's
The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of

Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Review

y sister Laurel
has to be the
slowest card
player in the world.
No matter what the
game, she takes her
time rearranging her
cards, studying them,
and plotting her next
move as if it will
change the course of
history. We are talking
s-l-o-w, folks. Annoyingly slow.
But my sister has
nothing on the gang
of 18 that populates
Sierra's new card
game compilation,
Hoyle Official Book
of Games, Volume I.
The idea of the package is good. Let
players choose from
Solitaire, Hearts, Old
Maid, Gin Rummy,
and Cribbage. Then,
let them select one or
more players from a
palette of eighteen.
The variations are
seemingly endless,
cutting out the
obligatory predictability that seems to
ruin most card game
simulations, but running the package of
six card games on my 12 MHz IBM clone was a lesson in
patience. Then, I had the chance to operate it on the lightning
quick Everex 25 MHz VGA system. You got it—still as slow as
playing Ms. PacMan without a joystick. True, the VGA screen
made for a pretty picture with razor sharp graphics, but the
pacing of the game mitigates against full enjoyment.
That one of the games does not follow
the exact rules set up in Hoyle's Book of
Rules is another matter. Cribbage is the obvious culprit with scoring techniques that
are absolutely unique to this package. The
other games follow the rules all right, but
are really children's games and offer no
great excitement.
CGA or higher graphics are required, but
EGA or better is almost a necessity since
CGA graphics are in four ugly colors and
resolution is barely acceptable. This is
primarily because the cards appear
scrunched together instead of full-faced on
most of the game screens, reducing their
easy visibility. Manipulation of the cards is a two-part process.
First, you select the card to throw and then you validate it by
clicking with cursor key or mouse click. A mouse is highly recommended since the cursor keys are awkward and slow to use—and
if there is anything Hoyle does not need is something else to slow
it down.
The 18 expert and amateur players that can be chosen as opponents in the various games include the remarkably sleazy
Leisure Suit Larry; Warren Schwader, designer of this product;
Colonel Henri Dijon, a blowhard and title character of The

M

Colonel's Bequest;
and Princess Rosella,
daughter of King
Graham of Daventry
and protagonist of
King's Quest IV. Oh,
yes, there is even
Bulldog, a card playing dog. Each is
shown full-faced, complete with moving facial features. Herein
lies the best part of
the game for most
people, the humor involved in interacting
by Michael S. Lasky
with the familiar Sierra characters. If you
like insults, kibitzing
and conversation
that's consistent with
characterization, you'll
probably enjoy this
game's approach.
Roger Wilco complains of being in the
wrong game, Larry
makes malodorous
remarks, and various
TITLE:
HOYLE OFFICIAL BOOK OF GAMES
characters add to the
VOLUME 1
table talk by recountSYSTEM:
IBM (CCA or Hercules minimum)
(mouse/joystick optional)
ing their adventures
(Supports Roland MT-22, Ad-Lib,
in other Sierra
Game Blaster, and others)
games. Those of us
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNER:
Warren Schwader
who prefer competiPUBLISHER:
Sierra
tion over comedy may
Coarsegold, CA
find the humor grating, however. True,
the conversation feature can be turned off - but not totally!
The package's best executed game is Klondike, the solitaire
game. It's good for a number of reasons. Foremost, the cards are
spread out full-faced so they are readable for a change. Then,
again, maybe it's because, it is solitaire and I was not subjected
to the cartoon character style 'conversations' which the selectable
characters interrupt with. Also, the player is
given the choice of how the game will be
played—basically, how the cards will be
dealt from the deck.
Cribbage comes complete with a full lifelike peg scoreboard. Nevertheless, even in
high res EGA and VGA graphics, it is difficult to clearly see the pegs or know which
set belongs to which player. Gin Rummy is
passable. Even though the cards in your
hand can be sorted by suit, by number,
and in a matrix, it is still somewhat difficult
to play the game because the screen
layout, because of scrunched up cards, impedes easy card recognition. Despite this,
the price of Hoyle's Official Book of Games Volume 1 is
reasonable enough to make the package worth considering. For
those that want Cribbage and Gin Rummy with all the bells and
whistles, as well as tournament play capability, Software
Toolworks' Cribbage King/Gin King has more to offer. For those
that want more than those card games, this set offers a higher
entertainment factor if one is willing to put up with its incredible
plodding speed and its built-in prejudice for EGA screens and
mouse owners.
Perhaps, my sister is not so slow afterall.

These Characters
Are Real Cards
Sierra's "Hoyle's Book

of Games:

Volume 1"

Review

Many readers have
requested a review of
"Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes" and "White Death",
two titles from a small
publisher called Command Simulations.
"Blitzkrieg" came first,
followed by "White
Death", a product
based on the
boardgame published
by Game Designers'
Workshop. This review
introduces the style of
these games and will
be followed in
February with a more
detailed look at the
newest game, "White
Death".

superimposed over the
terrain which extended
from Antwerp in the
west to the Siegfried
Line in the east. When
players are making tactical decisions, the map
zooms into a view of
eight hexes by six
hexes. In both cases,
the terrain symbols are
easily deciphered by
veteran wargamers. Perhaps the nicest facet to
the map views is the
ability to have the best
of both worlds, the "big
picture option". In this
view, the player is able
to view the entire map
on the left threequarters of the screen,
while examining a more
detailed view on the
right side of the screen.
This option is a tremendous aid to game play
and is simply a visual
treat!
The units themselves
are based on divisionlevel formations. Onscreen, they resemble
nothing so much as the
old-style square
counters used in traditional board games. German units are red and
black, while Allied units are blue and
green. There are armored, infantry,
mechanized infantry, paratrooper, and artillery units available in the game. Each
counter features the standard information, including unit symbol, combat
strength,
and movement
points.

Amiga in the
Ardennes
Command
Simulations'
"Blitzkrieg
at the
Ardennes"
by Robert A Hottin

hat happens
when an army's
intelligence service tells a general exactly what the enemy is
about to accomplish,
but the general is too
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
preoccupied with his
# PLAYERS:
own plans to take any
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:
heed? That is exactly
what happened on 16
December, 1944.
General Bradley had
been forewarned of
Hitler's plans for an Ardennes offensive,
but he simply accepted the conventional
wisdom which stated that the Germans
lacked fuel for a major offensive. As
usual, the conventional wisdom proved
to be a mixed bag, partially correct and
partially in
error. At
0530 on
16 December, German infantry utilized the
cover of inclement
weather to
assail the
American
position in
a line from
Monschau
(the northernmost point of attack) to Echternach.
The "schwerpunkt" of the attack forced
the Allied position nearly 50 miles back
before the offensive stalled (because of
lack of fuel) on Christmas Day and the
Axis was beaten back from 26 December
to the end of the month.

Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes is a simula-

Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes
Amiga (with 1 MB)
1-2
$59.95
Command Simulations
Bldg. 3, 297 North Street
Hyannis, MA 02601

tion of the German offensive in the West
in December, 1944, the so-called "Battle
of the Bulge" or "Wacht am Rhein". It is a
visually attractive game which combines
some elegant new features with an oldfashioned boardgame design. The use of

on-screen dice rolls and an opening title
sequence with a cartoon Hitler that will
leave players howling are some of the
animated extras that make Blitzkrieg at
the Ardennes different from the average
computer wargame.
The map is, as boardgamers would
suspect, a hexagonal grid (1,700 hexes)

Zones of
control are
operative
in the
game and
combat is
generally
mandatory
between
adjacent
opposing
units. Even
the combat results table will be instantly
familiar to boardgame aficionados with its
references to "Defender Back 2", "Exchange", and "Defender Eliminated".

Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes is not simply
a boardgame, however. Several novel fea(Continued on page 75)

Review

W

ho does the
best job at
portraying
James Bond? Connery? Moore? Lazenby? Dalton? You?
That's a question for
you and your computer to solve by utilizing Broderbund's
Licence to Kill, the
U.S. version of a
game originally
released in Europe by
DoMark. In the
game, players become a vengeanceseeking James Bond
as he seeks to destroy
the drug smuggler
Sanchez.
The graphics are
clean and sharp.
Strangely enough,
however, the different
IBM graphics cards
are supported via
three separate disks
(No big deal, it just
seems somewhat inefficient). Also, there
isn't much music or
sound to enhance the
overall gaming experience. It's amazing
how soon one gets
used to sound board
support.

Nobody Does
It Better
By Yung Min Choi

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The game consists
of six arcade scenes.
In the first scene, players fly an attack
helicopter over a runway-pursuing
Sanchez in a jeep. This segment is deceptive. Player's don't really have to catch
the jeep! The real goal of the segment is
to survive the gauntlet of gun emplacements. The jeep will stop and wait. In
fact, the slower this segment is played the
better. The faster the helicopter goes, the
lower it flies in comparison to the ground
and hence, closer to enemy fire.

Licence to Kill
IBM
(Amiga, Atari ST and
C-64 planned)
$29.95
Quixel & John Kayanagh
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

Scene two is, perhaps, the most challenging. Bond leaps from the helicopter
and begins a foot pursuit of Sanchez.
Sanchez leaves his minions behind to ambush our hero. Five hits take one of
Bonds computerized lives away. 007 only
has a fifteen shot Beretta, but if he uses
careful strategy he can pick up a
machine gun and extra magazines for his
pistol (Funny I thought those guys were

carrying Smith and
Wessons, not Berettas).
Scene three sounds
simple, but it's really
not. Players will have
to line up their
helicopter with the tail
of Sanchez's escaping
plane so that Bond
can be lowered by
rope onto the plane.
This takes great care.
Sometimes, it can be
completed quickly
and sometimes, it just
takes a little patience.
What's a James
Bond adventure
without an underwater sequence? 007
decides to stop a drug
drop. So, he dives
into the water and
must avoid the boats
which are shooting at
him. He also can
destroy the drugs and
earn a scoring bonus.
Finally, he lines up
with the seaplane and
fires a harpoon into
its pontoons.

Hang on! Scene five
is a thrilling water ski
chase. Players attempt
to dodge rocks and
other objects while
reeling in the rope behind the seaplane. The patterns are fairly
easily learned and no previous waterskiing skill is required.
Those "big wheels start movin' on" in
scene six. James must stop Sanchez,
who has hidden his drugs in 18 wheeler
tanker trucks, from reaching the border.
This is accomplished by lining up the
plane with the first truck that appears and
jumping onto the tanker when the white
square appears. The player can then play
demolition derby to his heart's content.
The idea is to destroy every tanker in turn
until you finally catch Sanchez. Time is
running out, so don't be slow.
If the player is not a devoted arcade addict, he will probably find that Licence to
Kill can be a "license to bore". There is
no puzzle-solving, thrill of discovery and
exploration, or, with the exception of
hoarding bullets in scene two, resource
management. Instead, it is a very difficult
arcade challenge. Licence to Kill is often
reasonably entertaining, but strictly for
the arcade-oriented player.

(Continued from page 20)

HERO'S QUEST I
pain on your opponents' faces when you
get in a good shot. They really look like
they've been hit. A very nice touch!
So anyway, you wander around, avoiding the nastier critters for the moment,
and seeing what's what in the land.
There are many curious places
and things to see, such as the
Spore-Spitting Spirea, the Frost
Giant (no, really, don't try fighting
him!), Baba Yaga's hut (chicken
legs and all), Magic Mountain
("Trespassers will be toad!". . . my
favorite sign), the dryad (a tremendously pretty animation sequence), the Antwerp (weird!),
and Erana's Peace (Hint: absolutely the best place to spend the
night) among others.
Then, you have to start making
some sense of it all. The best way
is to go slow, doing a little at a
time. There isn't, as far as I could
tell, any particular time limit here
(although some individual situations are time-dependent when you're actually in them, such as the brigands'
mess hall). Gather information by talking
to everyone, and put the pieces together
as you get them.
Many of the puzzles can be solved in
any order (and in different ways), but the
big three must be done in order: finding
the baron's son, rescuing his daughter,
and taking care of Baba Yaga. Of course,
you won't be attempting these right at
the start; they should be left for late in
the game when your character has advanced in ability and staying power.
That still leaves you a quite a lot to do
in the game, and since there isn't any
specific order you need to follow for
much of it, I will just give some hints for
various puzzles.

Spirea: grabbing a spore isn't hard.
Fighters and thieves can use physical
methods; mages have magic at their disposal (read up on the spells). Check your
list of skills (for non-mages) to see what
might be useful here.
Healer's ring: the location is pretty obvious. The same method that worked
with the Spirea will work here.
Frost Giant: It's just a matter of ample
supply. Several trips are necessary.
Goblin cave: There is no way inside.
The goblins are useful only for fighting to
increase your skill.
Brigand Fortress: There is no way in by

the front door. In time, you will learn
about a back way in.

you're a thief, they aren't important.
Sorry, but that's how it is.

Antwerp: Walk carefully and you'll have
no problems. The critter is weird, but not
hostile.

Troll: He has some treasure, but you
can bypass him if you prefer (he's not
easy to kill); he isn't important to solving
the adventure, even if his name is Fred
(but he ain't my Fred, who doesn't have
a drop of Troll blood in him).

Fairy dust: They only come out at night.
Baba Yaga: By the time you're ready for
her, you should know what you need and
have it. However, for an amusing se-

quence, do pay her an early visit. The
skull outside on the gate will tell you how
to get into the hut.

The Graveyard: A good place to avoid
at night, unless you have a death wish or
the undead repellant.
The Cave by the waterfall: You can't
climb up (although perhaps a thief with
very good climbing skill might manage it;
I wasn't able to test that out), but you do
have to knock on the door. Remember
the Spirea. Also, once up there, be very
careful where you position yourself when
the door opens. Save the game after you
get up there as a precaution.
The Wizard: Unless you're a mage, he is
only a source of information (some of it
important) and a lot of baaaad jokes.
The baron's son: All you need is kindness and a key. Getting the key is, of
course, a trifle harder. Visit the tavern in
Spielberg afterwards.
Inside the fortress: Once past the
Minotaur guard, you should not have to
do any real fighting. The most difficult
part, due to timing, will be the mess hall.
Save before you go in. You are likely to
die the first few times, until you have
seen everything you're up against, and
know exactly what to do. The hardest sequence is dealing with the guys who look
like, well, the Three Stooges. This requires using the candelabra, chandelier,
and table in the right ways and at the
right times. Tricky, this one.
Locked doors around town: Unless

As you can tell from the above, the puzzles are mainly just a tad over the introductory level. Ordinarily, this
would cause the more experienced gamers to skip it. However, while I, myself, prefer the
tougher adventures, I found this
one fun to play, simple though it
was. That in itself is quite an
achievement (grin). Combined
with the outstanding animation
throughout the game, the beautiful graphics, the many touches of
genuine humor, and the surprisingly well-integrated role-playing
aspects, Hero's Quest I is a
definite winner. If you need a
break from the more serious dungeoneering or adventuring
games, pick this one up for a
pleasant vacation.
Bug Alert: There are, however, a few
problems with the game that you need to
know about, especially if you have the
original version of HQ. If you are playing
in high-speed hero mode, turn it off
when: (a) trying to enter Baba Yaga's
front door; (b) when entering the secret
entrance to the brigand cave; and (c)
when leaving the brigand leader's room
by the secret exit. Also, you should absolutely avoid the graveyard at night unless you have the undead repellent active. If you are ever chased by ghosts
before then, the repellent won't work.
Sierra knows about these problems, and
they are being repaired. By the time you
read this (if not before), corrected versions of the game will be out.
Well, I see by the invisible clock on the
wall it's that time again. Remember if you
need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States,
or Fred will eat your letter!): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Special Report

The Psychology
of Computer
Games
by Michael C. Robinson, Roger Thomas and Kenneth Weaver

South Pacific, the North Atlantic, and
Arth.

Michael Robinson (his Ph.D. is due to
be conferred in Spring, 1990) and Dr.
Roger Thomas are statistical
psychologists, currently teaching at
Texas Christian University. Dr. Kenneth
Weaver teaches statistical psychology at
Emporia State University. The following
article is based on Reader Input Device
statistics compiled over the last year.
We publish this analysis in hopes that
the material provided will allow all of us
an insight into ourselves, our hobby and
the entertainment software industry as a
whole.

As psychologists, it is our job to investigate the mind, including the processes
by which people acquire and use information to make evaluations and decisions.
For example, it would be desirable to
determine how people assess a game's attributes in order to form an opinion of
and eventually, to make a purchasing
decision regarding that game. It would
also be relevant to examine the strategies
people develop to meet the objectives of
the game and how these strategies are
applied. This type of information cannot
be observed directly, but can be inferred
from responses to questionnaires or
other experimental methods. In turn,
these responses can be analyzed using
statistical tests to extract trends or
relationships. Working with data supplied
from CGWs "Reader Input Device", we
have attempted such an analysis.

Exploring CGW's Hall of Fame
hat attracts you to a particular
computer game? Its cover art,
the name of the manufacturer, a
review in CGW, a friend's recommendation, the type of gaming adventure it represents? How do you determine the satisfaction level of a game? Is it worth the
price? Does it hold your interest? Do You
rush home in breathless anticipation of
another chapter in an unfolding saga? Is
the game too difficult, too boring or is it
a wondrous escape into a world of fantasy and magic? Why did you buy this
software? Will you buy its sequel? Do all
of your friends enjoy it as much as you?
Do some of your friends love the game
and others find it trivial? These questions
are representative of the growing research into the psychology of computer
games, a field that we are exploring with
the same enthusiasm we experienced in
the Lands of Sosaria, Werdna's dungeons, Skara Brae, the Russian front, the
W

The initial step in the procedure is to
construct an array of the ratings data
suitable for multi-dimensional analysis.
First, we made a chart of the ratings
themselves with the games listed across
the top and the months down the side
(fig. 1). Then, we manipulated this chart
into a correlation matrix to determine
how each game's ratings changed in
comparison to all the other games (fig.
2). The values in a correlation matrix will
range from 0.000 (very low) to 1.000
(very high). A high number would indicate that the ratings for the two games
changed from month to month at a
similar rate. A positive number means
that the ratings changed either up or
down together. A negative number
means that when one rating went up, the
other went down.
Therefore, these correlation values may
be interpreted as an index of the

similarity between games. A multi-dimensional analysis of the correlation matrix
will convert all of the similarities between
the games to distances, determine the
number of dimensions needed to display
any relationships between the games,
construct a graph of the distances so that
each axis of the graph represents a different dimension and then, plots each
game onto the graph. An analysis which
found only one dimension would be
plotted as a single line; an analysis which
found two dimensions would be seen as
a graph with an X axis and a Y axis; and
an analysis which yielded three dimensions would show as a chart with three
axes (X, Y and Z) depicted.
Once the graph has been constructed,
(Fig.3) the known attributes of each
game are examined to see which ones fit
the graph in such a way that the X, Y
and Z dimensions can be labeled. The
labeled dimensions, then, represent the
attributes that readers use to evaluate the
games.
Along the X axis, Starflight and Gunship were plotted at opposite ends of the
axis, while Wizardry, Ultima III, Ultima
IV, The Bard's Tale and Might and
Magic clustered together in the center.
We interpreted this to represent the
reality of the location in which the game
occurred—Gunship on modern Earth,
Starflight in a fictional future universe
and the remaining games in fantasy
worlds that resemble a medieval version
of our Earth. We call this axis the Reality
Dimension.
The Y axis appears to represent the
perspective (point-of-view) of the player.
At one end, the Ultima games provide
the player with a detached "top-down"
perspective located above the action,
whereas games like Gunship and
Wizardry allow the player to see the action from the perspective of a character
in the game. Starflight offers a mixture of
both perspectives, depending upon

whether the spaceship is
in space or on the
ground. We call this the
Perspective Dimension.
The Z axis seems to
reflect the graphic quality
of the game. At one end,
Wizardry provides few
colors and limited control
over the action. The Ultima games, grouped
near the center, use only
a few colors, but provide
substantial control over
the action. At the other
end, Starlight offers a
variety of looks via its fractals and a good deal of
control over the action.
We call this the Graphics
Dimension.
These results suggest
that the COW readers
who responded to the
ratings surveys evaluated
the games according to:
1) the location in which
the game was set; 2) the
perspective from which the game was
viewed; and 3) the nature of the graphics
with which the game was presented.
Since the data used in this study represented only those games rated as superior by the readers, we cannot tell which
of the dimensions are preferred nor
which end of each dimension is seen as
more appealing. However, with your help,
we will investigate a wider range of
games and be able to develop a better
understanding of what CGW readers like.
We want to do a similar analysis on
data specifically designed to help us investigate many of the questions posed at the
beginning of this article. We need you to
rate several games at the same time. In
addition, we would like you to provide us
with some information about yourself to
help us analyze the data more effectively.

To help us in this survey, provide the information requested by Question #54 in
the Reader Input Device for this issue.
There will be no cost to you and all
responses will be strictly anonymous. The
results will be published in an article
similar to this one in a future issue of
Cow.

The New Ratings System
The editors of COW altered the rating
system used to evaluate games from a
numerical evaluation to a letter grade system. Their rationale was that the numerical system was too artificial and the individual reader would not have a uniform
standard against which games might be
compared. On the other hand, everyone
has had experience with the letter grading system in school and they felt that
this familiar system would provide the

reader with a more comfortable standard by
which games could be
rated. The original ratings
system was a fine one
and was only abandoned
because the editors felt
that the letter grading system would make a good
rating scale even better.
Since they were concerned about how well
the new system would
work, they asked us to
compare the ratings
generated under the old
system with those from
the new system.
Under the old numerical
system, reader responses
demonstrated a pattern
known in testing as a
Central Tendency. In
other words, people who
responded under the old
system seemed to shy
away from the extremes
of the numerical rating
scale. Ratings became less numerous
closer to the ends of the scale. This
meant that some very good games did
not appear quite as good and some
stinkers did not appear quite as bad.
Another artifact of the numerical system
was that the majority of the games rated
fell within a restricted range between 6.0
and 8.0 and could only be separated by
using a very fine scale to two decimal
places. Thus, a better-than-average game
would not fall very far from just average
games and a very minor shift in the
original numerical ratings of a game
might cause a significant shift in that
game's final position on the ratings chart.
Finally, the original system rated games
in only two categories—strategy and action/adventure. Thus, games that were
quite different from one another might
(Continued on page 73)

Origin/CGW Omega Tournament

Origin/CGW
Omega
Tournament
Report
AUSTIN (CGW) -- The
monthly competition in the
Origin/CGW Omega Tournament is getting red hot.
September's tournament
had 39 entrants, October's
tournament featured 48
competitors, and the November shootout sported an impressive 76 tanks! Can the
December tournament top
the 100 entrant level? Stay
tuned.
The NovemberOrigin/CGW
Omega Tournament Champion is HELVES designed
by Steve Huskey of Overland
Parks, KS. Steve is an
OMEGA level Cybertank engineer using the Amiga. The

top six tanks in the November tournament were: 1st HELIVES (Uses random tactics. You never know what to
expect); 2nd - DORSAI2
designed by Gus Smedstad
of Kentwood, MI (A new improved version of the 6th
place tank, DORSAI. Loves
to Fight); 3rd - DORSAIL2
also designed by Gus (Utilizes a Turbo-Laser for quick
firing); 4th - DRAGON2 by
Dennis Belcher of Princeton
Junction, NJ (Stands in the
trenches until the final shot.
Tough to take out); 5th STRYKBOK by Steven
Schafer of McHenry, MD
(Designed for maximum
durability. A very stalwart
tank); 6th - DORSAI by
guess who of you know
where (Hyperaggressive. A
close combat specialist).
Each of the designers of
the above tanks qualify for
the Championship Round.

There are now a total of 18
"cybertank engineers" that
have qualified for the
OSI/CGW Championship
Round to be held in
February 1990.

Comments From
OSI Officials
The November Tournament was oriented around
the use of terrain and tank
mobility. OSI was pleased to
observe that
most tanks had
well-developed
scanning and
stalking
routines to locate enemy forces. We used
some open
fields on the
tournament
map to encourage open
ended fighting
with multiple op-

ponents. Overall, OSI is
proud of their top-notch
"cybertank engineers" (pay
raised are being discussed)
and encourages all
employees to work hard to
prepare for the January Tournament. OSI management
wishes all of its employees to
have a productive (and
happy) New Year!
The January Tournament
deadline is January 31,
1990, 9AM.

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Nintendo
Practices to
be Referred
to Justice
Department
Washington, D.C.—On
Thursday, December 7,
1989, Chairman Dennis Eckart (D-OH) of the Antitrust
Subcommittee of the House
Committee on Small Business announced that his
subcommittee had uncovered a number of concerns with regard to Nintendo of America's role in the
home video game industry.

Issues which will be referred
to the Antitrust Division of
the U. S. Department of Justice include: use of "lockout" computer chips in a
large majority of games and
game players; use of exclusive and restrictive licensing practices; potential
problems regarding the retail
market for home video
games; and the practice of
bundling software purchases
with hardware sales. Assistant Attorney General James
Rill will bear the responsibility for further investigation and necessary action.
The Justice Department has
the option of declining to investigate further, but it is

CGW Readers Select
All-Time Favorites
In CGW #63, readers were asked to list, in order,
their five all-time favorite computer games. First
place votes were worth five points, second place
votes scored four, and following. Here are the
Top Ten:

Title
Empire
Dungeon Master
Ultima IV
Wasteland
Pool of Radiance
F-19 Stealth
Fighter
Bard's Tale
Ultima V
Wizardry
Pirates!

Total
Points

First
Place
Votes

220
183
147
139
125

17
23
15
13
8

111
111
110
102
102

12
5
9
9
5

rare for the department to
completely ignore concerns
brought to their attention by
Congress.

Software
Toolworks
Acquires
Mindscape
Chatsworth, CA—The
Software Toolworks, Inc.
(NASDAQ:TWRX) has acquired Mindscape via an exchange of stock where slightly over two shares of
Mindscape common stock

brought one share of
Software Toolworks stock
(exchange ratio 1:.4375).
The merger agreement in
which the acquisition takes
place has been approved by
the Board of Directors of
each company and only requires approval of
Mindscape shareholders, expected to be obtained by
March, 1990. Software Toolworks CEO Les Crane formally reported the advantage of acquiring Illinoisbased Mindscape as adding
diversity to product mix and
revenue flow. In specific, the
official statement underscored the Nintendo license
and foreign publishing and
distribution facilities of
Mindscape as of particular interest to the company. Both
Crane and Mindscape CEO
Roger Buoy (who will remain
on board as Creative Director of the combined companies) cited Nintendo
products as a primary factor
in the product mix of the
new company.

Conversions
Received
Alien Syndrome
(Sega) IBM
Ancient Land of Ys
(Kyodai) Apple IIGS
Ballistix
(Psygnosis) C-64,
IBM
The Cycles
Accolade) Amiga
Deathbringer
(Spotlight) C-64
Decisive Battles
Vol. III (SSG) IBM
Dragons of Flame
(SSI) Amiga
Dragon Wars
(Interplay) C-64
The Duel: Test
Drive II: Car Disk
(Accolade) Amiga,
IIGS
Dungeon Masters Assistant
(SSI) Amiga, IBM
Fiendish Freddy (Mindscape)
ST
Fire Brigade
(Panther) Mac
F/16 Combat Pilot (EA) Amiga
Halls of Montezuma (SSG) Mac
Joan of Arc (Broderbund)
Amiga
Leisure Suit Larry II (Sierra)

Amiga
Manhunter 2
(Sierra) Mac
Omni-Play Horse Racing
(SportTime) Amiga
Space Rogue (Origin) Mac
Targhan (Silmarils) Amiga
Thud Ridge (360) C-64
Thunder Blade (Sega) IBM
TV Sports Football
(Cinemaware) IBM

(Continued from page 43)

Kriegsmarine
opt to conduct the battle under a geographically unique condition known as Arctic Twilight. If this option is chosen units which
are directly to the North fall under sighting restrictions used in
night combat while all other vessels are sighted normally. The
level of air superiority reflects how frequently during the course of
a battle aircraft attacks will occur, as well as how effective air attacks are against those damaged forces trying to make it to port
after the fray.

Call To Battle
The essential element of success in either pre-generated or
"home grown" scenarios is the proper definition of combat
doctrine. This involves: 1) the establishment of the conditions
under which vessels will open or close the range to their contacts; 2) determination of the circumstances under which ships
may fire on contacts; and 3) establishment of preferred torpedo
and gunnery ranges for each of your groups. Speed of approach
and engagement, intended ship movements and utilization of
smoke screens are also delineated at this point. One of the nicest
additions in this area is the inclusion of the "Target Nearest or
Largest" option. This allows better fire coordination and control of
dispersed elements of the force once the battle is joined.
Actual combat, especially during night or Arctic Twilight, is
often confusing and more disorganized than the well thought out
battle plan intends. This uncertainty and hesitation to fire on unknown contacts (yes, friendly fire is a real danger) reflects some
of the actual tension faced by commanders, then and now. Battles are fluid and often find the forces intermixed in a dance
known as the torpedo two-step. The sudden and quite unexpected loss of one of your vessels to one of these deadly dancers
is dramatic and, sometimes, decisive in affect on the overall
engagement.

Returning To Port
The historical scenarios include the "Battle of the River Plate",
an indecisive engagement which resulted in the unnecessary scuttling of the Graf Spee, the "End of the Bismarck", the "Sinking of
the Charybdis", the "Battle of North Cape" and several lesser
known actions involving German commerce raiders. Some of the
scenarios are balanced, but the majority reflect the inadequate
readiness and numerical inferiority faced by the German commanders. One final element which may enter into game play involves the degree of pressure Hitler placed upon the German
Naval Command not to lose capital ships because of the ensuing
loss of prestige that would result. Historically, this led to a much
more cautious approach by the Germans than was actually necessary. Selection of this option not only causes German forces to
disengage more frequently, it also increases British victory points
for damage inflicted upon German capital vessels.
Even games which offer considerable play value can be improved. Kriegsmarine is no exception to this rule. Although the
expansion of the doctrinal options is commendable, one must
wonder why the games in this series take so long to resolve calculations. The IBM version of Kriegsmarine runs nearly as slow
on a 286 machine at 12 Mhz as Long Lance did on the Apple
II+. One could also hope for a little bit more input on damage
control. Couldn't the flag officer establish some orders regarding
what to accomplish on these occasions. Finally, with independent
companies like General Quarters and Conflict Analytics offering on-screen maps and Combat Information Center perspectives, shouldn't SimCan join the graphic movement? Nevertheless, Kriegsmarine is a fine addition to an already successful
series of naval wargames by Simulations Canada. The scuttlebutt (translate as rumor for land lubbers) has it that the final
game of the series is currently in development. Tentatively entitled Fleet Med, the game will cover British, Italian, French and
American forces in the Mediterranean from 1940-1943.

Letters

Architectural Complaint
In reply to your September review of
our Sargon 4 chess program, we readily
appreciate the difficulty of analyzing
programs of this complexity and the time
involved to accurately evaluate them.
We feel you are doing your readership
a very great service by comparing the
two best chess programs available in
the micro-computer market. Unfortunately, with no opportunity to review
this comparison, some inaccuracies
have come in.
My first remark has to do with comparing apples and oranges. Although
a product may span many different
machines and computer architectures,
the operations of such software, the
implementation and low level functions, must (by virtue of their very differences) be quite unique. It is quite
possible to evaluate the front-end (interface, menu styles, etc...) of any
software created across hardware platforms, however the guts of any processor
dependent algorithms can not be. Chess
algorithms fall into this latter category. To
evaluate the Macintosh version of Sargon
4 against anything but the Macintosh version of another chess program, when
speaking to the chess engine, power of
the program, or speed, is both inaccurate
and misleading to your readership.
Mr. Wagner points out that there is
some confusion about opening library
size. Mr. Wagner seems confused, and
seems to equate these words to mean
the same thing. I think the term "68,000
unique positions" is fairly clear, indicating
calculation of all the truly different game
positions available, (not just counting the
moves!). We find our competition's calculation of opening moves a bit puzzling,
but on that basis we fall into the 150,000
or greater range also.
Mr. Wagner mentions that Sargon 4 features a "Novice" and "Easy Play" mode
while the competition has 2 modes plus
"type of play" features. By design, we
have chosen to implement a system of
user controls over the "power" of the
chess algorithm, (reducing the memory
available to it, the time or level it can
think to, how it uses the opening book)
instead of introducing some pattern of
random bad moves (essentially degrading
the chess engine). We feel this allows
users some control over their opponent
while insuring the integrity of the chess
engine algorithm.
Your writer indicates that Sargon 4 only
lets the user set the number of "plys" to
20, while our competition lets the user
set any number. This is correct, but we
don't believe this statement to be mean-

ingful, nor do we consider it a limitation.
Should you try this level of plys it will
seem almost equal to infinite play. 20
plys is very deep, well beyond the depth
usually searched (even in several hours
per side).

An Error: In paragraph 12, "With
Chessmaster 2100, it will referee between you and another human player.",
implying that Sargon 4 does not support
this function. It does. ("Verify Moves",
second item in the "Options" menu in
the program, also found on page 35 of
the IBM manual and page 33 of the
Macintosh manual).
Lastly, I must take exception to your
writers final comments and conclusions.
In the second to last paragraph, he contradicts himself and draws a conclusion
which is wrong, baseless, and misleading
to your readership. I quote, "A definitive

answer to this", (how our program performs against the competition), "would
be very difficult to provide without a
great deal of time to try and find a fair
match of options and conditions". This
statement is VERY true. Next, your writer
goes on to state that he tried several
matches (obviously across computer architectures) and found the results to be a
draw. In one sentence he states that to
do a fair comparison, one must match
the software (and the hardware!) correctly. In the next, he states his conclusion
based on inaccurate and obviously mismatched circumstances. To properly compare these two programs you must be
using equal machines (speed, available
memory, same architecture) and select
equal settings, and do a large number of
tests (a statistically significant amount).
From this type of testing true conclusions
can be made. I think You'll find a VERY
definitive answer!
If you really want to test the usability of
these products, try running them head to
head on original PC's (at 4.77 Mhz) with
EGA, video cards and 640K of RAM. To
really point out the facts, use 3D mode
on both. In this comparison, they both

play many levels of good chess, but you'll
find yourself with LOTS of free time
while waiting with our competition's program.
William H. Ellis
Product Development Manager
Spinnaker Software

With regard to comparing apples to
oranges, please note that we did not
have the IBM version of Sargon 4 in
hand at the time of the September
review (completed in July). Mr.
Wagner's reference to the "draw" was
preceded with the caveat in order to
insure that readers would not believe
there was a simple, definitive answer
when comparing the programs. We
had so many requests from readers
to explain the differences between the
two games that we felt obligated to
compare them, even across the architectures. Even though there are occasional differences between game versions prepared for different machines,
CGW's primary goal is to examine game
design and playability rather than
machine specifics. We try to be
"software specific" rather than "machine
specific" wherever possible.

The Too

"

Blue" Blues

I thought you were supposed to be a
multi-system magazine! All I have seen
lately are reviews for the IBM!! How about
more reviews for Amiga users?
Jim Allman
Wyandotte, MI

We continue to try to cover the
software as it is published. Right now,
most companies are attempting to get
their MS-DOS products out the door,
first. That is why there is such a
proliferation of IBM-specific reviews.
Hang on to your CGWs, though. Amiga
and Atari ST conversions have the inside
track over other formats. As for our MSDOS emphasis, remember that we
covered "Populous" and "Archipelagos"
in CGW #62, while they were Amiga
only products; "Journey" was not yet
available on the IBM, nor was "Arthur"
when we reviewed them in September;
"Universe III" was reviewed based on the
Amiga version in October's coverage
and "The Kristal" was Amiga only; and
our Christmas Buying Guide referenced
13 announced Amiga products out of
the 36 mentioned. We haven't merged
with "Big Blue" yet!
It is interesting that a few years ago
when the Apple II format was the #1
entertainment PC (as the IBM is now)
(Continued on page 87)

(Continued from page 34)

these letters represent, and you must be
careful about using the letters, since you
have only one of each. Thus, if you label
a square A, and later on use A again,
only the second usage will show on the
map.
This is especially handy when you want
to return to an important place you've
marked but can't quite recall its location.
On the auto-map, you can "jump" to any
labeled square and see exactly where it is,
saving a great deal of time and trouble.

Flaws In The Ointment
(Critical Notes)
However, Uukrul does have its flaws.
The random chastising of clerics, for instance. If a cleric uses his prayers
frivolously, or attempts one for which he
is not yet ready, a bolt from the blue is
understandable. When it comes in the
middle of fierce combat and the prayer is
a sincere one, it is less so.

Combat can also be frustrating at times,
since the monsters usually get more
moves than you do. For instance, you
move a fighter next to an Orc. The Orc
steps down a square. You move the
Paladin in front of it, and the Orc moves
back a square. This often led to wasted
rounds, where the fighters stood around
helplessly with nothing to hit, leaving you
dependent on whatever your mage or
cleric could do. While some monsters
might have multiple moves, there is no
reason for most all of them to have that
ability.

been better, as it is all too easy to make
a mistake and have to start over again.
Finally, it is a material error to have
both the save position and the backup
position on the same disk that is used for
playing, especially in a game that is as
disk-intensive as this one. One crash,
and you are in severe trouble. So it's a
good idea to make regular backups of
both the A and B disks at regular intervals as a precaution against disaster.

Good puzzles should have been introduced much earlier in the game. Until
you reach Urshas, you have the feeling
you're in another typical "hack and slash,
nuke 'em 'til they glow" dungeon
scenario. This feeling is reinforced by the
lack of interaction with anyone outside
the marketplace and, even there, you are
limited only to merchandising activity.

For all that, Uukrul is still a
better-than-average specimen of the all-dungeon
romp. Except in the latter stages of the
game, you spend a lot of time in that activity. Most of the puzzles are clever and
of better quality than found in many
games of this type (except the gargoyle/Phoenix riddles, which are rather
blatant). The manual is easy to read,
well-laid-out, and provides all the information
you need to get started.
Bottom line: A good choice for the
(patient) puzzle-oriented dungeon adventurer.
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

The soul amulets, which are the game's
copy protection, were a pain to translate.
Fortunately, they are needed only when
you reach a new Sanctuary. Even so,
something a little less tedious would have

Riddle Me This
(Conclusions)

(Continued from page 24)

before Christmas (Amiga, Atari ST and
IBM).
Remember an earlier mention of
Ocean's F-29 Retaliator where the player
flies an American aircraft of the same
name? Well, the game must be based
more on fiction than on fact as the only
"29" designation denoted to an American
aircraft is the X-29, the forward-swept
wing test plane based on the Northrop F5. The only plane depicted thus far in
publicity for F-29 Retaliator more closely
resembles the MIG-29. Do the pictures illustrate the good guys or the "bad guys"?

Over

There!
graphics and logical puzzles. Characters
are supposed to be able to interact with
all objects and surroundings and arcade
action will be included in the mix. The interface will place spells, potions and
weapons under joystick control (a game
to rival Times of Lore, perhaps?).
Blade Warrior is set in a land of fantasy
where evil reigns. Only the player's character has a chance of quelling the foe
with the aid of his trusty broadsword and
magical power. His task is to collect a

variety of stone fragments from many
wizards. Once collected, he must give
them to a mad sorceror. Only then, will
he be given the legendary sword, the one
weapon powerful enough to destroy
Murk—the power of hell incarnate. Blade
Warrior, which promises a complex plot,
is unusual in that the graphics utilize an
atmospheric, multi-frame, silhouette technique (the programmer comes to game
design from the film animation business).
It is expected to be released in the U.K.

Games published in the U.K. can be ordered from the following mail order
retailers:
Computer Adventure World, Bank Buildings, IA Charing Cross, Birkenhead,
England, L41 6EJ. Tel: 01144 51 666
1132.
Castle Software, 2 William Clowes St.,
Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, England. Tel:
01144 782 575 5043.
SDC, 60 Boston Rd., London, England,
W7 3TR. Tel: 01144 567 7621.

(Continued from page 61)

The Psychology of
Computer Games

the old two category system. These six
categories (strategy, simulation, adventure, role-playing, wargames and action/arcade) are realistic divisions based
on the nature of the game. This in-

by those players who prefer that type of
game. Thus, a comparison of the ratings
within a category will more than likely tell
you what the "experts" in that category
like.

creases the chance that games within
any given category will probably be rated

One final comment on the
CGW ratings system is in order.
In their ratings chart, CGW always provides information on
the average number of responses upon which a game's rating
is based. In statistics, ratings
based upon larger numbers of
responses tend to change less
than ratings based upon fewer
responses. So, the rating of a
game with an average of 100+
responses will be more stable
than the rating of a game based
on thirty or so responses. In
other words, one can tell how
many people have played and
evaluated the game and infer
something about the game's
durability. Even though the
game may be older, a respectable rating based on a large
number of responses may
suggest that it is worth one's time to try
it out.
--

end up being compared to each
other on the same listing. Therefore, when these ratings were
collapsed into a composite
scale, their positions relative to
one another could be misleading.
Under the new letter grading
system, the spread of the
ratings is more uniform and a
comparison of the monthly composite ratings with the original
data shows no evidence of a
Central Tendency. The new
ratings accurately reflect the actual spread of ratings in the
original data and the grades
given are distinct in the monthly
ratings. By the way, the numbers in the monthly ratings may
be easily converted to letter
grades (12 = A, 9 = B, etc.).
Another benefit to the new system is the adoption of six categories into
which the games are placed rather than

(Continued from page 50)

Blitzkrieg at
the Ardennes
tures utilize the computer's ability to
relieve the player of some of the more
tedious aspects of wargaming. The
"where" feature is a nice addition, which
brings up a map depicting about half of
the total map area, with the active unit's
current position outlined in yellow and all
the hexes it could legally move to outlined in blue. This feature obviates the
necessity to trace movement hex-by-hex,
totaling movement points against terrain
costs as one goes.
In combat, units engaged against one
another are outlined in a distinctive color
so the player can tell at a glance which
units are involved in which battle. The
game also features weather, air attacks
(weather permitting), V-2 rocket attacks
against Liege or Antwerp, bridge-blowing,
bridge-rebuilding, defensive fire from artillery, infiltrators, hidden units, and more.
Most importantly, the computer opponent will play either side, depending
on your preferences.
In spite of these advantages, the game
does have several drawbacks. None of
these are fatal toward ultimate enjoyment
of the game's challenge, but they warrant
mention nonetheless. First, the computer
opponent can take up to 15 minutes to
resolve a turn. This seems excessive, all
the more so as the cybernetic Field Marshall is no brighter than any other "computer general" you've played against of
late.
Next, the game could be considerably
improved with a historical order of battle.
Neither on-screen nor in the documentation are there historical unit designations.
This may not be a disaster as far as
game play is concerned, but it lessens
the value of the game to students of
military history.
Finally, the documentation has a few
problems, as well. For example, the startup menu lists a feature entitled "PlayLevel 1-5". It is not even mentioned in
the documentation, much less explained.
Despite its flaws, however, this is a challenging game. It is easy to learn, stimulating to play and offers a reasonable
simulation of some of the choices available to the respective Army commanders.
Hidden units provide a high uncertainty
level and mandate a level of caution vs.
risk that one seldom experiences in a
pure boardgame.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 8)

football package for players who want to
do it their way. Players build their team
from scratch, distributing ability points to
their players, creating a playbook with a
sophisticated play making system, and
designing an artificial intelligence to
coach based on their pigskin
philosophies. The game comes with
several pre-created teams of varying
levels to play against. This looks like one
of the better football packages out
there. Mac ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.

Capcom
3303 Scott Blvd.
Santa Clara, CA 95054
POCKET ROCKETS: Put four 600cc
superbikes to the test on either the drag
strip, or a standard road racing scenario.
Both scenarios offer standard road
racing arcade action. IBM (pictured)
($34.95), C-64 ($29.95), & Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Innerprise
128 Cockeysville Rd.
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
BATTLE SQUADRON: One or two
players fight their way across the Barrax
Empire's home planet, trying to dodge,
bomb, and blast their way past a
landscape bristling with more than 50 different ground emplacements, "flash and
burn" weapons, and spinning, darting
air opponents. Colorful backgrounds
and 3-D graphics will keep the joystick
jockeys jumpin'. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.
Kyodai
58 Mitchell Blvd.
San Rafael, CA 94930
PSYCHIC WAR: This Japanese roleplaying/action game comes across the
ocean complete with six 3-D mazes, 49
different enemy aliens to conquer, eight
psychic powers to master, and a variety
of maps, decoders, cards, crystals, transmitters and armor to acquire. The
players must put together an ideal fire
team of psychic warriors, equip them
with all the right weapons, and then
fight their way past the evil energy-draining Psychic Barriers and the dread BioBeast. All in a day's work! IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
675 Almanor Ave.
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
DRAGONS OF FLAME: This latest
Dragonlance action game has eight
"Companions of the Lance" on a quest
taking them through the wilderness of
the Elven Mosaic, through the caves of

Sla-Mori and into the fortress of Pax
Tharkas. Once there, they must recover
the sword "Wyrmslayer" and free the
slaves held there by the evil dragons and
Draconians. Dragons, giant wasps, griffins, wraiths, zombies and scores of
other monsters are betting the players
won't make it. IBM (pictured) & ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9.

handy editing options. IBM ($14.99).
Circle Reader Service #10.

Virgin Mastertronic
18001 Cowan, Stes. A & B
Irvine, CA 92714

TIME TO DIE: The player takes the
part of Sam Harlow, a 1934 Private Eye,
and is immediately issued a death threat
in this text/graphic adventure. Quickly
find out which of the twenty suspects is
behind the threat or fall subject to getting shot at, burned, beaten up, strung
up, ripped to pieces by dogs, blinded by
crowbars, or ... IBM (pictured) & C-64
($14.99). Circle Reader Service #11.

DEMON'S TOMB: This is a standard
text/graphic adventure in which players
first play an English archaeologist who
experiences a violent death on a dig in
Devonshire England, and then portray
his son in an attempt to unravel the
mystery of his father's death. The game
can be played with or without graphics
and has an 'advanced' parser with many

VEGAS CASINO 2: In this sequel to
Vegas Casino the players compete in
Roulette or Craps. The two games are interlocked so money won in one game is
automatically transferred to the second.
At $9.99 it's much cheaper than a trip
to the "City of Lights". IBM (pictured) &
C 64 ($9.99). Circle Reader Service #12.

(Continued from page 14)

Lost in the Ozone Again
matter to rest those on your target and
press the right mouse button. With
tracers enabled, you'll see a spray of
shells heading toward your target.
Naturally, the opposing pilots won't be
waiting for you to fire. They'll jink, dive,
climb, and perform other tactics to get
you into their sights.
An aircraft that's hit will begin to trail
smoke. This gives you time to eject and
parachute to safety. (One of my early
flights ended when a radio conversation
suggested: "If you want to see if you have
bombs, hit 'Escape P'." I thought, "Gee, I
wonder if I have bombs?" and duly hit "Escape P". I'd forgotten that meant
Parachute.)
You may want to join a bomber as a
gunner, to help knock out enemy radar
or airfields. Once at a "/field", ask around.
If 7777 decides to be pilot of a B17, you
could ask to "/join 7777 tail" to sign on
as tailgunner. You'll be notified upon acceptance or rejection. When all positions

are manned, 7777 will "/fly" and away you
go.
On Saturday nights, there are campaign
games where all participants must adhere
to certain rules. For example, one side
may be restricted to FW190s, while the
other side is limited to BI 7s and Mustangs. Targets may be radar installations
or airfields.

Tactics
In my various falls from grace, I've
learned a couple of tricks that may help a
beginner last longer.
1) Using only 10-20 percent of available
fuel makes your ship faster and lighter.
2) Emergency power gives your plane
an extra speed boost, although it uses
the fuel faster.
3) Never join a fuzzball, er, dogfight.
4) With flaps down you gain altitude in
place of speed. Flaps up give you increased speed, but not as much altitude.

5) Don't bother leading the target as
you would if you were duckhunting.
Simply put your crosshairs on their ship
and fire.
6) Avoid aces. You can examine other
players' scores. So, if they have a high
pilot rating, avoid them!
7) Practice landings without wheels.
You'll sometimes lose your undercarriage.

Analysis
If you enjoy airplane games, you'll like
Air Warrior. You had better be resigned
to spending some money on it, though,
because time flies while you do. I just
wish it were cheaper. Even so, hope to
see you in the wild blue yonder.
(To join GEnie, set your terminal
software to half-duplex, have a major
credit-card handy, and dial through
modem 1-800-638-8369. When it comes
on-line, hit HHH. After U# appears, enter
GEnie and hit Return. It costs $25.95 to
sign up, and non-prime-time connect
costs are $5.00 per hour for 300 bit per
second [BPS] modem, $6.00 per hour
for 1200 BPS, and $10.00/hr. for a 2400
BPS unit.)

(Continued from page 18)

Sword of the Samurai
samurai. Larger armies provide more opportunities for battlefield
glory and the cycle continues.
In between these opportunities, there will be ample time to
"Practice Kenjutsu" (improving one's swordsmanship and hence,
likelihood of gaining honor through dueling) and participate in
"Melee" sequences (to achieve honor). A caveat concerning the
"Melee" sequences should be mentioned here. Early copies of the
game had a bug on Disk "C" which caused the game to crash in
the middle of some of the "Melee" sequences. This was only a
minor annoyance if one was in a position where he could restore
without losing land or honor, but it was extremely frustrating if
the character happened to be returning to his home fief in order
to save the game after winning a battle or duel (essentially losing
land or honor). Microprose's Customer Service department will
replace those Disk "C"s free of charge. Those who cannot wait
can download the corrected file from GEnie's Games RoundTable (File #1688, Category 7).

On a Kakuyoku and a Prayer
The "Battle" sequences are elegantly choreographed. Players
choose from one of three offensive or defensive formations (in accordance with the dictums of Sun Tzu). On the offensive, the
Hoshi (Arrowhead) formation is utilized for head-on attacks, while
Kakuyoku (Crane's Wing) enables one to develop a double flanking attack and Katana (Long Sword) helps in attempting to flank
one side or another of the enemy's lines. On the defensive,
Ganko (Birds in Flight) assists one in meeting the Hoshi-style attack head on, while Koyaku (The Yoke) aids one in enveloping
the enemy from the flanks and Engetsu (Half-Moon) enables one
to place all his strength on one flank or another. Both terrain and
one's opponent's initial formation may dictate which will be most
successful for the player.
Of course, selecting the initial formation is not all there is to
generalship. One must be ready to take advantage of any opportunity. In the "Battle" sequences, players may order any unit
under their command to any place on the battlefield by selecting
the unit, pointing the cursor (a Japanese war fan) to the position
on the battlefield the unit needs to march to and clicking. It is
clear, simple and efficient, as well as having exactly the right feel
of realism to it. The terrain is sufficiently varied to keep it interesting and the battles keep getting larger and more complex as the
player's ability in this area improves.

Just An Old Fashioned Blood Song
The "Melee" sequences are, graphically, the least attractive part
of the game. The overhead perspective in these sequences, especially those where the character is exploring the interior of a
castle, is reminiscent of a time-honored game style dating back
to computer gaming's formative years (e.g. Castle Wolfenstein,
Temple of Apshai, Rescue At Rigel etc.). Even so, the system
works and serves to present a vital part of samurai legend—the
hero against hordes of villains. Samurai films invariably offer
these sequences as a means of showing how far above the
average fighter the skilled warrior's abilities are.
Isolated from the rest of the game, the "Melee" sequences are
extremely disappointing. However, in the context of the game, i.e.
as a counterpoint to the "Battle" and "Duel" sequences, the
"Melee" sequences add pacing, excitement and variety to the
game. Characters strike from long range with their bows and
from short range with their katanas and face opponents with a
random assortment of bows, muskets, spears and swords to increase the variety. As the manual notes, the bow is the most efficient weapon in these sequences. Some constraints of realism impinge on the arcade action here. Alas, once the character is

engaged at sword
range, he cannot
ever backtrack fast
enough to increase
range far enough
to use the bow (at
least, in this
reviewer's experience). It would
have been more
convenient in dealing with some opponents at close
range, albeit less
realistic.
In reality, those who dislike the "Melee" sequences can "Just say
no" to these sequences by choosing the "Avoid trouble and go
about your business" option. In essence, the gamer who can
work generalship (through the Battle sequences) and swordsmanship (through the Dueling sequences) to his advantage may be
able to compensate for the honor lost (by avoiding as many
Melee sequences as possible).

tuitive that even
this reviewer, who
usually eschews
games which
depend upon
quick reflexes and
significant
hand/eye coordination, became a
competent
swordsman. The
entire sequence
was smoother,
easier and more
logical than the similar sequence in Pirates!.
As a bonus, the sound effects were extremely effective (even
with the IBM speaker). One could hear the opponent parry one's
thrust (or vice-versa) or aurally note the katana finding its mark.
Note: As one advances to hatamoto and daimyo, the opponents
get better, so it is advisable to select the "Practice Kenjutsu" on
occasion and improve one's skill with the sword from time to
time. One never knows when it will be necessary to face a rival in
a matter of honor or square off against an assassin.

Duel in the Rising Sun
Fortunately, the "Duel" sequences more than make up for any
disappointment which one may encounter in the "Melee" sequences. Since the player views his character from a behind the back
view, the interface is very natural. One moves in a logical pattern,
using joystick or keyboard directional keys, and moves the sword
in the same way by pressing the button or "Enter" key. It is so in-

Arigato's Ambition
As "Domo Arigato", my player finally attained the title of Lord
Matsuya. This is where the game offers some parallel to Koei's
Nobunaga's Ambition. Both games deal with the province to
province conquest which lead to the formation of the Shogunate.
However, SOS does not rely on hex grids and traditional war-

game mechanics. Instead, one's generalship now becomes the
vital factor in conquering enough provinces to declare oneself
"Shogun".
Again, there is a beauty in SOS's game design. One does not
automatically become "Shogun" when he achieves the number
of provinces necessary to declare himself such. Rather, he must
be certain that he is sufficiently strong to fight off the combined
forces of all the other daimyos when he declares. Then, when he
does declare, the battle takes place using the familiar "Battle" sequence, but portraying more massive forces than previously in
the game. The battle can be hot and heavy, with plenty of confusion and movement, but it is a glorious experience where the
ebb and flow of battle is both visual and visceral.

Scroll of Honor
Sword of the Samurai is more than an action/adventure. It not
only offers enough divergent streams of opportunity and destiny
to insure replayability, but provides enough different gaming
styles and venues to beckon many styles of gamers into its web
of intrigue, warfare and honor. It may seem to be a mere compendium of mini-games, but (to paraphrase Sartre) the gameplay
is not the sum of what is included but the totality of what may be
experienced. As noted earlier, Sword of the Samurai has a zen of
its own.

Designer's Notes
The Secret History of Sword of the Samurai"'
by Lawrence Schick
Microprose Software, as you probably know, established its reputation

by producing top-quality vehicle simulators (such as Solo Right and F-15
Strike Eagle), as well as wargames (like Crusade in Europe and Conflict
in Vietnam). By early 1986, game designers Arnold Hendrick and I were
eager to expand into role-playing adventure games. We weren't satisfied
with the games that were out there and thought we'd like to take a different approach. However, company president Bill Stealey wasn't keen on
the idea—he felt we should stick to what we know.
Clearly, only co-owner Sid Meier was going to be able to change Bill's
mind about role-playing adventure games, so we were quite pleased when
Sid got interested in creating one of his own. Sid and Arnold came up with
Pirates! and Major Bill was converted. Initially, Pirates! was greeted rather
warily by our marketing and sales departments, but once it was selling like
hotcakes, all they wanted to know was what we were doing for a follow-up,
and when it would be ready.
At a game design presentation in late '87, Arnold and I unveiled our
proposals for MI Tank Platoon and Sword of the Samurai. Both games
got the go-ahead and I was assigned the project leadership of Sword of
the Samurai. My task was to create an outline of the game's structure,
then form a team to develop the game: an artist, a sound composer/programmer, and several game programmer.
My first problem was that I knew next to nothing about feudal Japan, so
there was plenty of research ahead of me, particularly since we at
Microprose pride ourselves on setting our games in accurate and realistic
contexts. Actually, we sometimes overdo it, and worry about whether a
game is historically accurate when we ought to be worrying about whether
it's fun. I knew I'd have to be careful about overdoing the details on this
game, since it deals with a subject most Westerners are unfamiliar with.
We already knew Sword of the Samurai would employ the graphic-window-and-text-menu interface that had been so successful in Pirates!, but
what else should be in it? I wanted to avoid designing a game that would
be too esoteric for the average American gamer, so I decided that first I'd
take only a quick survey of samurai culture—just hit the high spots, the

stuff people expect in a samurai game—and build the design around
those. Once I'd determined the game's basic structure, I'd go back and do
some serious research.
After reading several general histories of feudal Japan, devouring a stack
of novels and comic books, as well as watching every Kurosawa samurai
film I could get my hands on, I decided on the features I wanted in Sword
of the Samurai:
1) The game must reflect samurai culture. Feudal Japan was a warrior
culture in which honor, loyalty and martial ability were respected above all
other virtues. The game should judge the player's success by how he
measures up to these standards. To do well, the player should have to
think like a samurai.
2) The player should have a wide range of opportunities to improve his
character's situation. At most times in Japan's history, a samurai's fate
was determined by his birth. However, during the 16th century, the 'Warring States" period, the country dissolved into near anarchy (the perfect setting for a role-playing game). Central authority disappeared and each
clan's warlord became almost an absolute ruler. Warriors could and did
rise from the lowest ranks of the clans to become lords and commanders
of mighty armies. Setting the game in this period also gave our game a
goal (i.e. become your clan's warlord, conquer all the other lords and then,
unify Japan under your rule—becoming Shogun!).
3) There must be rival characters who act intelligently. This period is
rife with war and intrigue. Therefore, all the samurai located around you
player also dreams of bettering themselves—preferably at your expense. I
wanted the player to face ambitious rivals who have the same opportunities as the player and who select their courses of action based on intelligent self-interest. Players should actually be able to learn about the game
by watching their rivals' moves.
4) There must be battles. Warlords fight wars, so we needed some way
of resolving them. I decided to give the player a taste of generalship by including a simple wargame sequence in which the player-general controls

units of spearmen, archers, cavalry and musket-troops. This would be a
wide-open, fluid system, not based on boardgame hexgrids.
5) There must be sword fights. Last, but by no means least, there must
be a way to resolve points of honor between warriors. The duel between
two highly skilled swordsmen is a central feature of most samurai epics. In
addition, there are the melees in which the lightning-fast hero cuts down
dozens of lesser samurai. Yes sir, duels and melees—I wanted them both.
By the time I'd finished, I'd outlined a monster of a game, with everything in it but the kitchen sink—but somehow it didn't look too big back in
'87. I started to put together the development team.
Picking the first two members was easy, as they both insisted on being
in on this project. Michael Haire, our head artist, had some great ideas for
the graphic look of the game. He thought we should abandon our usual
representational approach and emulate the heavily stylized Japanese art of
the 16th and 17th centuries. When I saw what he had in mind, I quickly
agreed. Sid Meier was intrigued with the idea of non-player characters who
act on their own initiative. He came on board to create the framework of
the "self-interest generator" that enables the player's samurai rivals to
make intelligent choices. Later, he came back to lend a hand with the
Duel screen.
The rest of the development didn't go so easily. It was nearly a year of
fits and starts before we settled down with a committed team of game
programmers to realize the rest of the game: John Kennedy on the Melee
screen; resident tools guru Dave McKibbin creating the Battle screen; and
ace game engineer Jim Synoski handling the role-playing code and holding it all together. Veteran sound programmer Ken Lagace created the
sound effects, with atmospheric Japanese-style music composed by Jeff
Briggs (one of our game designers who happens to have a doctorate in
music composition). The result is an action-packed role-playing game
that's rich, subtle, easy-to-get-into, but difficult to win. We're all very proud
of it.

(Continued from page 66)

we were called Computer Apple World
by one disgruntled Atari 8 bit reader.

Feelin' "Grog"gy
I just wanted to send you a letter to let
you know how much I enjoyed your
December 89 issue. I especially enjoyed
the two game reviews by Ltc. M. Evan
Brooks. There is just one thing I would
like to ask him—what is a "grognard"?
This term shows up in both his reviews
(and your "Inside The Industry"). I've
been in the military for 13 years (Air
Force and Air National Guard) and been
a computer gamer since 1980, but I'm
not familiar with the term. Who knows—I
may be one and not even know it!
Raymond P. Stickler
Paris, IL
"Grognard" is a French word used to
reference members of Napoleon's "Old
Guard". It comes from the French verb,
"to grumble" or "to complain". Hence,
even though you won't find the word in
an English dictionary, we use it to refer
to experienced wargame fanatics who
are willing to slog through plenty of
details, even if they complain a bit. As
both a military veteran and a "Stickler"
for detail, you probably would be a grognard.

Don't Go Ahead
Usually I don't respond to product
reviews because I strongly believe it is a
reviewer's prerogative to report his/her
personal opinions about a product. However, having just read Scorpia's review of
Accolade's new role-playing game, Don't
Go Alone, I feel it is very important to
respond. In an attempt to respond to
Computer Gaming World's editorial
needs and lead time, we provided a prerelease version of the product that was
approaching final code, but was certainly
not complete. This version was not
meant to be regarded or reviewed as final
software, but, due to an unfortunate
error, it was reviewed as such in last
month's issue.
I strongly believe that the review of
Don't Go Alone would have been more
positive had Scorpia had an opportunity
to review the final version that was
released to market. This version, in fact,
contains many of the features Scorpia
noted were lacking.
As with any product of this magnitude,
many features were tweaked, changed
and even added during the last weeks of
development. All ten levels of the house
were redesigned. Existing puzzles were

reworked and more were added. The
ability to trade items among the search
party was included, and the product now
supports Ad-Lib and CMS sound boards.
We also made a conscious decision to
adjust the play balance so that the first
two levels of the house were easier,
making the game more accessible and
less frustrating to a larger audience. As
the player moves through the game, however, the challenges increase in terms of
puzzles that need to be solved and
strategy tactics required to defeat the
creatures the party will encounter.
Scorpia noted that in her version there
were "no puzzles, no mysteries to solve
and no difficult obstacles to overcome."
On the contrary, the version that your
readers will find in their software stores
contains a multitude of puzzles and
obstacles that players must encounter
and solve before progressing to each
new level. On the early levels, for instance, players will need to collect clues
and information required for use in the
later levels, such as: formulas, hints and
items. There is also beneficial information
hidden throughout the ten levels that can
help or heal you—if you can find it. The
layout of the house is progressively more
complex and players will not be allowed
to proceed until they successfully solve
each level's puzzles.
Further, I'd like to respond to some of
the statements in the review that are no
longer accurate as they regard the final
version:
1) While you cannot create characters
from scratch, the stats of the 16 from
whom you can choose are randomly
generated and vary each time you create
a new party.
2. The "trial and error" method using
the Table of Elements is certainly one
way to complete formulas, but a more exciting method is to "discover" them hidden in the house as you proceed through
it.
3) Monsters do make physical attacks
and all of a character's stats are affected
Viewing a character's stat screen will
reveal both a numeric and graphic display of his/her current stats.
4) If you run from combat, there is a
one in four chance that an item will be
stolen from you. This does not occur
100% of the time as indicated in the
review.
5) All characters have the ability to trade
items and to carry more than one of any
item. This is, in fact, necessary since
many items can only be used by particular classes.

6) Every encounter has animated
monsters.
7) Contrary to the remark that nothing
can be used or manipulated, every
weapon must be activated as well as
armor. Formulas have to be used (there
are even some that don't exist in any of
the books, but can only be found by
making your way through the house) and
there are certain items you will find along
the way that you will be required to use.
These comments are not intended to
criticize Scorpia or her remarks. Indeed,
had we stopped development of Don't
Go Alone with the version she reviewed,
her comments would be accurate. Since
the final version is markedly more advanced, I hope Scorpia will take a look at
it and draw new conclusions about Don't
Go Alone.
Sheldon Safir
Manager, Product Development
Accolade
An unfortunate error has occurred in
this case. It is CGW's policy to write a
"Sneak Preview" about a game when we
have not yet seen the final copy, but to
hold the review until we have the final
version of the game. With Don't Go
Alone, Accolade provided Scorpia with a
pre-publication version so that we could
get an early start (Scorpia is an
out-of-house writer based in New York). Later,
they updated the copy with an advanced beta version. Scorpia knew it
was still a beta version and Accolade understood it as such, but (since the
editorial staff did not see either the disks
or the cover letter that identified it as
such) we assumed that the final code
(which would play just like the games
sold in the stores ) had been sent to her.
In an effort to avoid this problem in the
future, we will restrict our advanced
looks to those products which can be
previewed in our California offices.
We're thankful for Mr. Safir's clarifications about the product.

Visceral Evaluation
Your game reviews are accurate and
useful. Your reviewers render an opinion
about the game unlike other magazines
that only describe the game without listing pros and cons about that particular
game.
Your magazine has guts!
Richard Lim
Houston, TX
And we intend to spill them, too!

Reader Input Device

