October 1983

Vol. 3 No. 5

FEATURES
ELECTRONIC ARTS

10
Dave Long

Trip Hawkin's Dream Come True

ADVENTURE GAME CONTEST

12

A Crossword puzzler

COMBAT LEADER

14
Floyd Mathews

Review

ARCHON

16
David Willis

Review

LODE RUNNER
Review

20
John Besnard

Review

22
Dick Richards

TAC
PARIS IN DANGER

28
Floyd Mathews

Strategies and Rule Modifications

BOARDGAMER MEETS COMPUTER

32
Jay Selover

COSMIC BALANCE II

34
James A. McPherson

Review

DELTA SQUADRON

37

James A. McPherson

Departments
Inside the Industry
Hobby and Industry News
Taking a Peek
Scorpion's Tale (Zork III)
Name of the Game
Tele-Gaming
Dispatches
The Learning Game
Silicon Cerebrum
Atari Arena
Commodore Key
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

/

3
4
5
24
25
36
38
40
42
43
44
51
52

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other gamers around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk. PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE OR ATARI VERSION WHEN
ORDERING. $15.00

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISK
CGW's Robotwar Diskette contains the source code for the entrants to the
Second Annual CGW Robotwar Tournament (with the exception of NordenB)
including the winner, DRAGON. Also included is the winner of the First Annual
Tournament, NORDEN+. Twelve robots in all. Muse Software's ROBOTWAR`"
required to use tournament disk. $12.00.

CGW BASEBALL DISK
Contains the four teams of the All Star League reported on in 3.3 (AL West All
Stars, Al East, NL West, and NL East); the six teams of the 1982 Winter League
(see 3.3), the eight teams of the Greatest Baseball Team of All Time
Tournament, and a reprint of the results of The GBTOAT tournament from
issue 2.3. SSI's Computer Baseball Apple version required to use data disk.
Apple version only. $12.00.
Send check or money order to: Computer Gaming World, Disk Order Dept.,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. California residents please add 6%
sales tax. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

Last issue, we surveyed the readers
of CGW on how you buy software
and on what types of software you
spend your money. The results of
that survey will be reported in this
column next issue.
This time, we'd like to find out
what other types of games you've
played — or are now playing —
besides the home-computer type.
Most of you are probably familiar
with role-playing games and
wargames; not the ones you see on
your monitor, the ones that are
played on boards or with miniatures.
Many of the manufacturers of such
games are very sensitive to what they
believe are "lost" gamers — you who
now play computer games. There
are, of course, some opposing views
on this subject. The opinions most
often expressed are:
1.

2.

3.

4.

playing these other types of
games, as well as computer
games.

2. Role-Playing Games (such as
Dungeons & Dragons, Traveller
etc.)

Which statement most closely
reflects your experience as a computer gamer? Here's your chance to
tell us the types of games, other than
computer, that you have played or
are currently playing. Please answer
the questions below, using the
Reader Input Device at the back of
this issue.

3. Wargames (such as Squad Leader,
Ogre, Ace of Aces, etc.)

Part I (Question 1)
Mark the one statement below (A,
B, C, or D) that best describes your
gaming background.
A. I didn't play any other games
regularly (at least 3 to 4 times a
month) before I got into computer
games, and I still don't play
anything except computer games.

A large number of people who
had played role-games and
wargames got into computer
games and then stopped buying
and playing non-computer
games.

B. I didn't play any other types of
games regularly before I got into
computer games, but now I play
other types of games fairly
regularly (as well as computer
games).

The above statement is only partially true. Some computer
gamers still play other types of
games, as well as computer
games.

C. I played other types of games
regularly, and still play these
other games regularly, as well as
play computer games.

Statement number 1 above is only temporarily true. Computer
gamers stopped playing other
types of games for a while but
now play these other games
again, as well as computer
games.
A number of computer garners
never played other types of
games a lot before they got into
computer gaming. Computer
games, in fact, have gotten them
interested in and involved in

4. Miniatures Wargames (using
micro-tanks, 15mm, 25mm, or
other scale model soldiers)
5. Abstract Strategy Games (such as
chess, go, backgammon, Pente
Trivial Pursuit, etc.)
6. Coin-operated Arcade Games
(such as Pac Man, Frogger, etc.)

Part III (Questions 7
through 11)
If you checked either statement "C"
or "D" in Part I above, check one or
more of the types of games below that
you played regularly before you got
into computer games.
7. Role-Playing Games
8. Wargames
9. Miniatures Wargames
10. Abstract Strategy Games
11. Coin-operated Arcade Games
Thanks for taking the time to tell
us about your gaming interests. The
results of this mini-survey will be
published in a future column.

D. I used to play other types of
games regularly, but now I play
only computer games regularly.

Part II (Questions 2
through 6)
If you checked either statement "B"
or "C" in Part I above, check one or
more of the types of games below that
you now play regularly (other than
computer games). If you checked
either statement "C" or "D" above,
please go to Part III below.

Use R.I.D. in the back of
this issue to respond to
questions on this page.

HOBBY & INDUSTRY NEWS
Michael Berlyn, Project Manager at Infocom,
reports that all seven Infocom products are now
compatible with 13 different microcomputers.
Following is an up-to-date list of available formats:
APPLE II; ATARI; COMMODORE 64; CP/M; DEC
RT-11; DEC RAINBOW; IBM PC; NEC PC-8000;
NEC APC; TRS-80 MOD I; TRS-80 MOD III; TI
PROFESSIONAL; and the OSBORNE 1.
Infocom, Inc., has also announced the fall release
of INFIDEL, the first game in the new Infocom Tales
of Adventure Series. Set in the vast Egyptian desert
somewhere near the banks of the Nile River,
INFIDEL challenges you to find the buried entrance
to the last great pyramid and, once inside, seize
priceless treasures that have remained hidden for
thousands of years.
It is the second prose adventure written for
Infocom by Michael Berlyn, author of Suspended.
Berlyn says the Tales of Adventure genre offers
players a modern-day journey into the chronicles of
history. "A tremendous amount of research went
into this product," Berlyn says, adding, "We have
incorporated detail that presents players with an incredibly realistic environment." Berlyn was assisted
on the, project by Patricia Fogleman, a graduate
student at Harvard University who was especially
involved with the research on pyramids.

TI 99144 and certain other home computers. The
game will be available September 15 and sell
for $39.95.
The AIRPORT Air Traffic Controller game is now
available from the Software Toolworks in a version
configurable for most CP/M computer systems. AIRPORT can be configured for most 80 column, 24 line
displays with cursor addressing, and uses character
graphics if available. It comes in 8" CP/M format,
and 5 " formats for DEC, Kaypro, Osborne (80 line
or Executive), Xerox, and Heath/Zenith computers.
Suggested price is $19.95 and may also be gotten
from The Software Toolworks, 15233 Ventura Blvd.,
Suite 1118, Sherman Oaks, CA, 91403.
Activision, Inc. has announced the release of two
of its best selling games for the ATARI line of home
computers. RIVER RAID and KABOOM!, both of
which have sold more than one million units in their
original designs for the Atari 2600, will be available
at retail in October and will carry a retail price
of $34.95.

REACH FOR THE STARS, from Strategic Studies
Group Pty. Ltd. of Sydney, Australia, has announced
that the C-64 version of their game will be available
by the end of September and will sell for $AUS45,
or approximately $US40.

Commodore International Limited announced
record revenues, net income and earnings per share
for the fourth quarter and year ended June 30, 1983.
Mr. Irving Gould, Chairman of the Board of Commodore, in commenting upon the record results
noted that "the past year's growth at Commodore
was attributable to continuing and acceleration
strength in Commodore's complete microcomputer
line, including extremely strong demand for the
C-64 personal computer."

THORN EMI Video will release COMPUTER
WAR, a home computer game based on the movie,
"WAR GAMES". COMPUTER WAR will be compatible with the Atari 400/800/1200; the Vic-20; the

MSA (Management Science America, Inc.) announced the acquisition of EDU-WARE SERVICES,
INC. of Agoura Hills, CA. Edu-Ware is a leading
supplier of educational microcomputer software for

school and home use. MSA acquired all of the
outstanding stock of Edu-Ware in exchange for a
combination of MSA stock and cash of approximately $1,500,000 and some deferred payments based on
future revenues and profits of Edu-Ware.
TG SOFTWARE has been announced as a new
division of TG Products to develop and market
programs for Atari-compatible computers. The
parent company, TG Products, has been manufacturing joysticks, trackballs and game paddles for
personal computers for three years. TG Software
released four games at the Summer Consumer
Electronics Show on cartridge for the Atari 400/8001
1200XL computers. the games include DROIDS,
NIGHTSTRIKE, OZZY'S ORCHARD and ABRACADABRA and will sell for $44.95.
Insoft has LOWERED PRICES on its Apple
Arcade game series. The suggested retail price of
Grapple, Spider Raid and ZARGS— all written in
GraFORTH—is now only $19.95.
Thom Keith, Director of International Network
Affairs, THE GAMES NETWORK, INC., that agreement has been reached in principle with W. H.
SMITH & SON, LTD., a London-based publisher/
retail chain/news distributor, that W. H. Smith will
be the exclusive distributor of The Games Network
technology and programming to CATV systems
throughout the United Kingdom.
Synapse Software, the first company to introduce
successfully three-dimensional graphics to home
computer games, staged a real-life dramatization of
its BLUE MAX World War I aerial combat game at
a press premiere on Wednesday, August 24 at

Continued on p. 12

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere
in this issue, the following products have been
received by CGW. Some of these products will
receive more detailed attention in future
issues. Readers wishing to review any of these
games should contact CGW.

Avalon Hill Game Co. (Microcomputer Games)
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
S.C.I.M.M.A.R.S.: Game of "gladiatorial
armored combat in the far future" using
small armored ground cars. One could call
this a high speed version of "Battlezone".
Nine levels of difficulty. Higher levels
increase enemy armor and/or decrease your
armor. Apple II. $26.00.
PARTHIAN KINGS: Strategy game with a
fantasy setting. Terrain and units are designed by the players. lip to four can play
(the computer can play up to three positions). Multiple play options good graphics
and artificial intelligence make this an enjoyable game that will be played over and over.
Apple II. $25.00.

Avant-Garde Creations
P.0 Box 30160
Eugene, OR 97403
TROMPERS: A whimsical arcade game in
which you, in control of the local dog
catcher, try to catch TROMPERS (little
bouncing space critters). The first two levels

are almost preschool in terms of difficulty
but levels 3-5 (which include 'people holes'
that must be jumped over) are a good deal
more challenging. In concept the game is a
bit like the Atari VCS game KA-BOOM.
However, TROMPERS goes beyond KaBoom. Apple. $29.95.
Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
OPERATION WHIRLWIND: Broderbund's
first wargame. OW is a strategy game
(tactical level) for the Atari based on WWII.
As Battalion Commander you order your
companies, platoons, and batteries in an
assault on an enemy town. Graphics are
reminiscent of Eastern Front (EF) but movement/combat is different. In EF you issue
orders to all units then the units move
simultaneously during an execution phase.
In OW you move each unit individually. The
phases are Command, Movement, Combat,
Assault Order, Assault. The game can be
saved. Handsome Battle Map poster included in the slick SSI sized package. Look
for upcoming review. $39.95.
Datasoft
9421 Winnetka Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
MOON SHUTTLE: Nice graphics are
featured in this "space invaders" type
arcade game. Each "wave" of descending
aliens is preceded by an asteroid sequence
in which the ship must blast it's way through
an asteroid belt. The Atari version includes

cassette and disk in the same box. Also
available for the Radio Shack Color Computer, Apple, and C-64. $29.95.
O'RILEY'S MINE: Your task is to mine for
gold, rubies, diamonds, etc. as you attempt
to stay ahead of rising waters and river
monsters. Your task involves not only
staying ahead of danger but digging paths
that do not take you into further danger.
Often tunnels previously dug fill up with
water, therefore you should dig tunnels in
such a way that the need to cross previously
dug shafts is minimized. Atari. $29.95.
ZAXXON: The Apple version of the popular
arcade game. When used in conjunction
with the MOCKINGBOARD is compares
very favorably with the Atari 400/800 version (also by Datasoft). $39.95.

Dataworks
P.O. Box 236
Deep River, CT 06417
TANK PLATOON!: A tactical wargame in
which each player chooses and controls ten
units (tanks, personnel carriers, infantry,
leaders). Players see the battle from the viewpoint of the unit currently being ordered. In
addition to the hi-res views available to each
unit, the leader can look at a low-res map.
Apple II. $29.95.
Discovery Games
936 W. Highway 36
St. Paul, MN 55113
FLYING TIGERS: An interesting looking
game of air combat in which you can fly any
of eighteen Allied fighter types against the
fighters and bombers of the Japanese Empire
(1937-1942). In Operational Mode you see a
"side view" that covers several miles. Your

plane starts on the Operational map somewhere between the enemy and the target city
of the Japanese bombers. Once close enough
to the enemy you enter a tactical mode in
which you fight a hi-res arcade style
plane-todgfih.RvewcomnAplI.
LAFAYETTE ESCADRILLE: A TRS-80
game of "real time animated action" WWI
air combat. You choose your plane from the
24 types available (French, English, German). Missions include Offensive Patrol,
Defensive Patrol, Long Range Patrol, Bombing Mission, Balloon Busting, and Training
Flight. Review coming.

Infocom, Inc.
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
PLANETFALL: An interactive space comedy game. You, as Ensign 7th Class in

charge of janitorial work, are thrust into
adventure when you are shipwrecked on a
doomed and plague-stricken planet. A mischievous robot named Floyd (you'll grow to
love him) assists you in your attempt to save
the planet. Available for many machines.
$49.95 (some versions $59.95).

WITNESS: An interactive personal computer game whose situations, personalities,
settings, and packaging reflect the classic
whodunits of the 1930's. As with all Infocom
games, numerous game playing aids are
included (such as The "Nat'l Detective
Gazette", a copy of a newspaper from the
time of the murder, suicide note, etc.).
Multiple systems. $49.95 (some $59.95).

Jay Gee Programming Company
7185 Blue Hill Dr.
San Jose, CA 95129
DEVIL'S DARE: A computerized board
game in which players race against time to
get five tokens in a row before the computer
does. It can be played by one to four players.
Twelve board sizes and three skill levels.
Difficult to play if you do not have the GTIA
chip. Atari. $19.95.
Penguin Software
830 4th Ave.
Geneva, IL 60134
MINIT MAN: An arcade game in which
you perform several functions all leading
to the launching of your missiles against
invading robots. Three screens are required
to display the minit man launch facilities.
You must repair the bridge (so the train can
bring the missiles to the site), stop infiltrating robots, and set the launch computer.
Apple. $19.95.

THE QUEST: A graphic adventure game in
which you kill a vengeful dragon. 200 locations, full sentence parser. There are many
ways to arrive at the solution in this adventure thus it can be played several times, each
time taking a different path to the solution.
Two-sided disk. Apple. $19.95.
THE SPY STRIKES BACK: Their subtitle
is "How to Not Be Seen". Our subtitle is

"Son of Spy's Demise". You must find nine
clues scattered on five floors (well, five floors
is all your intelligence report reveals). The
secret? Don't be seen. Apple and Atari.
$19.95.
Sierra On-Line Inc.
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614
SAMMY LIGHTFOOT: You control Sammy, a circus performer whose hair (or is it
a wig) flys around when he falls. You must
jump over objects, hang onto ropes, use
trampolines, and ride elevators in your
climb to stardom. Apple.
Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd. Bld. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043
BROADSIDES: A detailed simulation of
fighting sail. You can play it on an arcade
level, which is easy and quick or you can opt
for the tactical game in which you make
detailed decisions such as type of shot. The
boarding action sequence is nearly a separate game by itself. Only one ship per side
(multi-ship game coming from SSI in the
future). Ships can be constructed (statistics
for a number of Napoleonic Era ships are
included in the rule book). Review coming.
Apple. $39.95.
EAGLES: Aerial combat in WWI. One to ten
planes per side. An introductory level game
which, while not as detailed as most SSI
games, is enjoyable to play and gives the
"feel" of WWI air combat. Seventeen plane

types are provided but the program allows
you to construct any airship you wish. The
scenarios, mini-games and campaign game
provide the gamut of situations a WWI pilot
might find himself in. Review coming.
Apple and Atari. $39.95.
GEOPOLITIQUE 1990: A solitaire game in
which you play the roll of the President in
the 1990's. You are in a power struggle with
the Soviet Union (played by the computer).
In the "peaceful" phase (GEOPOL) you
produce goods which are offered to minor
countries in exchange for alliances, agreements, and concessions. In the military
phase (GEOWAR) you conduct conventional
warfare. Apple. $39.95.
RINGSIDE SEAT: A game of championship boxing. A hi-res semi-animated screen
brings to life boxing matchups between
great fighters of the 20th century. You
manage the fighters, giving them betweenround instructions. Review coming. Apple
and C-64. $39.95.

Lor Inc.
Rt. 2, Box 185
Rigby, ID 83442
OPHIR: In this cartridge arcade game, you,
as Ophir, must free jewels from a series of
ten progressively more complex spider
webs. To prevent this, and hopefully destroy
you, are spiders which multiply unless
destroyed by you when young. Fast moving
and tough to beat. C-64.

Sirius Software
10364 Rockingham Dr.
Sacramento, CA 95827
SNAKE BYTE: You must use all of your skill
and planning ability to master all 21 rooms
of this arcade game. In it, you guide your
snake through progressively more cluttered
rooms, eating the apples which appear while
avoiding the randomly bouncing plums.
Beware though, because with each apple
eaten, your snake grows longer and moves
faster. Apple, C-64, and Vic-20.

The brightest new star on the computer software
market is almost certainly Electronic Arts of San Mateo,
California, a company expecting to have literally hundreds of titles on the market by the mid 80's.
Electronic Arts is attempting to jump into the forefront
of the microcomputer software field as an immediate success, much as the goddess Minerva leapt full grown from
the brain of her father Zeus. This brainchild of 29-year old
Trip Hawkins has bypassed the "test the waters" stage
and made a total commitment to be one of the leaders in
its industry, both in game development and in gaming
systems development.
Trip Hawkins graduated with high honors from Harvard University with a specialization in "Strategy and Applied Game Theory" and in 1975 had the stated goal of
starting a software games company before 1985. After
receiving his MBA from Stanford, he joined Apple Computer early in its growth, and left the company in the Spring of 1982 after serving as the Director of Marketing for
Apple's new LISA. One of a number of sharp young
thinkers who walked away from Apple as millionaires
Trip almost immediately began laying the foundations for
Electronic Arts.
EA, says Trip, wants to do three specific things. First,
they want to find and help develop new talent. One of
their key concepts in this area is the strong publicity that
they give to the authors of their games. Each game comes
packaged in a heavy cardboard album about 9" x 9".
Each is in full color glossy and gives an introduction to
and a picture of the game creators. EA hopes that treating
the author of a game as the artist that he or she is will encourage the growth of talent, and encourage creativity. In

addition, EA provides a great deal of assistance in the production of a game, and hopes to be able to bring out the
fine points of each new product. I'm sure many of us have
played games that were enjoyable, but which could have
been truly great games with only a little more work. From
what I've seen of EA's new releases, they must know what
they're doing in applying these finishing touches.
Secondly, EA wants to make a contribution to the development of software technology; to enable each prospective game designer to understand the machine and its capabilities. Moving a game from one machine to another,
say from the Apple to the IBM, currently requires complete translation of the program which in many cases virtually amounts to starting over from scratch. One of the
things which Trip wants to create is a process for making
new games in which games are developed on a sort of
master machine, which could then translate them directly
into all the other varieties of computer much more efficiently.
Thirdly, they plan to use their unique marketing techniques to help retailers more easily sell the games. Again,
I'm sure that many of us have looked at the package of a
new game in frustration, not being able to tell much about
it and unwilling to "buy a pig in a poke." EA's packages
give a very good idea of what's inside thus encouraging
the consumer to buy.
Trip says that one of the strong themes of his company
is expressed by philosopher John Dewey's belief in the
dynamic process of learning. We learn best, according to
Dewey and Hawkins, by doing. If you try to acquire new
ideas and skills while you are an active participant in the
learning process, you will learn more, and faster. Further-

more, the wider the range of sensory experiences involved, the more meaningful will be the experience.
One of the first games produced by EA is M.U.L.E., a
financial simulation on another planet. This game, I firmly believe, could take a key position in the Economics
class at any high school or college. The only problem
would be in trying to get the students to stop playing! On
the other hand, a group of elementary school kids could
spend hours playing M.U.L.E. at its easiest level and
never even suspect that they'd just acquired an excellent
background in economics.
EA wants its games themselves to excel in three ways.
First, the game must be simple. In other words, you
should be able to get into the game fairly easily, and quickly, without having to study a 150-page rulebook intensely
for three days prior to booting up. Second, the game
should be hot, with lots of media action, good sound, good
graphics, and should take full advantage of the capabilities of the machine. Third, it must be deep. As you
play you should discover more and more — to have the
game grow with you — so that after a month it is not
another dust gatherer on the shelf under your computer.
EA enters into contracts with its authors much like a
recording studio does with its musicians, and encourages
them to think of software as an art form. The advantage of
the computer in the game world is that it handles all the
administrative detail. Instead of having to roll the dice
repeatedly, the computer decides. Instead of having to attempt to determine whether or not your piece has line of
sight to mine, the computer decides. This opens your
mind to concentrate on the proper strategy and tactics for
winning. To use Trip's example, a 13-year old kid would
kill Attila the Hun in a simple round of Dungeons and
Dragons, because poor Attila just wouldn't be able to handle the mechanics of the game.
The first generation of games from EA has six new
releases and one translation. Bill Budge, now an Electronic Arts artist, has translated his Pinball Construction
Set (see last issue's review) for the Atari. The six new
games will all be reviewed separately; including the
previously mentioned M.U.L.E., which offers you the option of handicapping one or more players, has superb
graphics, and as already stated, is an excellent economic
simulation for any level of player.
Another new release is Archon, a fantasy board game
with fast action arcade combat between opposing pieces
occupying the same square. In this battle between the
forces of dark and light, the central squares of the board
fade from dark to light, with the relative strength of the
pieces ebbing and flowing with the change of colors. A
third release, Worms?, involves creating brightly colored
trails of light which weave intricate patterns and compete
for control of the dot matrix on the screen. Their fourth
release for the Atari is Murder on the Zinderneuf, a real
time murder mystery which could be the
great-great-grandson of the old boardgame "Clue."
These four are available currently for the Atari, and had
me pricing Atari's for two weeks after I saw them. For the
Apple, there are currently two releases, Hard Hat Mack,

and Axis Assassin. Mack is an arcade game in which you
try to complete a construction project while avoiding vandals, OSHA inspectors, and a series of on the job hazards.
Axis Assassin, and I have no idea where the name came
from, is a fast action shoot-'em-up played on a series of
geometric shapes and is reminiscent of the arcade game
Tempest.
If this first generation of games is any indication of the
quality and craftsmanship that Electronic Arts hopes to
put into all of its releases, then we (the consumers) have
just acquired a new hero. Trip promised that his company
does not plan to discriminate according to make, creed,
or model of computer but will offer releases for all the major systems (Apple, Atari, IBM, and Commodore). I, for
one, am waiting with baited breath for Archon (soon) and
M. U.L.E. (don't hold your breath) for the Apple. Another
delight in the works on the Hill in San Mateo is a
"dungeons and dragons" type of fantasy game called The
Standing Stones. The maze graphics are very clean and
fast, and with a promised September release time, it
should be ready just in time for my birthday.
When these folks say they mean business, they aren't
kidding. My bet is that this is one company which will
rapidly chisel out a very comfortable block of the software
market, and stay an industry leader for a long time to
come. Now if they'd only have M.U.L.E. ready on the Ap0
ple for my birthday . . .

ADVENTURE GAME CONTEST
What is this? Deja Vu? Wasn't this the
contest that was run in CGW 3.3?
Yes. It is true. Just in time for Halloween, the Adventure Game Contest
has risen from the grave (ominous
organ music in background — bats fly
past your face). In CGW 3.3, we threw
down our gage and challenged you to
solve the puzzle. The gage proved to

be mighty, for no one has solved all 23
puzzles. So here we are to challenge
you again.
This time we will give free two year
subscriptions to the top three contestants. The more complete your puzzle,
the better your chance of winning.
Send your submissions to: Computer
Gaming World, Puzzle Contest, P.O.

INDUSTRY NEWS (Cont.)

and 5" formats for DEC, Kaypro, Osborne (80 line
or Executive), Xerox, and Heath/Zenith computers.
Suggested price is $19.95 and may also be gotten
from The Software Toolworks, 15233 Ventura Blvd.,
Suite 1118, Sherman Oaks, CA, 91403.

Schellville Airport near Sonoma, CA. The event was
designed to re-create the "barnstorming" atmosphere of a 1920's fairground picnic and air show.
The day's highlights included mock dogfights and
aerobatics by pilots in vintage biplanes, visitor air
rides, on-the-ground demonstrations of the Blue
Max game and press interviews with Synapse
executives and the game's author, Bob Polin.
THORN EMI Video will release COMPUTER
WAR, a home computer game based on the movie,
"WAR GAMES". COMPUTER WAR will be compatible with the Atari 400/800/1200; the Vic-20; the
TI 99/44 and certain other home computers. The
game will be available September 15 and sell
for $39.95.
The AIRPORT Air Traffic Controller game is now
available from the Software Toolworks in a version
configurable for most CP/M computer systems. AIRPORT can be configured for most 80 column, 24 line
displays with cursor addressing, and uses character
graphics if available. It comes in 8" CP/M format,

Activision, Inc. has announced the release of two
of its best selling games for the ATARI line of home
computers. RIVER RAID and KABOOM!, both of
which have sold more than one million units in their
original designs for the Atari 2600, will be available
at retail in October and will carry a retail price
of $34.95.
Commodore International Limited announced
record revenues, net income and earnings per share
for the fourth quarter and year ended June 30, 1983.
Mr. Irving Gould, Chairman of the Board of Commodore, in commenting upon the record results
noted that "the past year's growth at Commodore
was attributable to continuing and acceleration
strength in Commodore's complete microcomputer
line, including extremely strong demand for the
C - 64 personal computer."

Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566.
Entries must be postmarked by
December 31, 1983.
The crossword puzzle was created
with CROSSWORD MAGIC from L&S
Computerware. CM runs on the Apple
II and retails for $49.95. L&S Computerware, P.O. Box 70738, Sunnyvale,
CA 94086.

MSA (Management Science America, Inc.) announced the acquisition of EDU-WARE SERVICES,
INC. of Agoura Hills, CA. Edu-Ware is a leading
supplier of educational microcomputer software for
school and home use. MSA acquired all of the
outstanding stock of Edu-Ware in exchange for a
combination of MSA stock and cash of approximately $1,500,000 and some deferred payments based on
future revenues and profits of Edu-Ware.--

TG SOFTWARE has been announced as a new
division of TG Products to develop and market
programs for Atari-compatible computers. The
parent company, TG Products, has been manufacturing joysticks, trackballs and game paddles for
personal computers for three years. TG Software
released four games at the Summer Consumer
Electronics Show on cartridge for the Atari 400/800/
1200XL computers. the games include DROIDS,
NIGHTSTRIKE, OZZY'S ORCHARD and ABRACADABRA and will sell for $44.95.

Continued on p. 46

COMBAT LEADER:
Review and Analysis

Floyd Mathews

and grey smoke rounds vanishing
with the wind. You can also hear the
popping of high velocity guns, the
whistle and crash of incoming mortar rounds, and the crackle of automatic weapons. As many as 118
moving units may advance simultaneously in real time, with as many as
70 additional symbols for smoke and
fire. The overall visual effect is striking, and is comparable to an arcade
game or even a videotape animation.

NAME:
Combat Leader
TYPE:
Wargame
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800/1200
FORMAT:
Diskette
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
David Hille
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations

Combat Leader (CL) is one of the
best tactical wargames I have played
to date. CL is David Hill's first game
design, and it is excellent. I hope he
produces many more in the future.
A platoon level game against the
computer, CL simulates small unit
tactics of the period from World
War II to the present. You can play
the company commander, or you
can take a platoon and let the computer or another player command
your company.
CL has many positive features, such
as superb graphics and sound, the
speed and sophistication of machine
language programming, and the ability to create an infinite number of
scenarios with new maps and units.
It also has other superb features,
which include real time simultaneous
movement and fire, realistic line of
sight and line of fire restrictions, very
competitive solitaire play and capa-

bility, and "robot" subcommanders.
This game is extremely realistic,
but it is the excellent arcade quality
graphics which first seize your attention. You really have to see it to
appreciate it. A vertically scrolling
map occupies about three screens
and represents about two square
miles. The green map shows a variety
of black terrain symbols with different effects on movement, line of
sight, and protective cover.
Miniature individual tanks and
armored personnel carriers (APC's)
are represented from a bird's eye
view with realistic graphic symbols
which include gun facing. Also, each
two-man buddy team of infantry is
represented by a tiny cross symbol.
The relative scale of the graphic
symbols is very accurate.
You can actually see tiny yellow
muzzle flashes spitting from firing
units, red shell bursts in target areas,

If the computer's mortars start ranging in on your position, you may
even feel a strong urge to hit the dirt!
The program randomly generates
a new map for each game, so you
never get bored after mastering all
the good ambush spots of a single
map. Each new game presents fresh
tactical problems depending on the
lay of the ground. However, if you do
find an interesting map, you can
replay it as often as you wish in order
to explore all of its possibilities.
You can modify the random distribution of different types of terrain
when generating new maps. If you
want to design an Afrika Korps
scenario, simply request lots of clear
flat ground, a few depressions, zero
trees or hills, and . . . presto — in a
microsecond you will see a realistic
stretch of the northern Sahara. Do
you want to try a contemporary
Fulda Gap scenario? No problem.
Simply ask for lots of hills and trees,
and the program gives you a typical
rolling forest in central Germany.

The rulebook is well done and the
program is very user friendly. It is
very easy to enter the general characteristics of the most famous tanks
and APC's from World War II to the
present. You can also set the characteristics of infantry weapons of
different periods, such as mortars,
anti-tank guns, and so forth. In order
to better simulate the "fog of war",
it helps to have the computer or
a friend set the forces for both sides
so you don't know what you're
up against.
The real time pace of the game
is also adjustable. When you are
first learning, you should set a slow
pace. As you become more adept,
you can speed up the pace so the
game never becomes tedious. A
typical game lasts about 30 minutes.
If you blunder into an ambush, it can
be a lot shorter.
Although this is basically a solitaire
game, you and your friends can team
up against the computer. You can
each take a platoon, select someone
to be the company commander for
your side, and then pass the joystick
around. You should set a slow pace
so that you won't wrestle each other
for the stick when the action heats
up. Be careful though! I have seen
games in which insubordinate platoon leaders were threatened with
courtmartial for cowardice in the
face of the enemy.
Your units always start near the
bottom or south edge of the map, and
the computer's troops start near the
top. You can see all of your units on
the screen, but as you scroll northward you can only see those enemy
units which are visible to your troops
under the line of sight rules. Your
computer opponent operates under
the same limited line of sight restrictions. Hence, if an enemy tank is
behind a hill, in woods or in a depression; your forward units may not be
able to see him, and vice versa. Further, if a visible enemy tank moves
behind a hill, it will immediately
disappear from the screen. This
feature can really keep you guessing
about the location of the enemy's
main strength.

There are similar line of fire restrictions on direct fire flat trajectory weapons, such as high velocity
guns and automatic weapons. These
weapons can only shoot at visible
targets. But your mortars are indirect
fire long range weapons. You can arc
mortar rounds over a hill to blast
invisible targets on reverse slopes.
Therefore, your mortars are probably
your best weapon in this game. My
only complaint is that the mortars
appear to be too effective against
tanks. In reality, I doubt that infantry
carried mortar would have much
effect against tanks.
In addition to building your own
new scenarios, there are six variable
scenarios included with the program.
The novice and intermediate scenarios are simple games for learning the
game system. In the attack scenario,
your goal is to destroy as many
enemy units as possible. In the objective scenario, the program randomly
marks a key terrain feature with an
"X", and both sides must try to seize
and hold it. In the mobile defense
scenario, your job is to maintain a
defensive line as far north as possible
for as long as possible, while the
computer tries to break through to
the south. In the recon scenario, you
command a small light armor force
and try to infiltrate northward against
superior forces in order to spot as
many enemy units as possible without being destroyed.
All the scenarios are interesting,

but I find the mobile defense is the
most intriguing. You have the extremely difficult tactical problem of
defending almost 1700 yards of front
with inadequate forces, with the
scenario bringing out the sneakiest
traits of your computer opponent.
Once I set up a good defensive line
holding most of the high ground. The
wily computer feinted in strength
toward the left side of my line until
I committed my armor reserve, and
then it punched through my weak
right side with most of its tanks.
Another interesting aspect of the
program is the use of "robot" subcommanders. You can directly command individual tanks, APC's and
infantry squads if you wish. But it is
probably better to give general orders
to each of your "robot" platoon
leaders, and let them carry out the
details of movement. This is one of
the great innovations of this game: It
is not necessary to tediously plot
movement for each of your units! For
example, you could order one of your
tank platoons to occupy a wooded
hilltop 500 yards forward, and then
watch as the program individually
maneuvers the five tanks toward the
objective, carefully selecting the best
line of advance, utilizing protective
terrain, and covering each other.
Firepower is the key factor in this
game. When units come under enemy
fire, they have a very realistic tendency to slow down, take cover, and
Continued on p. 47

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Archon
Strategy/Arcade
Atari 400/
800/1200XL
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1-2
AUTHOR:
Westfall, Freeman,
& Reiche
PRICE:
$40.00
PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
If you like the idea of chess, but always thought it was
too much work to be recreation; and instead of fighting
with bishops, rooks, and pawns, would like to fight with
things like dragons, wizards, valkyries, manticores, and
goblins; then Archon is your game.
Archon, created by Anne Westfall, Jon Freeman, and
Paul Reiche III, is a highly imaginative game, and very
well designed. Just how they got the idea for the whole
thing is explained in the program notes (one source of inspiration was the holographic chess scene in Star Wars).
They provide a great deal of information on the thinking
behind the game as well as humorous biographies on the
authors. They really want you to feel the personal and artistic efforts that went into the game, and you do. I felt
more interested in the game after having learned about
the authors and the background of the project. As for the
game itself .. .
It is played on a chess-like board, except that half the

squares (called delta squares) are constantly changing color. The other squares remain black or white but, after
every other move, the delta squares shift towards black,
shift totally to black, then start shifting to white, and back
again (or vice versa). As in chess, there are two sides —
black and white (or the Light and the Dark as they prefer to
call them). There are also five squares on the board that
contain "power points". To win, you must capture all five
(you start out with one). The other advantages to power
points are that when you are on one, you heal more quickly and cannot be affected by magic.
Each side has a wide array of pieces, as in chess. Unlike
chess, however, few of your pieces are identical to the
other side's. The pieces, called icons, move from three to
five spaces (by walking, flying, or teleporting). Walking
pieces cannot move through other pieces, even your own;
whereas a flying or teleporting icon can. The icons are
various forms of creatures and humans from mythology
and fairy tales.
When you move an icon onto a square containing an
enemy icon, that square expands to cover the entire
screen, and the two of you fight for possession of the
square. Each icon has different characteristics; lifespan
(how many hits it can take), speed (how fast the icon may
move), attack strength (how much damage his attack
does), attack speed (how quickly his attack travels), attack
interval (how long he must wait to make his next attack —
you can't just fire machine gun style), and mode of attack
(this can be with a sword, with fiery breath, bow and ar-

row, etc.) Learning each icon's characteristics is a very
important part of the game, so that you can avoid sending
a creature into certain death.
The battles are entirely arcade-style, and require fast
reflexes and quick thinking. The lifespan of each icon is
displayed on the screen, and each time it's struck the span
diminishes. When the lifespan line is gone, the icon is
dead (well, he knew the job was dangerous when he took
it) and the winner takes possession of the square. Any
wounds received by the winning icon will remain, and
can heal over time or by a spell cast by the wizard/
sorceress. Don't forget, that if you're on a power point,
you will heal more quickly. Also — and this is crucial — if
you are on a square that is the same color as you (black on
black, white on white), then your lifespan can be up to
50% longer than normal. Not only that, but your enemy's
lifespan is reduced if he's on the wrong color. It becomes
important to have your battles on a square that's a
favorable color to you. If you're able. to surprise an
enemy's big nasty monster on a color that's unfavorable
to it, you can destroy him a lot more easily than you could
otherwise. Since wounds carry over to the next battle, you
could also kill off a strong icon by sending a succession of
weaker icons against it and wearing it down.
It is apparent that a great deal of work went into the
makeup of each icon. There are subtle differences in their
strength and weaknesses, and in the way they move. For
instance, the Unicorn makes a cute little clopping sound
when it moves; the Troll has a heavy shuffle, and the flying creatures sound like their wings are beating against
the air. Each icon's characteristics combine to make him
unique, for example: The Phoenix (a piece on the Light
side) attacks by exploding into a ball of fire, which lasts
about a second. Anyone caught in the flames takes damage, with the amount of damage depending on how long it
was exposed to the flame. The Phoenix has a long attack
interval (the time it must wait to attack again), so to compensate they made him invulnerable to damage while he

is exploding. After he explodes he's got to run like crazy
till he's able to attack again.
Another example: the Golem and Troll. They move very
slowly and have a slow attack speed with a long attack interval but attack with great force. So, when they do hit, it
hurts. They also have a long lifespan. Another icon, the
Basilisk (dark side) has a powerful attack force, a short attack interval, and a fast attack speed. It sounds ideal till
you look at his lifespan, which is short. He packs a big
wallop, but he's gone if he takes one or two hits.
One of the most interesting pieces in the game (and the
most fun to play) is the Shapeshifter (dark side). He has no
characteristics until he goes into battle, where he changes
into a duplicate of whatever he's fighting. This is a very
handy and powerful trait, but it can be used against him.
By sending in something weak and stupid, you have just
as much chance of killing off the Shapeshifter as with a
powerful piece. It can be very annoying to the Dark side to
have a nice icon removed by a little Knight.
There are many strategy options available in this game.
You can be conservative and just try to wear down your
opponent or dash madly into the fray hoping to gain lightning victory. You also have the choice of playing against
the computer or against another human being. It's definitely more fun with a human unit. We ended up screaming and howling during the heat of the battle, hurling insults and battle cries. These battles were enjoyable even
when you had little chance of winning a particular skirmish. It's always worth a try to be a David to a Goliath,
and it has worked many times. There is nothing like the
feeling of walking in with a Knight (the weakest piece) and
knocking off a Troll (a very large and nasty critter whose
mode of attack is to rip boulders out of the ground and
toss them your way). While he's doing that you run
around with a little sword trying to nick his knees. Of
course, if you nick him enough . . .
Since you have such an advantage if you're on a favorable color, timing is crucial, and you must make your win-

p ing thrust all at once, before the colors shift back again.
Very important to winning is timely use of your spells.
The Light side has a Wizard and the Dark side has the
Sorceress. These icons can cast spells. They both have the
same spells to use, but they can cast spells only once per
game and each spell they cast decreases their lifespan
slightly, making them weaker in combat. The spells are:
teleport, imprison, heal, shift time, exchange, summon
elemental, and revive. Teleport lets you move any icon of
yours not on a power point to any non-power point square
on the board. This is a great way to send a powerful
monster into the enemy's rear ranks and create havoc. Imprison prevents an enemy icon from moving till the delta
squares turn to its color. This is good for keeping a key
piece out of your way while you launch your offensive for
the power points. Heal does just that, bringing a wounded
icon's lifespan back up to full. Shift time reverses the flow
of time. If the delta squares are currently turning black,
then they start shifting to white after you cast this spell.
Exchange: this makes any two icons (not on a power
point) trade places. If you're threatened by a powerful
icon, you can switch him for a wimp from the back ranks.
Summon Elemental: causes an elemental to appear (earth,
air, fire, or water) and attack an enemy icon. This is handy
for getting rid of or just weakening an annoying enemy
unit without risking one of your own. Their only drawback is that once the battle is over, they disappear, win or
lose. Revive: brings back one dead icon. I use this one
every game I play. If the enemy hasn't used his revivespell
yet, it might be worth your while to kill off his spellcaster
just for that reason.

There's no doubt that correct use of spells can determine the outcome. Launching a heavy attack when the
colors are shifting in your favor, then casting shift time to
give you more time after they start to shift against you is a
standard move. Sometimes I will make an all-out attack
on the wizard or sorceress to deprive the enemy of their
spellcasting ability. Having the only spellcaster can give
you an enormous advantage.
But no matter how smart you are on the strategic board,
if you fall apart on the tactical arena you will lose. Some
people (sore losers — including me) have, at one time or
another, said that the outcome of the game depends too
much on the tactical battles and not enough on strategy. I
found, however, that after playing for a while most people
arrive at a level of proficiency that enables them to enjoy
the game. One good way to become proficient is to play
the computer. The computer does not play well on the
strategic board (often ignoring moves that could win) but
can be deadly in the arena. It makes those 45 degree angle
shots very easily and always seems to know exactly where
to aim. In fact, playing against the computer for your first
game can be very frustrating indeed and there may seem
to be no hope of winning. Have patience, as after a while
you'll see that it tends to play certain pieces the same way
every time and gets rather predictable; letting you set it up
for the kill. If you play the computer consistently, you'll
start to beat it every time.
You'll also find that you develop an expertise with certain types of icons, and can play them better than others.
For instance, I can't play the Banshee very well and lose
many times when I should have had an easy victory. (The
computer, by the way, plays the Banshee better than any
human I've seen). Conversely, my opponents groan when
I attack with the Djinni because they've seen it down
many an icon.
I come from a boardgaming background and I don't
particularly care for most arcade-type games, but the
beauty of this game is that there's a reason for each battle.
You want to move into this space? Fight for it! Maybe
most players don't need this rationale, but somehow it
makes it better for me. Better, at any rate than defending
Earth against invading aliens. (What, another invasion?
Ho hum .. .) Plus, each piece fights differently, so that it's
not just a matter of developing reflexes. After you've
learned the game, you don't have to ponder each move for
ten minutes — you can just pick a strategy and run with it.
It makes for a fast moving game.
In conclusion: this is a very good game, with lots of care
put into its development. I recommend it highly and
would only hesitate to recommend it to those who love only purely strategic games. If you're turned off by most arcade type games because you like to think a little, this
hybrid may be for you. I play it frequently and do not find
it predictable at all. The people at Electronic Arts are
breaking a little new ground here by putting together
some old and new ideas in a way worthy of your computer, and I hope they continue to manipulate electrons in
such a delightful manner. 0

LODE RUNNER
John Besnard

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Lode Runner
Arcade/Strategy
Apple II (48K)
Disk
One
Doug Smith
$34.95
Broderbund
Software
San Rafael, CA

The robots come with a built-in intelligence. It's not too
terribly sophisticated, and is very predictable. This trait,
and the fact that the hero always goes faster than the
robots, makes Lode Runner a game that requires more
strategy than most arcade games. Planning which scaffolding to vaporize and in which order makes this one of
the few thinking men's arcade games. It might take you a
good month just to figure out a strategy on each of the 150
levels. And if that isn't enough, the game comes with an
editor, allowing the user to fabricate his or her own

Is there really room for another game that has scaffolding and ladders? Well just maybe, but it would have to
be really good. After all, we've already learned to use a
shovel in APPLE PANIC. We've already defused bombs
in CRISIS MOUNTAIN. We've collected a few brews in
BEER RUN. And we've avoided wild goats in CANYON
CLIMBER. It becomes immediately obvious that programmers love ladders. Doug Smith is no exception. He's
got loads of them in his new game LODE RUNNER (LR).
There are 150 different sets of scaffolding and ladders
with which the user must contend. Although they are all
based on the same theme, I couldn't find any two that
played the same way. Each one has it's own unique
challenges. I was devilishly proud when I finally completed level 123. Now don't get the wrong idea. I didn't get
there by completing the first 122 in a row. Doug is
reasonably civilized. You can play the level of your choice
by entering the edit mode. The basic objective of each
scenario is to collect all of the gold ingots that the bad guys
have left lying around. These same bad guys (the Bungelings of Choplifter fame) have left a bunch of robot guards
around, too. If they so much as touch you . . . well, we all
know what happens then. All is not completely one-sided,
however. Mr. Smith has been kind enough to give us a
weapon: a Laser Pistol. For some reason it's useless on the
robots, but it does a dandy, if somewhat temporary, job on
the scaffolding. The hero and the robots can fall into the
holes created by firing the laser pistol. If the robots fall,
they get stuck and the hero can walk on their upstreched
hands to safety. If the hero falls and goes though the scaffolding completely, he drops to the next lower level. If not,
the wall soon reforms on his tender body, revealing yet
another way to commit video suicide.

games. The photo example shown above was created
especially for Computer Gaming World.
This is perhaps the easiest game creator I have ever
seen. Use the I, J,K and M keys to move an oversized
flashing cursor around the board. Then, by simply pressing any of the keys 0 through 9 an element of the game is
formed. Put in horizontal and vertical ladders, diggable
and non-diggable floors, trap doors, gold ingots, the good
guy and the bad guys. Save the game on an initialized disk
(there's room for 150 more) and then test it. This data disk
doesn't boot, so it doesn't make much of a gift, but if your
friends have Lode Runner, challenge them to your creations. Make sure you can win first, though, because they
just might want you to prove it can be done.
Make room for the newest ladders and scaffolding
game. And I bet you can't do level 123 on your first try!
20

TAC:

Review & Analysis

Dick Richards

what makes the edge of the woods
difficult to determine. Nonetheless,
it was often very hard to set my units
to halt just inside the woods with my
gun alone sticking out of the trees. I'd
usually find that either I had halted
still in the forest and was unable to
see anything, or that I was out in the
open for all to see, and destroy.

NAME:

Tactical Armor
Command
TYPE:
Wargame
SYSTEM:
Apple (others
to follow)
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
Ralph Bosson
PRICE:
$40.00
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, MD

Tactical Armor Command (TAC) is
Avalon Hill's new game of World
War II Armor/Combined Arms combat. Each side can control up to eight
units in your choice of five different
scenarios. The game includes eight
major armored fighting vehicles
from each of four nations — the US,
USSR, Germany, and Great Britain —
as well as infantry squads and field
guns for each nation.
TAC can be played against the
computer at four varying levels of
difficulty, or against a human opponent. In starting the game, you allocate a certain number of points per
side, and then select your units by
"buying" them through the expenditure of those points. This effectively allows handicapping of one side to
even things out against an inexperienced opponent, and also serves

as a guideline to allow you to know
that the sides are even when you
want them to be.
TAC is played on an 1800 x 2000
meter section of the north German
plain, with the map divided into fifteen sectors. The sectors are labeled
A to E along the vertical axis, and 1 to
3 along the horizontal, with sectors
A-3, B-1, D-3, and E-1 containing
woods. The other sectors are devoid
of terrain, there apparently being no
roads, ravines, hills, rivers, creeks, or
towns in this particular section of
Germany. The woods left me somewhat frustrated, since it is difficult to
know exactly where the border of the
woods lies. The instruction booklet
points out that units are not shown in
their correct scale to one another in
conjunction with the size of the
board, and I suspect this is part of

Movement is directed by means of
a "control yoke" on the keyboard.
Key U directs the unit to move forward, H and J direct a left and right
turn respectively, and N moves in
reverse. When the movement phase
begins, your unit revs its engine and
starts moving. It then moves straight
ahead for the full distance possible
unless you order a turn or a shift into
reverse. I'm not sure what the U key
does (orders a forward move) for Armored Fighting Vehicles (AFV's),
since the unit moves forward on its
own. This method of movement was
one of my main complaints about the
game, since it requires fast action to
enter your orders, you aren't sure exactly how far a unit may go and, as I
said earlier, the only visible terrain
features (woods), have well nigh indistinguishable edges. Perhaps I am
simply too "hex oriented" to appreciate this design, but I found it
frustrating not to be able to give more
detailed movement orders.

ZORK III

As told by Scorpia

Welcome back! A chair is waiting
for you by the fire, and Fred is pouring out a tall one (Spelunker Beer;
only the best for my customers!) Now,
settle in, and I'll tell you a little about
ZORK III.
The first think you'll notice, as you
wander through this part of the Great
Underground Empire, is that it's not
as extensive as the previous Zorks.
Compared to the others, Zork BI is
actually tiny. In fact, if you have a
good memory, you might not even
need to make a map, although having
one is always helpful, especially in
Shadow Land.

Right about now, you should be
getting suspicious. If the game is that
small, there can't be too many pi izzles.
And if there aren't many puzzles, the
ones that ARE there must be mean
ones. Which just happens to be the
case. There are only 7 points to
accumulate in this game, so that
should give you an idea of what
you're up against. Oddly enough,
obtaining the points isn't hard. In the
first two Zorks, you received points
for accomplishing difficult tasks or
gathering treasures. In Zork III,you
get the points for doing easy things,
not for doing hard ones. As an
example, you get one point for
climbing down a cliff and finding a
chest. That's the easy part. The hard
part is getting the chest open, for
which no points are awarded. This
can make the game very puzzling;
you find that you're picking up points
very quickly, yet you are nowhere
near finishing the game. In fact, you
might have 5 or 6 points, and still
have no idea of what's going on. So,
keep in mind that your current score
is only an indication of how you are
doing. There is much more to Zork
BI than meets the eye.
Now let's look at this mysterious
land in a bit more detail. You start at
the foot of an endless staircase, with
the familiar brass lamp nearby. Those
stairs really are endless, so don't
waste time trying to climb back up.
Instead, take the lamp and begin
your explorations. You will first come
to the four-way junction, with a
sword in a rock. Yes, it's your old
friend, the Elven sword. Don't bother
trying to pull it from the rock, though,
because there's no way to do that.
Just leave it; in time, the sword will
come to you. Moving west from the
junction, you eventually come to the
cliff mentioned above. Climbing
down the handy rope, you come to
the ledge with the chest. At this point,
you will find that you can't climb
back up the rope while carrying the
chest. What to do? Well, just be
patient, and remember not to be
greedy. You aren't on a treasure hunt
this time out. Climbing all the way
down the cliff will lead you to the
fabled Flathead Ocean. No swimming

allowed, but if you hang around long
enough, something should happen.
You will have only one chance to do
the right thing, so it's best to save the
game before going to the beach (read
a book from Zork I while you wait).
Another interesting spot is the lake
area. Here's where you get to do a
little swimming. You'd probably
rather not, as the waters are pretty
frigid. Alas, there's nothing to be done
about that, so plunge in! Just be sure
to drop what you're carrying first.
You can't stay in the water very long,
so make for another shore quickly.
It's better to visit the western side of
the lake first. This is where you'll find
a strange place called "Scenic Vista".
There doesn't seem to be much here,
but everything in this room is quite
important. Examine all objects with
care, and don't be afraid to experiment. Get physical, if necessary.
When you finally leave here, you
should not be empty-handed.
When you re-enter the lake, you'll
drop whatever you have with you.
Don't worry, just dive down to the
bottom, keeping an eye out for
hungry fish. Pay careful attention to
the description here, or you'll miss
something. Since you can stay under
for only a limited time, you may need
to make more than one visit to the
lake bottom. Once you're back on the
surface, swim for the southern shore,
and head into the cave. Yes, it sure is
dark in there, and you don't have any
light. However, if you did the right
things at Scenic Vista, you won't
need a light source here. Once inside,
it will be fairly obvious what to do
and where to go.
After that, you may want to pay a
little visit to Shadow Land. It's a
spooky sort of place, and a bit difficult
to map. However, this area isn't a
maze, and it can be mapped if you
pay careful attention to the descriptions. What you're looking for
here is a mysterious person in a hood
and cloak. You must wander around
until he appears. Be aware that he is
not friendly, so trying to be nice will
get you nowhere. On the other hand,
killing him will not help you to win
Continued on p. 46

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

more than a game machine"), advanced features, and low price — all
qualities unmatched by any of its
"old-fashioned" competitors like the
Atari 800.
Obviously, they're not talking
about "our" Commodore.
Let's start with something easy:
price. Anybody who's been looking
at the ads must surely have noticed
that you can get an Atari 800 for
about the same price as a 64, and the
400 is much less. The new 600XL and
800XL are expected to be in the same
ballpark. An Apple IIe is substantially more expensive but also a far better computer, with better and faster
drives, far better documentation and
customer support, and a hundred
times more peripherals. Not to mention software .. .

REMEMBER THE PET?

Jon Freeman

THE EMPEROR'S NEW
CLOTHES
I really wanted to write about
something less critical this month,
but my friends and associates insisted that somebody had to point out
that the emperor has no clothes.
I'm speaking, of course, of the
Commodore 64, which has to be the
most overpraised, deceptively advertised, and "user-hostile" machine to
appear in years. If you've already got
one, you may not (yet) realize how
thoroughly you've been hornswoggled. No one can blame you; it looked
so good on paper, and the magazines
have so studiously avoided more
than a hint that the 64 isn't the
answer to the prayers of every
would-be computerist in the land.
In recent weeks, publications as
prestigious as the New York TIMES
and the Wall Street JOURNAL have
printed articles that sound like Commodore press releases. After praising the wisdom and foresight (!) of
Commodore executives and the efficiency (!!) of the company, the
writers, who obviously have no firsthand knowledge of personal computers, cited the 64's unique potential as a learning tool ("something

It's true that you'll probably soon
be seeing more software for the 64.
Nobody likes to program on the
machine, and the company is worse
than unhelpful, but the untapped
market is prompting a lot of conversions. Commodore is notorious for
whimsically changing their computers, disk drives, and operating
systems so that no two will run the
same software. If they do this to the
64 (and they announced at CES their
intention to do so without warning
outside developers or the public), or if
the current rush to the 64 falters, software developers will jump off the
bandwagon even faster than they got
on.
All right, you say; so the
company's not the greatest. What
about the machine itself?
For starters, the "64K" is largely illusory. The ordinary user working in
BASIC has only about 39K to play
with — almost exactly the same as an
Atari 800 with a BASIC cartridge.
The textual display is arguably the
poorest of any computer's. The color
is unappealing; the print is hard on
the eyes; the background looks like
graph paper, and the screen is rife
with RF interference. (Don't believe
a salesman's claim that it's just the
conditions in the store; it always
looks that bad.) An improved gra-

phics chip on newer models helps
some, but if you're stuck with an
older one, you're just stuck.
Of the ballyhooed 16 colors, five
are black, white and three shades of
gray. Only half are available at any
one time as foreground characters.
Only one of the 16 — black — makes a
decent background for most colors.
The vast majority of other foreground/background combinations
produce unintelligible smears.
(While the Atari is not immune to
this, the 400/800 are not nearly so bad
as the 64, and the XLs are better still.)
The Atari offers 16 colors in 8 shades
apiece — 16 shades in one GTIA
mode.
The 64 has eight sprites; the Atari
has four "players" and four
"missiles." Sprites are wider; playermissiles are taller (the full screen
height, if you want). Sprites offer the
potential of higher resolution or
multiple colors; on the other hand,
they're far clumsier to move and occupy more memory.
Although obviously more elaborate than the Apple's, sound on the
64 rates no better than a toss-up with
the Atari's. The 64 has more controls, but they get in the way as often
as not, and the Atari is much easier to
use.
Collision detection on the 64 is a
joke (It will tell you that something
ran into something, but if you want
to know what, you have to go to a lot
of trouble.) You won't find any information about reading the joystick
from BASIC — perhaps deliberately.
(The 64 has trouble telling a joystick
command from a random keystroke.
If a game you're playing periodically
crashes, restarts, or does other inexplicable things, this may be why.)
Nor does Commodore's BASIC support elementary graphics commands.

CAVEAT USER
It is in the area of "userfriendliness," in fact , that the 64 sets
new lows. The User's Guide that
comes with the computer is almost
totally useless; to do anything of
consequence requires the Programmer's
Continued on p. 50

PARIS IN DANGER:
Strategies and Rules Modifications
Floyd Mathews

NAME:
Paris in Danger
TYPE:
Wargame
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800/1200
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 2
PRICE:
$35.00
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, MD

PARIS IN DANGER (PD) is both
a strategic and a tactical level simulation of Napoleon's campaign of 1814
in defense of Paris. After the
disastrous 1812 Russian misadventure, Napoleon was thrown on the
defensive. Numerically superior
Allied armies invaded France in 1814
from three different directions.
The Allied victory objective is to
obtain 60 points by capturing and
holding French towns. Each town is
worth one point and Paris itself is
worth 30 points. There are 62 French
towns on the strategic map which
can be captured, but practically
speaking, the Allies will probably not
be able to take Paris against a competent French player. A more
realistic Allied plan is to try to capture 60 smaller towns. The Allies do

not get any points for destroying
French units.
The French victory objective is
simply to obtain 60 points by destroying 45,000 Allied soldiers. French
casualties are not subtracted in determining French victory points.
Each game turn on the strategic
map represents one week, and the
entire game lasts 25 weeks. If neither
player achieves 60 points within 25
turns, then whoever is ahead is the
winner.
The players use a joystick to secretly plot movement for each of their
corps for each turn on the strategic
map. A corps can move one square
per day, plus bonus moves for forced marches. You can also concentrate several of your corps in the
same square on the strategic map by

stacking them atop each other, but
each must be moved separately. After
all movement is plotted, the program
displays simultaneous movement for
all corps one day at a time.
If during the movement execution
phase, opposing corps should enter
the same square of the strategic map
on the same day, the program immediately shifts to combat resolution
on the tactical map. You have the option to either have the program
resolve the battle automatically, or to
fight it out in detail with the tactical
battle subroutine.
If you do go to the tactical map, all
corps present are broken down into
their respective divisions of cavalry
and infantry with artillery allotted to
each unit. The tactical combat
subroutine is very detailed, and large
battles can take an hour or longer to

complete. The tactical display is also
a scrolling map and occupies about
six screens. There are four random
tactical maps for variety, but on the
very large scale of 200 feet per
square, much of the terrain on the
tactical map is clear.
The Tactical Level game has three
phases and lasts for 48 turns or until
both sides decide to end the battle by
pressing the option key. Each player
may move any or all of his divisions,
each unit fires its artillery. Finally,
each unit has a melee I fire phase. Individual casualties are displayed for
each division, as well as morale level.
If a division's morale is shattered, it
may halt or even rout.
You can also form your infantry
divisions into the standard formations of this period — such as line,
column, mixed or square — with each
formation having different effects on
morale, movement, firepower, casualties taken, ability to face enemy
cavalry charges, and so forth.
The high resolution graphics of the
strategic map display are excellent.
The tactical map display has lower
resolution graphics, but is adequate
for their purposes. Surprisingly, most
of this program is written in BASIC.
Despite this limitation, the program
is very detailed, runs fairly quickly,
(although I do think the strategic
movement joystick control subroutine is too slow). And, if you make a
mistake in entering movement on the
tactical map, there is no command to
correct the error.

Rules Modifications
The following suggested rules
modifications are intended to
shorten the game and also to add
realism. First, let the program resolve
all tactical battles automatically, with
the exception of giving the French
player the option of picking three battles to fight on the tactical map. This
will save a lot of time, plus the automatic results tend to be more realistic
than the tactical map results. In reality, the French often outfought the
Allies even when outnumbered, and
the automatic results are accordingly slanted toward the French. But, if
both players have equal skill, the

French may not often win on the tactical map. Additionally, many battles
on the tactical map tend to be
unrealistic massacres with much
higher casualties than in real battles,
because the losing army cannot retreat off the tactical map. In order to
avoid these unrealistic massacres, I
suggest that you permit either player
to terminate any battle on the tactical
map after 15 turns by pressing the option button. With the automatic resolution feature, the loser's casualties
will rarely exceed 20 percent even in
the worst defeat. To further shorten
the game, I also recommend a 15 turn
limit for the strategic phase, which
is about the same length as the
historical campaign.

Secondly, at the start of a turn on
the strategic map, each player should
tell the opponent where each of his
corps is located. This will save both
of you the time and eyestrain of searching for them. Further, it can be
very frustrating for the French player
to lose a game merely because he
overlooked a single Prussian corps
sneaking toward Paris "camouflaged" in some script on the map
display.
Thirdly, one of Napoleon's big advantages in reality was his unified
national command, which the Allies
lacked. You can better simulate the
lack of Allied unity with a four player
game in which each Allied army is
commanded by a separate player.
Further, under this rule modification,

if any Allied army sustains more than
30 percent casualties, that player
must immediately march all of his
corps eastward and quit the game.
This simulates the fact that the Allies,
particularly the Austrians, were not
confident of victory, and were unwilling to fight a war of attrition.

French Strategy
The French player should obviously try to engage in as many battles as
possible in order to try to get 60
points before the Allies capture 60
towns. If you agree to use the first
rule modification discussed above (in
which the program automatically
resolves most battles), the French
should try to use their three options
to go to the tactical map whenever
they catch a smaller Allied force, and
try to wipe it out. With this rule
modification the French can also risk
battles even when outnumbered
three to one and, using automatic
resolution, still get excellent results.
However, if you do not use this rule
modification, the French player
should probably try to avoid most
battles at three to one odds on the tactical map, as the Allies might wipe
out the smaller French force.
There is one special situation in
which the French can always risk
engaging a superior Allied force at
worse than two to one odds on the
tactical map: If the French have more
than 24 divisions on the contested
square on the strategic map, the tactical subroutine will only pick up the
first 24 divisions for each side for
display on the tactical map. Therefore, if the French have at least 24
divisions, the French will always get
at least even odds on the tactical map.
This is a rather major glitch in the
program, and it helps the French
player who stacks 24 divisions per
square.

Allied Strategy
The Allied player should always try
to avoid battles, except where
necessary to win control of an important town or bridge. When required
to fight, the Allies should try to get
odds of at least three to one. After a

battle is resolved, the program retreats the surviving defeated corps
one square on the strategic map
(usually toward the east for the Allies
and usually westward for the French)
with the victorious corps retaining
control of the square. If retreat is
blocked by a river on the strategic
map, all of the defeated corps are
eliminated! Therefore, it is risky for
any commander to fight on a square
adjacent to a river unless he is prepared to fight to the last man on the
tactical map.
The Allied player has one big advantage on the strategic map: he can
easily plot evasive maneuvers in
order to hopefully dodge around or
retreat away from French corps seeking battle. In general, if French corps
are nearby, the Allied corps should
try to converge into a powerful stack,
and try to avoid the French.
However, if no French are near, the
Allied corps should disperse in order
to capture many towns as quickly as
possible.
I recommend the following four
prong invasion plan for the Allies. All
Allied corps must of course try to
avoid early battles, even by withdrawing from France if necessary.
The main Allied thrust should be
made by the seventh corps initially
located north and west of Strasbourg.
The abbreviated corps designations
are as follows: P1, PG, A3, A4, R3, R5
and RWOR, comprising 84,000 men.
They should march west through
Nancy or Metz, and look for a
chance to cross the Meuse River
unopposed at Verdun or St. Mihiel in
order to threaten Paris from the east.
If a large French force advances to
the Meuse bridges to oppose a crossing, this Allied force should retreat
and try to draw the French away
from Paris.
The second major Allied thrust
should be composed of the six corps
initially located south of Strasbourg
(PB, A5, R1, R2, R6/cavalry and R7)
totalling 69,000 men. They should
swing south through Basel and
Belfort, and then try to strike northwest toward Paris along the east bank
of the Seine. Regrettably, the Yonne
River (which meets the copyright

declaration at the southern border of
the strategic display) is impassable,
hence this second prong cannot
strike west across the Yonne to
threaten Paris from the southwest by
the "back door". However, this force
can threaten to capture the towns
east of Melun, and later in the game
possibly cross the Seine at Melun to
then threaten Paris by the back door.
The four Allied corps initially
located north of the Moselle River
(P3, PL, RSBW and R11) totalling
43,000 men should try to cross the
Meuse unopposed near Liege, then
race westward across Belgium, and
try to capture as many French towns
as possible in the vicinity of Cambrai.
Later in the game, this force should

try to move south to threaten Paris
directly from the northwest, or cross
the Seine west of Paris in order to
threaten Paris by the back door.
The fourth Allied prong should be
composed of the three corps (P2, R9
and R10) initially located west of
Mannheim totalling 18,000 men.
They should move west through
Trier into Luxembourg, and hopefully cross the Meuse unopposed
near Mezieres. Later in the game this
force may try to proceed westward
to capture any undefended towns
north of Paris, and possibly threaten
Paris directly from the northeast.
The French player must try to react
promptly to Allied threats, hence it
is very difficult to define any general
French strategic plan. Obviously, the

French must always protect Paris,
and should try to prevent any Allied
corps from moving between Paris
and blocking French corps. The program checks for victory conditions
daily during the strategic movement
phase, therefore the French should
not allow any Allied corps to occupy
Paris at any time during the movement execution phase. The French
should try to control important
bridges and utilize the rivers east of
Paris as barriers to delay the Allied
advance, and also to hopefully trap
an occasional Allied army.
Inevitably, as the Allies bypass
French strongpoints, the French will
be forced to withdraw toward Paris
in order to concentrate for its
defense. If the French can make a last
stand holding Paris, Versailles and
Melun, they have a chance to win
very late in the game. The French
should try to keep 24 divisions at
Paris in order to get good odds on the
tactical map if that city is attacked.
If most of the Allied armies are kept
northeast of the Seine, the French
player should be able to utilize the
much shorter interior lines southwest
of the river to rapidly shift reinforcements between Paris and
Melun, concentrating wherever
necessary to meet Allied threats. The
French at Melun should always look
for a chance to try to break out east
of Melun to recapture any undefended towns. Additionally, the tiny Fifth
corps (2,000 men) should be detached from the main French army and
sent north to try to recapture as many
undefended towns as possible in the
vicinity of Cambrai.

Tactical Tips
When you do engage on the tactical map, I recommend that you
form your infantry divisions in line
formation, and place them shoulder
to shoulder in order to cover each
other's flanks. You should anchor
your infantry flanks on woods, or the
edge of the map rivers if possible, for
protection against flank attacks. Your
cavalry are your best shock troops,
and you should try to circle them
Continued on p. 47

Boardgamer Meets
Computer
Jay C. Selover

What the heck is going on here?
I've been playing board wargames
for a while and feel like I'm really
"in" the hobby. So, of course when
wargames for personal computers
started to spring up, I got right into
it. (At least I thought that last December was pretty quick.) So how come
people are already talking about
"third generation" designs which are
now being supplanted by the "fourth
generation"? Things must be moving
very quickly in this fledging hobby.
I'm sure that I'll enjoy watching it
grow from here, but I still feel like a
father who 'missed the first two years
of his child's life — there's much yet
to come, but how much have I
missed?
So how does computerized
wargaming measure up for a crusty
old hard-core like myself? Pretty darn
well, actually! I'm sure that all board
wargamers have considered the
potential benefits of computerization:
true limited intelligence, unbiased
refereeing and rules arbitration, and
challenging solitaire play. All of these
are being addressed to some extent
by current computer wargames, but
I can also see another forthcoming
benefit. With a tremendously expanded market of potential consumers, good computer wargames
hold the promise of legitimatizing the
whole field of conflict simulation.
Wargamers, in my experience, are

not frustrated generals, snipers, or
fighter pilots. They are intelligent
people who enjoy competition, who
prefer less abstract conflict simulation than is offered by chess, and
who have a significant interest in
history. Good designs, like Guadalcanal Campaign, teach logistics and
goal-oriented planning as well as
quite a bit of history. As computer
owners learn that a good wargame is
not just a body-counting contest, I'm
wondering if we might not see even
some additional expansion into
board wargames because of some of
the unique features they still have
to offer.
A quick survey of current releases
in computer wargames indicates that
designers are exploiting the limited
intelligence and solitaire capabilities
of the computer quite well. The ability to keep enemy units hidden until
actually spotted by a friendly unit
makes all the difference in the world
in a game like Computer Ambush
when it is compared to a similar type
board wargame like Patrol. You've
got to be much more careful about
the movement of your men when
you're not sure just exactly where the
enemy squad is located. Computers
provide a quantum leap into realism
with this type of simulation. The
solitaire capabilities of almost all current computer wargames (along with
"save game" features) also provide
great advances over board war-

games. No longer must you set aside
one full day with your opponent, and
then rush the last few turns because
the table has to be cleared for dinner!
One potential benefit of computerization has turned into a mixed blessing. The computer knows the rules
of the game and won't let you break
them. It also performs the calculations required for combat and movement. These facts seem to contribute
to a weakness in the documentation
of some computer wargames. Rules
are often presented in a cursory manner, without examples or discussion.
The feeling seems to be that you'll
learn the rules as you go, especially
when you try to break one. (I do hate
those rude noises that some games
make when rejecting an illegal
order!) Combat algorithms are often
shrouded in mystery. Typically, the
rules give general guidelines as to
which features influence combat
results, but optimized tactics can't be
formulated without knowing a little
more about the importance of each
factor. The problem with the "learn
as you go" outlook is that everyone
has a "frustration threshold", and
complex, computerized simulations
without good documentation are
right on the ragged edge (especially
with novice game players). Understanding the rules and combat
algorithms allows strategies to be
developed for winning play (whether
or not these strategies are historically

sound is a function of the design
quality). If the rules presentation is
incomplete, there is a risk that the
player will not learn to play as well
as possible, or that he will never
know why he consistently wins or
loses.
I hasten to add, that not all computer wargames are devoid of explanations, examples, and other aids.
Many provide help or are really selfexplanatory. Perhaps if software
companies formulated some minimum standards for documentation,
the quality would be more consistent.
Another approach to greater understanding and enjoyment of the game
would be to include a "tutorial
mode" in a wargame. A program
with solitaire capabilities must be
able to evaluate game situations, and
ought to be able to recognize when
a human player makes an obviously
bad move. In tutorial mode, the program could point out bad moves (and
also good moves) either during the
game or in a post-game critique.

Some analysis of the game after it is
completed would also be particularly
appropriate; one thing that I dearly
miss from board wargames is the
after-dinner rap session where you
finally find out exactly what your opponent was trying to do throughout
the game. I have played several
solitaire computer wargames where
I had no idea why the computer moved units where it did or how in the
world it was attempting to achieve
the objectives of the game. When I
won, I didn't know whether I had
defeated a "random move generator"
or had somehow out-maneuvered a
masterful trap that the computer was
trying to spring on me. Here again,
a post-game critique (with the computer commenting on its own performance) would be most enlightening.
One fact about computer wargames which I've noticed is that they
are generally the products of only
one person who has both designed
the game and programmed it. In
view of this fact, the wargames

published thus far are truly remarkable. But, I wonder if great strides
couldn't be made by a two man
designer/programmer team (something like the designer/developer
teams so common in board wargames). The potential is apparent by
looking at Computer Ambush. It was
a fine game in its first edition (that
is, it was a fine design); but the fact
that the second edition involved
mainly programming changes and
resulted in a forty-fold increase in execution speed illustrates what could
happen if design and programming
functions were each executed by
specialists. While there is still untapped potential, you can't fault computer wargaming for its current
"state of the art". The games are
already side by side with board wargames in design concepts and sophistication. If you haven't played a
wargame before, check with your
local software dealer for an entrylevel title and try it out. I'm betting
that you'll like it!

Review & Analysis
James A. McPherson

Cosmic Balance II
Space War-Game
Apple II/
Atari 400/800
Diskette
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR: Paul Murray
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

COSMIC BALANCE II, the sequel
to the popular game THE COSMIC
BALANCE is now available. While
The Cosmic Balance (CBI) is a tactical game, Cosmic Balance II (CBII)
is a simulation of strategic operations in an interstellar culture. You
discover and colonize planets;
establish commerce nets; allocate
production to supplies, starship construction, and research; and order
your starships to various missions.

The game provides five scenarios
tracing the history of the human
races' expansion through the stars.
Each scenario is on a somewhat
larger scale than the previous one —
and each is harder to play than the
previous one.
1) Terran Expansion: This scenario
is for only one player. It has no conflict and it's sole purpose is to let the
beginning player become familiar
Commerce Nets, important factors
in CBII, consist of one industrial
with the movement, economic rules,
and how to "build" a commerce net.

planet, two mining planets, seven
farming planets, and a minimum
number of cargo ships traveling between these planets to keep them active. You begin to build your net by
sending out scout ships in the immediate or neighboring sector to
discover new planets. You can discover three types of planets: Terran,
Farming, and Mining. Industrial
planets, a fourth type, are merely
converted farming and mining planets. Conversion of a planet to industrial just uses more supply points.
All planets must go through a period
or steps of colonization. The industrial planets take eight turns, the
longest, and the farming worlds only
take two turns. There must not be
any gaps in these steps. If for any
reason you cannot supply your colonies they will deteriorate. Once you
have the prescribed number of planets out of colonization and into
what is called the active phase you
are ready to start your commerce
net. The commerce net is started by
sending cargo ships on commerce
missions. There is a minimum

number of ships that must go on
these missions in order to keep the
nets active. In addition, once the
commerce net is in operation it
becomes self-sufficient and no
longer needs supplies. In fact for
every cargo ship on a commerce mission above the minimum and below a
maximum there is generated resource points that are used to procure supplies, ships, or research. It
must be noted that these economies
are fragile. If one of the planets in the
net is captured, bombed, or for any
reason reduced below active status,
then the net is destroyed. Each
planet left must immediately be supplied by ships or they too will begin
to revert to "discovered" (the
original undeveloped status).
There is one additional note. Terran planets are self-sufficient. They
are not part of a commerce net.
Once you learn how to establish
commerce nets you are ready to go
onto the more advanced scenarios.
2) Colonial Wars: In this scenario
you get your first taste of conflict.
You begin with a commerce net and
some ships and your opponent has a
terran planet and some active planets. You win against the computer if
you bring Terra to an inactive status.
You lose if all your planets go inactive. You only have 10 turns to complete this scenario.
You learn quickly that the enemy
doesn't sit back and build up his
strength. The first few times of playing this scenario found my planets
captured or reduced to rubble by the
enemy in no time at all. You must act
swiftly to gain the advantage. I began

attacking supply ships since I felt I
did not have enough firepower yet to
attack Terra, and I wanted to hinder
all attempts at setting up a commerce
net. I also tried to beef up my defences at every opportunity given me
by my limited resources. Every time I
have won this scenario its been
because I have some planets active,
not because I have reduced Terra to
an inactive status. While I have not
tried this approach, I have been told
that it is better to invade Terra, as opposed to bombing it.
3) First Contact: In this scenario
you have three commerce nets plus
Terra and the enemy has four nets in
an adjacent sector. Your objective is
to prevent your own economic collapse for ten turns. The enemy significantly overpowers you in ship firepower. I have found that no matter
what I do, I just end up barely surviving after the ten turns (Which by the
rules is winning, isn't it?) My general
procedure has been to attack the
commerce nets and to strengthen my
defenses against the heavy attacks.
4) Rebellion: In this scenario, you
have three sectors under your control plus one sector that is inhabited
by you and the enemy (sector B). The
enemy also has two other sectors.
Your object is to establish a commerce net in sector B.
My approach to winning this scenario was to use all of my sectors to
provide ships for sector B's conflicts.
You must do all of this while maintaining the other sectors. This was
the first scenario that really began
getting involved for me. For instance, each sector has a maximum
of 40 planets, so that between all parties we were manipulating 240 planets worth of instructions.
5) The Final Conflict: In this
scenario every sector except one is
involved. That means 15 sectors or
600 planets. The sectors are evenly
divided (OK, our side does control
one more sector then the enemy).
This is an all out war and it is the one
scenario I have not yet completed.
6) Creating A Scenario: You can
definitely spend a lot of time playing
the other scenarios. But what if you
want to create a game scenario of
your own? This option allows you

complete freedom in designing your
own game. You can build a fleet of
ships that is undefeatable and scour
the galaxy or be hopelessly outnumbered and rely on your wits.

the active sector, and their status
(those being active, ecolapse, colonial, and discovered). This table is
set up like the ship display.

Ships
Maps and Displays
When I first read the instructions I
was overwhelmed with the amount
of detail involved. But, the screen
and map displays simplify the procedures and help you accurately
keep track of everything that is happening. The only thing is that these
maps and displays do nothing to
make the game interesting. You are
constantly manipulating numbers as
if all you are actually doing is a
balance sheet at the end of a month.
Even the names of the different ships
are reduced to two-letter abbreviations.
Here are the screens:
1) The Map: The map is divided into 16 sectors, each of which contains
about 40 usable planets. Control of
the sectors is indicated on the map by
the color of the sector. Each sector is
designated by a letter. This is the only portion of the game that is helped
by a color tv or monitor. However, I
have no difficulty using a B&W
monitor.
2) The General Display: This gives
you the most complete display of
what is happening within a sector.
The information supplied on this
screen includes how much is in the
supply pool, any cargo currently being transported, lists of ship types
and the number of each available for
missions. There is even a table at the
bottom of the screen which shows
the number of each class of planets
for each status and the number of
enemy planets in the sector. This is a
busy screen and you can understand
the need for abbreviations.
3) Ship Display: This is a table of all
ships currently in the active sector.
Across the top is a list of the types of
missions available. Along the left
margin is a list of the types of ships.
By cross-indexing you can tell how
many ships of each class are of any
given status.
4) Planet Display: This table exactly
details which friendly planets are in

There are 15 different classes of
ships and a standardized planet.
Each ship class has three basic attributes; size, range, and cargo
capacity. Each also has a standard set
of combat values.
There are 5 sizes of ships, each approximately twice the mass of the
previous one. These are the Corvette,
Frigate, Destroyer, Cruiser, and
Dreadnought.
Each ship is rated under all of
these categories and its effect in battle is determined accordingly.

General Comments
CBII is sold under SSI's Rapidfire
series. After playing the game one
may ask why? The connection is that
if you so desired, CBI could be used
to fight each battle in CBII. The two
can be used together to play a campaign. But keep in mind that CBII,
itself, is not as "active" as the other
Rapid Fire games. [Ed Note — We
like to think of CBII as "Visicalc in
Space".]
An in-progress game can be saved.
However, in order to save a game
you must give it a specific name that
must always begin with "scen". I
found that this was sometimes
overlooked.
You can either play with another
human or against the computer with
four difficulty ratings to choose
from.
Don't colonize planets before its
really necessary. Keeping extra
planets active is costly.

Conclusion
CBII is a very complex game with
many details and intricacies. Some
game-players will think this is
enough, but I felt that CBII was too
much like working on a balance
sheet and watching the numbers
change. CBII's strength is not as a
stand alone game; it is rather, as a
campaign companion to CBI.

TELE-GAMING

With great effort (the light is very
dim), you are able to decipher the
following words: 'Restricted Area —
Keep Out!" Your command? ENTER
As you cross the threshold into the
gaming room, the iron door slams
shut behind you. Suddenly, a cloaked
and hooded figure materializes in the
center of the room. It gestures for you
to approach Then, in a rasping voice,
it says: "You may now play a game or
download one for later enjoyment.
What is your pleasure, sojourner?"
Your command? PLAY And, play you
shall...once you've learned the
groundrules.
In my last column, I discussed
private electronic bulletin board
systems (BBSs) which provide fantasy role-playing games and/or
gaming hints. This time, I'll be listing a
number of BBSs where you can find
computer games for online playing
and/or downloading.

Patricia Fitzgibbons

Logging you into the guest book
Please wait...
Greetings, adventurer! You must
be either very courageous or very
foolhardy to visit these premises. But,
never mind' The ores will be so
pleased to know you're here. They
were terribly disappointed when our
last guest got away. We really
shouldn't make them wait any longer,
should we? Prepare to enter the
labyrinth....
You are standing before an intricately carved iron door. The door is
slightly ajar. If you look closely, you
can see something of a pattern there,
cut into its surface. Your command?
READ CARVINGS

Playing a computer game online is
similar to playing a purchased game
on your home computer. However,
in online gaming, you use your
modem to connect, via telephone, to
someone else's computer. If a BBS
offers online games, you can select a
title and play by responding to the
other system's prompts. Generally,
the games available are in the public
domain. Most of them are imaginative, fun, and free (some BBSs do
charge small membership fees). As
always, remember that the typical
BBS is privately run; call again if the
line is busy or doesn't answer. Of
course, occasionally a system is shut
down by the owner because he or
she decides to discontinue the BBS.
Here are brief descriptions of eight
excellent single-player (one caller at a
time) gaming systems:

Dragon's Lair (Long Beach, CA) —
(213) 428-5206: The Dragon offers
fifteen adventures, including
"Dutchman's Gold" and "Sabotage."
There are also seven simulations,
such as "Nukewar" and "Lunar
Lander." When the system answers,
type the password DRAGON. A onehour playing limit is in effect here.

Big-Top Games System (Milwaukee,
WI) — (414) 259-9475: The Ringmaster (Neal Patrick) provides the
caller with nine adventures, including
"The Wizard's Castle" and "Jungle."
There are also eight other games,
ranging from "Civil War" to
"Blackjack." The system is available
evenings and weekends only.

Nessy (Chicago, IL) — (312) 773-3308:
Nessy is an adventure game in itself.
Start in the Main Room by reading
the "Help Book." Then, just explore
— watching out for the carnivorous
ferrets! — until you reach the Game
Room. There you will find nine
games, including text versions of
Phoenix Software's "Adventure in
Time" and "Queen of Phobos." The
hours vary, but the system is usually
online from ten p.m. to eight am.
daily.
Drucom (North Wales, PA)
— (215) 855-3809: Dru (the "Sexy
SysOp") presents five games in the
arcade section. You can try your
hand at "King Tut," or, perhaps,
"Atlantis." Page the SysOp for a
password to view the Adult Menu.
Signature Software BBS (El Segundo,
CA) — (213) 675-1001: The Game
Room is closed from six p.m. to ten
p.m. nightly. At any other time, you
can battle Klingons in the classic
"Star Trek," or hone your skills with
simulations of "Blackjack" and
"Othello."
Lethbridge Gaming System (Alberta,
CAN) — (403) 320-6923: This
Canadian BBS offers nine online
games, including "Wumpus,"
"Casino," "B-1 Bomber," and
"Pyramid 2000." When the operator
is present, you can play "Dungeons
and Dragons (TM)" or "Traveller
(TM)" as well.
Commnet-80 (Akron, OH) — (216)
645-0827: In the arcade area, you'll
find "Isle," "Dogstar," or "CIA." Note
that there is a thirty-minute limit per
call.
Disk Byters (Union City, CA) — (415)
489-0388: Four online games are available here: "Thunder Road Adventure," "Dawgbite," "Othello," and
"Scramble."
Continued on p.

50

DELTA SQUADRON

NAME:
TYPE:

Delta Squadron
Strategic
Space War
SYSTEM:
Apple II/64K
#PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR:
Gilman G. Louie
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Nexa Corp.

Delta Squadron (DS) is a strategic
space war simulation. You, as the
Legion Alliance Squadron Commander, must direct up to 34 small
one or two seater fighters down a
long trench and destroy the Cetusites
Main Power Induction Inverter.
This will result in the destruction of
their station (Does this sound
familiar to you? I hope so). You must
assign some ships to fly cover while
others are set for on-course
targeting. The Cetusites will use their
own Tactical and Tactical Command Fighters as well as ground
defense systems to prevent you from
accomplishing your mission.
Delta Squadron has nine scenarios

with a save option so that you may
quit your game and come back to it
later. Each of the scenarios are color
coded to designate the average playing time, which can be from one to
three hours on the average.
In all of the scenarios you must
enter or already be in the trench to
ultimately be able to launch your
photon torpedo down the MPII
(Main Power Induction Inverter)
and win the game.
Data is available on every fighter
whether it be friendly or enemy. This
data is very important in your
strategy. For instance, pilots are
ranked according to their flight experience and length of service. The
more experienced the pilot, the more
accurate their targeting skills and
greater their evasive abilities during
combat situations. It is wise to attack
the enemy with a pilot of at least the
same rating or higher.
To win, you must navigate an oncourse Alpha or Beta fighter down
the trench and land directly on the
MPII so that the ship can fire it's
photon torpedo on the Inverter before running out of time. There is a
20% chance that the shot will fail so
have some backup at all times.
As always, there are many ways to
lose. Have all of your ships shot out
from under you, you lose. Run out of
time, you lose. Have no on-course
Alpha and Beta fighters, you lose.
Miss the target, you lose. Fun, isn't
it?

James A. McPherson

This game has it all and, if I haven't
mentioned it already, you need a color television or monitor to play. Well,
you could possibly play with a black
and white monitor, but you would
have a difficult time telling the good
guys from the bad. It also wouldn't be
very enjoyable.
As I was saying, there are 3-D
animated graphics throughout the
game. In the beginning, you see all
the fighters in animated 3-D. When
you fire on an enemy fighter you
switch to an animated 3-D
viewscreen and you fire at the fighter
through crosshairs. If you fly over a
turret you get to see it take potshots at
you. If there is a hit your fighter
blows up. When and if you get as far
as the MPII you again switch to 3-D
and watch the photon torpedoes go
down the tube (if your shot is good).
The finale is watching the Cetusite
Satellite blow up. You did make it to
the end didn't you?
Delta Squadron is a strategic space
war game for those people who are
tired of the text and colored-grid
games. My only request is that the
next time, Nexa incorporate the fancy graphics into the actual game
where the player can interact with
them, rather than have to sit back
and watch.
The program is a bit slow due to it
being a 100% graphic format but,
after a few games, I forgot about it.
This was because of the ease of playing the game with paddles. ❑

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

to stimulate our brains by playing
strategy games. What is surprising,
at least to me, is the number of people who seem to prefer "mindless"
games of eye/hand coordination. Arcade games are still big winners in
the sales race. They outsell strategy
games by at least two to one, and,
at times, by as much as ten to one.
This is particularly depressing to a
strategy game designer. A couple of
years ago when I was faced with
these discouraging facts (that translated into discouraging financial situations), I found I had three options:
1) I could go back to work at a regular
job. Engineers still get paid good
money but it's just not the kind of
thing I want to do with my life.
2) I could try to write action/arcade
games. But I just don't have a "feel"
for that type of game. 3) I could learn
some lessons from arcade games and
maybe improve my games in the process. This is the option that I've
chosen (although the jury is still out
as to whether I will be successful
enough to avoid the first option).

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape

Virtually all simulation games are
strategy games. All strategy games
are thinking games. These are the
games that tickle the space between
your ears.
Although this column was previously devoted to the design elements of "real-world" simulation
games (and called Real World Gaming), I would like to broaden our
horizons a bit. The dictionary defines
strategy as:
a) a careful plan or method, b) the
art of devising or employing plans
or strategems toward a goal.
These definitions imply the use of
intelligence towards reaching an
objective. This is what makes human
beings unique among the animal
kingdom. So it is not surprising that
you and I should find it entertaining

So, what is there to learn from arcade games? Typically, they employ
a simple input mechanism. A joystick
and a fire button are all most coin-op
machines have. Nothing could be
easier or more familiar to use. I am
certain they didn't leave the keyboard
off their design because of cost. It's
just too complicated for "regular"
people. The fact that the most sophisticated personal computer on
the market uses an equally simple
device is no coincidence either. The
"mouse" in Apple's new "Lisa"
computer is the result of extensive
human engineering. It is the main
device for user input. So how can we
take advantage of all this design
effort and apply it to strategy games?
The answer: use a joystick as your
input device.
This is easier said than done.
Joysticks work fine for moving an
animated creature against a background, but strategy games consist of
much more than a few objects on a
single screen. The input required is
much more complex than simple
directions for movement. Many strat-

egy games communicate in abstract
concepts. They provide a lot more
options to players than arcade games
do. Thus, the simplest solution for a
design needing a variety of inputs
has always been to use the keyboard.
The alphabetic keys provide 26 options by themselves. If whole words
are used, then the choices are almost
infinite. However, very few people
are as comfortable with a keyboard
as with a joystick. Most of us have to
"think" about what we're doing
when we type in a command. Although strategy games are supposed
to be thinking games, I don't believe
players should have to think about
"how" to choose a certain stratagem.
They should only have to decide
what choice they want to make. The
simpler the mechanism for selection,
the more the player can concentrate
on what is being selected.
While there are a number of games
that have been designed using this
idea, there are still many more being
published that force players to learn
"command keys" or even whole
"command languages". Bill Budge
did an excellent job with icons
(graphic symbols) and a joystick in
his Pinball Construction Kit. Chris
Crawford broke new ground in creating a wargame that includes all the
realism of the best of that genre but
communicates only through a joystick. FreeFall Associates, in Murder
on the Zinderneuf, achieved the
amazing feat of allowing players to
question suspects in subtle ways
using only a joystick. It is obviously
possible to make strategy games that
are easy to play. It just requires better
design from game designers.

Since a joystick can only indicate
direction, the designer must find
some way to present the options
available to the player in a "spatial"
arrangement. It makes no difference
if the items for consideration are text
words or graphic icons. Just so they
have a positional framework and
some way to highlight the current
choice. For instance, to move among
text options on a screen you could
make the current position "inverse"

and you could move the selection
to the item above if the joystick is
moved up. All the designer need do
is define how the options are related
according to joystick movements.
Then a simple push of the fire button
will activate the player's selection.

MAKE

TYPE

Mine
Bunker

Shooter
Comndr
Missile

The lines above represent part of a
game I designed called Cytron Masters. In the case shown here, the
player selects which type of unit to
make. When this is first printed on
the screen, MINE is in inverse text.
If a player pushes right, SHOOTER
is highlighted and MINE returns to
normal text. Pushing the joystick
down from that position will place
COMNDR "under the cursor". If the
player continues to push down, then
the cursor will move to MISSILE. (A
timing loop tells how long the player
has pushed.) Only pushing up from
MISSILE will cause anything to
happen. Although the design for the
way the cursor moves could have
included "wrap-around", I thought it
was too disorienting.
What if you want more options
than the available screen space will
allow? Then you scroll the screen,
adding new items to the bottom as
the joystick is moved down (or the
top if up). Or you can allow the
player to "flip screens" as one option
on the current screen. In Cytron
Masters I was looking for a way to
allow two players to simultaneously
control armies of 50 units each while
the armies were still moving on the
screen. Something like Crawford did
in Eastern Front (where you position
a cursor over a unit on the map)
which worked fine for directing individual units, but I wanted the players
to be able to create new units (of 4
different types) at variable locations,
organize armies under commanders,
and occasionally fire missiles at opposing massed fronts. This required
several menus on a three-way split
screen (with most of the screen being
taken up with battlefield). The use of
a joystick for each player in the Atari
version (and a paddle on the Apple)

made this process possible as well
as playable.
This points out one of the other
advantages of a joystick — multiple
players. Putting two or more players
on a keyboard is almost ridiculous.
There just isn't enough elbow room.
An even more significant advantage
of joystick input is the fact that the
player cannot make a mistake. It
simply is not possible to input an incorrect command. With a keyboard,
the designer must make provisions
for illegal keys or commands. Since
what is a legal entry depends on
what is being asked by the program,
this is no small task. I have played
games where you could type a letter
for a major option. Then you would
be given some broader choices that
required typing a word (that you had
to look up in the manual). And then
you would type a number for an
amount. If you made an error on the
amount you specified, then you had
to start the process all over. Although
the designer could have added more
sophisticated error checking, I can
sympathize with his problem. Flagging bad input can be a real bear!
With a joystick design you only show
"legal" commands. You can even
control numeric input better. If, for
instance, you want the player to tell
how many of something, you start
out with the minimum value on the
screen. You tell the player to push his
stick "up" for more and "down" for
less. As he pushes, you reprint the
value displayed. He can press his
button whenever he has the right

amount. You just don't let the player
push past the top or bottom limits.
This is a lot cleaner than waiting for
the player to hit "return" before you
can check his error or warn him.
You can get more elegant by adding acceleration to your joystick
routines where there is a chance
the player may have a lot of ground
to cover. This is essential on Atari or
Commodore joysticks (since they
only have switches not potentiometers). To control the speed of the
joystick (or cursor) you would keep
a total of how many times the program has looked at the stick and
found the same direction. You could
use this number to determine how
fast to move. To slow the speed, the
player would only need to let off his
direction for an instant. With a few
enhancements, this technique could
give the player accuracy for short
"fine" movements and speed for long
"coarse" movements.
The use of a joystick as the main
input device in a strategy game can
make a complex game much more
playable. This requires that the designer do the work and let the player
have the fun. But that's what they pay
us for, isn't it?
Dan Bunten is the author of COMPUTER QUARTERBACK, CARTELS
& CUTTHROATS, and CYTRON
MASTERS all available from Strategic Simulations. He is now a member
of the Ozark Softscape group that
wrote M.U.L.E. (a family game for the
computer) which is available from
Electronic Arts.

makes it possible to have more competing firms than you have players.
For example, you can play solitaire
against three other companies,
which is more interesting (and more
realistic) than having just one other.
Each turn of the game represents
three months of business. A turn
consists of reviewing the reports of
how your firm did in the previous
quarter and then making plans for
the coming quarter. The first photo
shows the Profit and Loss report of

the•
learning
game
Bob Proctor

CARTELS &
CUTTHROATS

As I sat reading my back issues of
Computer Gaming World the other
day, I realized that CGW has never
had an in depth review of Cartels &
Cutthroats. There was a brief overview back in Vol 2, Number 4 but that
was over a year ago and before CGW
had pictures of what the screen looked like. Such a great game deserves
more. It would get my vote for the
best adult educational game for any
microcomputer and I wouldn't want
regular readers of this column (if
there are any!) to overlook it.
Each player in Cartels & Cutthroats is the President of a manufacturing company. There can be up to
six companies and the computer can
control up to five of them. This

Bob's Bits for the second quarter of
the first year. The most important
numbers are, of course, those on the
famous "bottom line". In this case,
they show $1,815 total profit for the
quarter, which is 18% of Revenue.
You can also see that I'm making $91
per unit sold, which is a big 102% increase over the previous quarter.
If I choose, I can examine other
categories in the same manner but
this is not necessary to enjoy the
game or even to do well at it. Advertising & Marketing, Research &
Development, and Interest are the
three which you have the most control over. Cost Of Goods Sold (COG),
the biggest cost, is made of raw
material cost and labor. These costs
cannot be avoided, but your decisions can affect them. For instance,
you can buy extra raw material when
it is cheap and avoid paying high
prices later. And when your workers
ask for more money, you can say
"No!", which keeps labor costs
down. The longer you keep denying
their request, however, the more likely it becomes that your factory employees will strike!
Besides the P&L Statement, there
are four other reports. There is the
traditional Balance Sheet. There is a

Sales Report (photo #2) which shows
the demand for your product, and
how you rank in the five categories

that buyers use to decide which product to buy. Notice, for instance, that
Bob's Bits is number one in Price
(lowest) and that 73% of the people
who bought BB (as opposed to one of
my competitors) gave this as the
main reason for their selection. The
relative importance of these categories may vary. Price is very important when your product is a
necessity — something that people
have to buy — but it is much less important when your product is considered a luxury. The reasons that
buyers choose one product over
another also depends on whether the
economy as a whole is doing well or
poorly.

These factors are established at the
beginning of the game. Photo #3
shows the first screen you see after
you decide how many players and
how many turns. It tells you what
kind of product you have, what the
situation with raw materials is, what
the economic outlook is, and how big
a role luck will play in the game.
If you don't want to play the
scenario which the computer has
chosen, you can either have the computer choose another at random or

you can select each factor yourself.
Raw Materials, for example, can be
scarce (in which case you must outbid your competition or do without!)
or they can be abundant. They can
also be subject to transportation
strikes, which makes it crucial to
have some stockpiled when the
source dries up! Likewise, Inflation
can be anything from non-existent to
rampant. The impact of chance can
also be controlled. This determines
how much variation there will be between predictions and actual events.
There are four levels from which to
choose, going from no variation to
the wildly unpredictable!
Okay then, you know what kind of
company you have and you know a
little about your competition and the
market. How do you convert this
knowledge into a plan? Forming a
plan consists of answering seven
questions. How many units of raw
material do you want to buy? How
many units of product do you want
to make? What price will you sell
them for? How much will you spend
on advertising this quarter? How
much will you spend on research this
quarter? How much money do you
want to borrow (or pay back)? And,
finally, how many factories do you
wish to buy (or sell)?
Occasionally, there will be a
special decision to make. These
always show up as letters or memos
attached to your reports. They may
be a request for money from a charity, a chance to hire an outside consultant, a demand from the labor
union, or a plan to automate part of

your factories. You make these decisions with a one-letter response on
the planning sheet. Of course there
are no right answers; what works
against one opponent may fail
against the next.

Once all the plans are done, the
computer quickly calculates the
results (about 15 seconds) and
displays them on the screen like a
teletype. Photo #4 shows part of one;
the top has news about general
economic conditions. As you can
see, Bob's Bits (BB) has done all right,
and may be taking sales away from
Applers, the other low-priced product, but the other two continue to
sell very well at higher prices.
Presumably, their product is heavily
advertised or possibly it just has a
good reputation.
What we don't know is how much
of their revenue they actually keep as
profit. This is important because
that's how the winner is determined.
It's okay to make half as much on
each unit as long as you're selling
more than twice as many! At the end
of every four turns, you get to see the

Annual Reports of your competitors
to see how you stack up.
Hopefully, you already see how
educational this can be. Maybe you
even learned something from my
brief description. You learn how
businesses do their accounting, you
learn some of the theory of the free
enterprise system, and you learn a little about how to manage a small
business. You may also gain insights
as to how businessmen feel about inflation (will YOU hesitate to pass it
on to the consumer?), who "wins" in
a labor dispute, and exactly what is
the real value of research.
If you want to share this experience with larger groups, you can
split them into teams and play the option that prints the reports on a
printer. Give each group a fixed
period in which to check results and
agree on a plan. This will bring group
dynamics into play and add another
valuable (though not always pleasant) lesson to the event.
Yes, the game does have limitations. For instance, you can never
have more than one product whereas
most makers of cars, stereos, computers, etc. have models to fit many
tastes and pocketbooks. Or, if you
need more money to build a factory,
you can't issue bonds or stock, you
can only borrow it. So, it's a bit
simpler than the real world, but you
won't notice when you're in the middle of a price war. More likely, you'll
be hinting loudly that if prices don't
stabilize, NOBODY will be making a
profit. Oh yeah, there's no law
against price fixing either .. .

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster

HEURISTIC SEARCH
PART 2: BREADTH-FIRST
SEARCH

RECAP
Last issue, we talked about using
heuristic information to help find
solutions to computer problems. We
gave the example of tracing a path
from one location to another on a hex
grid by the following method:
(1) Find the six hexes circling our
present location.
(2) Eliminate any hex already in
our current path or through
which we cannot otherwise
move.
(3) Of those remaining, pick the
one closest to our goal.
(4) Move to the hex selected.
(5) If we are in the goal hex, stop;
otherwise, go to (1).
As we saw, however, this method
won't necessarily find the shortest
path. In fact, in many cases it won't
find any path at all. So, we need
something else.

BREADTH - FIRST SEARCH
An alternate solution is to use a
breadth-first search. The best discussion of this that I've found in
Nilsson(71), though he gives a more
general version in Nilsson(80). Our
approach will require a copy of the

hex map (called TRACE) that will accept the values 0 through 7, where
0 = hexes we can move into,
1..6 = hexes that we've already moved through, and 7 = hexes we can't
move through at all. We'll also need
to keep a list of hexes to be looked at
(called OPEN). Given that, here's our
approach:
(0)Put the starting hex on OPEN
and set its location in
TRACE[start] = 7.
(1) If there are no more hexes on
OPEN, then no path exists, so
quit.
(2) Get the first hex in the OPEN
list, called H.
(3) Examine the six hexes adjacent
to H, called ADJ (n) for n = 1..6.
(4) If ADJ (n) is the goal hex, then
quit.
(5) If TRACE[ADJ (n)] = 0, then set
TRACE[ADJ (n)] = n and put
ADJ (n) at the end of the OPEN
list. Otherwise ignore ADJ (n).
(6) When all 6 hexes have been examined, go to (1).
Figure 1 shows the map that we
ended up with last issue. S represents
the starting hex; G, the goal hex; and
X, hexes through which we can't
move. Let's see what kind of path this
algorithm will find.
To start with, we put S on OPEN,
and then immediately pull if off to
look at the hexes adjacent to it. All six
hexes are clear, so all of them are
placed on OPEN, and TRACE gets
set to the appropriate values. Figure 2
shows what our map now looks like.
We now have six hexes on OPEN,
so we pull these off, one at a time,
and repeat our steps above. When
we've dealt with these six hexes,
there are now 12 new hexes on
OPEN, and Figure 3 shows what the
map looks like now. The process
continues until we finally hit the goal
node. Figure 4 shows the state of
TRACE when we reach our goal.

TRACING THE PATH BACK
Now that we've found the goal hex,
how do we trace the path back to the
starting hex? Well, we need the function INVADJ (n), which is the inverse
of ADJ (n). What does this mean?
Suppose we're at hex H. If we move

to any hex ADJ(n), n = 1..6, then H =
INVADJ (n). More simply put, INVADJ allows us to go back to where
we came from. Incidentally, INVADJ
(n) = ADJ(1 + ((n + 2) MOD 6)).
Okay, once we've got INVADJ, we
can find our path from the goal hex
to the starting hex using the following steps:
Continued on p. 48

ATARI ARENA
Allen Doum

ELECTRONIC ARTS
As mentioned in David Long's article, Electronic Arts is an "all-star"
group of independent designers,
marketing their games under one
logo. But, it is not the "stars" that are
making the impact; it is the games.
Pinball Construction Set was discussed here last issue. The graphic
and sound limitations of a converted
Apple game are the only weak points
in this magnificent piece of software.
ARCHON (see the review in this
issue by David Willis) is a chess-like
game in which combat is resolved on
an an arcade-like battlefield. While
neither the "chess" or "
arcde"potinsfhgmwuldtano
their own, the combination is unique.
As most wargamers have long
known, mastering the tactics of a
game can be far more important that
mastering the strategy. The better arcade players, likewise, can dominate
in ARCHON. The board game has
another weakness. Instead of defining geometric "chess moves", the
Icons have been given "movement
allowances". This, plus the uncertainty of the battlefield, means that
the combination play tactics in chess
is largely missing in ARCHON. And,
since so many pieces can "fly" over

other pieces, positional play is not
very sophisticated either.
ARCHON is a good first step
towards what will be an exciting new
class of game. Its play, despite the
lack of depth or variation that will be
possible, is fast moving. But watch
this space for future developments.
The basic concept is too good to
ignore.
MURDER ON THE ZINDERNEUF is a mystery game for those
people who don't have time for a
twelve-hour deadline. Instead, the
player, (impersonating one of the
worlds great detectives,) has only
twelve minutes to crack the case.
One of the sixteen passengers on the
airship Zinderneuf is missing, and
since the ship will dock at Lakehurst,
New Jersey in those 12 minutes,
there is not a moment to be wasted.
The player (using a joystick) guides
his on-screen counterpart through a
vertically scrolling rendition of the
cabin deck, searching the staterooms
for clues, and questioning the remaining passengers. He may question (in any of several styles) or accuse any passenger he meets, but if
he accuses without proof, that
passenger will not talk to him again.
ZINDERNEUF is the first game, to
my knowledge, that requires the
GTIA graphics chip. (It can be
booted with only the CTIA, but the
screen is virtually unreadable.) This
allows perhaps the best looking
"floor plan" in computer gaming.
Without "breaking" the game, it is
impossible to tell how much variation is possible; although there seems
to be a great deal. An experienced
player will more easily recognize the
difference between a standard answer about a character and a possible clue, however.
The mechanics of MULE were
discussed in last issue in the review
by Edward Curtis. But what really
sets this game apart is its graphics.
Virtually every graphic "trick"
available has been used to enrich this
game. A great deal of thought was obviously put into the "human engineering". The auctions, in
particul,gveyhoictbur
sell, to set the price of an item and
even collude with other players en-

tirely by using the joystick, while the
on-screen display clearly shows the
effects of these decisions. All in all,
a superior game.
Describing WORMS? with words
is far more difficult than showing it
to someone. Nonetheless, the attempt must be made. The playfield of
WORMS? is filled with dots, each
one of which would be at the center
of hexagon. Starting at the dot in the
center are from one to four worms.
As each worm moves to an adjacent
dot, it draws a line connecting those
dots and no worm may move where a
line is already drawn. Each worm is
a different color, and as it moves the
dots and the lines connecting them
are changed to the color of the last
worm at that dot. When all six lines
to a dot have been drawn, the last
worm there claims that dot and gets
one point. Also, worms die when
they become trapped at a dot with no
exit route. Due to the mathematics of
the game, pairs of worms will kill
each other, while an odd worm will
die at the starting dot.
But how do the worms know
which direction to move? Each
worm is programmed to move in a
given directions, depending on
which lines are already drawn to the
dot it is on. For example, a worm that
for the first time is at a dot, with only
a line drawn to the left, has a choice
of five directions to move. If it moves
to the right, then for the rest of the
game it will always move to the right
in that situation. There are four ways
for a worm to "decide": NEW,
AUTO, WILD, and SAME. A New
worm will stop at each new situation
and let a player decide, using a paddle. An Auto worm does the same,
with the instructions coming from
the computer. A Wild worm is randomly pre-programmed, and Same
indicates that the worm will repeat
its last program. It is also possible to
have a worm "sleep" through a given
game, and still have it remember its
last program at a later date.
WORMS? can be played
competitively, either by teams or individuals or can be used solitaire as a
pattern drawing puzzle. Its sound
Continued on p. 48

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

Commodore 64
Roy Wagner

Welcome again to the Commodore
Key. This time we are going to look at
public domain games and look alike
games. The first is relatively cheap to
buy and the latter is relatively easy to
produce because the design has already been proven and the market
has already been established.
Public domain games are most
often available from users groups.
With the popularity of the Commodore 64 (C64) user groups are forming rapidly everywhere. Usually
starting with about five people, they
quickly grow. Someone is usually
designated disk librarian and they
collect and categorize public domain
software. The librarian is responsible to make available only that software that is in the Public Domain. If
games are not in the Public Domain
and they are copied for other than
the original owner, that is an act of
copyright infringement, or more
simply piracy.
Public domain games are usually
made available for the cost of the

medium upon which they are stored
(tape or disk), a nominal fee for copying, and mailing. The cost is usually
about $10, for which you get several
games. Public domain games are
also marketed commercially by companies. This is quite legal. Generally,
the companies improve the original
version and give full credit to the
original author.
An example of this is the game
MONOPOLE, which was originally
written for the PET over a year ago
by John O'Hare (writer a several of
good public domain games). When
the C64 was introduced, two fellows
added color, credited themselves as
the authors, and started selling their
version for $25 (piracy of another
kind!) John O'Hare has made his own
C64 version available for $10.
A lot of good games are available in
public domain, a lot of bad or
mediocre games are also there, but
the price is right. You generally find
many adventure type games, some
tactical, and few good arcade type
games.
Another group of games usually
available from user groups are those
that have appeared in magazines.
These are generally not considered
public domain unless expressly
stated by the author or magazine.
They require the person who has a
copy of it to own that issue of the
magazine.
The second area to cover are
games which imitate already
popular original ideas. These games
look and usually feel like the original.
We have all seen games that look like
PAC MAN or CENTIPEDE or
FROGGER. Many of these border
directly on or are examples of
copyright infringement. These are
often only cheap rip offs of a good
and highly profitable idea. Others,
though, are extensions and enhancements of the popular theme.
A legitimate version of the arcade
game FROGGER is FROGGER (no
need to create a clever new name!)
from Sierra On-Line. If you enjoy the
arcade version and want a copy at
home for your C64, get this one and
forget about any cheaper look alikes.
A game that extends the original
limits of a good idea is JUMPMAN

from EPYX. This game has similarities to DONKEY KONG, but
honestly enhances the idea. There
are 30 screens to complete, broken
up into three levels of play (Beginner,
Intermediate, and Advanced.) Each
screen presents a different challenge
that can be completed with the proper strategy. The speed of the Jumpman can be varied from one (fastest)
to eight (slowest). At the slowest,
even a four year old can run away
from bullets. At it's fastest, watch out
arcadian! Best of all, the top 20
scores and bonuses are saved to disk.
I hope that you now see that we
have only begun to unlock the many
areas of gaming available to the Commodore 64. Please feel free to write
in and make any suggestions or comments to The Commodore Key, c/o
Computer Gaming World. Until next
time, good luck!

Vic-20
Dr. Johnny L. Wilson
THE COMMODORE KEY TO
ARCADE ACTION: Crossfire, the
best of the arcade games yet submitted is representative of the improving quality of the games available for
the Vic-20. In fact, several of my
friends who own old VCS systems
are becoming increasingly jealous of
what's available on the Vic-20. At
first, they would question if there
was any significant difference between "video games" and the computer games available for the Vic.
Now, I can usually say, "Yes!"
though it was not always so.
In the beginning, there were the
Commodore games. The VIC AVENGER was actually SPACE INVADERS for the Vic, just as RAID
ON FORT KNOX was a thinly discussed version of PAC MAN. Even
companies like United Microware
Inc. offered little advancement,
since their AMOK was an even more
primitive form of BERZERK.
Now, however, there is a very real
difference between the VCS systems
and Vic games. GRIDRUNNER (GR),
by Human Engineered Software (see
CGW 3.4) is a faster and more complicated game than CENTIPEDE.
The first few grids seem to be a basic

version of CENTIPEDE, but one
soon learns that the Y-zapper on
GRIDRUNNER is more dangerous
and harder to avoid than the spider in
the "original" game. Not only that,
but the bombing patters in GR greatly reduce the opportunity to use a
rapid fire strategy with any success.
The playtesters of GR wisely suggest
that players fire more sparingly than
in other arcade games.
GR is not the only game that penalizes the rapid-fire player. I immediately liked the bookkeeping
system in PARATROOPER. My
brother, a VGS fanatic, couldn't
figure out why he would keep
slaughtering the enemy Paratroopers, but lose the game. He had
been taught by "video games" that
there is a "free lunch" — that is,
unlimited ammunition. Now, even
the most inexperienced strategy
gamer knows that that's not true, but
"video games" tend to work on that
principle.
Nick Dudzik changed that
Philosophy by subtracting either one
or two from your score, depending
on the level of play, for every bullet
used. PARATROOPER also uses the
most delightful array of sound effects that I've heard in any computer
game. It's hard to believe the detail
put into the common situation where
the paratrooper is separated from his
parachute. The invader falls faster
than the parachute and lands with a
gross little SPLAT upon the ground.
One soon learns to expend ammunition wisely and select targets carefully in order to score well in this game.
SEAWOLF (SW), a new entry from
Commodore, offers a slight variation
to the rapid fire strategy. In SW, each
player's submarine has four torpedo
tubes available. He doesn't reload
until all torpedoes have been used.
Then, the computer takes about five
seconds to reload all the tubes. In this
three minute timed game, it can
make a big difference how the ammunition is used. If you attempt to
set up a rapid fire pattern, you are
likely to be in the loading phase when
some of the faster, and thus more
valuable, targets appear on the
screen. By creating a game where the
player must compete against the

clock, ammo limitations, and
another player; the designers have
advanced another step from the
typical U-boat shooting gallery
game.
In CROSSFIRE, Sierra Vision
deals with ammo limitations in a different way. As the defending ship
patrols the city to rid it of the alien
menace, it is limited to 25 shots. Near
the center of the city grid are some
"crosses," representing supply
depots. The player must pass over
one of these supply squares at an appropriate time in order to reload.
Since the aliens are metamorphising
as they are shot, and attacking with
increasing speed and sophistication,
just reloading can become an intriguing challenge.
Another game from Sierra Vision
that addresses this factor is
THRESHOLD. THRESHOLD takes
the SPACE INVADERS/GALAXIAN
genre into a new dimension. Not only do you have to keep track of a
limited supply (in this case, your fuel
supply), but the rapid fire strategy
will heat up your lasers until they are
useless. This encourages the player,
even more than in other arcade
games, to devise a different strategy.
I found that the best strategy is to stay
to the extreme left or right of each
screen and move my ships in for
quick sniping expeditions and right
back out to the edge of the screen.
Even though each progressive
screen offers "space pirates" in different configurations and with
slightly different combat styles, this
approach will achieve good results.
Another feature which distinguishes THRESHOLD from its predecessors in the genre is its
hyperspace feature. Each Federation
fighter (the player's ship) is allowed
to go hyperspace on one occasion
during the game. The fiction
associated with this limitation is that
the fuel consumption is too lavish to
allow this more than once. By pressing the space bar, the player's ship
goes hyperspace and the entire
screen (except for his ship) slows
down. This feature enables the
player to get certain screens that are
faster than others, under control.
Another good feature is that each

kind of "space pirate" featured on
the screen uses a different combat
strategy. Some of the pirates are very
adept at laying down covering fire
and then sending in their raiders on a
strafing run. Others lay down an intricate bombing pattern on diagonal
or vertical lines. Some are fairly slow
in both motion and rate of fire, while
others are fast in one or the other and
a few, are fast in both. It is a unique
game in that regard.
Sierra Vision's LUNAR LEEPER
has another approach to strategic
limitations. This game, similar is
style to CHOPLIFTER, has several
interesting limitations. First, one
doesn't have to worry about ammo
supply too much, because the object
of the game is to rescue your comrades WITHOUT damaging any of
the alien life forms (i.e. Lunar
Leepers). You lose points on your
rescue attempt when you have to kill
one of the aliens. The second limitation is with regard to fuel. Each ship
only has a limited supply and you
must try to use it to its fullest advantage. Do you go for the rescues close
at hand first, or those farthest away?
Another interesting factor in this
game is the lack of brakes on your
space ship. You must strictly use inertia in order to slow down and make
your rescue. This is a challenging
and frustrating game. Those who
have mastered CHOPLIFTER will
want to try this "pacifist" variant.

COMMODORE KEY TO THE
UNKNOWN: Tired of playing arcade games on your Vic? Want a
more strategic challenge? Try Parr
Programming's Sports Strategy
series.
FOOTBALL ADVERSARY, which
I find to be as enjoyable as playing
Avalon Hill's board game — FOOTBALL STRATEGY. Also, since
COMPUTER FOOTBALL STRATEGY isn't available for the Vic-20, it's
far better than attempting a solitaire
version of FOOTBALL STRATEGY.
The computer mixes its offensive
and defensive plays in a logical, yet
sometimes innovative fashion. One
has to make sensible decisions consonant with sound football strategy
in order to win. The computer will,
otherwise, soon grind you down. It

took four games before I could win
one, but once I discovered how to
mix up my offensive plays, I began to
gain ground consistently against the
computer. Also, I had to learn what
each defensive formation did best.
Some of my early humiliations could
have been solved by better documentation (all you get is a plastic card
which lists your basic choices), but
one can become competitive with
the computer soon enough. With
eight different defensive formations
and 21 different offensive plays
available, the game (though completely text oriented) is very playable.
Since one must make a decision for
every play, it is a very involving
game. Also, the game offers a
beautiful statistical summary at both
the half and at the end of the game.
At $14.95, this may be the best
bargain available on the Vic-20
market for sports fans.
NEXT ISSUE, KEY TO THE
UNKNOWN visits Prickly Pear Software, strength against the
computer's team.

REACH FOR THE STARS, from Strategic Studies
Group Pty. Ltd. of Sydney, Australia, has announced
that the C-64 version of their game will be available
by the end of September and will sell for $AUS45,
or approximately $US40.

Sirius Software announced the release of four new
games and the translation to new machines of
several others. The new titles include GRUDS IN
SPACE (Apple, C-64, and soon Atari), SQUISH'EM
(C-64, Vic-20), CAPTURE THE FLAG (Atari, and
soon Apple, C-64, and Vic-20), and BUZZARD BAIT
(Apple, IBM PC). The translated games include
BLADE OF BLACKPOOLE (C-64) and TYPE ATTACK (C-64).

October releases for SSI include FORTRESS
(Apple and Atari, $34.95), which is a cross between
Chess/Go/Othello; QUEEN OF HEARTS (Apple and
Atari, $34.95), a pinball game; COMBAT LEADER
(C-64 version), KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT (C-64
version); and PROFESSIONAL TOUR GOLF (Apple
and Atari, $39.95), a golf game using real courses
and historical players. COMPUTER BASEBALL on
the IBM PC has been moved back to a late October
release. CARRIER FORCE, which includes all four
major Pacific carrier battles should be out by
Thanksgiving (Apple and Atari, $59.95). WAR IN
RUSSIA (a game of the Eastern Front WWII) should
be ready for the Apple and Atari in Spring 1984.
The winner of PENTATHALON (held recently at
MICROCON) was Russell Schmalenber of Anaheim
CA. He just edged out Chris Many of Los Angeles.
Russell received a $1000.00 check from SSI, sponsor
of the PENTATHLON. A full report on Microcon
will appear in our next issue.

SCORPION'S TALE (Cont.)

the game. Nor, for that matter, will
running away (although you may
have to do that if you're close to
dying). It's a very tricky situation, so
consider your remaining options
carefully.
Sooner or later, probably later, you

will make your way to the museum
area. One of the rooms here is the
Jewel Room, which contains some
pretty items well-protected by a steel
cage (make sure you read the
plaque!). Of course, there is no way
for you to open or break the cage, so
you'll have to look around for another
way of getting to the goodies. You
might find something helpful in the
Museum itself, which has three
strange machines in it. Two of them
are just decorations, but one can be
very useful to you. Examine it
"thoroughly". And remember. just
because you find something in one
room, that doesn't mean it has to stay
there to work.
You're almost set for the end game,
but there is still the Royal Pain, err,
Puzzle (hehehe). This is the most
tedious part of Zork III. It isn't a
maze, but you probably wish it was.
There is only one solution to it, and it
will take you a while to work it out, so
I'm just going to tell you what you
have to do (you're gonna love it). The
proper way to get out is to move the
wall with the ladder on the west side
to the hole where you first entered.
Then, you can climb up the ladder
and get out. You must exit this way
with the book, or you won't be able to
finish the game. It's a matter of
moving the walls in the proper
sequence, so take the time to map the
Puzzle carefully, moving as few walls
as possible. After that, advance
planning, as well as trial and error,
should get you out.
Now, at last, it's off to see the
Dungeon Master. First, find a room
with pictures. If there's nothing
special about it when you get there,
keep going out and coming back
until there is. Then, of course, you
have to do the right thing; I hope you
picked up everything you came
across in the game so far!

About now you should be through
the secret door. You will find the
sword helpful in the Beam Room. In
fact, you should not take the sword
with you beyond here, because there
is a bug in the game (all versions). If
you have the sword with you, Zork
III will hang just before the end of the
game. Of course, if you've done the
right thing, you won't have the sword
with you at that time. Now the mirror
should be open. Inside it is rather
bizarre room. Careful attention to
the descriptions, and a little experimentation, should give you an idea of
how the room works. When you
leave, you may be confronted by the
Guardians of Zork. This is the last
obstacle before the end game; the
solution to it is transparent. Cheers!
At last, you meet the Dungeon
Master, who presents you with the
final puzzle of the Zork trilogy. Keep
in mind what he tells you; it's quite
important. Also, notice that he follows
you around, but there is one place he

won't go. Finally, think about the
robot in Zork the situation here is
much the same.
That should be enough to see you
through! Next issue, we'll take a look
at Zork Meanwhile, it's time to toss
off a few quick ones....
STARCROSS: Getting in is not
hard. Count the number of bumps,
and think about where you're from.
As for the colored disks, they can
help you in several ways. Try putting
them on the floor, and work from
there. WIZARD & PRINCESS:
Getting off the island should be done
in a vial manner; keep in mind the
general direction you've been going
all this time. SAVAGE ISLAND I: You
know what the bear wants; what's in
the ocean, and have you found a hot
place yet?
Well, it's closing time again. Thanks
for dropping by, and if you need help
in between issues, you can reach me
in the following ways: 1) Send a selfaddressed, stamped envelope to
Scorpia, 1319 Second Ave, Suite 540
N.Y., N.Y. 10021; 2) On the Source:
ST1030; 3) On CompuServe, Go
GAM-310 or EMAIL 70001,1263.
Happy adventuring!

COMBAT LEADER (Cont.)

PARIS IN DANGER (Cont.)

reduce their rate of return fire. There
is even a chance that a unit under fire
may panic. A panicked unit will not
fire, will probably halt, and may even
run away.
CL has a very competitive artificial
intelligence. Many designers achieve
play balance in complex solitaire
games by adjusting the odds in favor
of the program, but not in this game.
Your computer opponent in CL plays
under the same rules you do. I have
heard favorable comparisons between
CL and the U.S. Army's JANUS
tactical combat simulator at the
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory.
Twentieth century small unit tactics
is a very complex subject, and this
program realistically portrays the
uncertainties and hazards faced by a
modern mechanized company commander. You will probably get butchered in your first few games, but this
is a safe and painless way to explore
new possibilities. The fastest way to
improve your skill is to play a few
games as an armor platoon subcommander with the program as your
company commander, and carefully
observe how it handles different
tactical problems.
The main idea is to shoot a greater
volume of fire at enemy units than
you receive. Volume of fire is determined by the number of guns firing
multiplied by their rate of fire. Stationary units have a higher rate of
fire than moving units. Terrain also
has crucial effects on line of sight,
line of fire, protective cover and
movement capability.
Any public library should have
several useful military history books
on small unit tactics. I especially
recommend General George Patton's
War As I Knew It (Appendix D) and
General Marshall's Men Against Fire.
For German tactics from 1939 to
1945, consult the German Army
Handbook by Davies. Don't be afraid
to improvise, but remember . . . the
real time pace of the game forces you
to act quickly. As General Patton
once said, "A good plan executed
immediately is better than the perfect
plan executed too late."
Good luck, and stay low!
❑

behind the enemy infantry in order
to make rear or flank charges to
hopefully scatter them. When shooting your artillery, always aim first at
nearby enemy cavalry if possible.
Bloodied infantry units with low
morale should be immediately pulled back from the line and put into
square formations to steady them
against cavalry rushes. You should
try to maintain a small reserve of
high morale infantry units in column
formations directly behind your main
line which can be used to rapidly
plug any holes in your line, to exploit
any breaches in the enemy line, or to
hopefully block any enemy cavalry
charges directed at the rear of your
line.
When these reserve divisions make
contact with the enemy, they should
deploy from column to line formation in order to increase fire power.
You should always direct your
musket fire into the square directly
in front of your line to maximize
firepower, not to the side. Try to concentrate your firepower on the
enemy unit with the lowest morale.
If a unit routs, very few survivors will
subsequently reappear on the
strategic map. Therefore, you will
probably inflict more casualties by
scattering one panicky unit than by
shooting up several steady ones.
The three divisions of the famous
Old Guard Corps (12,000 men) are an
elite corps of French veterans whose
morale level will always commence
at 100 percent on the tactical map
regardless of how many casualties
they suffered in previous combats.
This high morale makes them excellent for use as shock troops. In the
twilight at Waterloo, after the rest of
the French army had quit the field,
two squares of the hopelessly outnumbered Guard were literally faithful to their brave regimental motto:
"The Guard dies, but never surrenders!" The French player should
not waste the Old Guard by placing
it in the main line exposed to enemy
artillery. These crack troops should
be placed in reserve in column formation behind the main line, and
hopefully unleashed at the decisive

moment to strike a hammer blow at
a demoralized section of the Allied
line.
The random tactical map display
which has bridges is a death trap for
whichever side attempts a bridge
crossing. If this map appears on the
tactical display, do not try to cross,
but converge into a "U" formation to
defend your own bridgeheads, and
hope the enemy tries to cross over into the killing ground.
If you are interested in learning
more about Napoleonic military
history, any public library should
have several books on the subject.
Good luck, and Vive L'Empereur.
There were several major bugs in
the first production run of this game
which have been corrected. To check
your copy, try to march any corps off
the northern border of the strategic
map. If the program crashes, you have
a defective copy.
ED NOTE — A couple of frustrating
aspects of Paris in Danger are: 1)
strategic orders are repeated each
turn and; 2) the tactical formation
known as the column (a favorite of the
French) is not given adequate treatment in the game.
With strategic orders repeating
themselves, your unit will continue to
march on even after reaching the intended destination. We would like to
have seen orders start from "scratch"
each turn. Mike Cullum, Director of
Software at Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games, indicates that
playtesters were split in their opinion
on repeating orders, some wanted the
repeating orders which meant that
units moving long distances need not
be reordered each turn; and also forced players to take the time to check
each unit each turn. Other playtesters
supported our view that starting from
scratch each turn is better.
Cullum admitted that column formation was not given adequate treatment in PID citing lack of memory
space as a reason. He said that future
releases incorporating the PID tactical game system will have improved
treatment of columns. Waterloo and
Leipzig games using the PID tactical
system are planned.

ATARI ARENA (Cont.)

SILICON (Cont.)

and graphics are excellent, and some
of the graphics elements and the
speed of the game can be varied.
Games like WORMS? and PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SET address directly the nature of the computer. Not simply computer versions
of some type of board games which
perhaps provides an opponent, but
classes of games impossible without
a computer. These two join the small
list of games like COSMIC
BALANCE from SSI and the-as-yet-unavailable-on-the-Atari ROBOT-

(1) Set H = the goal hex and clear
out OPEN.
(2) Put H at the front of OPEN.
(3) If H = the starting hex, then
quit.
(4) Set n = TRACE[H].
(5) Set H = INVADJ (n).
(6) Go to (2).
When this process ends, OPEN will
contain a list of all of the hexes in the
path from the starting hex to the goal
hex, inclusive. Figure 5 shows the
path found by this means — an optimal path (7 hexes). In fact, this
algorithm will always find an optimal (shortest) path, if a path exists
at all.

WAR (hint, hint) from MUSE as true
"Computer Gaming". May their
tribe increase.
In all of these Electronic Arts
games, every effort seems to have
been made to put as much graphics
and sound into the game as possible.
The controller input for each game is
easy and obvious. The games are all
good to excellent. If these standards
are maintained, may their tribe increase also. 0

VARIATIONS
I've given a version adapted to hex
maps. However, it works very well
for rectangular grids, especially
where the range for ADJ is n = 1..8.
In fact, I recently played a computer
game involving personal combat on
a grid that could benefit from this. In
it, computer-controlled individuals
moving toward a goal frequently got
trapped in rooms and couldn't move
out. Appropriate use of this
algorithm could easily get them out
of those rooms.
Another variation involves different terrain types, where movement into such hexes is possible but
costs more in movement points.
We'll call that value ENTER(H) for
any hex H. An optimal path is then
defined in terms of total movement
points required, rather than actual
number of hexes moved through. To
accommodate this TRACE must
now hold an additional value in each
location: the cost to reach that location. TRACE[start].COST is set to 0.

When a hex H is expanded,
TRACE[ADJ (n)].COST = TRACE
[H].COST + ENTER(ADJ (n)). There
are a few other modification, too. Instead of using the first hex in OPEN
for H, H is set to the hex in OPEN
having the lowest cost. Also, if
ADJ(n) has already been expanded
from another hex (i.e., if TRACE[ADJ
(n)] = 1..6), then we need to check if
TRACE[ADJ(n)]. COST TRACE
[H].COST + ENTER(ADJ(n)). If so,
then we've found a better path to
ADJ(n). In such a case, we need to set
TRACE[ADJ(n)].COST = TRACE
[H].COST + ENTER(ADJ(n)), set
TRACE[ADJ(n)].DIRECTION = n,
and place ADJ(n) on OPEN (if it's no
still there).
One last variation: instead of a
single starting hex and a single goal
hex, we can have several starting
hexes and/or several goal hexes. In
step (0) above, we put all of the starting hexes onto OPEN. In step(7), we
check if H is any one of the goal
hexes. We have then found the
shortest path between the two sets of
hexes. If we want to, we can remove
one or both of the linked hexes from
their respective sets and start the
whole process over again.

CONFESSIONS
Having given you this marvelous
method, I now have a confession to
make: this algorithm involves no
heuristic information. Instead, it's
known as a "blind search" or "uninformed search". Its prime benefit is
that you are guaranteed to find the
optimal path from start to goal. Its
main drawback is that it tends to eat
up a lost of time and memory,
especially for large maps.
Next issue, we're going to modify
this algorithm into an ordered-search
method which will use heuristic information, to see if we can't improve
on its speed while maintaining its effectiveness. See you then.
REFERENCES
Nilsson, Nils J. (1971): Problem Solving
Methods in Artificial Intelligence,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York,
1971.
(1980): Principles of Artificial
Intelligence, Tioga Publishing Company,
Palo Alto, 1980.

TAC (Cont.)
Infantry movement uses the same
"control yoke" but with one difference. Each press of the key moves
the infantry one movement point in
the indicated direction, thus allowing you to position the infantry exactly where you want them. Why
don't the AFV's have this incremental movement? I don't know, but in
this writer's opinion it would have
been much less frustrating.
Both infantry and field guns have
their own built in transportation and
can be in either a loaded or unloaded
state — referring, of course, to
whether the unit is in fighting mode
or transport mode. When loaded, the
transport and the fighting unit are
indivisible. If hit and destroyed, they
both go together. When unloaded,
the unit can survive while watching
its transport be destroyed. If this occurs, your infantry will still have
some movement ability, but the field
gun will only be able to pivot in
place.
Combat can take one of five forms.
Most non-infantry units can engage
in indirect fire, AFV's can perform
overrun against dismounted infantry
or field guns, infantry can close
assault AFV's, infantry can engage in
firefights with other infantry, and of
course AFV's infantry, and field
guns can engage in direct fire against
all types of targets. The graphics in
the combat resolution phase are
quite acceptable. The firing unit
shows a nice muzzle blast and then,
if a hit occurs, the target flashes red
while you are informed as to where
the hit occurred and if you have
destroyed the target. There is one unfortunate bit of programming which
slipped into the game. When an infantry squad is the target and you
score a hit, you set the disconcerting
message that the unit was hit, say, on
the upper left turret, or perhaps the
lower right hull. This is forgivable,
but does slightly detract from the
overall effect as your average infantry squad has neither a turret nor a
hull.
Five different scenarios are offered for play. Number one, the
meeting engagement starts team one
along the left edge of sector A-1, and

team two along the right edge of sector E-3. These units always start in
the same positions, so early use of indirect fire against the enemy's
known starting position can be very
effective. Scenario two is a static
defense, with team two setting up in
row D or E with a minefield somewhere in row C,D, or E. Only infantry units can clear minefields for
your AFV's to move through safely,
so this one can be a real challenge. In
addition, team two starts in improved positions, so they are harder to see
and hit.
Scenario three is the same as two,
except that team one has to exit from
the lower right corner of sector E-3,
and that there is no minefield.
Scenario four, rear guard, is a continuously renewing stream of IS II
Russian tanks attacking from the
south. Each time you destroy a Russian tank, a new one appears at the
south map edge. How many can you
wipe out before they get you?
In Scenario five (a stalemate situation), both teams begin in improved
positions with a minefield between
them. The goal is to break through
and kill the opponent.
The AFV's of each nationality are
rated according to armor thickness,
sun range and effectiveness, fuel tank
location, speed, and many other factors. The infantry squads and field
guns are all generic, with each unit
possessing unlimited ammunition
and fuel. No detailed information is
given, so unless you have the statistical data available elsewhere in your
library (I did) you'll have to fight your
way to knowledge. You will soon discover, for example, that there is no
way that an American Stuart tank
can knock out a German Tiger or
Russian JS II from the front. You can
hit'em all day long, and you just
won't do any damage.
My overall reaction to TAC is
positive. The graphics and sound effects are good. A fact which was
mentioned in the rules but not
highlighted, is that the game does
support Sweet Micro Systems,
MOCKINGBOARD, and when doing so has excellent sound effects —
enough to make you want to duck the
incoming rounds.

One rather strong objection which
I had was that you cannot scroll between map sectors. This means that if
my Pershing is at the extreme left
edge of one sector, and your Tiger is
at the right edge of the adjoining
board, we could be almost adjacent
and never be seen on the same tactical screen at the same time. I'm
sure that adding scrolling to the map
display would have been quite a job,
but it most certainly would have
made play considerably smoother.
Another annoyance was that the global (or strategic) map is not
accessible at all times, but only at
specific spots in the sequence of
play; and that it is in black and white
only.
In conclusion, I found TAC to be
an enjoyable and relatively accurate
representation of individual armored combat, and one which I will continue to play, on occasion, for quite a
while. On the other hand, with a little
more development, perhaps greater
input from the folks at Avalon Hill or
more suggestions from playtesters,
this one could have been a true All
Star. When I think of what this could
have been with ravines, creeks,
roads, and clearly defined forests;
with a more incremental system of
movement and a scrolling map .. .
ED. NOTE — Mike Cullum, Director
of Software at Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games, indicates that the
problem of tank movement as explained in David Long's review is a
matter of "practice". After a period of
learning, players can solve the problems of movement. He said that one
reason for including the fast action
movement was to put the player in a
"live" stress producing situation in
which mistakes are made by beginners and are avoided by veterans.
Cullum also told us that TAC is the
first in a series of games using the TAC
system. Tactical armor, both WWII
and modern, as well as a divisional
level Civil War game are subjects being explored. Future releases will
have more emphasis on infantry, better movement systems, and maps
which center on units. Cullum says
that comments from players of their
games are always encouraged.
0

TELE-GAMING (Cont.)
Many BBSs provide software
libraries for downloading, and their
catalogues often contain good public
domain games for various brands of
computers. "Downloading" involves
the transmission of a program directly from the BBS' computer to
your machine. You will have to read
a particular BBS' file transfer instructions in order to determine
whether you can utilize protocol
transfer (with error-checking) or
standard downloading (no errorchecking). Among the systems I
mentioned above, Commnet-80 , Disk
Byters, and Drucom also have games
in their download areas. Here are
descriptions of nine additional BBSs
which offer game programs:

A.R.C.A.D.E. (Sterling Heights, MI) —
(313) 978-8087: Primarily an Atari
system, the A.R.C.A.D.E. game files
include "Civil War," "Microids," "Live
Wire," "Island Jumper," and "Horse
Race." The menu is updated
periodically.

Ed Gelb's Data Base (Wayne, NJ) —
(201) 694-7425: The software library
here is very extensive, and contains
many games for the Apple, TRS-80,
CoCo, and Heath/Zenith machines.

RCP/M System (Chicago, IL) — (312)
789-0499: As with many of the remote
CP /M BBSs, this system offers a
huge library of software, including
numerous game programs. It is online twenty-four hours a day, and is
often busy. Keep trying!
DAJAX Software (Augusta, GA) —
(404) 736-3529: This is a fee system
like the Telephone Software Connection. You will have to obtain an
account number and a verified password before you can access DAJAX's
extensive catalogue.
Miami's Big Apple (Miami, FL) —
(305) 948-8000: With that name, you
won't be surprised that this is an
Apple system. The software catalogue
is very good; however, you must pay
a membership fee in order to download programs.
Los Angeles RCP/ M BBS (Los

Coin Games Net (Covina, CA) — (213)
336-5535: This system is run by a
company that distributes coinoperated video games. There is a good
selection of games for the Apple, Pet,
and TRS-80 computers, including
"Monopoly," "Nevada Craps,"
"Caribbean Cruise," 'Deep Space,"
and Invaders."
ARK-NET PBBS (Little Rock, AR) —
(501)372-0576: ARK-NET is primarily
a TRS-80 system. It is online after
midnight on weeknights, with extended weekend hours. Several
games are available, including "Star
Search," "Centipede," and "Rubik's
Cube."
Telephone Software Connection
(Torrance, CA) — (213) 516-9432:
T.S.C. is run by Ed Magnin, who
offers nine games. "Go-Moku,"
"Chess Connection," "Tele-Gammon,"
"Wall Street Journey," "Keno
Master," and "Computer Concentration" are popular favorites. All
games are for the Apple, and you are
billed to your credit card for each
download.

Angeles, CA) — (213) 296-5927:
Another CP /M- based system with a
large library, including many games.
The line is frequently busy, so try
calling late at night.
If none of the systems I've mentioned is local to you, you can find the
names and modem numbers of other
gaming BBSs by asking experienced
users in your area or by checking the
"Other Systems" selection on one of
the boards described above. You can
also call the People's Message System
in Santee, California (619) 561-7277
for a list of BBSs throughout the
country and abroad.
A final word: As you use different
BBSs, reciprocate the favor by joining discussions on the message board
or uploading some of the game programs you've collected. Most systems
are free, and the SysOps appreciate
caller participation.
In my next column, I'll be discussing multi-player tele-gaming — those
systems which allow many users to
play exciting online games...
simultaneously.

NAME GAME (Cont.)
Reference Guide. Both books share
an amazing facility for "explaining"
things in such way that you can't
understand what they're talking
about until you've figured it out for
yourself. The text contradicts itself
left and right. The sample programs
are full of typos, bugs, and incorrect
annotations.
Using the disk directory is clumsy
and utterly unintuitive. You cannot
run a program without first loading
it; an outoboot is impossible. You
cannot "SAVE" an updated version
of a program over an old one. (A
separate command or a change of
names is required.) If you try — or if
you do any of the hundred other
things it doesn't like — the drive will
flash a red light (or, worse, go off into
limbo and never return); but
nowhere, ever, will you be told what
you did wrong. Most programming
or operating errors are not identified
even with a number.
The temperamental drive is numbingly slow. It takes almost half an
hour to back-up a disk! Worse yet, it
has a fatally unbalanced flywheel; as
of mid-August, Commodore is quietly recalling the 1541 from large
retailers without notifying owners or
the public of the flaw.
The real tragedy is that the people
who are buying the Commodore 64
(in droves) are novices — the people
least suited to the machine. Only two
reactions are likely: either they will
think themselves stupid (because
they can't understand what's going
on and can't avoid mysterious
mistakes), or they will think all computers are horrible and throw the
whole idea out the window along
with their 64.

Do yourself, your friends, and the
whole industry a big favor: steer people toward something else. Anything
else.
Ed. note — As our regular readers

know by now, Jon Freeman writes on
controversial subjects. Your responses are always welcome.

There were 234 RIDs turned in by
press time for this issue. The
breakdown of users was: Apple
(47%), Atari (43%); C-64 (4%); others
(3%). As they have done for several
issues, the Atari readers gain ground
on the Apple readers. There are two
reasons for this trend. First, the Atari
market has, of course, outgrown the
Apple market in terms of machines
in the field. And, second, games
reported on in CGW are more uniformly available on both machines. It
will be interesting to see what happens with the C-64 readership now
that they have their own column and
the long awaited onslaught of games
is starting to hit the marketplace.
One of the questions we asked in
RID #9 was "what is your favorite
category of computer game?". The
breakdown was: Strategy (62%),
Adventure (27%), and Arcade (11%).
Newly rated games and updated
game ratings are listed with bold
type in the table on page 52.

GAME RATING
The table on page 52 includes
games evaluated by our readers. For
a game to be included in this listing it
must first have been offered for
rating in our regular RID rating
system. Games offered for evaluation are those covered in the
magazine and/or those having a good
sales record during the time of
evaluation. Once offered for evaluation, the game must have been
evaluated by a sufficient number of
readers to be included in the results.
Any game not evaluated by at least
10% of the respondents was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider
such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?);
LIFE (does the game wear well?)

RID #10 (Use card provided)
Use boxes #1, #2 and #3 to record
reader survey answers from INSIDE
THE INDUSTRY. See page 3 for instructions.
On this page a number of games
and articles are listed for evaluation.
Please take time to evaluate these
games and articles. Use the
guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which
you have not played enough to have
formed an opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of
the article itself, not your opinion of
the game being reviewed. Enter a
zero for any article that does not interest you.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 51 for details on the Reader Input Device

