1

February 1992 Number 91

•

Review

Access
Salt Lake City, UT
LINKS CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE —
HYATT DORADO BEACH: Another
course has been made available in this
popular 3-D golf simulation, this time
taking the action to the Hyatt Dorado
Beach East course. Located in Puerto
Rico, the tropical setting was made for
this Robert Trent Jones custom designed
course. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service # 1.
Accolade
San Jose, CA
ELVIRA II: THE JAWS OF CERBERUS:
The sequel to 1991's Role-Playing Game
of the Year looks even better than its
predecessor. The magical potion
mixing/spellcasting interface is much improved and the high-quality graphics
have been retained. Although there are
not too many non-combat encounters,
there is plenty of both humor and horror

to discover and an interesting environment to explore (three "sets" at a motion
picture studio which specializes in "B"
horror flicks). IBM ($69.95). Circle
Reader Service #2
LES MANLEY IN: LOST IN L.A.: The
stars are out in L.A. In fact, they are way
out, disappearing one by one until only
(use loud basso announcer's voice here)
Les Manley can save the day (provided
he doesn't succumb to California's decadent lifestyle). Complete with plenty of
digitized scenes (particularly of gorgeous
women who include models, beauty
pageant contestants and one who appeared in a Playboy layout), it is clear
that real persons have actually acted to
make this game come to life. Aside from
enjoying a rollicking good adventure
game, all we Californians here at CGW
can add is, "No, it's not really that wild
out here! (hehehe)" IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
MIKE DITKA ULTIMATE FOOTBALL:
There is certainly nothing penultimate
about this action/strategy game. Although the play-by-play is resolved by

fast reflexes (well, not that fast, actually),
plenty of strategy is involved in "setting
up the pieces" for each play. Play selection (players can even create their own
playbooks, teams, leagues, player stats,
etc.), variable difficulty levels (optional
penalties, fumbles, injuries, etc.), league
play and playoffs, plus fine sound support and complete sports-game graphics
(freeze-frames, replays, etc.) make this
package an all-around champion for the
arcade football enthusiast. IBM ($54.95).
Circle Reader Service #4.
Data East
San Jose
BO JACKSON BASEBALL: Although
the graphics are definitely a notch up
from those in EA's Earl Weaver II, the
gameplay in Bo Jackson Baseball is
more typical of arcade games which
have preceded it. However, the interface
for pitching to a specific location is both
unique and interesting. The ball bounces
back and forth under home plate like a
catcher changing the location of his mitt
and the player must press the pitch button at exactly the right time to get the

Review

pitch location desired. The early version
has some problems with collision detection (players running through each
other), but it does not really affect play.
Those who liked Cinemaware's "TV
Sports" line-up of games should enjoy
Bo Jackson Baseball. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #5.
Dynamix
Eugene, OR
NOVA 9: Another in the genre of
"hovercraft" games, Nova 9 is the sequel
to Stellar 7 and bears many similarities
to it. This arcade game has the player
facing the nine worlds of challenge in the
Nova 9 system. Full 256 color VGA and
support of all major sound boards adds
maximum intensity for this scroll and
shoot diversion. IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service //6.
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
ARE WE THERE YET?: For those who
couldn't get enough of the puzzles in
Games magazine, here are over 200 computerized mind-benders. Using over 23 different styles of presentation, these puzzles are interspersed with a bit of U.S.
geography and history along with a
wacky storyline concerning the intrepid
Mallard family, whose entire summer
vacation hinges upon the player's successful completion of this gauntlet of challenges. While diverting, each puzzle takes
about 10-15 minutes to sort out, so there
is a lot of distraction packed in that
strange-looking box. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service 117.
EARL WEAVER BASEBALL II
COMMISSIONER'S DISK II: Now, players
can complete their baseball fantasies
with Earl Weaver Baseball II. By including league drafting, schedule generation,
seasonal autoplay and a manager construction set, the challenge of the "long,
long" summer is at hand. Current player
statistics can now be downloaded, and
game results and statistics can be
printed out. Even "baseball cards" can be
generated! Finally, a ballpark editor has
been included for those who really want
to hit this game over the fence. IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service 118.
THE COMPLETE PGA TOUR GOLF
LIMITED EDITION: This repackage of
PGA Tour Golf includes in its bigger box
the PGA Tour Golf Tournament Course
Disk (described separately below) and
the History of the PGA Tour VHS video
tape (76 minutes running time). EA is
taking a mulligan on any more changes
to this long time favorite golf simulator.
IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service 1/9.

PGA TOUR GOLF TOURNAMENT
COURSE DISK: Three (count 'em) new
courses for PGA Tour Golf. They include
Southwind (home of the St. Jude Classic), Eagle Trace (where the Honda Classic is played) and Scottsdale (where
huge crowds flock to see the Phoenix
Open). Ten different pros are also there
to offer their tips and advice on each
hole. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
#10.
Infogrames
France
ADVANTAGE TENNIS: Another tennis
game that's more work to play than real
tennis, this polygon filled exercise in backhands and lobs is an advanced arcade
game for the IBM. While the box is
wrapped like fine chocolates, this game
left a different taste in our mouths. The
brief rules (in four languages) present the
basic keystrokes and outline the gist of
tournament play. This game gives new
meaning to the term "fault." IBM. Circle
Reader Service #11.

Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
SPEEDBALL 2: BRUTAL DELUXE: One
hundred years from now, a new national
pastime emerges. Akin to the sport
depicted in the film Rollerball or the computer game Projectyle, Speedball is
more like dangerously armed men in
robotic armor playing a cross between
hockey and basketball. Players must
take the worst team in league history
and turn them into champions. Players
can be trained and their equipment
upgraded throughout the season, but
reflexes and dead aim will be the other
team's undoing. Those who enjoyed the
"Spotlight Software" version of the game
which was previously released by
Cinemaware should like the new, improved version. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service //12.
TEAM SUZUKI: This is a basic Sega
video arcade style motorcycle racing
simulator brought to the IBM courtesy of
Konami. More than just a licensed name,
the actual Team Suzuki got involved in

Review

the development of this game to give it a
good, first-person "feel." With 32 tracks
to compete on, the racing season will be
long indeed as players shift, brake and
accelerate their motorcycles as the filled
polygons go whizzing by. Spectacular
crash? Watch it again in full replay
mode. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service 1113.
The Learning Company
Fremont, CA
OPERATION NEPTUNE: This clever
game of marginal manual dexterity has
the player rescuing the world's oceans as
they unravel a mystery sent from space.
Players must use all of their mathematical skills (ages 10 to adult) to pilot a
mini-sub scouring the ocean floor for
wreckage of a space capsule. Beginner
and expert levels are included and the
math problems can be customized. The
game includes an on-line calculator and
the story is compelling enough to inspire
players to want the next clue. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service //14.
SUPER SOLVERS SPELLBOUND!: The
spelling bee meets a game show for kids
on the IBM. Different "games" such as
wordcross (a crossword puzzle style
game), flashcard spelling and the classic
word searches are all presented. Players
can even customize the word library by
adding up to 3,000 of their own words to
the database. Digitized speech has been
added to give words their proper sound,
too. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#15.
Mallard
Lewisville, TX
SOUND, GRAPHICS AND AIRCRAFT
UPGRADE FOR MICROSOFT FLIGHT
SIMULATOR: If that's not a title that says
it all, what is? This package adds sounds
(supporting most major sound cards, including digitized voices and Doppler effects), graphics (to VGA, Super VGA, ATI
and Video 7 modes) and aircraft
upgrades (to the Concorde SST, a WWII
P-51-D, the 1939 Laird Turner Meteor
Racer and the Spectrum Beaver RX 550
Ultralight), just like they promised. Take
off, eh? IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service 1/16.
SCENERY UPGRADES I-IV FOR
MICROSOFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR: Each
of these four upgrade packages for the
Macintosh version of Microsoft Flight
Simulator offers the player some new
skies to fly through. Set I includes the
Eastern seaboard, from Pennsylvania to
Florida, Western New York, Lower
Michigan, Ohio, Indiana and Illinois. Set II
includes Japan, Hawaii and the New

England states. Set III features the
southern two-thirds of the East coast, the
Atlantic and Western Europe (including
London, Paris, Frankfurt, etc.). Finally,
set IV includes 100+ locations in the
American Midwest, plus Hawaii and
Japan. Macintosh ($59.95 each). Circle
Reader Service 1117.
Mind Tech Systems
Los Angeles, CA
(213) 666-7243
PSYCHIC REWARD: This software isn't
really a game per se. It is a program
used to train a person's intuitive powers
using a new principle of 96 percent positive feedback. The "game" plays like an
electronic Wheel of Fortune with the
player guessing which letter will be randomly chosen by the computer. The
closer the guess, the more "money" is
won. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
//18.
Paragon Software
Hunt Valley, MD
MILLENNIUM: RETURN TO EARTH
Paragon's new menu-driven strategy

game has the player building up a new
civilization from the smoking remains of
the Earth. With humanity's last outpost
on Earth's moon, the player must
recolonize and generally lead the survival
of what remains of the human race.
Players must allocate precious resources
and build up other colonies. Tough
decisions have to be made and a sense
of adventuring into the unknown will help
the player carry the day. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service /119.
Psygnosis
Brookline, MA
AMNIOS: In this total arcade shoot 'em
up, the tiny space ship flies around
through ten different worlds in an attempt to kill the deadly spacetime eating
organs and/or rescue the encapsulated
humanoids. The rules in four languages
says it all for this zapper blaster from
Europe. Amiga ($49.99). Circle Reader
Service //20.
BARBARIAN II: Set in a 2-D scrolling
world familiar to arcade garners
everywhere, this standard fantasy quest

Review

fare (complete with "dungeon dude" villains, as the documentation so charmingly puts it) takes our acrobatic hero (no,
not Sonic the Hedgehog, but almost)
through the forests, caves, dungeons,
castles and temples of the land. Billed as
the "ultimate in loincloth entertainment"
(it's clear the designers have never been
to the Hollywood Tropicana Club), fans
of this genre won't be disappointed.
Amiga ($49.99). Circle Reader Service
#21.
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA
CASTLE OF DR. BRAIN: Puzzles, puzzles everywhere, but not a spot to think...
The Castle of Dr. Brain features plenty
of those nasty logic puzzles that drive
people crazy, yet seem so easy once
they are explained. With several difficulty
levels to choose from, "brains" of sizes
will meet their match here. Featuring
hand-painted, scanned VGA graphics, the
standard parserless "Sierra interface" and
full sound support, players solve these
puzzles to get words which allow them to
solve combinations which open doors to
different parts of the castle. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #22.
Software Toolworks
Novato, CA
CD GAME PACK II: This cavalcade of
classics put on one CD demonstrates
some of the storage power of that technology with regard to game applications.
The pack includes Chessmaster 2100,
Robot Tank, Beyond the Black Hole,
Life & Death, Gin King/Cribbage King,
Checkers, Loopz, Puzzle Gallery, Backgammon and Bruce Lee Lives (pictured). It requires the MSCDEX version
2.1 or higher to go with the CD drive.
IBM ($99.95). Circle Reader Service #23.
D/GENERATION: Touted as "virtual
reality meets action adventure," this
game simply simply doesn't live up to
the claim. While an interesting 45 degree
angle 3-D action game, the basics are
scroll-and-shoot with some logic and problem-solving puzzles thrown in. The trick,
of course, is to figure out how the
D/Generation organism is currently disguising itself, since it could be the chair,
the lamp or the floor! IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service 1/24.
THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS
WORLD ATLAS: AROUND THE WORLD
IN 80 WAYS!: Packed with useful information, including topographical, oceanic
and other types of maps, this electronic
atlas has obviously been around for a
while (East Germany?). Full of fast facts
and statistics, it might take the computer

to access the information, just because
there's so much of it there! Reports can
be customized and merged into other
documents (for a professional presentation). IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #25.
Ubi Soft
Sausalito, CA
JIMMY CONNORS PRO TENNIS TOUR:
Another entry into the world of bitmapped tennis games, this one offers
complete tournament play for singles or
doubles, a variety of courts and "roll your
own" players (male and female). Again,
one's dexterity must be quite high to
keep up with the action before a player
can ever hope to score his first point.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #26.
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA
SHUTTLE: THE SPACE FLIGHT
SIMULATOR: One can't help but get the
feeling that there must be something classified in this product. It is such a detailed

representation of the actual Space Shuttle that NASA could use it as a training
tool. Zillions of buttons, switches and
levers have to be operated by the player
to help keep the missions played on
course. By the time a player is ready to
quit playing this one, he or she will know
where the HSI Select Source TACAN button is, that's for sure! IBM ($59.99).
Circle Reader Service #27.
Wesson International
Austin, TX
TRACON FOR WINDOWS: For those
who liked Tracon (the aircraft controller
simulator), here's an opportunity to try it
out using through the popular Windows
environment. Special Windows features include flightstrip printing, more sectors to
fly in, a round radarscope, the compass
rose is always available and SoundBlaster sound support. The on-screen
soft buttons and switches of Windows interface will add a lot of enjoyment to
Tracon's many partisans. IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #28.

Review

T

he Los Angeles Police Depart-

ment has the unenviable task of
keeping peace in a virtual war
zone. To add anything else to their already overburdened capacity would be
like pouring a fresh pot of coffee into
an already full cup. So, when a
strange alien creature comes into
town on a hunting spree, the force is
hard-pressed to hunt it down. Indeed,
they face particular difficulty because
the creature is chameleon-like, able to
camouflage itself in virtually any setting, as well as having the capacity to
move at a speed beyond comprehension.
In Konami's Predator 2, players
have the opportunity to take on the
role of Detective Mike Harrigan in a
four-level arcade style free-for-all.
Players view the action from over
Harrigan's shoulder as he walks down
the street and blows away almost
everything and everyone in sight with
any weapon he can get his hand on.
One thing is certain — the game
doesn't suffer from lack of action.

Konami Gun Exchange
There are five different weapons available to Harrigan, from a .45 magnum automatic pistol (we don't
know whether it is the Grizzly or
Wildey model) through the Mark
III rifle (somewhat better, but
with the trade-off of firing at a
slow rate), a Mark II shotgun
(which fires a bit faster and more
effectively), a Mark I assault shotgun (the most effective and rapidfiring weapon) and onward to an
M-203 grenade launcher (only
fires once, but destroys all
enemies currently on-screen). In
this reviewer's gunsight, the best
all-around weapon for players to
use is the Mark I.
Players will quickly learn that
the key to the game is to constantly pick up fresh ammo, just
like one gobbles power pills in
Pac-Man. The reason for this is
that all the weapons cycle
through the available ammo at a
fairly brisk clip and there is a stiff
penalty for players who run out
of ammunition. When one does
run out, the program immediately issues a weapon rated one
level lower than the player-character's current weapon and five
fresh ammo magazines. This
can, of course, significantly
hinder the player's progress in

The Out-of-Towner
Konami's Predator 2
by David M. Wilson

the game, but it should not happen
very often (if at all) when the player
manages to keep one eye on the
ammo and continually acquire ammunition magazines as they become
available. Ammunition magazines are
acquired in typical arcade game
fashion by shooting them as they appear on-screen. Players should be
aware, however, that shooting the rocket icon more than once will immediately set it off and one just might
want to time its activation a bit more
carefully for optimum efficiency.

Predators, Two

1111E:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DEVELOPER:
PUBLISHER:

Predator 2
Amiga, c.64/128
and IBM
Amiga, C.64/128
$19.95
Mirrorsoft
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL

The Amiga version is beautiful, incorporating excellent graphics and
awesome action. In fact, the graphics
intentionally add to the difficulty of
the game as well as the look. This is
because the same color-schemes are
used for innocents, as well as
criminals. Hence, the fast-shooting
player is forced to look at the icons
rather than just glancing around the
screen and picking out targets at random. This makes for a type of
"Hogan's Alley" (F.B.I. shooting/training range) effect and adds to the challenge of the game. If the player
shoots too many innocent
people, he loses a life. Fortunately, the game designers
allow for a lot of "accidents,"
so the player doesn't have to
be too careful.
In addition, the "You lost,
buddy!" screens have a strong
cinematic appearance. (We'll
wager the alert reader wants to
know how we know about
those!) Depending on how the
player loses, by running out of
lives or shooting too many innocent people, there is an appropriate animation of either
Harrigan being carried away in
an ambulance or being called
into the captain's office for a
disciplinary interview which
results in the player's suspension from the force.
The crosshairs line up very differently on the C-64/128 version. It is extremely disappointing and must be so stated,
even though this reviewer
knows as well as anyone how
badly Commodore owners
desire software support — but
support like this is very inadequate. The game takes forever
to load, even with a fast-load

I

Review

cartridge. Splotchy icons dot the screen
with pictures that can hardly be recognizable as enemies.

advertised on the box and the only way
to get it is to send in the original disks
and wait for the "unprofessional" service
department to correct the problem.

Protection Racket
The Amiga box indicates that there is
no on-disk copy protection, but that is
not entirely true. Once into the manual,
Amiga owners are surprised with the
message: "Attention Amiga Users. Due
to the nature of this program, the disks
have been specially formatted to ensure
minimal disk swapping while maintaining fluid game play. Therefore, conventional back-up copies and hard disk install is not available. Contact Konami's
customer support for details regarding necessary back-up
copies." Upon contacting Konami's customer support line for
more information, this writer was greeted with, "Hey, dude, I was
trying to get ahold of you all day." Upon responding that this
was highly unlikely, since this was an initial call for information
and the technician had no reason to have ever heard of this
writer (after all, even the prodigious fame that surrounds CGW
reviewers was unlikely to have preceded this modest scribe
without benefit of introduction), his response was, "Oh, wow
dude." After asking for details on back-ups, he said, "Oh, dude...
just send in your original disks and we'll send you some that can
be backed up." To say the least, the customer service people
were far from professional. The consumer is not getting what is

Bargain Basement?
If Predator 2 were a "great" game, it
might be worth the wait. The game is
tremendously frustrating, however. For a
computer game not to offer a "savegame" option, at least upon the conclusion of each level, suggests that the
development team is out of touch with
today's market. Players are forced to
begin anew on the initial level after each
loss, as though there were some
mysterious virtue in traversing the same ground incessantly. This
tends to reduce the game to the point of becoming a digitized
treadmill rather than an exciting arcade experience.
On the positive side, however, Predator 2 offers enough action
for even the most bloodthirsty player. At the same time, the
game design makes at least some attempt to distinguish between innocents and enemies in this exercise in killing or being
killed. So, at the much lower-than-average computer game price
at which Predator 2 is offered, the game may be a satisfying
choice for those who cannot get enough super-macho challenges. All in all, however, as in most areas of life, one gets what
one pays for and Konami's Predator 2 is no exception.

Industry News

bytheHon rableHueyB.Short
was watching C-SPAN to see if they
were broadcasting my "Special Orders" address on the disastrous consequences of disk-based copy protection,
when I observed the most blatant act of
plagiarism since the last presidential campaign or my own use of the "Unknown
Comic"'s schtick. Here was a United
States Congressman wearing a bag over
his head and claiming that he was embarrassed at the number of congresspersons
who regularly bounce checks in their personal checking accounts. I chuckled,
realizing that he was never going to convince the U.S. Congress to experience a
mass conversion to budget balancing
whether he was speaking of public or
private budgets.

I

Some conversions are fairly interesting,
however, and I couldn't help but think of
the IBM version of Rampart, the coin-op
game in which players set cannons,
repulse assaults from ever larger waves
of sailing vessels and rebuild castle walls
for the next assault. The game has been
very popular in the coin-op version and
should be extremely addictive in the
modem-capable version currently being
developed by Electronic Arts.
I must have dozed off (actually, in
public life we call it "subliminal problemsolving using discretionary time-shifting"), because a new speaker had taken
the microphone and started to talk about
the sanctity of life. Now, I believe in the
sanctity of life and I am particularly excited about a new product from Maxis.
SimLife is a microcosm of SimEarth in
that it reflects the evolution of life-forms
in a smaller geographical area (an area
approximately the size of a county). The
game is not, however, a re-run of SimEarth on a smaller scale. The new
product follows Richard Dawkins' evolutionary theory as expressed in books like
The Selfish Gene and The Blind
Watchmaker rather than following the
Gaia Hypothesis used in SimEarth. Since
Dawkins is one of the foremost critics of
Gaia theory, the collaboration of Maxis
and Dawkins immediately after the publication of SimEarth is intriguing.
The phone rang and interrupted both
my memories of Maxis' future product
and my attempt to stay current with congressional thought. It was one of those
calls in which the caller tried to disguise
her sensuous female voice by placing a

handkerchief over the
mouthpiece. "Mr. Short,"
she attempted to drop her
modulation even lower,
"we need your help." The
damsel in distress
drowned the meandering
modulations from C-SPAN
as she continued, "We're
not really going to see the
kinds of products that we
want until more people
have CD-capable
machines. We need you to
spread the word."
Spread the word? What did this
mysterious caller mean? I've talked
about Origin's plea for purchasers of
Wing Commander II to purchase a CDROM drive; I've described Interplay's
Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space and how
it is a natural for a CD version; I've
leaked stories about products like
Virgin's Guest that are being designed
for CD-based gaming and I was preparing to write about two other games that
are naturals for CD-based products:
Electronic Arts' Holmes and
Activision's Leather Goddesses of
Phobos 2.
The former is Electronic Arts' foray
into graphic adventures and is expected
to be about 20 MB once it is exploded. It
has a musical score that emulates the
music of the late 19th century (imagine,
a Rob Hubbard score without a running
bass line!) and some very nice graphic
touches that bring the pen-and-ink world
of The Strand magazine into the multicolored world of computer games (particularly the way shadowing and fog is
handled in the backgrounds). The beautiful map of Victorian London that looks
like a colorful version of the original Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective
boardgame and functions much like the
map interface in Rise of the Dragon is
also very impressive. Holmes does not attempt to use digitized voices in the
game, but it is possible that a CD version
would do so.
Leather Goddesses of Phobos 2 opted
for plenty of digitized voice (the game features over an hour of digitized audio) and
comes complete with a hardware device
that connects to the printer port. The
device allows enhanced sound and voice
without having a sound board and the

game will even include a
software module that will
let players create their
own music with the
hardware device. The
game will come on ten
floppy disks and is, in the
words of producer William
Volk "a CD game on floppy disk." With a story by
Steve Meretzky and the
capacity to play the game
three different times as different characters (a male,
a female and an alien),
the game should be very
popular.
I told my caller about
these products, but she
would not be dissuaded
from her course of action. She wanted
me to declare my candidacy for President of the United States under the
American Interactive Party banner. She
had even created a slogan for the campaign, "A CD in Every Computer" and envisioned a platform that would be remembered as the "New Digital."
My eyes wandered back toward CSPAN as a midwestern representative
waxed eloquently about farm policy. My
mind was torn between talking about
Maxis' SimFarm game and agreeing to
her political scheme. The farm game has
economic elements (buying land and
selecting the right crops for making maxi
mum profits), as well as scientific
aspects (effects of crop rotation and
use/non-use of pesticides) and the ability
to customize the farm to reflect the
player's actual climate and chosen crop.
I told her about the game and she
responded that I wouldn't have to give
up computer games to campaign under
the CD banner, just my column. "Give up
my column?" I queried.
"Sure," she responded, "you don't think
the guys at CGW are going to let you
keep your column if they have to provide
equal access for all your opponents, do
you?" I conceded that I didn't think so.
So, I agreed to the AIP's draft and chose
Johnny Wilson as my running mate (he's
always wanted to be in politics and he's
used to being called "Number Two"). I
hereby immediately take a leave of absence from writing "The Rumor Bag" and
declare myself a candidacy for the
presidency. Pat Paulson, Batman, Mickey
Mouse and all the rest of you write-ins
can eat your hearts out. My bag's in the
ring!

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Shining in the Darkness
Sega Genesis
$79.95
Sega
Redwood City, CA

Sega Sets a Shining Example
Shining in the Darkness

for the Genesis

by Peter Olafson

S

hining

in the Darkness (SITD) couldn't have been better
named. This role-playing game — built around a giant ninelevel dungeon — is a bright spot in the sometimes shadowy world of Genesis adventures. Whispers before the game's
release had it pegged as a Dungeon Master-on-console and it is
not hard to see why. The dungeon does occupy most of the
game. True enough, there's a castle where one can send the adventuring party of three for new assignments and tips, as well as
a village for the inevitable equipment upgrades, game saves (via
a battery backup), local atmosphere and a good healing sleep.
Still, the castle and village are little more than pit stops — more
like graphic menus than actual locations — with no intervening
countryside to cross, so the dungeon provides the substance of
the game.

It's easy to discount SITD at first look, and maybe even at
second. The story line doesn't add anything new to the console
universe's standard good-versus-evil arrangement. There is a fellow named Dark Sol, a man in serious need of a manicure and
tinted contacts — to judge from the package — with his eye on
the kingdom of Thornwood. The princess Jessa, traveling to the
village shrine under escort by the player's father, Mortred, has
vanished. (It's a wonder there are any spare princesses left to kidnap in the videogame world.) Rather than checking seedy motels
from here to Dubuque, the king dispatches the player's character
(and, eventually, two spell-casting companions) to the Labyrinth
(the local dungeon) in order to obtain any evidence (and/or
hope) of the princess's presence.
Initially, the Labyrinth seems little different than the dungeons
in any of Sega's other role-playing games — right down to the
scrolling routines and wall tiles. Each Slimy Ooze (the most corn-

mon creature in the entry area) has two gold pieces in its pockets and is, apparently, armed with an unsharpened No. 2 pencil.
(Pockets? A Slimy Ooze has pockets?) Those who travel according to first impressions will not travel far. For those who have
patience, however, Shining in the Darkness is a relatively late
bloomer and really starts to flower once one completes the initial
quest.
The first evidence that SITD is something rather out of the ordinary comes in combat when overmatched monsters begin to flee
the field (a decided improvement over the chop-until-dropped tactics used by most computer-controlled bad guys) or try to summon help. In this more realistic combat, "critical hits" (each
called "an awesome blow" in the game's vernacular) become
more important and first-strike surprises and ambushes are more
integral to party strategy.
There are also sections of dungeon which force the party to ascend stairs, suggesting the experience one might have garnered
in Bane of the Cosmic Forge's mines or pyramid. One spell
provides fairly elaborate (and pleasantly conversational) item
identification, while another permits a form of automapping. The
game also features spinners, magic drainers, no-magic zones,
pits, invisible walls and more, as part of the designers' quest in
creating variety within the context of dungeon exploration.
Finally, although the game does not handle conquered territory
with a "once cleared, always clear" philosophy, conquering a
level of the dungeon does seem to bring down the monster
population to manageable levels whenever the party returns to
that area.
In addition to the dungeon, gamers will also want to visit the village. It is a row of buildings that scrolls smoothly in both direc-

Review

tions: a shrine (for saving the game, assessing one's progress
and resurrecting deceased members of the party), a weapons
shop, an armorer, an alchemist, an inn and, later in the game, a
trader.
The inn is a special treat. The music is audible well down the
street, grows gradually louder as one approaches and blasts the
party in the face as it enters. The characters arrayed at the bar
and tables actually look at the party when they speak, and their
conversation — mostly color commentary — changes as the story
unfolds. Unfortunately, as with most console "role-playing
games," the role-playing tends to emphasize "stat enhancement"
rather than conversation and exposition.
And... how to put this delicately... the characters don't all look
like Speed Racer. From the slumbering cartoon wizard who acts
as "master of ceremonies" for the opening menus through the
rounded, slightly-silly creations one encounters throughout the
game, Shining in the Darkness owes more to the Walt Disney
Studios style of animation than to the traditional Japanimation
most videogamers have come to expect.
Moreover, given all the dialogue in the village and at the castle,
it is a more text-heavy game than videogamers may be accustomed to. The writing itself, while simple, seems to have been
rigorously checked for adherence to American grammar.
Alas, one cannot talk to the monsters in the game, but then
again, one can never talk to the monsters in these games. They
are apparently all dedicatedly irrational creatures with very bad
headaches. On the plus side, SITD doesn't re-use monster

graphics ad infinitum with the same gang rendered in a different
palette and featuring more hit points. So, there's a nice variety of
creatures to send back to their maker.
Admittedly, the monsters here don't do much but stand there
with egg on their ugly faces. The more elaborate animations
seem reserved to end-of-level "boss monsters" like giant capering
crabs or hatching dinosaur eggs. The others waver around a bit,
but they never actually raise a sword or even an slimy oozing fist
at the party, so it is difficult to think of them as more than target
practice.
Nevertheless, minor graphic touches abound. The walls have a
torch-lit shimmer (and wise garners will watch their step with
those walls that shimmer a bit more than the others). The control
icons are all charmingly animated. A train of "Zs" issues from
monsters you've put to sleep. The player's perspective somersaults when the party wanders into a pit. Every spell has its own
visual effect on screen, and the icy orbit of the "freeze" spell really seems to come right out of the screen at the player.
The downside is that, even with all these nice features, Shining
in the Darkness is still a hack-and-slash adventure where the
story is kicked along by combat, the puzzles are garden variety
(a la "put the round peg in the round hole") and the conversations are one-way streets. The mechanics of the console RPG do
advance a notch in SITD, but it is not the full-blown CRPG that
many garners were hoping for. Nevertheless, considering the
limited role-playing products previously available for the Genesis,
Shining in the Darkness is a decided step out of the one-dimensional darkness of videogames past.

Review

Animation Waltz

Special effects can be added to an animation;
e.g. setting the scene's duration (the number of
different action frames) and the speed of the action (the rate at which those frames are displayed from very fast to very slow). It is even
possible to create a transition from one scene
to another by using fade boxes or fade pixels. Adding or removing sounds and musical themes to each scene is also possible.

by Roy Wagner
hen it comes to animation, Walt Disney ranks at the top
in detail and quality. There is a price to Disney animation, however. It does not come easy. To achieve its
level of sophistication requires hours of skillful work per onscreen second and years from idea to final product. It is also the
result of experience and the use of the techniques known to
produce good animation. The cartoons of Warner Brothers
(featuring Bugs Bunny and the other Looney Tunes characters)
are certainly much simpler, yet very funny and satisfying in their
own distinctive style.

One can also create a variety of text bubbles which can be positioned anywhere in the scene (but always appearing behind any
actors). To add variety, the size of text bubbles can be changed
and different text colors/fonts can be used in each bubble.
Finally, one can use the editing options to cut, move, duplicate
or insert a scene. This enables the "director" to continue the action of characters by instructing them to repeat their current action, e.g. walking across a stage. Then, it is a simple matter to
save the custom cartoons to to disk for later viewing or as gifts
for someone else to enjoy, even if they do not have the Cartoon
Workshop program itself. In fact, if a computer projection system
is available, these "cartoons" make great presentations at school or work.
Two or more cartoons can

It is no different with two relatively new animation packages for
the home computer. The one from Walt Disney Software is
thorough, but the product based on Bugs Bunny is a lot more
fun for the casual user. This review only looks at two of the
many animation software products available for your home computer. Many new graphic software products also include ways to
produce animation.

What's Up, Doc?
The Bugs Bunny Cartoon Workshop from Hi Tech Expressions for the IBM PC and compatibles is a complete

ment changed for special effects. Actors can
easily be removed from a scene or moved in
front of props or other actors.

TITLE:
Bugs Bunny Cartoon Workshop
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNERS:
Novotrade International
PUBLISHER:
Hi Tech Expressions
New York, NY

animation package, although it does not include drawing
tools. It is ideal for teaching the basics of animated video
production, without requiring any artistic expertise. All the
artwork has been completed and the user simply acts as the
director. One selects the cartoon characters (actors), backgrounds (stage), sound effects and musical score. Then, one
simply adds text bubbles where desired and it is "showtime." A
special "Junior" mode makes it easy for children or any beginner
to put together an animated cartoon and a "Master" mode gives
the advanced user full control over the animation.
The would-be director has a cast of characters which includes:
Bugs Bunny, Wile E. Coyote, the Road Runner, Daffy Duck, Sylvester, Tweety and Elmer Fudd (all dutifully licensed and
trademarked). The program comes with a tutorial that introduces
all the features of the program and, to make it even more intuitive, uses icons (pictures representing commands) to perform all
the steps needed to put together an animated presentation. The
interface allows keyboard input to select the necessary icons, but
really shines with a mouse.

Cartoons in The Bugs Bunny Cartoon Workshop are structured from the scenery up. One starts by selecting a "stage."
Then, as scenes change, other stages can be added as needed. It
is, of course, possible to jump back and forth between one or
more of the same stages. In addition to the variety in stage
scenery, there is a choice between "types" of stage. Some stages
are static backgrounds, while others are moving (an old movie
technique, first used in silent movies, which gives action to characters in the scene). One can, of course, add props to any stage
and some of the props can even be animated to give the illusion
of a zoom effect. Backgrounds for title and conclusion screens
are also provided.
Next, actors and other props are added. These can be flipped
or rotated to be in different positions. Each actor comes with a
number of pre-animated actions. These can be viewed prior to
selection. An actor is then positioned on the scene and its action
from start to finish can be defined. An action sequence can be
edited to produce the action wanted or direction of actor's move-

Review

Amiga (reviewed here), standard Amiga, SMUS sound,
music and instrument files can be used.
A separate "Getting Started" tutorial introduces the basic
features of the program. Pull-down menus and icon commands can be accessed with a mouse and, for those sans
rodentia, keyboard commands (single keys) are available
for nearly all options.
An animation is made up of many cels. Each cel (single
piece of art) must be created with this program. Truly, this
program gives its users control of even the most primary
level of animation. The history of animation and various
basic techniques are discussed in great detail in the manual.
The beauty of the program is that each cel is drawn on a
computer equivalent of a piece of onionskin (transparent
paper) and the artist (and anyone who uses this program
had better be one) can see several previous cels as he or
she draws the next cel. A powerful set of drawing tools,
similar to those in Deluxe Paint, are available to computer
artists. These give one the capability of copying a previous
image and only slightly changing it to create the illusion of
animation.

I
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The Animation Studio
Amiga, IBM
5129.95
Documentation Look-Up
Reichart Von Wolfsheild
Walt Disney Software
Burbank, CA

be linked (saved together)
for longer animated "features" and a single frame
can be printed or saved to
a format compatible with
Deluxe Paint to be used in other custom presentations.
This program can be run from either a hard drive or floppy
disk(s). It requires 640K and is not copy protected. The documentation is very good. The tutorial teaches all that anyone
needs to know in order to quickly and easily produce impressive
animation with this tool.

Sorcerer's Apprentice
The Animation Studio from Walt Disney Software is a complete animation package, including (and requiring) a drawing program. It is and has been used by multimedia developers as a
powerful toolkit for creating computerized animations. Though it
comes with some outstanding animated samples from Disney,
they are not in color and would-be "directors" cannot use the
samples in their original animations. Several legal warnings are
displayed each time they are viewed that make it clear that users
must provide their own backgrounds and animated characters/objects. There are a limited number of sounds provided. On the

As is the case in cel-based film mode, one's first drawings
are always done in "Pencil Test" mode (i.e. black and white
"sketches"). In this mode, cels can be animated at any time
to review the progress. After one is satisfied with the way
the animation flows, it is then possible to color each sequence using the "Ink a Paint" mode. Computer artists have
access to a palette of 32 colors which can be customized to
their personal color preferences. Color dithering and cycling
further enhance what one is able to accomplish with these
colors. Backgrounds for the animations created with The
Animation Studio can be created with either the drawing
tools with this program or imported as an IFF file from other
creativity tools.

Once the inking is finished, one can use an exposure sheet
to edit the cels used, change their duration and timing, and
list when events such as sounds and music will occur. One
can also cut, copy and paste cels working from this area of the
program, and an instrument command allows artists to specify a
type of sound (instrument), as well as its pitch and volume, for
each sequence.
This program can be run from either a hard drive or floppy
disk(s). It requires 512K on the Amiga (640K on the IBM), but
more than one megabyte is really needed if anyone is serious
about using this program.
Though the packaging sticker notes that there is no on-disk
copy protection, potential purchasers should note that it is copy
protected and requires finding references in the manual each
time one wishes to access a different mode. (Very annoying!)
The documentation is good, but does not give enough examples
for using the advanced features. It is, however, outstanding in
teaching the "secrets" of good animation, even though the
tutorial does not leave one feeling entirely comfortable in using
the program.

The End (A Roy Wagner Cartoon)
For quick and easy animations, The Bugs Bunny Cartoon
Workshop is highly recommended (especially for children and
beginners). It is possible to actually create some very funny cartoons and just playing with the program's options is very satisfying. For serious cel animation, requiring lots of work and time,
(and most likely worth all the effort put into it), The Animation
Studio is recommended. It gives its users much greater control
over all the details necessary to create original animations. They
are both outstanding, but differently targeted, products. So, as
the pig says, "That's All, Folks!"

Sneak Preview

Entrails From The Black Crypt
A Sneak Preview of Electronic Arts' Role-Playing Game
by Allen Greenberg

K

ilobytes below the surface of the

earth, two creatures battle for
domination. Mouze, the slippery
young upstart, at one time made his
home exclusively on featureless grey
desktops, curled up at the feet of respectably conservative and uncaring application programs. Now, he juggles inventory, casts spells, navigates mazes and
directs sword thrusts with increasingly
rapid and intuitive ease. His opponent,
Keeboord, was once the gateway
through which all orders and commands
were given. Now, he oozes ink from
paper-cuts inflicted by accurately placed
point-and-click assaults. If this continues
much longer, Keeboord wonders if he will
not find himself hiding behind the skirts
of wizened legal secretaries, grateful to
find his original vocation still intact?
Whatever the ultimate outcome of this
"Interface War," however, it is apparent
that aficionados of real-time, intuitionbased computer role-playing games are
about to enjoy a major victory with Electronic Arts' release of The Black Crypt.
Crypt is very definitely a descendant of
the often-referred-to Dungeon Master, a
program which earned a tremendous following and actually managed to spawn
an entire sub-genre of computer role-playing. Its gut-level, three-dimensional view
of the action, along with the player's
ability to graphically seize and use whatever dungeon paraphernalia may be
found in that view, gave the program
tremendous appeal. Perhaps, the most exhilarating aspect was the addition of realtime action — combat where dungeon
creatures could strike at their foul discretion, rather than wait politely until the

player had finished issuing commands to
his adventure party.
Since then, SSI's Eye of the Beholder
introduced a slightly watered-down version of the gut-level interface to MS-DOS
users. At the same time, several less ambitious releases have appeared on the
market, largely for the Amiga and Atari
ST. The latter have attempted to graft
the interface onto games which were
otherwise less interesting. The Black
Crypt, an outstanding program written
on the Amiga, offers a "turbo-charged"
version of the gut-level interface and is
generally one of the most enjoyable and
challenging romps through a dungeon
that this reviewer has experienced to date.
Crypt is a massive dungeon containing
about twenty areas of varying size and
complexity. These areas are interconnected by doorways, both natural and supernatural, which replace the traditional
stairways found in previously explored
dungeons. The player must explore and
conquer these areas in order to progress
through a dozen levels of difficulty and
complete the game. Each level of difficulty is in a different location within the
crypt and the player is only allowed access to two or three areas at a time.
The adventuring party is made up of
four members, the generation of which
has been extremely simplified. The group
must include a Fighter, Cleric, Druid and
Magic User. Unlike many standard dungeoneering games, there are no MiddleEarthly races to be chosen from. Typical
to the genre, however, the player may
select from a variety of faces to both represent each character and decorate the

screen throughout the game; christen
each character with a customized name
and distribute points among the aptitudes of strength, wisdom, intelligence,
dexterity and constitution. Also typical to
the genre, each class, or "guild," member
has his or her own forte, which determines the range of points which may be
assigned to particular attributes.
To the relief of millions (or at least to
this reviewer), even an apprentice Magic
User possesses an auto-mapping spell.
Once the spell is cast, a full-screen map
of the dungeon area currently occupied
is always available. Using this, players
may reserve their efforts for the extremely demanding tasks ahead of them,
rather than what many have come to
regard as the old familiar graph-paper torture. Of course, cartographiles have the
option of simply not casting the spell.
Moving around the dungeon is, as intimated in the introduction to this article,
most easily accomplished by using the
mouse. The keyboard is also available
for this purpose, but recommended only
for those with an unreasoning fear of
mechanical rodents. On-screen icons
allow movement, spell casting and recalling the auto-map. They also allow quick
access to each character's inventory, as
well as to the disk drive for saving or
loading a game in progress. These icons
have been intelligently placed ergonomically so that no player should suffer
undue wrist injury while attempting to
move the pointer at hyper-speed across
the screen under the strain of battle.
As in Dungeon Master, players may
use the pointer to reach into the graphic

Sneak Preview

screen and pick up the many objects
and place them into his inventory for
later (ab)use. Black Crypt also contains
an unending number of switches, buttons
and levers which are also controlled by
the mouse and pointer. Other functions
that can be performed in rapid-fire
fashion include: consuming food and
magic drugs, trading inventory and
preparing spells for casting.
Rapid movement is vital to success in
Crypt because players will be up against
some extremely agile creatures. Combat
can begin at almost any time and generally involves one enemy per battle. At any
level, however, enemies are generally
more powerful than the adventure team,
requiring a combination of muscle and
magic to end the creature's existence.
These attacks can become quite frenzied
and may require a fighter to search in his
inventory for alternate weapons or cause
a spell caster to consult his book during
the action. Also, during the battle, the
graphic screen may contain a dropped
dagger or a misdirected arrow which can
be picked up and reused.
The ultimate goal in Crypt is probably

the only mundane aspect of the entire exercise — there is a villain at the end of
the dungeon and he needs to be put in
his place (which in this case happens to
be another dimension). Leading up to
this, though, are some more interesting
tasks which generally involve manipulating the endless switches, levers and pressure plates in order to find lost objects
and restore order to different parts of the
dungeon. There is no interaction with
NPCs, and the various tasks are assigned
by mysterious messages. One of the
more intriguing aspects of the story is
that several areas of the dungeon are
meant to focus on the attributes of a particular character.
As far as the graphics are concerned,
the phrase "You Are There!" barely does
justice to the quality of the presentation.
Perhaps, the game's designers managed
to borrow some home movies belonging
to a family of amorphous flesh-eaters?
Creatures walk, crawl or undulate around
corners and into view, dripping with
whatever unpleasant material they enjoy
dripping. Even the dungeon walls
manage to set high new (low?) standards
for unpleasantness, although this oc-

casionally makes hidden buttons that
much more difficult to spot. Much of the
sinister detail comes from the use of the
Amiga's 64 color/extra half-bright mode.
The sounds produced by the monsters
are, likewise, not for the squeamish.
Footsteps, growls and heavy breathing
may warn the party that danger is approaching from a distance or, just as easi
ly, frighten the player out of his or her
CPU by suddenly emerging several inches away. The variety of noises these
creatures produce can only be the
product of a zoologist obsessed with
gastroenterology.
If The Black Crypt were an actual locale rather than a computer game, new
adventurers might notice a mangled, yet
contented, combatant emerging from the
dungeon. Said combatant would likely be
this humble game critic, returning from a
particularly enjoyable day at the office.
One thing seems certain, The Black
Crypt should not be spending much time
in repose on retailer's shelves. It looks
like it will be the kind of CRPG that will
keep gamers from "resting in peace"
until they finish it.

Game Hints

ell, the old back room isn't as
crowded as I thought it would
be. Probably because all those
releases that were supposed to be fighting for room in your Christmas stocking
didn't show up. Oh, Sierra got a few
goodies out the door and New World
published Might 6 Magic III, but as I
write this, there isn't much else on the
market — no Ultima VII (It will be
February, at least), no Wizardry VII
(February, to be precise), no Magic
Candle II ...you get the picture.

W

So, at least for those of us who prefer
adventure/CRPG games, it's been a lean
holiday season (sniff). That's been
reflected in the mail bag, too. The last
couple of months have been the lowest
in letters received the whole year, at a
time when it's often the heaviest. Ah well,
less work for me! (grin)
Might & Magic III: By far, the majority
of letters were about this one, which isn't
surprising. Lots of questions about bugs
from those who purchased the initial version, but those were covered pretty
thoroughly last issue in my "MM3 Tips"
article. All I'll say about that is, if you run
into any of them, send your disks back
to New World for the update. It will save
you a lot of frustration.
Speaking of frustration, if you're having
a hard time with any of the puzzles, you
may want to visit the pyramids (except
the one on the Isle of Fire, which has no
solutions). They have the answers to pretty much everything. The drawback is
that you don't know what you'll hear
until you hear it, so you may end up getting answers you didn't really want to
know about. On the other hand, at least
you can't become permanently stuck on
any puzzle, either.
Eye of the Beholder: Here are some
more clues to the hidden bonuses for
those who like to do everything. On
level 9, have ya ever wondered about
that inscription on the wall about the key

being on the other side? Bet you looked
all around and couldn't find a key. That's
because, strictly speaking, there isn't a
key to be found. On the other hand, if
you could figure out what to do at that
place where the inscription is written, really throw yourself into the problem, as it
were, you just might discover something.
A little further down, on level 10, is a
room with some niches and Mantis
guards. You probably killed the guards
and grabbed all the stuff (most of which
isn't all that terrific). That's a start. Now
you have to do something else. Don't be
chicken!
Elvira: Down in the catacombs is one
very nasty critter with a rock. You don't
want to go up against this thing until you
have the right weapon. That just happens to be the crusader sword. Nothing
else will really do the job. Of course, finding the sword, that's another matter
(heh). You'll have to go through the garden maze first, among other things.
Bane of the Cosmic Forge: Having
dispensed with Bane and Rebecca, some
people are stopped cold by the final
grate that wants a password before it will
open. This would be a good time to read
that King's diary you've been lugging
around for most of the game. What's that
you say? It's in code? Well, shucks, here
I thought you were a star adventurer and
could figure that one out.
Spellcasting 201: Elevephants,
dontcha just love 'em? No? Aww, too
bad. Maybe that's because they're so big
and mean-tempered. Oh, you got all that
taken care of and now you want to slip
the thing out of the frat house. Let's face
it, elevephants weren't born to be stealthy. Tip-toeing through the tulips isn't exactly their forte. So, you just better forget
about going through the front door and
look for another way out.
Pools of Darkness: Like most gold
box productions, Pools is pretty
straightforward, except when it comes to

Moander's Heart. This area is giving a lot
of people some fits. That's mostly because of the Watcher. She's never in the
same place twice, so you have to run
around a lot to find her. And you have to
find her several times. She's the key to
the solution of this entire area, so keep
looking. Without her help, you'll never
finish this segment.
King's Quest V: Some folks are in too
much of a hurry to get past the snake.
Relax a little. Do everything in and
around the town first. If you try going
into the mountains with some things left
undone, you either won't get very far, or
you'll find yourself in a no-win situation.
After a certain point, there's no turning
back. By the way, don't eat the pie! It
has a much more important purpose
than filling your tummy.
Timequest: The convolutions of this
one are causing headaches in a few
people. This is not surprising, the way
various time periods link to each other.
Keep in mind that King Tut/Charlemagne/Napoleon need to be done pretty much together, as the last sequence in
the game. The thread begins with Charlemagne (or, more properly, his crown),
although Peking 1940 has to be done
before you can start up this route. Get
everything else finished first, then work
on this chain, the most complicated in
the game.
That's about it for this look into the
mailbag. Remember, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups & Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games Round Table (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, P.O. Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1992 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Sneak Preview

S

neak Previews are not designed

"If Ever, Oh Ever

to be reviews. They are feature
articles based on "works in
progress" that CGW's editors have
deemed worthy of early coverage.
These articles are not intended to provide the "final word" on a product,
since we expect to publish appropriate
review coverage when the game is
completely finished. Sneak Previews
are designed to inform our readers
about upcoming games and generate
excitement about the "state of the art"
of computer game design in general.

A Sneak Preview
by Alan

If a tree falls in the forest while playing
Wizardry, the players will now be able to
hear it. While the great outdoors have
long been a staple of role-playing fare
among other top CRPG games, Wizardry
has too long been bound up in dungeon
delving. As one of their many ways of
"branching out," Sir-Tech Software and
programmer/designer David W. Bradley
have embraced the new world created in
Wizardry VI: The Bane of the Cosmic
Forge (Bane) and built many further enhancements to the Wizardry gaming system upon that familiar foundation.
Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark
Savant is a sequel that begins with an intrepid group of the traditional six heroes
setting off into the woods and pondering
the destiny of humanity (typical for a
Sunday afternoon stroll, right?). The
beginning depends on how events left off
in Bane, as characters can be transferred
over from that game. Yes, unlike CRPGs
that might simply boast of multiple endings, Dark Savant has multiple beginnings. There were three possible endings
in Wizardry Vl, so the new Wizardry VII
will have four possible beginnings; one
commensurate with each Bane ending
(each enjoying its own unique "historical" write-up in the Playmaster's Compendium) and one for completely new
characters rolled up from scratch or transferred parties who didn't complete Bane.
The astute reader is correct — players do
not need to possess Wizardry VI to
enjoy Wizardry VII. In fact, three skill
levels are built into the game's Al in
order to challenge players of every experience level evenly.

"How Would You Like It If
Someone Picked Apples Off
You?!"
So, the story begins in the woods, but
the characters are not necessarily out on
a limb. With no arcade sequences,
Wizardry remains a role-playing series
for player who like to ponder their
decisions. While doing so, they're certain

to notice that this latest installment of the
series has used a full 256-color VGA
palette for its graphics (16-color EGA is
also planned for support).
What was that noise? Ah, birds chirping... Well, that's just part of the complete sound support that helps bring stateof-the-art CRPGs closer to that personal
dimension so long enjoyed by "People G
Paper" role-playing games. Of course,
"People & Paper" RPGs seldom enjoy the
kinds of cinematic background music
and sound effects of a quality computer
game like Dark Savant, so score one for
the PC owners.

Poppies
While the great outdoors does not display graphics which are as mesmerizing
as those in a few other CRPGs, they are
certainly impressive when one considers
that they are Wizardry's first foray out of
doors. The sun and moon rise and set,

the sky lightens and darkens and players
should not march straight into the field
of poppies right away! (Grin.) One interesting note about time passing in the
alpha version this writer examined is
that, although the design is clearly such
that sleeping characters are "out" for
only eight hours of rest, the sun and
moon manage to pull off a complete 24hour sequence of rising and setting. Perhaps the days are only eight hours long
on this new planet?

Follow the Yellow Brick
Road
"The woods are lovely, dark and deep,
But I have promises to keep,
And miles to go before I sleep..."
— Robert Frost, "Stopping by Woods
on a Snowy Evening"
So where do the woods take our
heroes? To the path, of course, which

Sneak Preview

a Wiz There Was"
0fWizardyVIEmch
ever-popular
automapping feature. While it is not
planned to show the
entire level in which
the party resides, the
automapping feature
will show several
squares in all directions. Some magic,
however, is required
before the mapping
becomes "auto," and
players will still want
to keep their own
hand-drawn
"strategic"-level
maps with notes and
asides doodled in the
margins.

"Ignore That
Man Behind
the Curtain"

leads to a road, which goes to a way,
which ends at a gate where stands "New
City." New City, by the way, is a complete misnomer, but that is unimportant
here. The fact that there is a gate on the
opposite end of town leading through
more forests (boy, give the designer a
tree and he builds huge forests!) to...
well, I digress.
Players, however, will be less likely to
digress in Wizardry VII (than in previous
games in the series), because Dark
Savant is the first of the series to use the

What players won't
notice right away are
many extras in this
latest Wizardry installment. The spell
system has been expanded, as has the
combat system. The
combat system, in
fact, is not only
more artful in that
sounds occur and objects are hurled from
a first-person ("firstparty?") perspective
(the whooshing daggers are particularly
good), but also in
the details that make
up each round of combat. Armor classes
are weighted by body location, penetration considerations, combat skills, etc.,
but players will feel the additional realism
even if they'll never see every formula
used to resolve battles. In the alpha version examined, all monsters died, literally, in a mini-fireball with a satisfying
"bang." Presumably, each was naught
but a maniacal pinata stuffed with
firecrackers, but we hope there will be
more evidence of their passing in the
final version.

"If I Were King of the
Forest..."
Two things take on a particularly
fragrant air in Wizardry VII. This can
best be summed up as "Mice & Dice."
This previewer, for one, enjoys a good
mouse interface, and Crusaders of the
Dark Savant certainly has that. Except
for typing in occasional bits of conversation (and the look-up word from the
manual for the copy protection — no
more black-on-red non-repro paper), a
player can "click back" and enjoy the
game. The keyboard can still be used,
but those preferring to have their left
hand working a soda or some chips will
be very pleased.
Dice are, indisputably, the little plastic
building blocks of a role-playing game experience. Role-playing garners roll dice
for everything: to hit, to save, to detect,
to unlock, to calculate pi, etc. Like Bane,
Savant kept the dice, and literally "rolls"
them, just as a real, live dungeon master
would, for every little occasion. Truly,
these games have enhanced the entire
genre of CRPGs with their thorough use
of standard "People & Paper" RPG
modifiers, calculations and combat options. Best of all, the computer "dungeon
master" (i.e., the program) even gladly
lets players attempt some very non-structured activities and, if someone has the
right statistics for the job, it's done!

"I Don't Think We're in Kansas Anymore"
Oh, sure, Sir-Tech could have taken the
easy road and just added some more
weapons, monsters, skills, spells and
items (they did, by the way) to a new set
of maps (er, they did that, too, by the
way) and called it Wizardry VII knowing
that their installed base of Wizardry fans
would make the game a fine-selling hit
without requiring too much extra effort
on their part. Fortunately, Sir-Tech chose
to take the high road and push the limits
of their most ambitious game to date,
Bane of the Cosmic Forge. In the beginning (which, for the computer gaming
hobby, is pretty much the early 1980s),
Wizardry: Proving Grounds of the Mad
Overlord was computer fantasy role-playing. Over the years it lost its position of
leadership as other fantasy CRPG epics
came into vogue. With Wizardry: Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Sir-Tech is
making an important stride toward the
position of "the standard by which other
CRPGs are measured." While still playing
"catch up" in several areas, the progress
is marked, and the future for the Dark
Savant appears very bright indeed.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Let's Plot and Role:
Interplay's Bard's Tale Construction Set
as told by Scorpia

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

T

he Bard's Tale Construction Set
(BTCS) from Interplay is for those
who can't get enough of their
favorite series, are tired of waiting for the
next professional Bard's Tale (how long
has EA been talking about Bard's Tale
IV?) or just want to try their hands at
making a CRPG of their own.
Make no mistake about it: you can create a fully functioning Bard's Tale
scenario with this package. In addition,
you can make copies of your pride and
joy for friends to play and they won't
need BTCS to run it — the finished
product is a stand-alone game anybody
can run.
Since you have almost complete control over the entire creation process, the
scenario can be tailored to suit your own
particular taste — fewer monsters and
more puzzles, a hack'n'slash saturnalia
or almost anything in between.
Beginning at the main menu, you
choose which aspect to work on. There
are five separate editors, one each for
items, monsters, spells, maps and specials. There is also a set of utilities for
saving your creations, testing your dungeons and compiling the various files
into a playable game.

Editing most of the parts is a simple
process. Suppose you're working on
items. You bring up the item editor
choose create a new item. You give
name (Death Axe, for instance), a t e
(hand weapon), decide on which classes
can use it (a particular class, a bunch of
classes or everyone), how much damage
it does whether it has a special effect
(such as critical hit), what the chance of
the especial effect (anywhere from 0100% of the time), what spell (if any) it
can cast, ho wtiameshnplyc
be cast and how much it would cost to
buy the item (if it were available for sale).
Doing a monster is pretty much the
same. You decide on its name, level, hit
points, damage, number of attacks,
magic resistance, starting distance from
the party, maximum number that can appear at one time, special attacks (if any,
such as paralysis), spells (if any) that it
can cast arid even the type of action it
will perform each round. You also choose
the picture that's displayed when the
party encounters it in the dungeon.
Spells are a little trickier to design. Here
you have to decide on what a spell does,
which mage class can use it, how long it
lasts, what level it is, how much power it
requires, how far out from the party it will
work, what target(s) it will affect (one critter, a group of critters or all groups) and
the four-letter code used by the mage
when casting the spell.
Maps are a bit easier. First you decide if

you want to build a town, dungeon or outdoors. Then you get a blank 22 x 22 grid
to work with, which appears on the right
side of the screen. On the left is a
counter which tracks your location in
east-north (X,Y) coordinates, and gives
you a view of what the location looks
Iike, depending on which way the cursor
facing at the moment.
You move the cursor around the map,
ruins
putting up walls, doors, secret doors,
(outdoors only) and specials. These
a o anywhere on the map, although
ly one type of thing can be in any one
location. You can't, for example, put a
special on top of a door, only in front of
or behind it.
Specials are really the heart of the
game. This is where you create nasty
traps, pose riddles, initiate quests, provide information, and pretty much set up
almost any particular event, or combination of events, that you want. Up to thirty
different specials are allowed on a map,
but you can have as many of those thirty
as you desire.
There are forty-nine special situations,
plus another seventeen conditionals. The
situations are straightforward actions, activated when you step on the square.
These can be anything from darkness
zones to anti-magic zones to spell
renewal zones to damage zones to
monster encounters, and many others besides.

OPINION
Conditionals check for a specific circumstance before activating. They are
set up in the form "If-Then-Else." For instance, "IF everyone is carrying blue
marker THEN teleport to 15,6 ELSE noth
ing." This one is pretty obvious: all characters must have a blue marker in their
inventories for the party to be sent to the
particular location.
While there are only seventeen conditionals, they can be combined with the
forty-nine "regulars" to create some pretty sophisticated effects. You can have a
whole string of events occur in one location, since each special has twenty lines,
and you can set up both straight actions
and conditionals in one special.
Before putting the entire scenario
together, you test it out, one level at a
time. For testing purposes, there is a precreated party that you can run through
the maps to be certain that everything
works as it should, the balance is proper,
etc.
This party starts with nothing in the
way of equipment, so if the first thing
you're checking out is a monster-riddled
crypt, you should consider dropping a

temporary Garth's on the map. Otherwise, the party isn't going to last too
long. (I discovered this the hard way,
heh.)
I he system supports CGA(!), EGA,
VGA and Tandy graphics. Music (which
is heard only when a bard plays a tune)
can come through Sound Blaster, Sound
Blaster Pro, Pro Audio Spectrum,
Roland/LAPC, Adlib or Tandy. Oddly, the
sound effects can only come through
Tandy or the internal PC speaker. Since
there aren't that many effects, it's a little
surprising they aren't done with a sound
card.
For all the ease of use and power that
BTCS provides, there is still a lot of hard
work involved. Even the simplest dungeon requires a great deal of forethought
and planning, not to mention testing.
While you can jump in and start building
dungeon levels and working up neat-o
monsters with no preparation, you're likely to run into problems before long. To
really use this package properly, and create good scenarios, there's no way
around it — you have to sit down and do
it on paper first.

The budding designer will also find
some aspects of BTCS that are, perhaps,
a bit frustrating. One of these is the lack
of graphics. There isn't much to work
with in that respect. Altogether, there are
only 45 different pictures you can use,
and not all of them are monsters. Some
are interiors, such as Garth's, the Review
Board, a tavern, an empty room, etc.
Others are used to represent your party.
What's left is only a relative handful for
depicting the critters and NPCs. These
rather strict limitations make it difficult to
create your own art for the game. Considering the highly graphic nature of the
Bard's Tale series, it's both surprising
and disappointing that Interplay chose
to be so stringent in their requirements.
This is particularly so since they are supporting only one brand of paint program
and have provided only a small number
of in-game pictures.
Aside from the graphics, BTCS has
some other limitations. Damage spells,
for instance, are all pretty much the
same, varying only by how much they
hurt the opposition and how long they

OPINION
last. Of course, even with that, some pretty mean effects are possible.
You could start with a first level Flame
Dart that hits for 1d6 damage, then to a
second level Flame Bolt that does 2d6,
working your way up to a Conflagration
spell that does 10d6 every round to all
monster groups (ouch!).
The thing is, they all do the same type
of damage, and it doesn't matter if you
call it Flame Dart or Snowball or
Sheepskin. Further, spell damage is
defined by a set number of dice (2d6,
6d10, etc) rather than level of the
spellcaster. So, you end up having to create a fair number of damage spells, just
to keep the mages on a par with the
monsters.
Also, spells are restricted by class, and
no sharing is possible. If you wanted, for
instance, both a Conjurer and a Magician
to have a Cure Poison spell, you'd have
to create two of them, one for each
class. This makes for a lot of unnecessary duplication.
There is also little sharing of specials.
Except for the few stock specials such as

darkness, spinners, etc., the ones you create are all tied to a particular map. Thus,
if you create a special that has both darkness and silence for Crypt Level 1, it can
be used only there. If you want it on
Crypt Level 2 as well, you have to make
it up again for that map.
The Utilities section allows you to print
out the spells, but not items or monsters.
This is an amazing oversight, since the
only way to view these things otherwise
is by looking on-screen. If you have
many items and/or monsters in your
game, paging through the display becomes a bit much, and it's all too easy to
lose track of things.
One very surprising omission is the
lack of any way of personalizing your
completed scenario. You can't put either
your name or the name of your game
into it anywhere on the screen. It would
have been better, as well as much more
satisfying, for Interplay to have allowed
some space on the title screen for "The
City Of Doom by Joe Smith," or something similar. Not being able to do this
takes away some of the fun of making
your own dungeon game.

The manual is somewhat skimpy in the
details it provides. Most of the editors are
covered in no more than a page or so.
Few examples are provided for creating
specials and some of the specials themselves could use more informative
descriptions. As specials are the most
complicated portion of the scenario,
more in-depth material should have been
given on them. All the information on
graphic requirements for your own art is
not in the manual but in the README
file on disk, something that many people
don't read, even though they should. I
heartily recommend printing this, as it
contains important information and some
errata to the manual.
While BTCS is definitely rough around
the edges and somewhat lacking in
polish, it is still a good dungeon editor.
You can, with time and effort, create a
very acceptable game, and learn something about the elements of good dungeon design. Anyone who has ever
seriously considered designing his or her
own CRPG (or maybe even anyone who
has ever critiqued a CRPG design)
should give this one a look.

Review

A Tail of Two 'Possums
Broderbund's The Treehouse
by Caitlin Ackelson

TITLE:
The Treehouse
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59,95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
DESIGNERS:
Leslie Grimm
and Lynn Kirkpatrick
PUBLISHER:
Broderbund
Novato, CA

Chalk it up to
Learning

In the main room of
the treehouse, there is
a wide assortment of
things to do. Players
can play a game, use
the mouse to "draw" on a chalkboard with colored
chalk, watch as a mother bird feeds a worm to her
nest full of chirping babies, look through a telescope
(at several different views), check for a "this date in
history" fun fact, make the clouds change their
shape, look at the clock and see the "real-life" accurate time, have a snack or take a nap.
Outside, the player's 'possum can climb down the
rope ladder, peek in at some squirrels storing nuts for
the winter or just explore the back yard.

Games 'Possums Play

W

hen players, aged six to 10, climb up into The
Treehouse by Broderbund, they enter a player-driven,
interactive world of exploration, learning, games, puzzles
and surprises. Like its predecessor, The Playroom, The
Treehouse is a cozy place full of neat stuff where kids can play
on their own or with another. As one of the "Awesome
'Possums" (the male or female on-screen character), players
point-and-click their way through such topics as music, math, language and science. Rather than the dry, predictable treatment
that was the norm in educational software in years past, i.e. "computer flash cards," this software package presents its subjects
with subtlety and originality, sparkle and humor.
Inside The Treehouse, players can choose to get involved in a
game, eat a piece of fruit, just look out the window (at the
variety of goings-on there) or climb down the tree and see what's
happening outside.
Page 44

One area that The Treehouse addresses with especial thoroughness is music. The software accomplishes this
through both its "Musical Keys" and "Musical Maze" games. The
former allows players to play or listen to any of 24 familiar tunes
(everything from nursery rhymes to short pieces of classical
music) on a variety of instruments from strings, woodwinds or
brass to animal sounds or tissue paper and comb. (For example,
"Pop goes the weasel" on the oboe or a Bach minuet on the
electric guitar.) Or kids can make up their own songs and vary
the notes, instrument used, tempo, note duration, sharps and
flats — the works. When composing, players can work by clicking on the on-screen piano keyboard or directly on a musical
staff. Once a piece has been written, the sheet music can then
be printed for playing on "real" instruments — ideal for anyone
taking music lessons. If a sound card is not used, notes will
sound as tones only, rather than sounding like specific instruments..
The "Musical Maze" game allows players to test their
knowledge of musical notes, instruments and songs. There is a

Review

name-that-tune aspect to the game as well as a test of recognition of note patterns, tone and duration. This kind of practice
and repetition is excellent for reinforcing music concepts.

Go Math Racer, Go
The Road Rally game can be played with either money or
chips. In this Candylandish exercise, players roll the on-screen
dice and use math and counting skills to decide how far to move
their car. For instance, which is more: one dime and one penny
or one nickel and four pennies? Players make their choices and
advance accordingly. They may play against a computer opponent or another human player. The first player to reach his or
her goal wins the race and takes a prize back to the treehouse.

Lights, Camera, Interaction
In Treehouse Theater, players act as writer and director of a
silly production of their own play. They choose the who, what,
where and when elements necessary to create a story and then,
see it acted out on stage. This game allows players to practice
forming complete sentences that are grammatically correct and
also very funny, such as "The baby juggles at the beach every
day" or "My favorite teacher eats pickles on the moon during an
eclipse." Props can even be added to the scene, according to its
setting. So, at the beach, a star fish, a pail and shovel and a
beach ball are provided. For the setting entitled "The middle of
nowhere," props like a rainbow, a planet and a giant eyeball are
available. The designers have really let their imaginations run
wild here and the results are hilarious.

Help! The Back Yard is Full of Invertebrates!
The "Backyard Zoo" games teach players about different
groups of familiar animals and how they are classified according
to their traits. In "Animal Album," players choose animals of differing descriptions (has a backbone, is cold-blooded, has wings,
has two legs, breathes with lungs, eats plants and animals, etc.)
and places them in an outdoor scene to create a picture. So,
under the heading "has a backbone" are the groups mammals,
birds, fish and reptiles. Then under "mammals," are examples
like cottontail rabbit, dog, human, squirrel and chipmunk (pretty
distinguished company, huh?). Players can then click on the
squirrel and place it in the picture so it is sitting in a tree. (This
reviewer ended up with a garden full of ladybugs and a serious
overpopulation of hummingbirds.)
In "Guess My Animal," players are given clues about a specific
animal's traits and behavior (has four legs, is active during the
day, has no wings) and guess, from a sample of possible
choices, what animal it might be. In this way, players simultaneously learn about the animal kingdom and practice the use
of deductive reasoning.

A Smart Game for Smart Alecks
If "real live" players are anything like this reviewer, the first
thing they want to do with a game is mess around with it — do
stuff they're not supposed to do — and see if they can get it to
make a mistake or reveal some kind of flaw. The Treehouse is
up to the test. Players can try anything; they can throw apples
out the window and see what happens. (Look down on the
ground and there it is: apple mush! Then, ants come along to eat
the mush.) If they try throwing the teddy bear into the pond outside, the bear plops into the water. Then, a fish surfaces and
spews it right back on shore with a splash. Can it be possible
that the designers were expecting players to throw the teddy
bear into the fish pond? Apparently so. They seem to have been
ready for anything. Thoroughness like that does not go unappreciated by this reviewer; this software is well thought-out and
carefully implemented. The Treehouse is an involving, engrossing piece of work. It is the kind of game kids can lose themselves in for hours on end. This reviewer predicts that more than
one parental cry of "Come in to dinner!" will receive a reply of
"I'll be there in a minute...." Avoid arguments before they start:
just go into the computer room, pick them up bodily and carry
them into the dining room.

'Possumtainment
The Treehouse can be played with a mouse or a keyboard, but
a mouse is highly recommended. The documentation is clear
and easy to understand. It should be gone over by parents and
kids together at first. Then, once kids get the hang of the game's
interface, they should need little help. No reading skills are necessary in order to play the game. Frankly, although it is recommended especially for ages six to 10, younger children who have
been exposed to computer games as well as older players (particularly those with an interest in music) may be equally interested.
The Treehouse comes with a kids' guide and song book full of
supplementary information and ideas for things to do like
"Science in the backyard" and "Homemade instruments." There
is even a cassette tape of that toe-tapping Treehouse theme for
kids' listening and dancing pleasure. The designers have created
a full package of fun here that should serve as a valuable source
of education and entertainment.

Review

Where's Arnold When
You

Need Him?

TITLE:
Conan the Cimmerian
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$49.99
PROTECTION: Document Check
DESIGNER:
Synergistic Software
Robert Clardy, Michael
Branham and Robert Mendel
PUBLISHER:
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA

Virgin Games' Conan the Cimmerian
by Charles Ardai

Mrs. Conan wears the skimpiest of brass g-strings and her
husband a loincloth, there would not seem to be much
laundry to do.)
Suddenly, a band of marauders descends upon the village!
One of them shoots lightning bolts at Mrs. Conan, leaving
her sprawled, dead, on the ground. Another lays Conan out
flat with a blow from his mace. When Conan recovers and
finds the town in ruins, he resolves to carry out a vendetta
against the man responsible for the destruction of all he held
dear: Thoth Amon. Ominous drum roll, please.
So, as astute readers have already surmised, one spends
the first half of the game bringing Conan up to speed. This involves finding a mentor to hone Conan's combat skills, tracking down weapons and magic items suitable to his new life
as a mercenary and amassing forces to lead against the
nefarious Thoth Amon (James Earl Jones, in the movie).
The second half of the game consists of a collection of
quests on which Conan is sent from the central city of
Shadizar. Once Conan has completed these quests, he is
ready to face Thoth Amon himself in a climactic showdown.
The use of a big chunk of the game for "creating" Conan is
an interesting device. It permits a certain amount of plot and
character development in what might otherwise be a static
series of mini-adventures. Granted that much of this development will be familiar to players from Conan's previous incarnations; but if it is familiar, at least it is also faithful, visually
and in spirit, to its sources.

Conan the Geographer

T

he principle behind games based on licensed characters

such as Conan is that they give players a chance to inhabit
the world and the life of those characters. So, for instance,
Batman lets players "be" Batman, with all his skills, gadgets and
enemies, just as Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis allows
players to "become" Steven Spielberg's famous archaeologist. Interestingly enough, Conan the Cimmerian is unusual in that
Conan starts the game not as the proficient, sword-wielding barbarian of novel, comic book and movie renown, but as a peaceful blacksmith living in domestic tranquility with his wife. This is
not the Conan one is accustomed to seeing — and though that
Conan develops in due course, it is only with the player's assistance that he does so. This betrays the designers' interest in
doing something slightly different with the material than has been
done until now.
The game tells a lengthy origin story in an animated sequence
at the start of the game. Conan and his wife are leading an innocent existence, he at the forge, she doing something on the
ground. (It looks as though she is doing the laundry, but since

Conan takes place across the entire continent of Hyborea.
A world map gives an overview of the quest sites; as one progres
ses in the game, the map fills in with new locations. Thoth
Amon's city, Tarantia, is on the map from the start, but cannot
be entered until the end of the game. This provides a nice goad
for the player and a constant reminder of the overriding mission
that ties all of Conan's disparate agendas together.
Actual gameplay takes place both on Ultima-style street and
wilderness maps and on Karateka-style combat and interaction
screens. A very basic menu of commands is available at each of
these levels, as well as a point-and-click interface that calls up uni
que sub-menus for different types of interactions.
The choices available in any encounter are extremely limited.
The only permanent commands are Inventory, Status and the
generic "Action." Most sub-menus have only two or three choices
(Converse/Attack/Done, Yes/No), and combat consists of the following commands: Left, Right and Attack.
By the end, one can use a grand total of three different attacks

Review

— Swing, Thrust and Chop — but Conan starts the game only
able to Swing. (Stop smirking.)
The result is a game caught somewhere in the middle between
action and role-playing. It is perhaps the most rudimentary roleplaying game ever made, cutting down to the bare bones the
complexities of a Might and Magic or an Ultima. (There are
magic items, but no spells; there are a variety of weapons, but
most seem to be swords.) On the other hand, Conan clearly is
not primarily an action game, for two reasons: first, because the
game has plenty of CRPG-style puzzles to solve, some of which
are quite ingenious (how to kill an undead king who cannot be
harmed by Conan's weapons, for instance), and second, because
the action is not very good.
In fact, the game's major drawback is not its lack of complexity
in the role-playing area — Conan is not a difficult game (it is,
simply put, "fun"), but features endless, repetitive and poorly
animated action sequences that detract from the overall entertainment value. Unfortunately, every street and path in the game
teems with enemies who will attack Conan at the drop of a helm.
Then, each such encounter is played out as a side-view struggle,
with Conan and his foe raining blows on each other with all their
might. The characters are well-drawn, but since they are so large
(usually seen as a "plus" in the videogame world), there is little
room for maneuvering.
As combat continues, "life-meters" at the base of the screen indicate each character's declining stamina in conventional arcade-game fashion. Thus, combat
tends to be a matter of finding an attack that
will penetrate a given character's defenses
("Thrust" seems to work well in most cases)
and letting him have it over and over again.
Worst of all, the graphics do not reflect the action that is going on. None of the characters
react to being hit, except for collapsing when
dead, and hits are sometimes scored even
when little or no on-screen contact has been
made. So, after the first dozen battles, one gets
tired of going through the motions, even though the game does
offer a variety of enemies and, once, an interesting ally (a Norse
god).
The quests get gradually more difficult as one goes on, mainly
by taking place in larger areas populated by increasingly
dangerous foes. Whenever Conan dies, the game offers tips on
how he might have done better and resurrects him. This gives
players plenty of chances to finish the game. Needless to say,
there is also a Save Game feature so that armchair barbarians
can take a rest between bouts of hacking and slashing.
Despite this, however, many players will not be able to finish
Conan — not because of Hyborea's evil-doers or because they
will tire of the game (it is rather addictive, actually), but because
of some serious bugs in the program. In the end, it is not the impregnability of Tarantia but plain old programming flaws that
present Conan with his greatest challenge.

Conan the Bughunter
One does not want to make too much of these bugs since they
will presumably be fixed in future releases of the game. (Virgin
is aware of them and claims to have corrected replacement disks
available.) However, for the record, players of the original version
should be prepared for some difficulty moving Conan around.
At the start of the game, in Shadizar, the problem is limited to
Conan getting "stuck" against corners of buildings. The top-down

perspective is such that when Conan tries to walk behind or past
a building, he sometimes cannot, because the part of his body
that the building should obscure bumps up against it instead.
This leads to a lot of backtracking after getting Conan stuck in
spots which one does not expect to present any navigational
problem.
Later in the game, however, the problem gets really bad, with
Conan getting stuck on outstretched tree branches and the like.
It gets to the point where one periodically navigates Conan into
positions he simply cannot get out of, at which point there is no
choice but to re-boot. Even if one manages to avoid such unintentional traps (a matter of luck, really), the constant backtracking
and retracing of one's steps becomes unbearable.
These are not the only problems in the game, either. Perhaps
the most embarrassing involves the copy-protection scheme — a
set of runes printed at the top of each page of the instruction
manual — which is snafu'd by not one but two blunders. Not
only is an incorrect set of runes printed on the very first page of
the manual, but the errata sheet correcting this mistake itself contains an error!
Obviously, more care was needed prior to this package's
release. However, Virgin is supposed to be correcting the
problems now, so that future players will be spared the frustration this reviewer had to deal with.

Conan the Aesthete
Unlike the player, whom the game could treat
better, the character of Conan himself is wellserved by Conan the Cimmerian. The game's
graphics portray him as hale, tanned and
strong-thewed, nearly living up to the magnificent Boris Vallejo painting on the package.
Hyborea is richly detailed and well laid out, with
rooftops and underground caverns to explore in
addition to "street-level" locations. In fact, some
of the graphics are as grim and violent as anything put into a computer game in order to
portray the dark universe of the late Robert E. Howard as authentically as possible. For example, the opening frame includes a
severed head, so gamers should be fairly warned or tantalized, as
the case may be. Further, the music in the game, full of brooding
melodies and stirring war cries, is both satisfying and appropriate
to the dark fantasy milieu, as well.
Fans of Conan will find a great deal to like about this game. It
is clever enough to challenge the wit without being a hardcore
CRPG, and it offers all the sweat and blood a devoted Robert E.
Howard reader could ask for. Though the characters' motivations
are never even two-dimensional — Thoth Amon kills Conan's wife
because he is the villain and that is what villains do — this is a
weakness in the Conan canon in general, not just this game.
(Not just Conan, either. See also Tarzan, Gor, and John Jakes'
Brak the Barbarian.)
If barbarian adventuring is what one seeks, Conan the Cimmerian provides a refreshingly uncomplicated, unrefined and
vigorous example. This is steaming, juicy violence at its most
basic, with all of that genre's redeeming and unredeeming
qualities.
At least, unlike most games of this ilk, Virgin has taken a stab
at making Conan a creature of flesh and blood, rather than just
another bunch of testosterone-tinted pixels. By letting players participate in the birth of their hero, an added layer of interest, if not
actual depth, takes shape. Nietzsche it ain't, but Howard it is!

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
From Here to Aeternam
by Paul Rigby

ppearing

in Europe for the IBM
sometime before Christmas '91
will be Aeternam — a CRPG that
is, according to Infogrames, ten times
larger than their previous effort, Drakkhen. The game centers around Archipelago, where the progression of the
indigenous civilization is moving twice as
fast as the rest of the world. The player's
aim? Well, it is a little undefined to begin
with, but with the news of an "evil force"
appearing in the island one might get the
drift of the plotline. Aeternam will feature
256-color VGA graphics with AdLib
sound board support and "mobile realtime 3-D with height difference" —
whatever that means; presumably an advancement in scaling — plus the usual
promise of umpteen monsters and animation sequences. It also appears that a CDROM version for IBM owners is already in
the works.

countries against each other. The
scenarios in the initial module include:
Lebanon versus Jordan, Kuwait versus
the United Arab Emirates, Egypt versus
Israel, Iraq versus Saudi Arabia (with support from the United States) and Israel
(supported by the U.S.) versus a coalition of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and
Egypt. Each scenario is graded for difficulty and each has three criteria for
win/lose situations: population
demoralization, media pressure and
aerial superiority. Three maps (satellite,
strategic and radar) aid play, while the
player uses the information they provide
to issue orders for flight plans, transferring aircraft between bases, repairs, air
cover and armor strikes. In addition, supplies can be regulated and staying in
supply can be critical. The game is already out for the Amiga and Atari ST,
with an IBM conversion expected.

Impressions has been busy again with
the release of an intriguing wargame. In
Fighter Command, the player takes command of a country's air force and pits it
against a nearby opponent. Obviously,
the ground-based portion of the conflict
is largely ignored. In fact, success and
defeat will rest solely upon the aerial effort.

Those weary adventurers sitting in a
favorite armchair with coffee and biscuits
at the ready, but bereft of suitable reading material, should hearken to the following. Syntax is a bi-monthly adventure
magazine on disk, for both the IBM and
the Atari ST (although an "Amiga" version is available that runs via the publicdomain ST Emulator available from Syntax on request). Syntax is packed with
news, reviews, interviews, features, letters, screen shots of new games, hints
and tips, solutions plus many other adventure-related files. There is also an inhouse public domain library that sells ad-

A

Fighter Command is expandable. This
initial release comes complete with the
first "module," set in the Middle East,
and consists of 28 scenarios which pit individual countries or alliances of several

ventures, CRPGs and utilities. One good
example of the latter is an intriguing disk
called "Mapper" that allows the creation
of adventure/RPG maps on-screen for
one's favorite game. Public-domain disks
are £2.50 each. However, Syntax's
editor, Sue Medley, prefers to do business her way. If anyone is willing to contribute an article, solution, hints, etc. on a
disk, Sue will return the disk with a publicdomain disk, absolutely free! If a
shareware disk is chosen, one need only
add £1.00 (which is given to the disk's
author). The ST version of Syntax was
first published during July 1989 and is
now onto issue 14 and going strong. The
IBM version has just been launched. An
excellent read, Syntax is informative, welldesigned and nicely opinionated. Syntax
costs £5.25 (airmail) and is available
from Sue Medley, 9 Warwick Road, Sidcup, Kent, England, DA14 6LJ.
The French have, it appears, a
penchant for logic games. They produce
enough of them, at any rate. Booty, from
Loriciel, is the latest example. The
premise is as simple as switching the
basic computer on/off microchip instruction merged with the complexity of the
'domino theory.' For example, the first
level displays a grid of blue and grey
squares. They must all be switched to
grey before one can proceed. Clicking on
one square will change it from blue to
grey. However, two other squares, for example, may then change from grey to
blue. Memorizing how the connections interact with each other is the key to this
game. The levels, and there are 300 of
them, vary in presentation from multicolored squares to angels and devils, and
so on. The game is currently out for
Amiga, Atari ST and Amstrad CPC.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS1 1 2DD.
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80;
Fax: 01144-543-466-579.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01 144-268-590-766; Fax: 01 144-268-590076.
All of the above telephone numbers assume one can dial direct. If there is any
trouble in reaching the retailers, please
contact the international operator.

Industry News

S

pectrum HoloByte's Gilman Louie is tired of
simply hearing about virtual reality. He is ready to help
make it a reality. Along with
Edison Brothers, a major distributor of coin-operated amusements, Spectrum HoloByte
plans to bring "cyberspace"
(three-dimensional virtual reality)
to the "real" world. In fact, they
have already started doing so.

The $65,000 Question: Will Amusement
Operators Spend That Much for Virtual Reality?
On December 11, 1991, both
companies hosted both the

general and computer media at
San Francisco's Club DV8.
Edison Brothers' Andy Halliday
informed CGW that more than
3,000 people experienced their
products at a recent trade show
for amusement park operators;
4,000 people experienced Dactyl
Nightmare (see "I, Witness
Report" for a brief description of
the game) at a Dallas, Texas
lounge called Dave*Busters;
more than 700 people paid to
play the games at Santa Ana,
California's Main Place during a
two-day period; the units were exposed to the motion picture industry at several different studios
and the same units appeared on
NBC's Today show. During this
tour, Halliday noted that not one
person objected about the headsets (many critics had suggested
that the American public would
not accept re-using headsets), discomfort (some had suggested
that the headsets were too
heavy) or price (at the paid
venues, the company was charging $4.00 for three and one-half
minutes). Instead, the games
received ready acceptance and
enthusiasm at every temporary
venue.
Since Edison Brothers' main
business is with amusement park
and arcade operators, CGW
asked Halliday if there would be
any price resistance with regard
to placing the total-immersion
machines in various locations.
Halliday observed that, even at
$55,000 for the cockpit games
and $65,00-$75,000 for the networked units, these were not the
most expensive entertainment
devices for high-class lounges,
clubs, amusement parks and
coin-operated arcades. He noted
that Sega's R-360 is more expensive and not reprogrammable,
whereas these machines are
reprogrammable. They are also
low-maintenance items, since
most of the repair work is
restricted to easy fixes like replacing worn cables and adjusting
headsets. As Halliday stated,
"This is not the next video
game; these machines have
many applications." That, of
course, is where Spectrum
HoloByte's new Cyberstudio
group comes in.
Maxis and Lucasfilm veteran
A. J. Redmer will head up the
unit that will create adventures
and simulations for the virtual
reality units. The cockpit units
are expected to support networked versions of the

Electronic Battlefield Series
(including Falcon 3.0, Avenger
A-10 and Apache AH-64) by
early 1993.
Is VR sufficiently distinct to create its own market? The following is an eyewitness report from
veteran gamer and computer
game industry observer Russell
Sipe, CGW's Publisher and
Editor-in-Chief.

1, Witness Report
In ten years of covering the
computer gaming world I have
had a lot of great gaming experiences. None of them could
touch what I experienced this
week at the DV8 Club in San
Francisco when I got my first
hands-on experience with virtual
reality. Spectrum's CyberStudio
and Virtuality (which is making a
media tour this month) is everything I had hoped the first genera
tion of virtual reality would be
and more.
Three different VR demos were
shown. Two sit-down cockpit VR

simulators took you on a hang
gliding flight and Afterburnerstyle combat simulator flight.
However, a third VR product
linked four stand-up "cages" into
a interactive battle royale by running a program called Dactyl
Nightmare. Each participant
gets into a device that looks like
a 21st century version of a electrical lineman's cage (such as you
see suspended above electric
company utility vehicles). The
cage, along with the VR helmet
and the VR gun, reads your body
movements and recreates them
in the virtual world of Dactyl
Nightmare. The product did an
excellent job of mimicking my
body movements (to the point
that when I squatted down in my
cage, my character squatted
down as well).
The real thrill came from fighting the three other live opponents in the same VR environment (sort of a three-dimensional
chessboard with stairs). I felt like
I was reliving R.E. Connell's short
story, "The Most Dangerous
Game". For three and a half tension-filled, heart-stopping
minutes, man was indeed the ultimate prey and predator. Some
of the participants reported disorientation when removing their
helmets after a couple rounds of
combat. It is an intense experience.
VR is here and it is great!

Sports make a run on the COW Top Ten this month with Links
and NFL Pro League Football breaking into the Top Ten. This
is the second time COW readers rated I inks. Unfortunately,
Links was "rated" too soon on the first go-around (just as it was
shipping). Thus, the responses were not large enough to be
statistically significant. This time, however, the response was
vigorous. Might and Magic III debuts at the number one spot
among role-playing games (number ten overall), eclipsing >

>

Ultima

VI,

which had held top role playing honors since
August 1991. Police Quest 3 debuts at #13 overall and #2 in
adventure games, while
I 7A knocks Chuck Yeager Air
Combat out or the #3 spot among simulations. The normal
trend over several polls is for a game to lose a little ground with
each re-rating. However, The Secret of Monkey Island and The
Lost Admiral are showing strong tendencies in the other
direction.

Bestseller List

vi

Re ew

The Icing on the Slope
by Eric Masterson
TIRE:

The Carnes: Winter Challenge

M

ulti-venued games have been a staple of the computer
game industry for many years. The best multi-venued
games have usually involved Olympic events (Epyx'
celebrated licensed products of the mid-1980s and Electronic
Arts' parody of the "Games," Caveman Ugh-lympics, immediately come to mind). Accolade's The Games: Winter Challenge
uses today's faster frame rates, VGA graphics capability and
digitized sound capacity to allow players to experience competitive skiing, sledding and skating to a more exciting degree than
in any of its distinguished predecessors. All told, there are eight
different events in the package. Add to these features the
capability for running the game under Windows 3.0 (with at
least 1 MB of RAM) and one might well expect more computer
skiers flying down the slopes in adrenaline-filled downhill runs
than ever before.
The Games: Winter Challenge uses a third-person perspective
to present the action. The player follows along right behind the

Review

on-screen competitor and the
suspended disbelief is sometimes vivid
enough to cause him/her to duck
under the spray of simulated snow.
The action is fast and furious with
downhill events reminiscent of the
smooth-flowing Downhill Challenge,
published in the U.S. by Broderbund.
The latter was not as successful on
the IBM as it was on the Atari ST because of the CGA color palette and
the necessity of slowing down faster
processors with a separate software
patch in order to compete on 286s
and above. Veterans of the earlier
game might also be interested in the
fact that the ski jumping in The
Games: Winter Challenge is much more forgiving than the
event was in Downhill Challenge, however.

The Agony of Defeat
Readers who are part of the television generation will probably
never forget the film footage which always accompanied the line
"agony of defeat" during the opening credits of ABC's Wide
World of Sports. The out-of-control ski jumper crashing off the
end of the jump and tumbling to a stop reminded viewers on a
weekly basis that sports competition is no picnic. In the Accolade version of the ski jumping competition, the player's athlete must fly off the ramp, keep his/her skis in a parallel position

(in order to maintain lift) and then,
land. The key is, of course, to do all of
this without eating snow. If one wipes
out on the ramp, the would-be jumper
may slide down the ramp and make
the ABC Wide World of Sports
jumper look graceful.
Garners looking for more fast-paced
challenges can opt for the luge or
bobsled competitions. In both events,
one's athletes scream down a snakelike course of ice-covered, polygonfilled walls. The goal is to get maximum speed as quickly as possible
and to keep the vehicles in the groove
so that the time keeps getting shaved
with every run. These events are not
particularly difficult when compared to others in the game.
Another fast-paced event is the giant slalom competition. The
challenge in this event requires the player to maneuver the onscreen skier through the gates of a progressively more difficult
course. As in real life, excess speed tends to make one's
digitized athlete go unnecessarily wide in certain turns and eventually adds unwelcome seconds to the player's final time.
Those who like to test their coordination may choose the giant
slalom, but those who like to "flat out" go for it will opt for the
challenge of downhill skiing. In fact, the downhill simulation is so
exhilarating that fast skiers may achieve as much air time during

Review

this competition as they do in the ski
jump! This competition has obviously
been crafted by fans of this sport.

Ski Shooting
The biathlon event combines the
leisurely pace of cross-country skiing,
the slowest of the events depicted,
with the challenge of target shooting.
Both the cross-country skiing event
and the skiing in the biathlon require
more emphasis on timing than on
quick reflexes. The major benefit of
these events is to allow the programming team to show off their ability to
create bitmapped scenery. The biathlon simply allows the on-screen skier
to ski to a target area and then, enter the shooting mode. One is
given five targets to shoot at and penalized 15 seconds for each
miss. Shooting is done standing or prone.
One of the more graceful events is speed skating. The player
has the digitized skater compete against the clock by performing
laps around the 400-meter track. This is the only event where
one must wait for the starting gun. One false start is allowed, so
that the player does not become totally frustrated.

The Judges Are Ready
The user interface is a cool blue bitmapped menu system

which not only allows players to
navigate about the game with ease,
but also allows the painless use of the
installation program. The virtual world
is a clever blend of bitmapped mountains matted in over polygon-filled
slopes and courses. There are bitmapped grandstands, trees and even
a polygon-filled moving ski lift. Also,
the animations of video-digitized athletes add to the realism. In addition,
there is a video feature which allows
the saving of one's finest events to
disk-based film clips for future viewing.
In fact, about the only disturbing factor concerning the "look" of the game
is that during the events, there is a
map window which covers some of the left-hand portion of the
screen. While this is useful in order to see where one is located
on a particular course, it is somewhat obtrusive. An option for a
full-screen, and less distracting, view would have been most welcome.
Perhaps the nicest fact about the game is that an average fullscale Olympic competition with all eight events (depending upon
the number of participants) may be completed during a lunch
hour or during the half-time of an NFL football game. The action
is well simulated and can be very addicting. If the potential
player is the least bit interested in downhill skiing, he/she is likely
to find this game to be most playable and entertaining.

1
9
5
7
7
4
4
7
9
9
7
1
9
7
2
4
1
9
9
4
2
3
8
9
4
0
0
0
7
8
3
7
5
5

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Riders of Rohan
IBM, Amiga
$49.95
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL

Riders of the Video Mage
Konami's Riders of Rohan
by Allen L. Greenberg

n

intriguing quality of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the
Rings trilogy is that it refuses to be confined. That is, it
cannot be summarized, adapted, reworked or otherwise
carried from print to some other medium without first having certain plot branches either pruned or altogether removed.
Konami's Riders of Rohan (Riders) very likely represents the
first time in Middle Earth that the tree has been pruned away in
order to display a single branch. It portrays the story of King
Theoden and his struggle with the traitorous wizard Saruman.
Hence, it represents the most lengthy passage of The Lord of
the Rings which does not deal directly with the more spiritual
and weighty matter of the evil ring.

A

The graphic touches in Riders of Rohan are simple, yet pleasing. Both the animated and still screens are presented using the
same soft watercolor hues with which J.R.R. Tolkien enjoyed
painting. Unfortunately, from a gamer's perspective, the minuscule figures that occupy the battlefield during some sequences
and the master map of Rohan in others are very difficult to locate and select when the player needs to act quickly. Overall,
however, the game has a satisfying look.

Rider's creators have produced a most faithful recreation of a
scene from Middle Earth, although its value as a game is another
matter to consider. Essentially, Riders is a lightweight strategy
game that includes several action sequences and some very
limited character interaction. Those who have not read the trilogy
will probably have a difficult time understanding the events which
have led up to those in the game. However, the events that unfold within the game are simple enough to follow.

Libretto
In the game, the kingdom of Rohan is under attack from the
west by the wizard Saruman. The player directs the forces opposed to Saruman, although not all of these are available to the
player as the game begins. Several bands of "Riders" patrol the
River Isen, across which Saruman's armies of Orcs and Dunlendings are marching. At the fortress of Helm's Deep, groups of soldiers prepare for a siege. King Theoden remains at his home in
Edoras, under the spell of the vile Grima Wormtongue, refusing
to mobilize the remaining Riders. In Fangorn Forest, Ents —
those mighty personified trees of Middle Earth — need only be

,

Review

pointed in the proper direction to vent their anger against the evil
wizard. Finally, the remaining members of the broken Fellowship
— Gandalf, Aragorn, Gimli, Legolas, Merry and Pippin — are each
about to take part in the approaching confrontation.
So, the majority of Riders of Rohan is concerned with individual battles between the game's title characters and
Saruman's armies. In each case, the Riders are greatly outnumbered and the player must use strategy to survive. This strategy,
as suggested by both the classic trilogy and the game's
documentation, involves using light cavalry and infantry to distract the enemy while the heavy cavalry gets ready to charge.
For these battles, the screen switches from its normal view of the
map of Rohan to a close-up of the battlefield. The battles take
place in real time, although the action will freeze long enough for
the player to input his commands to each unit. Using either
mouse or keyboard, the player places the pointer on the tiny onscreen figure representing the unit he/she wishes to address.
Clicking on that figure gives access to a menu of commands.
This means that the player has to click on units incessantly
throughout the battle in order to monitor their progress. The battle ends when either the player or the enemy issues the retreat
command.
Battle may sometimes be preceded by one of the game's arcade sequences, in which leaders of
the two forces agree to a duel to the
death. Using mouse or keyboard, the
player controls the full-screen figure in
both attack and defensive moves. The
army belonging to the deceased leader
will then suffer from low morale during
the ensuing battle. The player also has
a "quick battle" option in which the
computer automatically generates the
results of the confrontation without any
input from the player.

Cast of Characters
In combat, there exist no more intimidating fighters than the Ents, who
handle their enemies much as a
modern-day lawnmower treats grass. It
is important that the Ents become active early in the game because they move very slowly and unless they are on the battlefield, their movements are not under the player's control. The
hobbits Merry and Pippin may activate the Ents if they have
been freed from the Orcs, or the job may fall to Gandalf — the
renowned wizard who has returned fresh from the bowels of a
mountain, wearing a new set of clothes.
Any army which has Gandalf as part of its company will enjoy
the benefit of having a list of spells at its disposal. The player
controls which spells will be cast, but will quickly discover that
overuse of the good wizard's magical prowess will not only exhaust the wizard, but will also attract the attention of the dread
Sauron in Mordor. Upon discovering Gandalf's potent intervention on behalf of the forces of good, Sauron will promptly dispatch one of his demonic Nazgul, mounted on a flying serpent,
to investigate. This, in turn, leads to Gandalf fighting the hellish
creature in the game's second arcade sequence. Floating in the
air like a medieval version of the "Rocketeer," the wizard trades
lightning bolts with his foe until one of the two manages to
microwave the other.
Aragorn's purpose in Rohan is to remove King Theoden from
the paralyzing influence of Grima Wormtongue. There is some

brief character interaction in which the player has only a small
part in deciding how Aragorn responds to certain questions at
Theoden's home. On the road, Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas will
frequently be ambushed by Orcs, leading to the same arcade
dueling sequence as the one which occasionally precedes the
army battles. Fortunately, Aragorn is a master swordsman and
any orc challenging him might just as well challenge Michael
Jackson to a moon-walk competition.
The final arcade sequence involves archery, and frequently occurs as the enemy gathers at the fortress of Helm's Deep. The
player directs an archer shooting at oncoming enemies who
must be hit as they come into range. The enemy will be throwing
spears as they approach and the archer must duck down or be
impaled. Legolas the elf may also engage in a similar sequence
while traveling through Rohan, although his shafts are apparently
AIM-9M "Sidewinder" arrows of elven manufacture.
Rohan will eventually receive a message from Gondor requesting the assistance which the Riders are pledged to give. If the
player has been defeated by Saruman, if too few of the Riders
remain alive to assist Gondor or if any of the powerful members
of the Fellowship have been killed, the game is lost. If the Riders
are able to fulfil their commitment, the player will win.

Opening Night Notices
In a very real sense, then, a player's
performance is judged by how closely
he or she has followed events from the
Tolkien canon. Thus, seasoned
strategists and wargamers may find
themselves unhappy with the restrictions under which they must achieve
victory. Likewise, many will find the battle sequences repetitious, since they
constantly feature similar units facing
similar enemies under similar disadvantages. So, oddly enough, the arcade
sequences in Riders of Rohan end up
being the most interesting parts of the
game, even though the game appears
to have been designed primarily as a
strategy game.
Perhaps, there is a limit to how many different game products
Tolkien's famous trilogy should be expected to inspire. One cannot help but survey the large number of software titles which are
based on The Lord of the Rings and wonder if they are, in actuality, a tribute to the diversity of Tolkien's work or simply a
reflection of the power of a successful license? Are such games a
recognition that Tolkien's Middle Earth touched archetypal symbols and emotions (such that gamers are continually drawn back
to Tolkien's vision) or are they an indictment of the repetitious
nature of current game design?
Such questions may be as unanswerable as whether books
should be made into films, films into television series or films,
television series, books or comic books into computer games. Ultimately, it depends upon the artistic implementation in each
product.
As for Riders of Rohan, there is little to hold the interest of experienced strategy players and wargamers and too few of the arcade sequences to challenge the dedicated action gamer. However, it is likely that many devotees of Tolkien will enjoy this faithful approach to one of Middle Earth's most memorable battles
and the characters who participated in it.

Review

Fantasy Action-Adventure
by Todd

previous efforts. During play, the game operates in two modes:
wilderness view and tactical view. The former is a rather standard
hex map showing roads, hills, mountains, forests and the like for
the lands between Pax Tharkas (to the north) and Thorbardin in
the south. A small golden icon (which, strangely enough,
resembles nothing so much as the Oscar statuette of Hollywood
fame) represents the player's party, while a similar silver icon represents the refugees' party (or parties, as we'll see later). Players
move along through the wilderness view, slowly crossing the
countryside. Then, when an encounter occurs, play switches to
the tactical view.

W

hat's a player to do? After battling against overwhelming
forces in the temple of Xak Tsaroth, then risking injury
and death in pursuit of the mystical Disks of Mishakal,
Champions of Krynn were able to both recover the magical
Disks and restore faith in the True Gods of Legend. After that,
the "Champions" journeyed from Xak Tsaroth to the fortress of
Pax Tharkas and rescued hundreds of peaceful men, women and
children who were being held captive by the evil Lord Verminaard and his vile Draconian guards. After such incredible adventures, what can a player do for an encore?
In Shadow Sorcerer (Shadow), an action game that continues
the DragonLance series set in the world of Krynn, players who
are not predisposed against action games should find their opportunity for a successful encore. Continuing the storyline established in Heroes of the Lance and Dragons of Flame, Shadow
adds a completely new graphics style and control system that
represents, in this reviewer's opinion, a big step forward in
playability for AD&D action games.

The More Things Change...
Like the earlier action games and unlike the role-playing "Gold
Box" series, combat occurs in real time. In contrast to the earlier
games, Shadow allows the player to control not one, but four,
on-screen characters simultaneously. Through the use of an
iconic interface, players can quickly and easily issue commands
to their on-screen surrogates with a mouse. Keyboard and joystick input are also supported, but using the mouse is so intuitive
that Shadow seems to have been specifically designed with a
mouse in mind.
Shadow's graphics represent an equally radical departure from

The tactical view employs isometric graphics to simulate a
realistic 3-D perspective for both exterior and interior/dungeon locales. (For readers unfamiliar with the term, the screen is "tilted"
at a 45-degree angle — this effect has been used skillfully in
games like Zaxxon and the more recent Zany Golf and The Immortal.) The tactical view graphics, in VGA mode, are lush and
colorful, and manage to impart a realistic sense of "being there"
(albeit from a fly-on-the-wall viewpoint). Characters (both the
party and NPCs) move smoothly, and some of the special effects
(especially Magic Missile and Fireball spells) are impressive.
Realistic sound effects (from this reviewer's AdLib card) also
add to the realism of the game environment, and are worth
noting.

...The More They Stay the Same
While most of Shadow makes sense and contributes to an enjoyable gaming experience, there are some aspects of the game
which are infuriatingly illogical. By far the worst of these is the
matter of the player's interaction with the refugees from the
fortress of Pax Tharkas. In the fiction of the game, players are
asked to believe that the role-playing characters have just escaped from this fortress of death, against awesome odds, and
that an army of deadly, bloodthirsty creatures is hot on the
party's (and thus the refugees') trail. In short, the only logical action to take is to flee.
Yet players will often find themselves contending with refugees
who, through an impromptu governing Council, may decide to
give up on Thorbardin altogether and high-tail it back to Pax
Tharkas, where certain death awaits! The manual concedes
that the refugees can become more than a minor irritant to the

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNERS:

Gets a New Look
Threadgill

PUBLISHER:

player and offers rationalizations for their often bizarre behavior.
However, the game is won and lost upon the refugees' safety
and having them suddenly turn against the player makes the
game needlessly frustrating.
Combat in the tactical mode often hinges upon character placement and this is another sore point. The iconic interface allows
the player to easily command characters to move to specific
places on the screen. Usually, the characters act immediately on
the command and move to the indicated square. Quite often
during a heated battle, however, the characters may be bunched
together and/or blocked by rocks or plants which prove to be an
insurmountable challenge for them to navigate around. So, the
characters stay put, often with fatal consequences. After witnessing this Al failure a few too many times, one cannot help but
think that some more programming time on the character Al
routines would have geometrically improved player satisfaction.

Words of Wisdom (Hints)
Readers wishing to avoid hints please skip ahead to the next
section.
Time can be one's greatest enemy in Shadow. While the
Draconians leave Pax Tharkas 48 hours after the party's departure, the wilderness is very large and there is much to do. There
simply isn't enough time to figure out where everything is, perform all the necessary actions and lead the refugees to Thorbardin in one fell swoop.
Clever gamers will take advantage of a few "false starts" to
map out the wilderness and the various dungeons before actually
playing the game and giving it full effort. After all, the players
are already supposed to know something about this wilderness,
according to the fiction. Then, once the maps have been made
and notes have been taken, it is much easier to "sweep through"
to a successful conclusion.
There are some time-wasting elements in the game's overall
design. For example, in order to reach Thorbardin, the Companions must pass through Skullcap, a large dungeon located at
the southernmost edge of the map. Before they will be able to
make it through Skullcap, they will need to make the acquaintance of a certain wizard (only with his physical presence in the
party is Skullcap passable). Unfortunately, his hangout in the

Shadow Sorcerer
IBM, Amiga
IBM
549.95
None
Jeff Groteboer
George MacDonald
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

wilderness is somewhat off the southward path one feels compelled to take. In short, it pays to explore everything ahead of
time so less time is wasted when it really counts.
Remember that the refugees' well-being is the key to success in
Shadow Sorcerer. At the start of the game, the refugees have
enough food to last a couple of days and after that they'll need
more in order to continue the journey. (Lack of food is a major
contributor to the refugees' contrary behavior mentioned above
and is to be avoided at all costs.) There's plenty of food around
in the wilderness, but you'll have to find it. Too bad rations don't
grow on trees....
Gamers should also avoid making a habit of switching back
and forth between the wilderness and tactical displays, since
each time the tactical display is exited, a half-hour of game time
passes (whether anything actually happened in the tactical mode
or not).
Of course, one should always keep an eye on the party's health
and well-being. Healing is only possible when a cleric is in the
party and, in turn, the party is in tactical mode. So, it is a good
idea to keep a cleric on hand. It is not, however, a good idea to
heal too often. Healing eats up precious time.

Final Observations
Shadow Sorcerer is apparently aimed at garners who are new
to fantasy games in general and the DragonLance milieu in particular. The storyline presents a welcome change from (to borrow
a phrase from one particularly well-regarded writer) the overplayed "Kill Foozle the Mad Wizard" scenarios. Graphics and
sound are top-notch, with a style and flair that holds the player's
interest and keeps him or her wondering just what is around that
next corner.
New and moderately-experienced players alike should enjoy
Shadow Sorcerer, although the refugees and combat movement
difficulties may be more than some novices may wish to contend
with. Experienced gamers will probably find little challenge here,
but might find the game enjoyable as a diversion from the
greater challenges of the "Gold Box" series. Small problems
aside, Shadow Sorcerer is a welcome improvement to the previous action releases in the series and yet another refinement to
a gaming system that is showing remarkable versatility.

Review

Back to Basics
Better Games' Stellar Agent
by Charles Ardai

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

nyone

who likes text adventures and wants to find new
ones to play has the devil's own time doing it these days.
No one makes them any more — practically no one,
anyway — so a dedicated texthound has to choose between
scouring the back shelves of computer stores for unsold relics,
playing Spellcasting 201 with the graphics turned off or waiting
patiently for Mediagenic to actually release the Lost Treasures
of Infocom package they have been promising for ages. Fortunately, there is now a fourth choice. One can send away to Better Games for a copy of Stellar Agent.

A

Stellar Agent, like Paul McCartney's "Liverpool Oratorio" and
the electoral college system, is a living anachronism. It is a
brand-spanking-new text adventure that looks, feels, and plays like a
piece of adventure game history. There are no graphics and
there is no parser. One chooses one's actions from numbered
menus. The screen is divided into sections labeled "Location,"
"Description," "Current Situation" and the like.
The storyline is so loose that it makes Zork's "Collect ten
treasures" plot look like War and Peace. It is as though a stateof-the-art game from 1977 had fallen into a time warp, only to
emerge a decade and a half later, blissfully oblivious to the technical and aesthetic advances it had missed in the intervening
years. Stellar Agent is more than rough around the edges — it is
rough everywhere one looks.

Stellar Performance
However, unpolished as it is, Stellar Agent also recalls the best
of the early adventure game era: ingenious logic puzzles; multistage death traps; a robust and shameless mixing of science fiction, high fantasy and anything else that caught the designer's
fancy; and, best of all, the anything-goes atmosphere of discovery and fun that characterized such classics as Starcross and
the original Adventure. The game is really no more than a collection of puzzles which are loosely strung together. To the

Stellar Agent
IBM
535.00
Robert Kraus
Better Games
P.O. Box 7644
Chicago, IL 60680
(312) 588-0795

designer's credit, however, the puzzles are fine examples of their
type and, to the delight of this puzzle-hungry player, there are a
ton of them. Some of them are the kind of puzzle one doesn't
see too often any more. Early in the game, for instance, the
player has to unlock a vault by pushing eight buttons in a sequence that will turn off eight lights. Each button reverses the current state of one or more of the lights, the complication being
that the buttons only function when their corresponding lights are
on. (This puzzle is not very difficult, but it is clever.) A later puzzle requires the player to destroy fifteen robots, each carrying
three different bombs, with just four uses of a bomb detonator.
These puzzles will remind players with long memories of such Infocom favorites as the royal maze in Zork III and the rock-chase
sequence in Spellbreaker. Stellar Agent's logic puzzles are no
less derivative of familiar archetypes than Infocom's were, but
neither are they any less enjoyable as a result.
Stellar Agent also offers more conventional adventure game
puzzles, and these, too, are ingenious. How to get past a lightning-fast monster with several elephant-like trunks? Try eating a
fruit that makes the eater smell awful. Hungry rats are barring
one's passage across a plain? Try scattering a handful of
poisonous berries on the ground. There are five planets' worth of
both types of puzzles to solve as the player picks his way
through a quest to uncover something called the "Info-Prism"
before a bunch of nasty aliens do. For what it is worth, this is the
game's storyline; it is fed to the player as quickly and sketchily
as possible at the beginning of the game and then vanishes for
long stretches at a time as one passes from sequence to sequence.
One could argue that a game like Stellar Agent really doesn't
need a storyline, and one would probably be right. As it is, the
game practically ignores the one it has. The game's structure
could hardly be called linear, since the player can use his
spaceship to jump from planet to planet at will. One does have

Review

to accomplish certain things before one can accomplish certain
other things, however, so some of the player's apparent freedom
is an illusion.
As a result, a good deal of backtracking is necessary as one
makes fatal mistakes and then goes back to correct them. The
game is full of dead ends and, in fact, it is impossible to get to
the end without dying and restoring several times. Fortunately,
the game has the most comprehensive Restore function this
reviewer has ever seen, permitting the player to restore to almost
any moment he chooses. This ability makes the game's requisite
trial and error almost painless. In addition, the game is divided
into seven "stages," and when one completes a stage, the game
tells the player so. One never has to backtrack further than the
beginning of the current stage.
Stellar Agent actually improves on the early adventure games
it resembles in that it is far less frustrating than they were. For
one thing, the menu-driven interface acts as a built-in hint system
— when the choice "throw berries" appears alongside the expected "eat berries," it gives one an idea of what one is supposed to do, though not where or when one is supposed to do it.
Because of this and the user-friendly restore function, players will
be able to go through the game with a minimum of tooth-grinding and hair-tearing. The game is not always easy, but where it is
difficult, it is difficult in the best possible way: it challenges the
player's wits, not his patience.

Stellar Limitations
Stellar Agent is an acquired taste, obviously, and this writer

fears that it is a taste one has to have acquired years ago.
Today's gamers may have little patience with it unless there is already a soft spot in their hearts for the Golden Age of Adventure
Games that it represents. It doesn't help that the game's descriptions rarely evoke more than the bare bones of a setting — "The
Commander's office contains the usual office furnishings," for example — or that the menu commands are sometimes abbreviated to the point of absurdity. (For instance, there is the
command "Purple alien," which turns out to mean "Talk to the
purple alien.") Other quirks, such as the player's inability to drop
anything, may turn some players off as well.
On the other hand, players for whom the lure of a good puzzle
is enough to make them put up with a mulligan stew of a plot —
throw in some cavemen, some robots, some jungle tribes — will
find in Stellar Agent a game unlike anything else on the market.
Players willing to grin and bear a text game peppered with such
misspellings as "wierd," "guage," "extention," "viscious," and
"lagre" (for "large") will find quite a lot to enjoy. To expect finesse and polish from Better Games would be unfair; they are a
new company, and, to date, Stellar Agent is their only title.
What one can expect, and what the game delivers in spades, is
the infectious enthusiasm of a new talent in the field of adventure
game writing. The tragedy, of course, is that this is a dead field.
There is no longer an Infocom for Robert Kraus to go work for
now that he has demonstrated his abilities. Nor is there a wide
audience for the kind of work he is doing. For those of us who
remain, however, Stellar Agent is a perfect reminder of what we
used to love so much.

Review

If Coolness Were
Soul, Bart Would
Be James Brown

NILE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DEVELOPER:
PUBLISHER:

R

The Simpsons: Bart's House of Weirdness
IBM
$49.95
Document Look-Up
Distinctive Software, Inc.
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL

equest from Bart Simpson to the editor of Computer

Gaming World: May I please, sir, dispense with some
of the high standards normally associated with CGW's
writing in order to talk about Bart's House of Weirdness? After
all, you can't talk about a family lacking any laudable
values unless you relax a few of your own.
Reviewer: Gee, Johnny, the kid's got a point!

by Charles Ami

Bart: Okay, man. I really like this game. I really think you
should buy it. Buy it a lot. I give it five out of five on being a
good game; five out of five on coolness; five out of five on...
Editor: BAAAARRRRTT!

"Some Day I'll Kill That Kid!"
Bart Simpson, of course, enjoys a well-deserved reputation for
provoking outbursts such as this from those unfortunate enough
to have to deal with him. Konami's The Simpsons: Bart's
House of Weirdness provides television's most popular
animated terrorist-in-training with a new method of generating
such screams. In this arcade game, clearly aimed at the
Simpsons' younger admirers, Bart must survive several adventures in his home, his neighborhood and — heaven help him —
his mind. The game is essentially a run, jump and shoot-'em-up,
but contains some original touches interesting enough to make
the program worth noticing.

"Go To Your Room!"
Bart, always in his element when in "deep, deep trouble," has
been sent to his room by his parents for crimes that are too unspeakable to document. In his room is stored some innocent
play-time paraphernalia, along with a few embarrassing snapshots, of which his parents are obviously unaware. The bedroom
will be Bart's home base during the game, where he will be able
to rest and chill out — a very necessary procedure if Bart is to survive. Just as important, this is where a game in progress may be
saved (specifically, in Bart's underwear drawer with the other contraband), a welcome feature which is too rare among arcade
games.
It is obvious that Bart is not going to stay put. A door leading
to a stairway gives him access to the attic where, hidden between the trunks and the painting of Marge Simpson, squadrons
of belligerent bees wait to attack. Armed initially with a "burpgun" and a limited number of burps, Bart will encounter more difficult enemies as he goes deeper into the attic. Also hidden in
the mess are cans of spray-paint which make for more formidable, though shorter-lasting, weapons. The hero will usually
have two different weapons at any time from which to choose.

Don't Lose Your Cool
Each time Bart is attacked by the creatures, he loses some of
his "cool," as clearly indicated by the "cool-o-meter" located at
the bottom of the screen. When this meter reaches its limit, Bart
lays down on the floor in a fit of "toastification" and loses one of
the three lives with which he started the game. In his travels, Bart
may come across a photo of himself through which he will gain
an extra life. Even more valuable are the many doughnuts which
he will also come across. Mold notwithstanding, their medicinal

Review

value in helping Bart regain some of his cool make them worth
finding.

violence is terrifying and rarely have mundane items been put to
such diabolic use.

Along with his weapon and "cool" status, the bottom of the
screen indicates the object for which Bart is searching. Once he
finds the object, Bart may instantly transport back to his room
and the safety of the game-save option. Some of the unused
weapons with which Bart finishes one section of the game will
then be available for use in other parts of the program.

Bart's reward for surviving these six adventures is to have access to one final quest. About this, little may be revealed, except
that it involves the rescue of Krusty the Clown — the foulest personality on children's television.

Beware of Dustbunnies
In addition to the attic, Bart must also explore the basement,
which contains deadly lint-balls floating from the laundry and
some family skeletons that refuse to stay in the closet. Outside
his window, Bart will engage in a treetop-to-sewer search for his
baby sister's rubber ball. Also outside, he must attempt to gather
enough money to buy a ticket to the movies. An amusing sequence here involves Bart destroying an intruder-prevention system at the home of his father's thoroughly disagreeable boss.

Bartman to the Rescue
Within Bart's closet are two further adventures which likely
reflect the nature of the hero's imagination. In one adventure,
Bart tracks space mutants who threaten the planet Earth, although not very seriously. The game's most challenging and
whimsical episode occurs as Bart enters an "Itchy and Scratchy"
cartoon. The insane hatred which those two cartoon-within-a-cartoon characters have for each other is so intense, it makes one
wonder whether a PG rating would not be inappropriate. The

The game contains an amazing "VCR" mode which allows
players to review their actions backward, forward or even one
frame at a time. Favorite sequences may be saved and actually
incorporated into the game's opening credits.

"Come Here, Boy"
Graphically, House of Weirdness very much resembles The
Simpsons TV show. This is hardly surprising in that the weekly
series itself uses very simple artwork, but the result is nonetheless effective. The program also includes music taken from the
show, as well as digitized samples of the demonic delinquent's
famous voice. The game supports Tandy, EGA and VGA
graphics, as well as Ad Lib, Roland and Sound Blaster cards. A
joystick is optional, though this reviewer found it to be unevenly
responsive during play.
House of Weirdness stands up as well as any "Super-Marioid"
arcade game, but its greatest appeal will be for those who also
enjoy The Simpsons on television. Of course, Bart Simpson
thinks even more highly of it, but he, one must remember, is a
kid. "Kids" in the words of the self-styled philosopher Homer
Simpson, "say such stupid things."

Letters

Just Released
As a reader who has read your
magazine since the days in which issue
numbers had decimal points, you do an
outstanding job. However, the little game
summary square in which you give title,
system, designer, publisher, etc. is nice,
but as a diehard Amiga owner, it would
be nice if the system line or, in "Taking
A Peek," the machine availability listed
my favorite machine. Often, the Amiga
version is out and your magazine makes
no mention of it. You seem quite "privy"
to inside information and release dates.
P. Dennis Jones
Placentia, CA
The "Systems" line has been a source
of frustration to us for many years.
Yes, we are privy to "release dates" for
various conversions, but the odds of
such conversions actually hitting those
release dates are less than overwhelming. It is a "Catch 22" situation.
(Remember Joseph Heller's novel
about WWII bomber pilots, in which
they could go home if they were crazy
— but they were not considered crazy
if they actually did want to go home?)
If we print that a game is available for
the Amiga because we were told at
press time that it would be out in 45
days or so and that conversion is
delayed, we are castigated by the
readership for cruelly hoaxing gamehungry Amiga owners. If we do not
print that the game is available (in
order to avoid that cruel hoax), the
game comes out and we are accused
of being anti-Amiga (and most of us on
the editorial staff are Amiga owners
and proud of it!). We list the conversions in "Conversions Received" whenever we have the actual conversion in
hand. Those are real!

Politically Suspect
I found a section of your recent Sneak
Preview of Sid Meier's Civilization very

disappointing. The section in question is
the discussion of the game's "politically
correct" philosophy. I'll start out by
eliminating any suspicion: I do consider
myself to be politically liberal (gasp of
horror from the back row), and, as such,
hold many "politically correct" views, but
I, in no way, shape, form or fashion, hold
with the "PC" idea that only those views
should be tolerated. With that out of the
way, I'll get into the meat of this letter. Incidentally, all my assumptions about the
game are based upon your (otherwise excellent) Preview.
You started out the section in question
by referring to the game's use of the
greenhouse effect, questioning whether
this theory is valid. I'll give you that one.
While I personally tend to agree with that
particular idea, I realize that its acceptance is hardly universal. In game terms,
though, it does add some encouragement for the player to deal with pollution.
I certainly don't think you're going to
argue that pollution isn't a problem that
shouldn't be addressed in a game of the
type discussed. I'll even agree that it
shouldn't be the overriding issue for a
modern society. Overpopulation is
another possibility, as is warfare. I'll wait
until I see the game to decide on that
issue, though.
The next comment, though, is where
the preview started to get to me. According to the article, the game's introduction
refers to evolution. Your response was
that, at least, that theory had been
around a while. The tone of that, in my
opinion, seemed to be rather snide. If
you don't believe in Darwin's theories,
fine; that's your right and privilege. But
taking an item that appears solely in the
game's introduction and using it to prove
your charge of the game being concerned about "PC-ness" is unfair.
In regard to the last two items, I also
wonder why you have never criticized
these two items in other previous games
SimEarth, for instance, includes both

(evolution in particular), but I don't
remember the game being condemned.
Is this some new editorial philosophy?
I he final item in the Preview, however,
was the one that inspired me to write. According to the article, the game includes
women's suffrage. That's all well and
good. But I hardly think listing giving
women the right to vote qualifies as
being PC! And I certainly hope that you
didn't mean to imply that women's suffrage wasn't a great accomplishment! If
you intended only to criticize the game's
apparent idea that super-highways are
necessary for women's suffrage, I'll accept that argument, but that wasn't the
feeling the discussion left me with.
Don't misunderstand me. I'm not asking you to leave your own political
views out of the magazine. Indeed, I realize that avoiding them completely in a
commentary-oriented format such as
yours would be well near impossible. But,
in a review, that should focus purely on
the game's entertainment value, I feel
that politics should be left out. You have
a monthly page of editorials; place the
commentary there. I would not have
found the material I've discussed here so
inappropriate had it been in the form of
an editorial. I still would not have agreed
with it, but I wouldn't have objected to its
placement.
All criticism aside, your magazine is
easily the finest computer entertainment
magazine on the market. Keep up the
good work, but keep it apolitical.
Arthur C. Adams
Ellicott City, MD
Just as a film reviewer would be
remiss not to point out the historical
repercussions of taking, say, Oliver
Stone's JFK at face value, we believe
that game reviewers (or in the present
case, previewers) should consider the
consequences of taking a game's
presuppositions at face value. Part of
the reason the editorial staff bothers to

Letters

consider the social, political, philosophical and religious implications of a computer game is that we consider computer entertainment to be a form of art
and art, if you will, shapes opinions.
Any serious criticism must take this
into consideration or it abdicates a portion of the critic's responsibility. An
editorial, on the other hand, should
not address the real-life underpinnings
of a particular game. It should advocate change in entire genres and industries.
As for the political stance taken by
the writer of the Sid Meier's Civilization
preview, there is no editorial
philosophy change. Alan Emrich does
not believe in the greenhouse effect.
Johnny Wilson, who wrote the article
on SimEarth, does believe in the effect.
Both Emrich and Wilson believe that
evolution is the most sensible scientific
theory, but the comment to which you
refer was not anti-evolution. It was
another potshot at the greenhouse ef
fect. The suffrage issue in the game
and the pollution issue are both very
relevant to game play, so we'll discuss
those a little later.

Most importantly, we want to clarify
our editorial philosophy with regard to
criticism. The opinions in a given article are not necessarily those of the
editorial staff. Our only concern is
whether the game is presented fairly. If
the writer says something that is not
verifiable according to our experience,
we may challenge it. If, however, a
writer honestly believes that a game
presents something that he or she considers socially, politically or philosophically questionable, it is not our job to
change his/her opinion, even if it does
not perfectly correspond to our own.
That is why we may have one
reviewer write one opinion of a game
in a review and another express a different opinion in a paiktography. Computer Gaming World offers an independent forum for reflection on both
the serious and frivolous considerations of computer games. We have no
monolithic editorial board to synthesize controversial opinion into a
bland, but uniform, consensus.
As for the pollution issue, the game
(and, of course, by Mr. Adams' own
statement, he only knows what we've

told him and Alan may not have made
this clear in his preview) already has a
significant penalty in victory points
that is assessed against the player if
pollution is not controlled. That should
be enough incentive to solve the pollution problem, even without the greenhouse effect. As for women's suffrage,
the semantic problem for Mr. Emrich
was listing the historical achievement
as a "Wonder of the World." He
believes that a wonder should be something that is built, not achieved. We, of
course, have had some debate over
why he did not feel the same way
about Darwin's voyage and Magellan's
expedition. Maybe we can call him a
male chauvinist? Maybe he does want
a retrograde society where women are
once again treated as property rather
than persons? Maybe he is trying to
seduce CGW into being the propaganda tool that forges a new era of male
domination throughout the world?
Naaaah! He just oversimplified his critique of what he perceived as an oversimplification.

Conversions Received
Cyberblast (Innerprise Software) Amiga
Heart of China (Dynamix) Amiga
Home Alone (Capstone) Amiga
Speedball 2: Brutal Deluxe (Konami) Amiga
Team Suzuki (Konami) Amiga
The Lord of the Rings: Vol. 1 (Interplay) Amiga
Trump Castle II (Capstone) Amiga
Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 (Bethesda Softworks) Amiga
Back to the Future Part III (Konami) C-64
Gateway to the Savage Frontier (SSI) C-64
John Madden Football (EA) SEGA
Shadow of the Beast (Psygnosis) SEGA
Starflight (EA) SEGA
The Immortal (EA) SEGA
Back to the Future Part III (Konami) IBM
Killing Cloud (Konami) IBM
Predator 2 (Konami) IBM
Jones in the Fast Lane (Sierra) IBM CD-ROM
Stellar 7 (Dynamix) IBM CD-ROM
SimEarth (Maxis) IBM for Windows
Tracon for Windows (Wesson International) IBM for Windows
Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Macintosh
Rise of the Dragon (Dynamix) Macintosh
Pirates! (Ultra Games) Nintendo
Where in Time is Carmen Sandiego? (Konami) Nintendo
John Madden Football (EA) Super Nintendo

a-

Review

The Do-It-Yourself Re-Run Kit
Konami's Mission: Impossible
by Charles Ardai

SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNERS:

Mission Impossible
IBM
$49.95
Document Look-up
Dave WrIield, Tarrnie Williams Ir.,
Stanley Chow and Peter Gardner
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL

revived on television a few
seasons back when a writers'
strike made it impossible to
get new scripts in Hollywood.)

There is bound to be more
of an audience for a Mission:
Impossible game than for,
say, a Welcome Back, Kotter
or a Man From Atlantis
game, though Konami may still find a certain age group scratching its
head in puzzlement at what is to them an unfamiliar title. The series format — a team of undercover agents using gadgets and deception to infiltrate and foil criminal enterprises — also has the advantage of lending itself naturally to game design.
PUBLISHER:

M

ission: Impossible was not the best show on television, nor was
it the worst. At its best it was ingenious and suspenseful, though
implausible and politically naive. At its worst, it still filled an hour
better than, say, Starsky and Hutch. More often than not, it fell somewhere in the middle. Despite its general mediocrity, however, Mission: Impossible was one of the best-known and most-loved shows of its day,
and few would deny that it is remembered today as an important piece of
our pop-culture heritage. There may not be annual IMF get-togethers the
way there are Star Trek conventions and the Franklin Mint may not be
knocking down anyone's door to solicit orders for an IMF chess set, but
ask the average Joe what show "Your mission, should you decide to accept it" comes from and chances are he'll be able to tell you. Granted,
the word "mission" is something of a giveaway there — but test the man
on the street with "This message will self-destruct in five seconds" or a bit
of Lalo Schifrin's famous theme music from the show and the results
won't be much different.
The same generation that can name all the Brady kids and recite lines
from Get Smart — the same people who saw the recent Addams Family
movie primarily as a reference to a TV series rather than as a cinematic
tribute to a series of Hew Yorker cartoons — feel toward Mission: Impossible the way an earlier generation felt toward Robert Stack's The Untouchables and a later generation feels toward The A-Team. These were
entertaining television shows, not great ones. People remember them
fondly.
It is clear, therefore, that Konami has not gone off the deep end in digging up this old series, currently seen only in off-network, off-hour re-runs,
for a computer game revival. (It doesn't hurt that the series was briefly

With everything going for it from name recognition and nostalgia to
ready-made game scenarios, Mission: Impossible is as close to a sure
thing as any software company could ask for. All that Konami had to do
in designing the game was stick close to their source material... which
they did.
Unfortunately, Konami stuck so close to their model that along with the
original's trademark gimmicks and devices, they seem to have duplicated
the show's mediocrity. Mission: Impossible, the game, is very much like
an episode of Mission: Impossible, the series — only not a very good
one. More unfortunate still, even the worst episode of the television series
was over in an hour and was followed a week later by a better episode
(or at least a different one), and cost nothing to watch. Mission: Impossible, the game, goes on and on, tells only one story, and retails for a
suggested $49.95.

Your Mission, Should You Choose...
The game opens with an exciting VGA/MCGA shot of Peter Graves lighting a sputtering fuse, which then burns along the bottom of the screen to
the accompaniment of the digitized series theme music. This opening
gets players in an appropriate mood, as does a passable VGA slide-show
prologue in which Jim Phelps gets his self-destructing assignment (this
time from a tiny computer screen rather than a tape recorder). One immediately misses the spoken-word audio that the scene deserves, as well
as some real animation (rapidly switched still pictures are used instead).
Nevertheless, the scene is effective.
However, the extra mile that the designers do not go in the prologue
should make players suspicious about what they are going to get in the
rest of the game. Sure enough, immediately after the opening, the program sinks into a sixteen-color, EGA-quality play mode, at which level it
remains for the duration of the game. (Actually, the EGA graphics the

Review

game offers are worse than those in the VGA/EGA-quality mode, but
only marginally.) The feeling of having been duped by a false front —
how appropriate for Mission: Impossible — is inescapable.

as long as at least one of the player's agents is present in a given location. Some locations have multiple levels and multiple rooms to explore;
others do not.

Before starting to play, one is asked to choose a team of four agents
from a roster of twenty. That none of the original series characters are
available, including Jim Phelps, will be most players' first disappointment.
(Imagine a Star Trek game in which one has to select one's crew from a
roster of nobodies.)

In the center of town, a nondescript house conceals the headquarters of
the IMF (Impossible Mission Force, for those not in the know). From this
computerized nerve center, agents can equip themselves with weapons
and espionage tools, set and monitor phone taps, recuperate from their
exertions (in other words, take a nap), and prepare those famous Mission: Impossible disguises which make an agent look just like a captured criminal.

The characters who are available have digitized portraits which appear
at the start of the game and which double as a truly annoying anti-piracy
scheme. The scheme is annoying mainly because the software doesn't explain what it wants the player to do. A certain amount of trial and error,
as well as flipping through the "Agent Procedure Manual," is necessary
before one figures out how to get into the game. There is no reason a
player should have to go through this. One sentence either on-screen or
in the manual would have eliminated the problem.
Once one is allowed into the game, one gets to review the team's statistics. As a tip of the hat to the sort of role-playing game Mission: Impossible clearly wants to be, each agent has an extensive dossier of skills
and abilities. Some of these come into play — lockpicking, for example —
while others are just window dressing as far as this reviewer could tell.
After one's team is selected and activated, one begins the game itself.
A scrolling overhead city plan gives a general view of the locations in
which the story unfolds. The city contains some residential houses, estates, hotels, docks, eateries, a library, a park and a golf course. Though
the playing field seems big at first glance, one quickly hits the edges and
becomes familiar with all its contents. As soon as this happens, the game
suddenly starts to feel small. Part of the fun of the television series was
the feeling that the agents were traveling all over the world (though not
necessarily in any single episode). The fact that the game is limited to
one fairly ordinary suburban scene removes a good deal of the romance
and adventure from the plot.
Actual gameplay takes place on side-view screens which are available
for each location and which allow one to "zoom in" from the map screen,

One's progress through the game is non-linear in a loose sense — one
can go anywhere at any time, with or without a reason — but there is a
fairly clear order of operations to follow based on the leads one gets from
each encounter. A name dropped by one criminal suggests a new phone
tap that might be worthwhile; tailing one suspect typically leads an agent
to another.
The player's four agents can work independently and, in fact, the best
element of the game is the need to have several operations underway at
once. Everything happens in real time in Mission: Impossible, including
travel from one location to another, and a single missed appointment or
encounter can mean the failure of one's mission. (The game kindly offers
a save/restore function for such emergencies, which the manual
euphemistically refers to as "[times when] you've gotten off track with
your investigation.")

You Call This Impossible?
The storyline one has to uncover, bit by bit, involves a shady plot by
unidentified bad guys to kill leaders of industry and government and
replace them with crooks. (A cynic might ask, "Who'd notice?") Several
hits have already been carried out and in each case the killer has been
released by a sympathetic judge. The IMF has to prevent further murders
and get to the bottom of the plot.
If this sounds as memorable as yesterday's horoscope and as spicy as
chipped beef, it is partly because the story is not one likely to inspire en-

Review

thusiasm either in ordinary players or in game reviewers ... especially
not in game reviewers, who see every game that comes out and, therefore, have to digest generic plots like this one by the dozen. To be fair,
the presentation of the story in the game is slightly more enthusiastic
than its in-a-nutshell presentation above. On the other hand, it's also
longer and consequently duller.
Furthermore, the plot lacks the element of heightened suspense that
made the best episodes of the television series work so well. There was a
sense in those episodes that no one on Earth except Jim Phelps and his
team had the necessary combination of wit, technology, intellect, and ingenuity to bring about a subtle and happy resolution to the problem of
the week, which was always fraught with grave dangers. Hence, the title
of the show, Mission: Impossible — like Captain Kirk in Star Trek II, who
found a way to win the no-win Kobayashi Maru simulation — the IMF
team is supposed to do the impossible. In the game, their job seems
much too tame, the results they achieve too readily accessible to anyone
with a good computer, a parabolic mike, an accurate wristwatch, and half
a brain.
As one plays Mission: Impossible, one is constantly reminded of
similar games such as Microprose's Covert Action; yet Covert Action is
a much better game, if only because it offers dozens of different stories
for players to investigate. If one story is dull, the player can switch to
another. That is not possible in Mission: Impossible.
The sad fact is that one gets to a point with this game at which one
simply doesn't want to go any further. It will be a different point for different players, but it will come all the same. It's the point at which one
knows the proper "moves" to make, but feels that there's no reason to
make them.
As with a tedious movie or play, the temptation is to walk out in the
middle. The temptation is doubly strong with a game like this, since one
can quickly survey most of the locations, hear all the music there is to
hear, whiz through a couple of encounters, and then sit back and ask,
"Now what?"
Without a compelling story to hold the player's interest, there is no

answer to that question. If this game really were the TV re-run it so often
feels like, most viewers would just change the channel.

In Re: Mission
Despite all its weaknesses, though, Mission: Impossible is not the
worst game on the market any more than Mission: Impossible was the
worst TV series. The graphics are not what one might hope for (which
would be something closer to Dynamix's Heart of China or, at least, a
Sierra "Quest" game), but for their mid-range standard look they aren't
bad. Despite some embarrassing flubs (houses are red on the map
screen but yellow and green in close-up) and weird animations (when an
agent turns, it looks like Leslie Nielsen breakdancing in The Naked
Gun), most of the scenes are crisp and attractive. The sound effects are
good, as is the music, and when either or both get irritating, they can be
disabled.
The controls are a combination of point-and-click and menu-driven and,
for the most part, work well. The system for moving agents from place to
place and estimating distances on the map screen is somewhat
over-cmplx(iknths,ea othr,insed)butog
used to it. The system of alternating, in close-up sequences, between
using the mouse/joystick/keyboard to control an agent's movements and
using them to control an on-screen crosshair (which can itself control the
agent's movements) is as cumbersome here as it was in Access'
Countdown, the last game that used it; but one can just set the controls
to the crosshair and ignore the rest.
If there is one good thing to be said on behalf of Mission: Impossible,
it is that it does succeed in evoking the look and feel of the TV series —
in some respects superficially, perhaps, but it does it. Fans of the series
will have their share of cavils, but the game should be a treat for them
nevertheless.
For the wider audience, however, this game cannot be recommended.
A player looking for a good thriller or espionage game would do better to
get Countdown or Covert Action instead. A player looking for a good
Mission: Impossible adventure is directed, with regret, to the late-night
listings of the current TV Guide.

Designer Profile

real complex situation.) Pegasus
Bridge was another favorite of
mine because of my memories of
the movie The Longest Day. This
disk allowed me to do two of the
three major "bridge" battles in
Europe, the second being the
Arnhem scenario (we didn't have
all the information we wanted to
do the third, a Remagan bridge
scenario). I like the Oahu scenario
because it was "hypothetical"
situation that I've never seen in a
wargame before, where the
Japanese invade Hawaii in December, 1941.
COW: In our beta version of the
The Perfect General: Battles of
WWII scenario disk, I noticed that
it automatically upgrades the
main executable program. What's
new in the new version and how
do people get it?

COW: Congratulations on The Perfect
General. It shot up to 114 in our CGW Top
100 Poll and is our new top wargame. How
did you first get started on this project?
MB: [The publisher,] QQP, while still in its
embryonic stages, called me with some
product ideas. They were fishing for someone
to turn their ideas into computer games.
CGW: So, basically, they had already done
the design work for The Perfect General and
you guys did the programming?
MB: Not exactly. What they had was a set of
miniatures rules that they'd been playing for a
number of years. This was the "core" game
from which The Perfect General was derived,
but this was not the game you know as The
Perfect General.
CGW: Did you two invent specific scenarios
for this "computerized" version of the game?
MB: Bruce [Williams, President of QQP] did
the base design for about half the scenarios.
BR: The rest Mark did.

90
Interview: Mark Baldwin
and Bob Rakosky
92
Strategy: The Perfect

General
98
Strategy: Gunship 2000
Review: Megafortress
Battleset
t)
Opponents Wanted

COW: How was the decision made to make
The Perfect General a modem game? What
was involved in that aspect?
BR: It was evident from the beginning that
The Perfect General was a great two-player
game. However, playing two players on a
single system has certain limitations because
both players need game information at the
same time. This, basically, eliminates any "hidden unit" features in the game. Allowing for
the connection of two computer system
provided the solution to this problem. Additionally, it makes it easier to find an opponent.
They're just a phone call away, rather than
needing to come over to one player's house.
COW: There's a new scenario disk for The
Perfect General coming out soon. What can
you tell us about that?
MB: I liked the two "semi-historical"
scenarios (Patton Kicks Butt and Alamein) I
did for the game. Combining that with the
desire for a "theme" for the scenario disk, I
opted to do World War II battles. The tricky
part was deciding which battles would make
good scenarios.
CGW: Which battles did you finally decide
on?
MB: I really enjoyed making the Anzio
scenario. (It has a huge map and presents a

BR: The new version is primarily
minor bug fixes, mostly in the
modem operations of the game. When this version of the game is released, it will be available on CompuServe, GEnie and BIX.
COW: What does the future hold for White
Wolf Productions? Is there life after The Perfect General?
BR: White Wolf Productions has acquired the
rights to the game Empire. Suffice it to say,
this game now has a future....
COW: Please, don't leave our readers hanging like that. C'mon, guys, spill the frijoles.
MB: Well, we're planning on doing some special things with the game. The first thing we'll
do is to make "good old" Empire, revised,
revamped and brought into the '90s with
graphics, sound support, etc. The "core"
game will be the same (and known as the
"standard" game). There will also be a "basic"
game and an "advanced" game included in
the package.
COW: What might the differences be?
MB: The basic game will be a simplified version of Empire using fewer unit types to help
introduce players to the system. The advanced game will go in the reverse direction,
adding additional unit types to enrich the
game environment. There will also be new terrain types like rivers, forest, mountains and so
forth.
COW: New unit types, eh? Like what?
MB: Possibly bombers and armored units.
CGW: Any paratroops?
MB: Probably not, although you never know.
The game will support six players, too, computer or human, with variable map sizes from
small to very large. The new editor is going to
allow for mapmaking, unit and city placement
as well, so players can create whole custom
scenarios.
COW: When can we look forward to the
release?
MB: Well, coding has already started, but it's
still a ways away. We're committed to this
project. These are all plans, remember. Plans
have a way of changing, so let me add that
caveat.
COW: Thank you, Mark and Bob. We're sure
our readers appreciate your answers and insights.

Strategy

WITH APOLOGIES TO CASCA
T

he orderly who conducted me into

the office had a familiar look, but I
couldn't decide where I'd seen him
before. Greece, Rome, France? ...Then it
hit me — I'd seen him all those places;
he was the Universal Soldier. Inside, I sat
down in front of a grizzled-looking Universal Officer: General Mayhem.
"Troop," he growled, "this Perfect
General is the latest and greatest transformation of miniatures-based wargaming
into a computer game. The computer
takes care of all movement accounting,
damage assessment and combat results.
All humans have to do is decide where initially to deploy units, where to move
them and who they should target.
"This makes it easy for human players
to seek enlightenment at the altar of the
twin gods of wargaming: Strategy and
Tactics." He motioned to his side and I
noticed his twin altars sitting in the
corner. "Today, troop, I'm talking tactics
only: fire and movement and unit characteristics. When you get these down Patton, I mean pat, the battle's half won.
Pay attention now...." Cigar in mouth, he
proceeded to the chalkboard.

Fire and Movement
The general pointed at the first line of
the chart and read it aloud with the
delight a Shakespearean performer
would have in reading a soliloquy from
Hamlet, "Firing: Think of Muskets!"
He paused to let it sink in and I waited
for the next artillery barrage of explanation.
"These weapons are WWII vintage, but

by Roger "Roger-Tzu" White

Strategy

if you think of men marching with muskets in the Revolutionary War, you'll
have a better idea of how to handle
firing. Units are given the opportunity to
fire many times during a turn, but they
can only exercise that option once per
turn, and the closer a unit is to the target, the more probable a hit is. This
means the winner in any engagement is
the unit that shoots last, and when I say
last, I mean closest — think about that,
son."
He smashed his cigar ash against the
second line on the chalkboard, "The
best time to shoot," and continued his
diatribe on combat doctrine. "There are
three times during a turn that a non-artillery unit can shoot: the first direct fire
phase, the passing fire phase and the
second direct fire phase. The ideal shot
is a 'passing fire' shot as the target unit
moves into an adjacent square. Passing
fire is particularly deadly because it's the
only time the targeted unit doesn't have
an opportunity to return fire before it
takes a hit.
"Now, listen up," he commanded, "the
next tip could save your butt. Passing fire
at close range — call it ambush fire, if
you like — is easy to arrange if you know
how to do it. Just place your units in the
woods or a city and wait for the enemy
to approach. Your units will remain hidden from the enemy until they are adjacent, so he can't shoot at you until he
pokes his nose into your muzzle.That
means," he smiled with a grin that would
do the Grim Reaper proud, "in case
you're a slow learner, that passing fire is
bad news for the attacker. The only good
news, if you're on the attack, is that the
defending unit can only do this once a
turn. So, once a unit has fired at one target, other attacking units can close with
impunity.
"...Bringing us to the
next-most-desirable time to shoot," he paused and

punctuated this portion of the lecture by
blowing smoke in my face, "the second
firing phase of the turn. After the
movement phase, all the units are snuggled up as close as they're going to get,
so fire will be the most devastating for
both sides. It is also 'Use it or lose it'
time. If you don't fire in the second fire
phase, you won't get to fire during the en
tire turn. You gotta question, son?"

wet end of his stogie at me as he continued. "If you're in a hurry and you've
got a lot of friendly armor on hand, you
can take cities with overrun assaults. Run
yer armor units over the top of the
enemy unit(s) one after another until all
the defenders die. It's quick, but it can be
expensive. I've seen three armored cars
go down to a single infantry defender,
son, and it's not a pretty sight.

He must have read my mind. I
hesitated for only a moment and
responded, "But what about the first fire
phase?"

"A way to cut the carnage is to spend a
turn bringing up and unloading ground
units two spaces away from the city. One
of the armored units then drives up to
the city to 'bell the cat.' Then, you can
use the final firing phase of that turn and
the first firing phase of the next turn to
clear the city, and the movement phase
to occupy it.

I he general chuckled, a somewhat artificial and unpleasant sound. "Think of it
as 'special circumstance' fire. Use it whenever you can't wait for passing fire or
end-of-turn fire. Take the case of the unit
you've snuggled up next to in the woods.
If you wait, it will move out of fire range
by moving deeper into the woods, so you
need to shoot it during the first phase.
Or, maybe you want to clean out some
city squares before the movement phase
so you can occupy the city. That requires shooting during the first phase."
The reference to "Assaulting Cities"
was his next objective on the chalkboard.
I remembered an elementary school
teacher who used to make the same mistake with a piece of chalk in her hand as
the general did while holding his cigar.
One has to be careful which finger one
points with.
"Taking and holding cities is the name
of the game in The Perfect General," he
began the next phase of the lecture.
"You win or lose based on how many
cities you hold, not how many friendly
units you save or how many enemies
you kill. So, knowing how to take them
quickly and without leaving heaps of
smoking friendlies on the outskirts is important."
He looked down at me and pointed the

"In fact, if you plan your assault a
couple turns in advance, you can soften
up the city with artillery before you arrive. If it's a small town and you get a
direct hit, it will be empty when you arrive. Those are the `by the book' ways of
handling a city, son, but I wouldn't be
much of a general if I couldn't offer you
at least one tricky way in, too! I'll cover
that under movement orders."
Before I could even interrupt with a
thousand and one questions, he smacked his knuckles against the next line on
the board, "Be sensitive to your order
of movement."
"The order in which you close with your
assaulting units is important!" He trumpeted the last word as though he felt he
had to wake me up. "Move your fired
units first and those that have the furthest to travel second. Finally, move
those that haven't fired and are closest to
the target. The goal, of course, is to have
the defender use up his passing fire opportunities on units that aren't as critical
to the final assault.
"Now here's the trick, son; it'll work
against the computer — and some
people. Move a unit within long range of
the defenders, then reverse direction for
a square. When that sand-for-brains computer sees the unit moving away, he'll
open fire even though it's a low probability shot. After the smoke clears,
reverse direction again and continue the
advance. Your target is revealed and he
may have shot in vain."
He paused and sighed as he looked at
the final line on the chalkboard, "Finding the killing fields." He turned
toward me and lowered his voice as if he
were a grandfather passing along a dark
family secret. "Remember, son, computers are very patient — even if some-

Strategy

thing doesn't work the first time, they will
try and try again. Most computer combat
algorithms will do pretty much the same
things every time you play them. Once
you have determined where the computer player wants to go and how he will
choose to get there, you can set up 'killing fields' and blast him back to
whatever silicon hell he crawled out of.
Your computer opponent in The Perfect
General likes to head for nearby cities.
You can freeze his advance by bombarding cities he already controls. Then, when
he loses control, he'll turn back to undo
the damage.
"Human opponents, on the other hand,
are less patient and a lot more varied.
Humans are sloppy about recognizing
the full capabilities of their units, but they
disguise this by excelling at using the subset of units they have mastered. So, set
up killing fields for human opponents,
too, but don't expect them to walk
through one more than once."
He reached into a briefing folder and
handed me a sheet of paper. It was a
simple list of available units. "Now," he
said, "that you know your enemy, it's
time to learn your units."

Unit Characteristics
Artillery
Light artillery
Heavy artillery
Mobile artillery
Tanks and Cars
Armored Cars

moves, but only at four per turn. On top
of that, it can't lay down a barrage,
either. It's technology that hasn't come
of age. I'm constantly on the phone to
Major Havoc, the development engineer,
saying, 'Get that Mark II version finished
ASAP.'"

ly laying a barrage on squares critical to
movement, such as roads running over
bridges or through woods and mountain
passes.
"The trick in using artillery well," he emphasized by waving his cigar as though it
was a symphonic conductor's baton, "is
that you gotta see things, troop. The
rules of this war say you can only target
where you can see. So if you love your
artillery like you should, be sure to occupy hilltops and scatter scouts liberally
around the base of those hilltops. Conversely, if your opponent likes artillery,
chase down his scouts and hill people
and you'll be limiting his artillery options."
The wizened old general slouched
against his desk and continued, "Take
light artillery, fer instance. Light artillery is inexpensive and, at close range, it
makes a good bridge buster and small
city neutralizer. Light artillery's weakness,
of course, is its limited range. If you don't
plan well, you'll spend half the campaign
breaking it down, hauling it and setting it
up again. So, plan well, dipstick.

He savored the cigar smoke in his
mouth like a connoisseur swirling a fine
wine about his palate. Then, he poured
the vintage wisdom of combat experience into my ears. "Now, the wise
commander is a mobile commander and
it will take tanks and cars to keep his
army mobile. That's because tanks and
armored cars are the means for getting
to critical ground as the firstest with the
mostest. They have to be used and used
often both to fight and to ferry artillery
and foot units around the battlefield.
"Take armored cars," he lectured,
"they're the taxpayer's dream, nimble
and inexpensive. You can buy a lot of
'em and use them to haul the ground
pounders into action. You can even use
'em for scouting.
"Tanks," he continued "are slower than
armored cars, but carry longer-ranged
and harder-hitting weapons. The bigger
tanks have less speed, more armor,
more range and more killing power. An
armored car, for instance, may have
trouble shooting at bazooka units in a
forest line. Light tanks have no difficulty
and heavies don't even have to be within
bazooka range. But," he sighed, "the big
babies cost more — which gives you
fewer shots per buck. Remember:
Stormin' Norman gets all the equipment
he wants; you don't. You're going to
have to make hard choices, troop.

Unit Characteristics

"Now, on the other hand, heavy artillery is called 'heavy' for a reason," he explained. "That's because it covers half
the map when it's centrally positioned. If
ya' got half a brain, you'll place your
heavies in centrally located forests and
surround them with infantry. Then, it's
likely to be a long time before circumstances force them to move and they'll do a
lot of damage in the meantime."

"All of which leads us," the master
strategist proclaimed, "to the ground
pounders. Foot units can't move fast or
hit hard compared to armor units, but
they'll buy you a lot of shots per turn.
The secret is placing them where trouble
comes to them — they shouldn't have to
chase after it. Flood strategic city and
forest areas with ground units during the
set-up phase. When the battle goes elsewhere, have them hitch rides on armor
units.

"Let's talk about artillery," he said. "Artillery fire kills units and stops movement. Killing units is as straightforward
as figuring out where they'll be next turn
and that, as you well know, is about as
straightforward as figuring out what your
new girlfriend will let you get away with
on your first date. Against the computer
that's not too hard to do, but humans
tend to be a lot less predictable. Denying
movement is more predictable: it's simp-

The general seemed to look off in the
distance for a moment, then grimaced
and asked a rhetorical question, "Mobile
artillery? I love it and I hate it. It can
not only move and shoot, but it shoots
before any other fire in a turn. It can
clear cities and freeze tight formations
before they smell their morning coffee.
It'd be the ultimate hot item if it weren't
for the 'Yes, buts.' Yes, it shoots first, but
it can miss by up to three squares. Yes it

"The most prevalent form of ground
pounders is infantry. Infantry units," the
general paused, "can't do anything well,
but God, they're cheap! I love 'em; taxpayers love 'em and they really flesh out
a victory parade. Consider this scenario:
you've got a city to defend and 20 points
to do it with. 20 points will get you either
one heavy artillery, three light tanks, four
armor cars, six bazooka units or 20 in-

Tanks
Ground Pounders
Infantry
Bazooka
Engineers

Strategy

fantry units. Which is going to take the
longest for the attacker to reduce?"
I hesitantly answered as he knew I
would, but he plunged on with the discussion without congratulating me for my
correct answer. "Now, bazooka infantry
cost three times as much as regular infantry, but they pack enough punch to
damage any tank unit at close range. If
you plan to survive, you better mix these
babies in with regular infantry so you can
keep the attacker's assaulting costs high.
"As for engineers," he glared at me as
though I were as low as the cigar ash
he'd just allowed to fall on the floor, "engineers are an expensive fancy-ass
specialty unit. They can do a lot of different things such as build and break
bridges and make or clear mine fields,
but all these things take time. Like most
fancy-dancy specialists, there is only a
sparing need for them in most scenarios.
"Now, listen and listen good! I'm not
gonna repeat these next points!" the
general insisted, even though I couldn't
recall a time in the briefing when he had
been forced to repeat anything. "When
you're the attacker, you get to shoot first.
This means you can put your units right
on the starting lines. Unless the defender
puts more units in a particular area, you
should win any first-turn firing exchange.
The exception is when the defender can
place his units out of sight, such as in a
forest line. In that case, you need to be
cautious. Put inexpensive units up front
and let them smoke out hidden units
before the rest advance.
"As the defender, you want your troops
placed where the attacker can't take advantage of his fire-first advantage. This
means putting your troops in forests and
cities, behind hills, and deep enough in
your territory that they're at long range if
the attacker starts on his starting line."
He cleared his throat and raised his
voice, "There is an exception to this,
though: those times when you, as
defender, know where the attacker is
going to appear and you can get close,
such as a single-beach invasion scenario.
Then, you can wreak havoc by buying
lots of bazooka troops, walling off the
attacker's launch point and opening up
on the first round with everything you've
got. It's a pretty sight. I've seen the
smoke clear after the first round with not
a single attacker left. By the way, if
you're the attacker in such a situation
and you see the defender just lickin' his
chops, start the invasion with waves of infantry. Bring in your mobile units after
his bazookas are gone.

"Finally, now that you've got the
authority to select your own troops, you
may need to know which ones to requisition. When you're the defender, you can
put your first-build troops directly into
critical areas, and you get more shots
per buck out of ground-pounding units
than armor, so make your first buys the
infantry-type troops you need to defend
critical areas. After you've planned what
you need for the critical areas, then add
mobile troops. They'll be the reserve that
can pull your posterior out of the fire
when something unexpected happens.
They can also launch spoiler attacks that
will unhinge your enemy's carefully coordinated plans.
"When you're the attacker, you need to
carry the battle to critical areas as quickly as possible. This means you'll be buying more armor than the defender, but
not exclusively armor — ground troops
still buy you more bang per buck than
armor, and once loaded on an armor unit
they can keep up with the action.
"In many scenarios, you'll be getting
reinforcements after the game starts.
When that's the case, overbuy on your
slow-moving troops during the first buy
and add mobility with your reinforcements. They can pick up the slower
ground troops on their way to the front."
He looked at his watch and lamented
that the time for the briefing was almost
over. "Ah, well," he snorted, "a battle
doesn't last forever, either; it can be as
short as six turns and it's rarely more
than sixteen. When you're attacking you
can't be as leisurely as you'd like and
when you're defending, you gain whenever you slow an advance. Time is
measured in how many turns you hold
victory point locations and in how many
turns you can deny your opponent victory point locations. Whenever you move
or shoot, keep time in mind. Always ask
yourself: 'Is this action gaining me or
costing me time?' Time means victory
points. Therefore, time is all that matters.
"That's it in a nutshell." General
Mayhem put down the now-much-shorter
cigar and returned to his desk. "There's a
lot of depth in Perfect General. Be sensitive to unit characteristics and master the
coordination of fire and movement. Do
that, and the entire Universal Army here
will be proud to follow you through every
square on the board.
"We are at your service, sir." He saluted
me. I returned the salute, thanked
General Mayhem for his time and headed
out for the field of honor.

Strategy

Gunship 2000 Guru
Tactics for the Microprose Flight Simulation
by Gary "Mo" Morgan

he

key to flying successful Gunship 2000 (GS2000) missions lies
in watching the APR-39 warning
receiver. This scope display shows
players the lateral position and status of
all entities (friendlies, neutrals, threats
and targets) around the helicopter —
even though it is somewhat unrealistic,
because it provides more situational
awareness than is usually available to actual combat aviators. Dots close to the
center indicate a short range from the
helicopter to the entities they represent.
Players who successfully survive missions practice flying with one eye looking
out the canopy and the other glued to
the warning scope.

T

Warning Is "Spoken"
The warning receiver is also equipped
with a missile warning system and laser
warning system. The missile warning system shows inbound and outbound missile/rocket positions (shown in yellow),
but activates a warning tone when missiles are inbound (indicated by a "cross")
or radar/laser tracking is detected (radar
tracking is indicated by a flashing
purple/magenta symbol). The warning
scope switches between different scales,
indicated by the number of dots at the
12:00, 3:00, 6:00, and 9:00 o'clock positions. More dots indicates a longer-range
presentation, while fewer dots shows a
"zoomed in" view.
Effective countermeasures employment
requires the player to know the type of
threat (radar or infrared) engaging the
helicopter, so that either chaff or flares

can be dispensed and the proper type of
jammer activated. Maneuvers and a descent are crucial to surviving a missile attack, and lucky players may find a nearby hill to hide behind. Since, however,
the ground has nearly a 100% probability
of kill when one is using the realistic land
ing (crashes possible) option, it is advisable to set the minimum altitude warning option to 50 feet ("C" key) and stop
the descent when the warning tone activates by adding torque ("+" key).
Most players should initially entrust the
employment of countermeasures to their
computer copilot/gunner, and personally
employ the weapons. The CP/G usually
selects the proper countermeasure, but
may not dispense chaff and flares at just
the right time to regularly decoy missiles.
Players who want to increase the odds in
their favor will hit the right expendable
decoy key ("M" for chaff or "/" for flares)
for the threat type engaging the helicopter.
Veteran Gunship pilots will note that
the IR and radar jammer displays are
changed somewhat from the original program (they used to show an "activated"
light and make a tone when selected).
When selected in GS2000, the jammers
display only a quick flicker of the appropriate light, leaving the player to
wonder whether the jammer will automatically activate when needed or will require another selection by the player at
the right time. Thus far, with the CP/G
operating the jammers, they don't appear to be very effective. Perhaps, they

are more effective when the player
operates them. This "pilot" is unsure.
Antiaircraft artillery (AAA) may be
detected at distances exceeding its effective range, thus allowing reactive shots
(especially Sidearm!) by the helicopter
before being engaged. Sidearm will work
against any type of gun (self-propelled
[SP] or towed) system. Towed guns are
troublesome since they are soft targets
(like infantry) and require short-ranged
rockets or cannon to destroy. ATGMs
like Hellfire (especially millimeter-wave
[MMW]), TOW-2, and Helstreak work
great against ZSU-23-4, ZSU-57-2, and
2S6 SP guns, and their longer range permits some standoff. Keep moving the
helicopter (called a "jink"), since the
warning receiver won't show the inbound
bullets (only missiles). Bullets travel in a
straight line and can't maneuver to follow
movement. Listen for the machine gun
noise which tells when the AAA is firing
and jink! The CP/G usually won't announce when a gun is firing at the
helicopter.

I Gotta New Altitude
Flying at altitudes greater than 200 feet
above ground level exposes the helicopter to detection by threats at distances
beyond the effective range of many onboard weapons. A good rule of thumb is
that targets can be acquired (and see the
helicopter) at a range of 1/10 km per 10
feet of altitude above ground. When
flying at 30 ft, expect to acquire targets
at 0.3 km, and at 100 ft expect to acquire targets at about 1 km. As in the

Strategy

original Gunship, the best way to defend
against a threat is to kill it, assuming
enough weapons are carried! Flying
below 50 feet minimizes detection of the
helicopter by threat systems, but also significantly reduces the player's target acquisition capability and usually precludes
successful launch of missiles (since they
fall to the ground underneath the helicopter when fired at altitudes below 50 feet).
Players flying at extremely low altitude,
particularly when defending against missile engagement, need to keep one finger
on the collective (+) key, even in easy
flight mode. If the helicopter receives a
hit to one of the engines, additional
torque is instantly required to counteract
that lost by the stricken engine. Failure
to add torque to compensate for the lost
engine can result in loss of altitude and a
fatal crash.

Workin' on the Chain Gun
GS2000 adds many more weapons
than were available in the original program. This writer finds that the tried-andtrue standard load of eight Hellfire antiarmor laser homing missiles and twin
canisters (seven in small canisters or four-

teen in large ones) of rockets complements the Apache's 30mm chain gun
and should be the standard choice for
most missions. Hellfires effectively take
out any armored vehicle at ranges out to
six kilometers and require the player to
maintain the target somewhere on the
canopy for designation. TOW-2 wireguided missiles perform in a manner
similar to Hellfires, but are limited in
range to four kilometers. A new
Helstreak laser-homing triple-dart highvelocity missile can only be used on the
advanced helicopters (Comanche and
Longbow Apache). It has a shorter
time-of-flight than Hellfires or TOWs and is
best against lightly armored vehicles (armored personnel carriers or air defense
vehicles). The requirement to orient the
helicopter toward the threat during the
time-of-flight of the Hellfire/TOW2/Helstreak minimizes tactical flexibility
and exposes the launching platform to
engagement by air defenses. One good
technique to limit this vulnerability is to
pull back on the stick to minimize forward velocity whenever firing a missile. If
one continues inbound toward one threat
during an attack, the momentum may ex-

pose the helicopter to subsequent
engagement by other nearby threats.
"Launch and Leave" ordnance does not
require any designation from the helicopter after firing, thus allowing the player to
descend and maneuver in order to minimize exposure. Hydra rockets require a
precise launch angle and are only effective at ranges inside three kilometers.
They are, however, ballistic and allow the
helicopter to maneuver freely after
launch. There are three varieties, each
for a specific application: M247 for armored vehicles, M261 for general purpose, and M255 flechettes for unarmored
vehicles and personnel. For a player accustomed to firing anti-armor munitions,
an "infantry" target is particularly
threatening and requires engagement by
either rockets or cannon (usually while
dodging a shoulder-fired SAM).

I Only Have Hinds in View
When a player attains the rank of Captain and can fly a Longbow Apache, the
MMW Hellfire B is available as a weapon
option. The MMW Hellfire B can be fired
immediately after target acquisition (out

Strategy

to 8 km) and requires no post-launch
designation. The Sidearm radar-homing
missile is fired at radar air defense
threats, and is really handy for SA-11
SAMs and towed guns. Firing MMW
Hellfires and Sidearms significantly improves survival, since the player can
maneuver immediately and fly away
from the threat while the missile guides
its way to the target.
Most missions pit the helicopter(s)
against at least one air threat, either an
enemy helicopter (Hind, Hip, Havoc,
Hokum or Gazelle) or a fixed-wing
aircraft (MiG-29 Fulcrum, MiG-23 Flogger
or Su-25 Frogfoot). For helicopters
without guns (Kiowa, Defender, Blackhawk), either a 20mm cannon pod or a
machine gun pod should be loaded, but
these require accurate pointing. At least
one helicopter in each section should
carry some type of anti-helicopter
ordnance. Sidewinders are deadly, can
engage at long range, and are particularly handy against high-speed MiGs. Normally, two boxes of Stingers can handle
one or two Hinds or Gazelles. Practice
firing at least one Stinger and quickly
switch to cannon when the helicopter
gets inside a range of 1 km. Don't forget
to maneuver, since enemy helicopters
will also fire cannon or missiles. M255
flechette rockets are effective against air
threats and Helstreaks are nearly as
good as Stingers.

weapons load would be four Helstreaks
on each side. A recessed weapons bay is
available on either variant, with three
small missile stations on each side. The
only weapons that can be mounted internally are Hellfires and Stingers. Try four
Hellfires and two Stingers unless the air
threat is forecast to be heavy, then
reverse the mixture. Unfortunately,
Stingers, Sidewinders, and Sidearms
can't be mounted on the Comanche
wingtips — a mandatory future modification! For this reason, Apaches are usually preferable to Comanches for heavy
threat scenarios, since the Apache can
carry such a large stock of weapons. The
single advantage the Longbow Apache offers is the option to use the MMW Hellfire
and Helstreak. With a load of eight MMW
Hellfires and eight Helstreaks, the player
can load Sidearms, Sidewinders, or
Stingers on the wingtips. MMW Hellfires
can do the same job as Sidearms except
against towed guns. Helstreaks can do

I Can See for Miles
Of seven types of helicopters, two are
reserved for players who are promoted to
higher rank (first lieutenant for the Comanche and captain for the Longbow
Apache). Essentially, a new player can
fly either the AH-64A Apache or AH-1W
SuperCobra Gunship, the OH-58D Kiowa
or AH-6G Defender Scout, or the UH60K/L Blackhawk Utility helicopter. The
Kiowa, Defender, and Longbow Apache
feature a mast-mounted sight above the
rotor, which allow "peeking" over terrain
without exposure of the entire helicopter,
but do not show acquired targets (players must try to guess if the dots in the distance are rocks or tanks). The Kiowa,
Defender, and Blackhawk do not have
guns, so alert pilots will make certain
that they carry some type of gun pod.
When the player is promoted to high
enough rank, the Comanche and
Longbow Apache should be tried out.
Two Comanche variants are available,
the Gunship and Scout. The only difference between the two is that the AH66 gunship has two wings which can
mount weapons. A typical gunship wing

the same job as Sidewinders or Stingers,
but the Sidewinder has the long range
and lethality.
-I he Longbow Apache looks identical to
a normal Apache, except that the player
can hit the F2 key and look through the
mast-mounted sight. The Comanche has
a beautiful modernistic cockpit with two
full-color Multi-Function Displays (MFDs),
while all other helicopters have a single
monochrome MFD. Players will normally
toggle through the MFD options on any
helicopter to find out the distance to the
next nav point, status of primary and
secondary mission target, look at the
moving map display, check stores status
(including a digital fuel quantity), or
select a targeting display. The
Comanche's warning receiver can be
selected on either MFD so the player can
configure the cockpit displays as desired.
Key points to remember when flying a
Comanche are to retract and extend the
landing gear (not required on other
helicopters), and to open the weapons

bay when using bay-mounted missiles
(similar to F-19 Stealth Fighter) and
close it after attacks to minimize radar
signature. The Comanche is highly
maneuverable and is fun to fly. Like the
SuperCobra, it only has a 20mm gun
which can be a limitation against tanks
and bunker targets.

Plight Made Higher
When possible, players should continue
to increase the realism levels of the
game as they become more comfortable
with the controls and tactics. Initially, let
the CP/G run only the countermeasures.
As soon as possible, try to fly missions
against Average troops, since missions
against Poor troops net very few points
or medals. Select realistic visibility and
wind options early. Try to use the realistic landings option, although crashes will
be fatal and trying to land with a
damaged rotor may kill you. The author
still uses easy flight and avoidance system options and, to date, has received
Army Commendation Medals, Air
Medals, and one Bronze Star. Use of
realistic flight and crack/elite enemy
quality should produce higher scores and
advanced decorations such as the Silver
Star, Distinguished Service Cross, and
Congressional Medal of Honor. When the
Persian Gulf becomes pretty routine,
transfer to Central Europe for more challenge with more modern technology
threats such as SA-11, 2S6, and new
threat helicopters.
After becoming familiar with single missions, attempt a campaign. These are
linked scenarios using the same map.
Results from one mission are reflected in
subsequent missions. If the player did
well on the previous mission, the enemy
is pulling back. If the player didn't complete either mission assignment, the
enemy is attacking. Use the best quality
helicopters and weapons on early missions in a campaign. Threats are dense
and capable. On later missions, particularly when the enemy is on the run, threats
will be more sparse and less capable. On
later missions, try using less capable
helicopters and weapons to increase
scores. Each campaign mission will indicate helicopters and weapons which are
not available, but there is usually at least
one type available which will have maximum efficiency in a given mission.
Gunship 2000 is a simulation that allows the player to grow in both piloting
skill and tactical intuition. It is to be
hoped that the tips offered in this article
will enhance every reader's enjoyment of
this exciting product.

Sneak Preview

A "Potk" by Any Other Name
By Mike "Moondawg" Weksler

n Megafortress, the player and fictional crew developed a mastery of their
respective duty stations by flying training missions such as those one would expect at Nellis AFB. Then, these skills
were tested to the limit in combat missions when the Mega fortress was
deployed over Iraq in the Desert Storm
scenario missions. Additionally, the
"Flight of the Old Dog" mission (based
on the Dale Brown book which inspired
Megafortress), was developed in order to
add a certain degree of role-playing to
the game (see CGW 1190 for tips). Now,
in an upcoming scenario disk, ThreeSixty Pacific plans to go one step further and, as a result, take the player into
the near future with Operation
Sledgehammer. Based on a plot that expands hypothetically on current events in
the Middle East, Operation Sledgehammer posits a situation in which an Iranian
military officer (with, strangely enough,
the surname of a progressive Egyptian
leader from the past) attempts to overthrow a moderate government in Iran by
using conventional, chemical and even
nuclear attacks.

I

Calling an "Old Dog"
In the scenario, it is impossible for the
Ultimate Bad Guy to get military supplies
from Iran, but he is being supplied by
sympathetic countries such as Libya and
Cuba. Supply ships, escorted by naval
convoys and combat air patrols (CAPs)
are conveying those from Libya (via the
Persian Gulf) and from Cuba (via the
Caspian Sea). In dire straits, the Iranian
government asks the player to fly the

Megafortress on covert missions to intercept these shipments.

Holiday in Libya
The player's first goal, flying out of a
base in Malta, is to interdict the supplies
coming out of Libya. This allows the
players to try their hand at anti-shipping
missions en masse. Since, of course,
supply ships are bound to be protected
by the Libyan navy, however, this is no
easy task. One can expect to encounter:
Soviet Koni class frigates, Vosper Thornycroft Mark 7 frigates, Soviet
Nanuchka II class missile corvettes, and the
Combattante II G FAC (fast attack craft).
All of these ships offer reasonably lethal
threats to the EB-52, each with its own
plethora of AAA and SAM ordnance, but
the Koni class frigate and the Nanuchka
class missile corvette pose a particularly
serious threat because they are capable
of firing the SA-10/SA-N-6 Grumble. The
latter has a fifty-mile range and moves a
two-hundred-pound warhead at the speed
of Mach 6!
In addition to missions designed to
destroy shipping, one may have the
navigator plot courses over land in order
to hit such targets as airfields, naval
yards (some with ships still in harbor),
CICs, oil refineries, terrorist camps, SAM
sites and other choice locations.
In land-based missions (or those in
close proximity to land), players are likely to encounter air defense forces comprised of the following aircraft: Mirage FlCs, MiG-25 Foxbats and MiG-23 Floggers.
The MiG-25s are fairly resilient and their

Libyan pilots have the near-suicidal
audacity to come in and make "gunsonly" passes after they exhaust their sup
plies of air-to-air missiles. The Mirages,
however, will prove to be the most deadly aerial assailants, due to their superior
maneuverability and advanced weaponry
Enemy aircraft are vectored to the
Megafortress via EW-GCI (Early WarningGround Control Intercept) radar sites, so
it is imperative that one's pilot fly low
(below 500 feet) in order to maintain a
stealthy ingress. SAM sites, of course,
abound, and the most lethal are the SA10/SA-N-6 Grumble sites. These
weapons are able to track and engage
multiple targets, so they should have little problem dispatching one's unwary EB52 pilot.

Target Iran
Eventually, the supplies will be cut off
and the Libyan terrorist machine will be
crushed. At this point, the Megafortress
will find itself based in Kuwait, poised
and ready to attack targets deep within
Iran. Naturally, the most important objective in the Iranian missions is to knock
out Iran's nuclear capacity.
In addition to the threats encountered
when attacking Libya, the Iranian military
is capable of firing the Hawk short-range
SAM and the awesome SA-12A
Gladiator. Although this SAM is slower
than the Grumble (Mach 3), it carries a
high-explosive warhead, weighing in at a
hefty 300 pounds!
When flying missions into Iran from
Kuwait, one's BUFF must fly through a

Sneak Preview

formidable gauntlet of SAM sites, EWGCI radar, and CAPs of various aircraft in
order to reach the respective targets. Distances are extremely long and refueling
after takeoff is a must — especially when
attacking targets in the mountainous
regions or near the Caspian Sea.

least 100% power to clear the peaks
without stalling. At low altitude, this is
likely to burn fuel at an astonishing rate
and may leave one's fuel needle resting
on empty by the conclusion of the objectives for this mission.

With the Megafortress for a
"Hammer," Everything
Looks Like a Nail
To deal more effectively with new
threats deployed against the player in
the new scenarios, the Megafortress is
now ASM-119A Penguin- and CBU-95 fuelair explosive-capable. The Penguin is a
low-cost alternative to the AGM-84A Harpoon and is most effective against the
outmoded Iranian and Libyan naval vessels. It is a passive IR homing missile
which flies to an initial point using onboard inertial guidance, then seeks out
the thermal image of a ship against the
cooler ocean surface. With only a twentymile range, it is riskier to deploy than the
Harpoon. Understandably, the inclusion
of the Penguin adds considerable excitement into the game, since anyone can
fire and forget with a Harpoon, but it
takes skill and daring to use Penguins.
The CBU-95 fuel-air explosive (FAE)
weapon is a laser-guided 500-lb. bomb
that detonates above ground and
releases gasses which are, in turn, subsequently ignited by a second, delayed
detonation. The resulting explosion is extremely powerful and capable of destroying hardened targets, including concrete
hangers and bunkers.

"On Top of 01' Smokey"
The objectives of the Iranian missions
are very interesting and this author does
not wish to give too much away — however, the second mission in the Iranian
section is literally a knock-out. The
primary objective of this mission is to
destroy the Tabas Nuclear Weapons and
Research Facility and its adjacent service
airport.
The primary target is located several
hundred miles behind enemy lines and
fuel management is critical. The designers recommend flying at 50% power for
the duration. While this is tolerable for attacks on sea-based targets, one should
remember that there is a major mountainous region to fly through. Additionally, the area is literally webbed with EWGCI sites so one must keep the plane's altitude below 500 feet. When encountering a mountain range, of course, the
cautious pilot will insist on having at

Bugs Exterminated
Operation Sledgehammer includes a
new MEGA.EXE file which has been
upgraded to solve fatal errors in the program, such as the QEMM compatibility
error and certain mouse driver compatibility errors. Additionally, the divide
error which was encountered when the
player had an Offensive Weapons officer
drop free-fall ordnance will no longer
occur.

Mission Accomplished

Fortunately, the tanker which tops off
the player's EB-52 at the beginning of
each mission will remain on station until
the end of the mission. So, the wise
navigator will plot a course to the
"second to the last" waypoint in a mission in order to accommodate a rendezvous with the KC-135.
In addition to fuel management,
weapons deployment is also critical for
victory. The player may wish to have his
OW destroy several targets of opportunity. While one will not want to expend
too many weapons on such targets
during the approach to the primary objective, this can be a very profitable activity
upon egress from the successful destruction of a primary objective. For example,
after the Tabas research facility is
destroyed, the player's navigator should
plot a course for the secondary target —
the Kerman uranium mine. This target is
awesome. Set in the mountains at an altitude of 6000 feet, it is guarded by two
heavy-duty SAM sites, which will not provide one's Electronic Warfare officer the
pleasure of jamming them.
The SAM sites are best taken out in
stand-off encounters, leaving the mine
relatively open for a clean shot. Since, by
this time, the Megafortress will more likely than not have a few engines burnt out
and be low on fuel, it is imperative that
speed be kept down to a minimum. This
brings the mission down to a crawl and
makes it harder to maneuver when flying
back through the gauntlet to Kuwait. At
this point in the mission, anything left on
the racks should be saved to mow a path
through the deadly lawn of SAMs and
EW-GCI sites which the Megafortress
must traverse.

As welcome as these new missions are,
there is little change from Megafortress
in actual gameplay. The overall engine
remains the same, while the missions expand the playability of the original game.
Therefore, any shortcomings which still
remain in the gaming interface, such as
the escape key taking one back to the
main menu rather than backing up by
one screen; the inability to save separate
weapons configurations and the lack of a
horizontal situation instrument when
flying from the EW and OW stations, will
hopefully be remedied in Megafortress II
(see below for more info).
Whatever it is that keeps players strapping into their EB-52's, fighting evil
wherever it rears its ugly head, Operation Sledgehammer delivers a bomb
bay full of it.

What Do You Do When
You're Done?
The next Mega fortress scenario disk
will be based upon Dale Brown's book,
Skymasters. For those who have not
read the novel, it is set in the near future
where, with the U.S. out of the Philippines, China grasps the moment and
decides to move in. The Megafortress
(quickly becoming the military's version
of Superman as it flies all over the globe
as a CAPped adventurer) goes deep into
China. Will the player, the player's crew
and the Megafortress survive death-defying, harrowing missions over thick
steamy jungles, to pull out the weeds of
evil by the roots? One will have to fly a
pattern until first quarter of 1992. Also in
the works are plans for a mission and
theater construction toolkit. Also expected to begin design in 1992,
Mega fortress II promises to be more
detailed in the aircraft on-board systems
and in the outside world. At this time, a
multi-player feature is being considered.

-

Opponents Wanted

Reach Out and Crush Someone

Editorial

Isn't That Just Spiffy?

S

tate of the Industry: Anyone
who has ever been browsing in a
retail store will have experienced
that deja vu moment of having a salesperson walk up and ask the inevitable
question, "May I help you?" Many times
one has to respond with that slightly em
barrassed aside that almost makes one
feel like an intruder, vagrant or freeloader: "No, we're just looking!" Of
course, there are times when one is
delighted to have the help, times when
one does not have the faintest idea of
even where to start looking for a given
product or what to ask for. That is when
the retail salesperson becomes the most
important resource available to a consumer.
Normally, this is a good idea. Sometimes, however, it can be a very bad
idea. It is a bad idea for the salesperson
to be the most important resource when
that salesperson provides biased information to the consumer. Now, we don't
mean that it is bad for a salesperson to
have an honest opinion on a product,
even when (heaven forfend!) that opinion
disagrees with the CGW review. We do
think it is bad when the salesperson is
biased because he or she receives a cash
"spiff." A spiff is a cash bonus which
comes to a salesperson on a per unit
basis (i.e. Ms. Dos receives a cash payment of $5.00 for every copy of Ishtar:
The Adventure Game that she sells).
Now, of course, it is no problem if the
computer game happens to be a good
one, but it can sure be a problem if, as in
our ridiculous example, that salesperson
recommends an adventure game based
on a box office disaster rather than a
"Hall of Fame" quality game. In one
recommendation, the salesperson may
have turned off a potential new computer
game customer by valuing that fast
$5.00 over a quality recommendation.
CGW has only recently become aware
that some software publishers are resorting to cash spiffy in order to move their
merchandise faster. We mention the
issue in order to present a "caveat
emptor" (Buyer Beware) warning to our
readers. We would also like to note that
there are some less obvious versions of
the spiff which are being practiced in the
current market. One such spiffy approach is the "Mystery Shopper" program in which the representative of, say,
Intrinsic Software wants to reward
salespersons who are pushing their An
Oriental Tale: Fido Goes Tantric role-

playing game. They put an advertisement or notice in the employee newsletter of, say, the "Electronic Cuisine"
software chain stating that the "Mystery
Shopper" will be traveling throughout the
chain during the month of February. The
mystery shopper enters a store; asks the
salesperson for a good computer roleplaying game; the salesperson recommends An Oriental Tale and the
mystery shopper pays $50.00 or so as a
reward for the salesperson's diligence.
Another approach is less insidious and
does not directly affect the salesperson.
A company called Best Dead Software
has a backlog of units from a failed title,
Noblesse Oblige (which originally
retailed at $49.95). They have a new title
called Gump Worsley's Real Men's Ice
Hockey and believe that it can do fairly
weli. So, they approach "Software
Boudoir" and tell them that they will provide the chain with a free Noblesse
Oblige (which they can sell at $9.95)
with every copy of Gump Worsley's
Real Men's Ice Hockey. If the hockey
game sells, the store makes a quick
$10.00 on the inferior product.
Again, CGW brings these three "marketing" strategies to our reader's attention
so that they can be forewarned. Hopefully, the next time a salesperson tells one
of our readers that Zen Archery is the
best action game on the market, our
reader will ask him or her if they are getting a spiff to say that or if they really
believe it.
State of the Magazine: Sometimes,
journalists become so jaded that they
take their role as gadfly too seriously. In
entomology, a gadfly is any of a number
of flies that bite and annoy livestock. In
journalism, they are those annoying,
opinionated writers/speakers that goad individuals, institutions and industries into
action. Sometimes, in our attempt to do
the latter, we simply accomplish the
former. Scorpia's recent opinion column
on Megatraveller 2 and her caustic
remarks about Space: 1889 in the CRPG
survey seem to have bitten unfairly. Because of some caustic remarks made in
private by CGW's editor on an earlier occasion, the latest remarks were perceived
as "yellow" journalism rather than factual
reviewing. Scorpia's remarks about the
"atrocious" combat system in the original
Megatraveller did not adequately convey
the significant work which Paragon has
done to improve the combat system (not
only in Megatraveller 2, but also in the

upgrade to the original CRPG). Further,
the comments on Space: 1889, while
being Scorpia's actual opinion, did not
take into consideration CGWs earlier
review which had been positive and was
also the reviewer's honest opinion.
While it is up to our readers to determine whether we are too critical or not
critical enough in our analyses of computer games, we regret the implication
that we would ever prejudge a
company's products or attempt to
sabotage a company's potential for success in the marketplace. It is our goal to
be critical. In doing so, we will occasionally make publishers, designers, marketers
and retailers angry. We do not, however,
deliberately set out to dismantle any
product.
Speaking of potential misunderstandings, we recently became aware of a misrepresentation of Sid Meier's Civilization that stems back to our early Consumer Electronics Show coverage. A
mail order advertiser lists the game as a
multi-player game because our CES
report described it as such. It is, of
course, a multi-player-style game where
the human player competes against six
computer players. We had originally
hoped that the game would support multiple human players, as well, so we seem
to have heard what we wanted to hear
rather than what Microprose was telling
us. We apologize for any disappointment
we may have created in what turns out
to be a magnificent product.
Finally, an open word from the editor to
the industry as a whole. Any criticism or
humor directed at company representatives during a private interview or
demonstration remains between us. As a
person who cares about computer
games and the future of computer game
design, I will never hesitate to give you
honest appraisals of games, stories and
features which you can take or leave. As
a gadfly, I will contend with you about
design decisions upon which we have disagreed in the past especially on those occasions when the "market" agrees with
my position) and I may conveniently forget the typos and errata in our publication, but such discussion is never intended to be malicious. Frankly, I believe
in computer entertainment and I am
proud of what you do. Speaking of pride,
COW is proud to announce the induction
of King's Quest V into its COW Hall of
Fame. The technological innovation and
commitment to excellence in its product
is indicative of the impact that the entire
Quest product line has had on the entertainment software industry.

