"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment JULY 1994 COMPUTER GAMING WORLE THE #1 COMPUTER GAME MAGAZINE EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! SAMES DOOM II Feature Reviews Pagan Ultima VIII Dragonsphere Great Naval Battles II AEGIS In-Depth Strategies o F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Preview Aces of the Deep $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian Secrets of the Computer Game Developers 07 071486 0114311 "


"New! Spear of Destiny Mission Disks! Mission 2: Return to Danger Y LA Mission 3: Ultimate Challenge FLOOR STORE LIVES 16 225800 4 3 HEALTH ANNO 907 97 *5 3006009 622 61 FLOOR SCORE 17 220800 LIVES 9 HEALTH AUDIO 100% 99 The Action Continues... New Challenges! in two brand new missions for Each mission features 21 exciting the fantastic virtual reality game new levels, with new enemy Spear of Destiny! Now you can guards, new treasures and a enjoy more of the heart-pound whole new fortress to penetrate. ing, adrenaline-pumping excite New puzzles require thought as ment you loved in the original well as quick reflexes. Fantastic game! These terrific new mis new art and unbelievable digital sions feature all new floors, sound make these the most excitguards, bosses, graphics and ing games ever! Get the latest sounds! Spear of Destiny missions today! LIVES 2 FLOOR SCORE 10 304400 9 REALTH ANIMO 17% 889 FormGen Inc. 7641 East Gray Road, Scottsdale, AZ 85260 (800) 263-2390 (905) 857-4141 Circle Reader Service #143 "


"\"THUMBS UP!» Johnny L. Wilson Computer Gaming World Carey Deluono's Mogul RUN YOUR OWN HOLLYWOOD MOVIE STUDIO Past the studio gate with your name on it lies your personal dream factory. Go for it: Buy original scripts and blockbuster bestsellers or steal ideas for yourself. Set vastly padded production budgets. Choose enough special effects to hide the lack of plot. Play God with producers and directors. Make and break superstars' carcers, or enslave stars of tomorrow. Shoot on Sound Stage 10, in London, or on the slopes of the Himalayas. Have marketing and distribution grovel at your feet. Attend your world premieres. Grab it all: Sit back and watch the grosses roll in. Snag that Beverly Hills mansion, Malibu beach house, 40,000 acres in Montana or your own Greek island. Collect the most overpriced art on earth. Find you can't live without that 4th studio jet. Keep the biggest names in Hollywood waiting outside your studio gate. Or Gamble it all! * Sell your shirt just to stay alive. If you've got what it takes to make it in Hollywood... Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is gonna take everything you've got. Circle Reader Service #60 To purchase, visit your local software retailer, or call 1-800-350-5550. De Vuono De Vuono Available For IBM And Compatibles. MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows versions available. 600k required, mouse suggested, 3 meg hard disk space required. GAMES 6 Care Devana's Holland Mond is 1 trademark of DeYuono Druono Games all rights reserved therhrines and product names are trademarks of their respective holders "


"Fall Under The Spell Challenging to cst Woll down path to Banc Shiustono Than nating oil, bralce "


"Of This Year's Most ntasy Adventure! From Far, far away and long long ago comes a story to savor: a tale of courage, romance, sorcery, evil deeds and malevolent curses; a tale to lift the heart and strike at the senses. Your kingdom has suffered hard at the hands of the Sorcerer Sanue. But it is 20 years since he and his dread castle were sealed within a magical force by the court wizard of your father; the then king. Now, the dragon representing the evil mage is stirring and the sphere that holds him is cracking open. The Sorcerer has reawakened! your quest is clear: Fight your way to the castle and defeat Sanwe! ORAGONSPHERE O PROSE ADVISO e cum Hoko Byte  Inc  1994 MicroProse, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Available on CD-ROM for IBM PC/Compatibles 1-800-879-PLAY "


"DELTA It's not a Game YOUR MISSION: You control the most agile racer known to man as you fly down the 256 color, 3-D, polygonalshaded landscape at speeds where thought and action are one and mistakes are paid for in blood! If you and your Trace Vehicle survive, use your bonus points to modify its armor, firepower or speed to suit your style, then jack back into the Net for another Run! In Delta V, a new type of Virtual Reality has been brought to the PC! "


"EADE. FLPHF PIPE FI TOPPED! LASERS ERDAL 07:56 FILCHFE 75167 DESTROYERT PROTON TORPED! Normal View Horumal View 4249 256_ 2526 ERCC: 01:30:09 ALPHA: 1126 DESTADY: 0/G BREFER TORPEDO Normal View L6 12-09-2147 17H34.48 \"So chummer, you want to know about runnin? \"The Net's the most dangerous cyber-dream you'll ever have, 'cept it's not a dream. You gotta be ruthless and quick, huggin' the lattice like an Olthan lungworm on a Borian air-grazer. Once you jack in, it's just you and your Trace. \"Like I always said, Netrunnin' is like a drug, the speed gets you higher than a 'ject of Cephilene Blue. but a mistake'll leave you deader than a jacked out straightliner. \"Thatchum, is as permanent as it gets . END --GROTHAN JHIR, ex-Netrunner. 1948 .It's a State of Mind DELTA BECHESDA SOFTWORKS Currently Available on IBM PC VGA, minimum 386/33 processor (486/33+ really cooks!), minimum memory 590K Ram, 2MB EMS memory and high density disk drive required. Supports: Roland, SoundBlaster and Gravis Ultrasound. Copyright 1994 Bethesda Softworks. All rights reserved. Bethesda Softworks and Delta V are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #47 "


"F E ATURES 35 Pagan D' 20 DOOM II: Hell On Earth Mesquite, Texas may not be hell, but CGW Editor Chris Lombardi visited the city's own id Software in order to find out the secrets of their upcoming DOOM sequel and to battle BFG to BFG with John Romero. Fortunately, he managed to survive long enough to file this story about the past, present and future of computerdom's current darlings (or is it damnings?). 26 DESIGNING PERSONS Once a year, San Jose becomes Florence during the Renaissance for more than 1,000 computer game designers and programmers. The creative brain trust of the industry gathers to share ideas, techniques and philosophy, as well as to swap stories about the old days. In our coverage of the 8th Annual Computer Game Developers Conference, we summarize our favorite sessions. 146 \"Under the Hood\" CGW's Tech Editor repairs your fried circuits ADVENTURE / ROLE-PLAYING TOKMAKT COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 35 SCORPIA'S STING CGW's official avatar challenges Origin's PAGAN: ULTIMA VIII 38 THE SCORPION'S TALE Wise counsel on PAGAN: ULTIMA VIII from CGW's Prime Adventuress 46 MICROPROSE'S DRAGONSPHERE Allen Greenberg calmly explains why politics and thaumaturgy don't mix 52 SIERRA'S GOBLINS 3 Jeff James teams up with his onscreen alter ego to file the scoop on the latest puzzle-filled adventure 64 MEGASOFT'S DISCIPLES OF STEEL Petra Schlunk delineates details on a most detailed computer role-playing game 68 INTERPLAY'S ASTRO CHASE 3D Alien-blasting and asteroid-blitzing through arcade space with Christopher Breen 88 The most powerful warship in the world AEGIS SIMULATION 79 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL Our new simulation column debuts as Tom \"KC» Basham dips his wings to on-line multi-player games 84 DYNAMIX' ACES OF THE DEEP Up Periscope with Kevin Turner for some in-depth sneak preview coverage 88 SOFTWARE SORCERY'S AEGIS: GUARDIAN OF THE FLEET Declassified data and state-of-the-art graphics put Terry Coleman on the bridge of the world's most powerful warship 92 FLYING MICROPROSE'S FLEET DEFENDER A top-notch tactical briefing from Tom «KC\" Basham 101 SURVIVING DYNAMIX' ACES OVER EUROPE Michael Rymaszewki tells new recruits how to become well-decorated sim pilots in a WWII aerial campaign "


"STRATEGY / WARGA MES 107 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT Alan Emrich tries to bridge the gap between boardgames and computer games 110 AVALON HILL'S KINGMAKER The Wars of the Roses are no longer a winter of discontent as Terry Coleman reviews this medieval wargame 112 SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE'S FIELDS OF GLORY M. Evan Brooks refuses to meet his gaming Waterloo in reviewing this U.K. import 114 SSI'S GREAT NAVAL BATTLES II: GUADALCANAL Josh Bruce surveys the slot for maritime enemies while reviewing this simulation/wargame 118 ELECTRONIC ARTS' POWER POKER Alan Emrich claims it isn't Risky Business to tinker with the rules in this new gambling game 122 MASTERING ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS 3 Game-winning wisdom from warrior-king Josh Bruce 128 ENRICHING MERCHANT PRINCE Tim Carter unleashes his Machiavellian masterstrokes on our unsuspecting readership 20 DOOM II Julie Bell's oil painting of a DOOMed soldier bears the distinctive qualities of her famous mentor, Boris Vallejo. 101 Ac8s Over Euroge 26 Designer's Dilemma DEPARTMENTS SELECT SDE 114 Great Naval Battles 11 8 LETTER FROM THE PUBLISHER Change 10 EDITORIAL Check Out The Remodel 12 INTERFACE Our Readers Speak 16 READ.ME Late Breaking News 134 OPPONENTS WANTED Free classified ads for gamers 136 SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Hot Shareware Games 140 HEX, BUGS AND ROCK 'N ROLL Game Technology 146 UNDER THE HOOD Help With Hardware 154 NOW PLAYING First Look At New Games 161 HALL OF FAME Top Games of All Time 162 SCORE Readers Rate The Top Games 164 PATCHES Game Files To Exterminate Bugs 166 THE RUMOR BAG (Baggus Baseballus) "


"JULY 1994, NUMBER 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Publisher Russell Sipe From the Publisher There's No Progress Without Change Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia ast August Golden Empire Publications sold Computer Gaming World magazine to Ziff-Davis Publishing. In the months since then one question has plagued me wherever I go: \"Are they (Ziff-Davis) going to change the magazine?\", the clear implication being that readers and game publishers did not want Ichanges made. They liked CGW as it was/is. The simple answer to the question is an unqualified «no!\", the complex answer is an equally unqualified «yes!\" From the perspective of the type of coverage we do, the editorial philosophy that backs our content, the dedication to honest hard-hitting reviews, and the realization that without the trust of our readers we don't have anything, nothing will change. Over the course of negotiations, Ziff-Davis and Golden ONLY THE Empire Publications struggled mightily over value and WISEST AND pricing, but never over vision. When I met with Ziff-Davis STUPIDEST executives last summer at the beginning of the negotiations, the one question that was paramount on my mind OF MEN and theirs was not money, it was editorial philosophy. If NEVER we hadn't been in agreement there, money would never CHANGE. have been discussed. The deal would have died then. ZillDavis has a strongly held philosophy that editorial excelCONFUCIUS lence is the fundamental cornerstone of successful publishing. If you have been a reader of CGW for any length of time, you realize that that is our philosophy as well. This will never change. On the other hand, there is no progress without change. And we will change. Some of that change you see in your hands. I am very proud to present to you the newly redesigned Computer Gaming World. It is more attractive, easier to use, and more informative. Calling upon talented people with years of magazine design experience, we sought to create a layout that is more colorful, more informative, more intelligent, and better suited to serve you, the community of computer gamers that turn to Computer Gaming World each month for the best in computer game coverage. Let us know what you think. Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games), Evan Brooks (Wargames) Contents are copyrighted by Zilt-Davis Publishing Co., 1991. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.91 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R125669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the US, and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167 Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6.00 per issue (58.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Zifl-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke, (714) 283-3000 x41 Printed in the U.S.A. ONWARD, Russell Dipe RUSSELL SIPE 8 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"FALCON NORTHWEST ANNOUNCES A NEW POWER FOR A NEW AGE OF GAMING: THE MACH VPTHE WORLD'S FIRST PENTIUM POWERED GAMING PC! MACH V Now there are 3 models of the ultimate gaming machine! Fill your need for speed! FAST... 40 VGA FRAMES PER SECOND! The MACH V Basic: for performance on a budget Intel 486 DX/2-50 MHz processor, 4 Megs of RAM, 255 Meg hard disk $1,995 Standard Features: 100% Compatible with All IBM PC Software Falcon VESA Local Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache, AMI BIOS VESA Local Bus Graphics Board with 1 Meg. 16.8 Million Colors! Falcon VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card -4 megs/sec! RAM expandable to 32 megabytes TEAC 1.2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives MPCTM Level 2 Compliant 250ms Double-Speed CD-ROM Drive SoundBlaster PROTM with Multimedia Encyclopedia on CD-ROM Shielded Multimedia Speakers with Bass Boost CH Products FlightStick PROT 4 Button Joystick CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Mini-Tower Case with 250 Watt Power Supply Two Cooling Fans with Temperature Sensing 14\" Non-Interlaced SVGA Monitor, .28dp, Edge-to-Edge Display 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover MS-DOS 6.2\" & MS-Windows 3.1. NEW 3 Button Serial Mouse UL, CSA. TUV.VDE & FCC Class B Approvals One Year Parts & Labor Warranty One Year On-Site Service Policy * Not Included with MACH V Basic model FASTER... 45 VGA FRAMES PER SECOND! The MACH V: The original with some new twists Intel 486 DX/2-66TM Processor, 8 Megs of RAM-NEWI, 255 Meg hard disk $2,495 UNREAL... 50 VGA FRAMES PER SECOND! The MACH Vp Pentium: the fastest game machine on the planet! Intel Pentium processor, 512K of static RAM cache expandable to 2 Megs, 8 Megs of RAM, 425 Megabyte hard disk w/256K cache $3,495 But don't take our word for it.. Will you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is \"Compared to the MACH V, XXXXXXX the best bet for your money.\" 2000's (DX2/66] system ran like @#%&!\" -Computer Gaming World Gary McMillan, Fairbanks, AK \"They (Falcon's techs) are always available and will spend time to work with their customers. The system is just perfect for our needs and makes running simulations a real pleasure.\" -P.C. Combat Simulations Magazine \"My Falcon MACH V lets me run all my games with the detail settings on high andlam still able to scream through the frames.\" -Keith Stadler, Wilmington, NC \"Every game I've bought, every program I've bought, has worked perfectly on the MACH V!\" Perry DiMarco, Howard Beach, NY \"It screams!\" -Paul Gentry, Portland, OR THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE THE MACH VIS PERFECT WHETHER YOUR MACHINE IS A DEDICATED GAMER, OR YOU ALSO USE IT AS A BUSINESS, SCHOOL, OR HOME COMPUTER. YOU CAN CUSTOM FIT THE MACH V FOR YOUR MISSION WITH THESE UPGRADE PACKS: BUSINESS PRODUCTIVITY PACK: WINDOWS FOR WORKGROUPS 3.11 CITIZEN GSX-220 24 PIN PRINTER 250 MEGABYTE TAPE BACKUP $375 STUDENT PRODUCTIVITY PACK: CITIZEN GSX-220 24 PIN PRINTER MICROSOFT BOOKSHELF CD-ROM W/DICTIONARY THESAURUS,&MORE $275 EXTREME SOUND PACK SOUNDBLASTER 16 ASP SONY SATELLITE/SUBWOOFER SPEAKERS (YOU GOTTA HEAR THESE!) $275 ENHANCED VISION PACK: MAG MX15 15° 1280X1024 DIGITAL MONITOR, SUPER HI-REFRESH 1 MEG VIDEO MEMORY UPGRADE $325 FALCON NORTHWEST To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available On Approved Credit. UND DAS SC53244501064 nece.. COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax:(503) 267-2575 Circle Reader Service #141 "


"Rants & Raves Editorial Remodeling by Johnny L. Wilson s families grow, their needs when we could compile ratings from our informed on late-breaking information that change. Many times, these readers. We left the scoring of games to you could well be vital to the power player, our changing needs cause parents to and tried to publish the most comprehencore reader. Everything from our new \"Beta be confronted with an uncomsive articles possible. Bits\" section about early versions of upcomfortable choice: buying a more Now, the magazine has grown to such a ing games and our \"Affairs in the Cyburbs\" functional house or remodeling size that even our long-term readership listing of exciting on-line activities to our their existing home. Whether doesn't have time to read the magazine new \"Pipeline» feature that gives you the you add new bedrooms, a family room, or from cover to cover, and the numerical tentative release dates of upcoming games. an additional bathroom to accommodate growth in readers has brought us a bevy of We are also adding \"Under The Hood,\" a the more demanding hygiene of the dating relatively new gamers that really want the troubleshooting column to help both new teenager, you are meeting the changing editors' guidance in terms of game ratings and experienced gamers get more perforneeds of your family. The frustration of the last group was really mance out of their gaming hot rods, and Computer Gaming World's family is getting brought home to us when we were examin«Hex, Bugs and Rock 'n Roll,\" a column larger as the magazine both grows in pages ing the CGW Poll Cards from a recent issue. that explores game technology and the perand circulation. Though every writer/editor A significant number of cards asked us to sonalities behind it. likes having a larger audience to serve, the start rating games at the end of each review. Finally, we have modified our position on newest readers of CGW have different needs So, as a result of these changes and re-editorial game ratings. Your letters have than the hard-core hobbyists who supportquests, we were faced with three new chalwon the day. We hope that the provision of ed us through our first decade. We have allenges. First, helping all readers find what game ratings based on the familiar \"five ways had a shared context with most of our they want easier. Second, re-emphasizing star\" system will not discourage you from long-term, loyal readers, since they, like the sense of community that we feel bereading our detailed articles, but we have to most of us on the editorial stafl, came into tween ourselves and our readers. Third, meet the needs of those readers who keep the computer game hobby from the board providing help for the newer gamer in telling us that they want us to give them a game or role-playing side. We could assume making purchasing decisions. In short, we «review-at-a-glance\" approach to game recertain conventions in terminology, design needed to remodel our house so that it views. Starting this issue, you will lind a expectations and even, to some degree, edwould serve our larger family more ellisummary box at the end of each review, ucational background. Many of them told ciently. each containing a one-to-five star rating us that we were so synchronized with their We're addressing the ease-of-use issue and a Pro/Con statement on the game. needs and taste that they read each issue with color coding, sections dedicated to While the reviewers will offer input on the from cover to cover. core genres of games, and a simplified ratings, the final decision will be based Indeed, we had so much of a shared conTable of Contents. Each of the major genupon a poll of the editorial staff. The results text with those of you who comprised our res of interest to our readers will have regushould be both interesting and informative. early readership that we could argue that lar sections that begin with a column of The iconic ratings symbolize the followyou would appreciate the same kinds of huspecial interest to like-minded gamers and ing editorial verdicts: mor, coverage, and critical approaches that a sidebar that presents the latest news with ****** Potential Benchmark we valued. We felt like we were all part of in that genre. Established readers will **** Excellent Game With the same community of gamers. This asrecognize the columns by Scorpia Limitations sumption led us to avoid certain journalistic (Adventure/Role-Playing) and Alan Emrich *** Average Mainly For Genre techniques as being too patronizing for our (Strategy/Wargaming), but we have also Enthusiasts readership. added Tom Basham's column for simula** Weak Has Significant Our philosophy has always been to give tion buffs. We trust these new sections will Problems readers enough information to help them be helpful for everyone. * Abysmal make up their own minds. We didn't want We're addressing the community ques. In short, we've just remodeled our to give numerical ratings for the games that tion in several ways. The expanded house. We hope you like what we've done would be based on the opinions of editors READ.ME section is designed to keep us all with it. 10 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"SO MANY TARGETS, SO LITTLE TIME! Ultra-detailed, smooth scrolling VGA graphics RAPTOR CALL OF THE SHADOWS Explosive cinematics and sound tracks Supports all major sound cards and game controllers IRED 205 27 enormous levels, each with at least one boss ship This ain eno dinosaur game! CYGNUS There are times when the best weapons just aren't enough. To answer the Mega Corp's call, youll need nerves of steel, an itchy trigger finger, and the strength to stand till the end. Your equipment: The Raptor, a super-tech bird of prey with enough state-of-the-art firepower to crush any foolhardy opposition. As if twin machine guns that can rip holes through 6-inch steel plate weren't enough, the Raptor can be upgraded with 14 hard-core weapons that go beyond intense, straight to overkill! Your mission: Kill for cash, and leave nothing standing in your wake! If your looking for a game with unbelievable graphics, fierce combat, and a pulse-pounding sound track, Raptor: Call of the Shadows is all that and more! Grab your gear. Head for the flight deck. Raptor awaits! CALL 1.800.GAME 123 IT'S TOLL FREE (We're here all the time!) For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive the first mission. Or download the first mission and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are: (508) 365.2359 (508) 368.7036 (508) 368.4137 2400 BAUD 9600-14.4K 14.4-16.8K Further episodes are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number. APOGEE SOFTWARE THE HEIGHT OF GAMING EXCITEMENT Raptor: Call of the Shadows requires an IBM or 100% compatible 386 or better computer with 2 MEG RAM (4 MEG recommended), a VGA graphics card and 12 MEG Iree space on a hard disk drive. Joystick and mouse are optional. Supports all major sound cards. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #43 A002CGW APOGEE SOFTWARE P.O. BOX496 3 8 9 GARLAND, TX 750 4 9 "


"Interface LETTERS FROM CGW READERS HEX, BUGS AND appeal due to established player with SVGA and Sound Blaster ple II. Build up a colony by colROCK 'N ROLL groups. The Rumor Guy menor SUPER M.U.L.E. lecting all the items. Gain monI don't know if anyone else is intioned an on-line version of David Romerstein ey through trade or killing terested, but I'd like to know SFB several months ago, but I Clinton, MD pirates. Great fun! more about how the games are would also like to see a straight Mike Alexander developed programming, game version. Also, your \"ArtiA new M.U.L.E. game was in the San Jose, CA graphics and sound that sort facts of the Ancients\" (CGW works at Electronic Arts, but Dani of thing. 118, pg. 50) did not mention Bunten was less than thrilled with ONCE UPON A W. Dwinnell WARP WAR, an excellent SFB some of the changes in basic design LAYOUT DREARY Philadelphia, PA rip-off for IBM, circa 1980. that were being required of her. Thank you for the critique of Brian Carllon Frankly, we'd settle for the old JUMP RAVEN in the April issue of How about more in-depth Stafford, VA M.U.L.E. on a Sega cart or in CGW. Your reviewer took his info about game development VGA for IBM. CRUSH, CRUMBLE time and played the game. The techniques? A regular column New World Computing once & CHOMP, on the other hand, is exresult thought-provoking on this would be great. owned Task Force Games, the actly what three or four sets of attorcomments that serve as one of Phil Dobranski publisher of STAR FLEET BATTLES. neys would do to each other if that the reasons that CyberFlix Garland, TX They explored the possibilities of dotitle was resurrected. We can well keeps looking to CGW for stiming a computer game based on the imagine a famous board game deulating game reviews. As we prepared for this issue's comboard game, but TFG's tenuous signer and a famous computer game However, there is one signifiplete redesign, we spent a consideragreement with Paramount's legal designer suing over whether the cant error in your review. The able amount of time thinking about department (over whether the game computer game was based on a headline lists Paramount as JUMP why we do what we do and how we was in violation of the copyright on board game or not. Then, we can RAVEN's publisher. This is incorcould better meet the needs of our Paramount's Star Trek properties well imagine a Japanese media conrect. Paramount is the distribureaders, both those who have been or not) would have been put in glomerate suing the winner. tor. CyberFlix is the exclusive with us for a long time and those jeopardy by the allempl to publish a publisher and creator of both who were just discovering us as a computer game version. The on-line You left out one of my all JUMP RAVEN and LUNICUS. The tiresult of our increased distribution version is likely in doubt over the time favorite games in your tles are wholly owned by us. over the last year. One of the things same issue, as well as the fact that strategic space games article. Bill Appleton, President we decided that we definitely needthe executive who signed the origiThe game is SUNDOG on the ApCyberFlix ed was a regular technology colnal development deal on behalf of umn. We will still have our special the network is no longer with the The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant Game Developers Conference covcompany. erage each year, and we will still As for Axis & ALLIES, Milton The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant have separate \"Behind The Bradley accepted offers on their CRATENNANT Screens\" articles at various times, board game properties about three but Paul Schuytema's \"Hex, Bugs years ago. Electronic Arts opted and Rock 'n Roll\" column is defor SPACE HULK, instead of Axis & signed to take you behind the ALLIES, and their U.K. brunch did screens of game technology on a a sterling job of recreating that unimonthly basis. Let us know what verse. you think of it. The \"Artifacts of the Ancients\" sidebar was not intended as a comWHEN YOU WISH UPON plete historical listing. We merely STAR FLEET BATTLES listed our favorites according to the «They Just Don't Get It\" (CGW amount of space available. Judging 118, Editorial) hit the nail on from the next two letters, though, the head! Just what I've been you weren't the only one who was saying for several years. intrigued by the sidebar on out-ofWhat I want to know is why print science fiction games. we haven't seen a computer software version of STAR FLEET I would love to see some upBATTLES by Amarillo Design dates to the games in your sci-fi Group or Axis & ALLIES by Miloverview («Artifacts of the Anton Bradley. Both of these cients\"). Specifically, I'd like to \"It was at this point in time that there appeared to be board games have heavy market see CRUSH, CRUMBLE & CHOMP some sort of mass insanity.\" 12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Here Are Four Good Reasons to Try Epic Pinball Today. Space Journey Cyborgirl Pangaea Toy Factory Deck LED Again Award-winning Epic Pinball offers realistically fluid ball movement, a high-quality sound track and ultra-smooth scrolling graphics. It's all here: ramps, sink holes, kickbacks, drop targets, multiple-ball play, jackpots, skill shots and scoring rules just like real pinball tables. The four tables shown above make up Pinball Pack #3. Individual packs are $29, two packs are $49, all three packs are $59 or get the CD-ROM with all three packs plus an exclusive new table for only $64. Epic Pinball combine great pinball action with great gaming value. «Epic Pinball rings up a high score\" Computer Gaming World \"Up there with the best of the commercial releases\", rated 91% PC Format \"Perfected to the peak of playability\", rated 5/5 PC Power Here's How To Try It. SHAREWARE On CompuServe, GO EPIC. You can download an Epic shareware game virtually free every month and visit the TRY IT TODAY! Epic forum for hints, tips, technical support and to download our other shareware games. From GO EPIC you can also buy and download Epic games, like Epic Pinball, instantly. For a free CompuServe sign-up kit, call (800) 5243388 and ask for representative #536. EXEC-PC, the world's largest BBS, let's you download Epic shareware games on your very first call. Call (414) 789-4360 (V.32bis). Or, check your local BBS. No modem? Call our toll-free line with your VISA or MasterCard ready and for $5 we'll send you the shareware version. You may also be able find the shareware version at your favorite software retailer. Super Android, the upgraded shareware version, now with stereo surround sound! TO ORDER CALL EPIC MEGAGAMES 1-800-972-7434 EPIC VISA, MasterCard and Checks accepted. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Please add $4 shipping and handling to above prices. Each order includes a bonus shareware game. In the UK or Europe please call Epic MegaGames UK at 0767 260903. MEGA GAMES Epic MegaGames 20 Courthouse Square, Rockville MD, 20850 .Phone (301) 983-9771  Fax (301) 299-3841 "


"Sorry for the confusion. At one time, CUT RATE grade for X-WING FIGHTER. PRIVAMAGNUM OMISSION we only had to worry about the disWhy do you ask for ratings on \"TEER has really wet our whistle. Our official continuity squad tributor/publisher distinction with games [for the Top 100 Poll], in Scott missed the fact that our OXYD MAGthe affiliates for Electronic Arts, this instance OPERATION CRULas Vegas, NV NUM! review was accompanied with Mediagenic (now, Activision once SADER by Avalon Hill, when the screen shots from the original more), Broderbund and Microgame will not be on store It might be tough to convince the OXYD. OXYD MAGNUM! is a comProse. Now, we are getting used to shelves until Junc? I own an folks at LucasArts. Thus far, pletely different game than the the idea that Accolade, Virgin, InIBM machine, but I have not games in the series have stayed shareware version previously reterplay, Paramount and Timeseen this game out in any forseen this game out in any foraway from letting gamers be actual away leased. Here's an image from this Warner all have affiliated mat, yet. What gives? characters from the films. So, since new release. publishers, as well. Hopefully, we'll Ken there is really only one Millennium make that mistake \"Nevermore!\" Alameda, CA Falcon, it is highly unlikely that Speaking of distribution agreethey will do so. ments, that's part of the problem Would you believe that we simply faced by the writer of the next letter. make up a lot of the game names on the list to see if you're paying PUBLISHER 3000 AD attention? How about if we told What company will publish BAT you it was a test to see if you were TLECRUISER? Please include this rating the games honestly? Okay, information in your articles. maybe the truth. The game is curEric rently out on the Macintosh forRoseville, CA mat. We asked for a rating because, at press time, it was supWhereas the article did mention the posed to be shipping and we expublisher, Mission Studios, it didpected it to hit the shelves at the n't mention the distributor, Intersame time as the magazines. play. That information is routinely supplied with the reviews, but the O SOLO MIO magnum! cover story from May was a Sneak Just a note from the Hans Solo MAZED AND CONFUSED OXYD MAGNUM!'s new lasers and bombs might make you MAZED AND CONFUSEN Preview and does not usually have fans to LucasArts. Please, please lose you that information. release a Millennium Falcon updi's totally instantaneous. op hom oos syi sub shop for games. Shop Naked This CD is loaded It pocks. No shocs. No shirt Great service. That's what you get when you shop for games at home with the new CD: Cyber Mall For Gomers Only.* Don't waste time guessing about games based on the hype in a catalog or the blurb on a box. Play the whole game-the full version-before making your choice. Cyber Mall isn't a demo. It's not shareware. It's real, complete games. And you can try them out before you buy-in your own time, your own space. Then you can order games with just a phone call. Give a credit card number, get a key that unlocks the game. It's ready for instant installation on your hard drive. No waiting around for your mail order. No pushing through a crowd at a store. \"Requires Windows 3.0 or better A phone call puts Cyber Mall in the mail to you. Another call gets you an installation code for any game you decide to buy. Get instant gratification. Get it cheap, too. CyberMall-For Gamers Only is just $318 S&H. The Cyber Moll CD delivers hot games. Quality games. More than 50 games on a disk, including: Leisure Suit Larry Betrayal at Krondor Kings Quest Aces over Europe Solitaire's Journey And more. Plus, CyberMall is the only disk you can get that's packed with nothing but fresh games like these. You can't get this much game buying power anywhere else. We're the only place you can experience all of a game before you decide to buy it. Then, you can buy it at a super competitive price. Call toll-free for the full-tilt gamer's exclusive 1-800-914-GAME (4263) 7am-9pm MST, or write: InfoNow Dept. CGW7 4001 Discovery Drive Suite 230 Boulder, CO 80303 Reader Service #167 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"FEAR. EXHILARATION. COURAGE. MADNESS. BRAVERY. EVIL. All in one little box LORDS OR MIDNIGHT COMING IN JULY '94. DOMARK For order information call 800-695-GAME today. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Illuminati: 300,000, Secret Service: 0 Fox Hunts For Interactive Profit Ex Tengen Exec Ted Hoff Heads Fox Interactive Division Those watching the inevitable infrom 16-bit cartridge machines Tick, appears to be a standard vasion of Hollywood into the to CD-ROM players. twitch-and-flex cartridge game. gaming industry may note that a From a marketing standpoint. However, PAGEMASTER, a fantasy new beachhead has been hit. Ted the move to release games based game based on the upcoming Hoff, formerly of Tengen (reon Fox films and videos makes Macauley Culkin/Christopher cently integrated into the Timesense, given their high profile. Lloyd film, and SCAVENGERS, a Warner Interactive Group), has fox executives remarked that science-fiction epic, both appear been chosen to head up Fox's the release of games on certain to be of more interest to CGW new interactive division. Fox anfilms was bound to happen, and readers. nounced it would release five that they saw no reason to conHoff and other Fox execugame titles in the upcoming year tinue licensing games. The first tives seemed sincere about on available platforms ranging of these many releases, THE avoiding the \"tonnage mentaliSecret Service Settles Steve Jackson Games Case After four years of legal maneuvering and more than one year after a federal judge ruled that the Secret Service unlawfully raided Steve Jackson Games in March of 1990, the United States Secret Service paid more than $300,000 to Steve Jackson Games. The raid took place on March 1, 1990, when Secret Service agents seized several computers and the galleys for a role-playing game supplement (GURPS Cyberpunk) that was ready for printing. The Secret Service carried out the raid under a sealed warrant, alleging a conspiracy of hackers on the SJG BBS. On May 5, 1994, SJG announced that the Secret Service had finally paid the judgment. The exact monetary settlement was $52,431.50 for lost profits due to the unlawful seizure of product and equipment and $252,405.54 for legal fees. The latter funds were originally provided by the Electronic Freedom Foundation (EFF), which will be reimbursed by the settlement. The judgment is an important watershed in protecting the privacy of computer gamers and other users on local bulletin board systems, as well as those who use the Internet. leagues, trades, and play-off' roster expansions will all be a part of the general manFront Page Sports: Baseball ager's life. The basic he design team that revolumodel for the game tionized sports sims with calculates the light of FPS: FOOTBALL, PRO is taking the ball of that bat usa crack at baseball. The designing a sophisticated team is taking a similar approach physical model, so the to that of FPS FOOTBALL, providpath of a given ball will be unply as an arcade exercise, using ing both a sound and detailed predicable, unlike most baseball the three different flight modstatistical simulation along with a sims. Projected Release: July. els available. For those wishing great action game. Like FPS more direction, the \"director's FOOTBALL, you will be able to Inferno cut\" scenario creates a camsimulate full seasons of major rom the other side of the paign story generated by your league play over many years, so Atlantic comes this Acactions, as you attempt to dethat players will age, come into 1 tion/Adventure game, feat the evil aliens in classic scitheir prime, slowly decline, and looking to be the heir to STAR fi fashion. Instead of being then retire. Drafts, minor CONTROL. 2. A staggering 700 locked into a linear flow, a la potential missions WING COMMANDER, INFERNO'S take place in a solar story branches have some 6000 system beautifully possible outcomes, making this rendered through a game far more replayable than combination of texmost of its genre. Sporting a ture-mapping, 3D dark graphic novel-like look, computer modeling the game has one of the best and digitized phoand most original soundtracks tographs. The game we've heard in ages. Projected may be played simrelease: July-August. 16 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Readers' PLAYING LATELY? Here are the titles that gamers are spending the most \"quality time with. Let us know which game you've been playing lately, by writing the name of your current addiction in the \"Playing Lately?\" section of the CGW Top 100 poll card.   Results for CGW #118, May 1994 Doom (id Software) 2. 5. ty\" of putting out large numbers of indistinguishable products. Still, when CGW asked how Fox intended to keep their stated artistic integrity intact given Nintendo's tendency to dictate content Hoff avoided the issue by discussing game ratings and censorship in a broad sense. Further, Fox sees games as largely for kids, and cited their adult line as beginning with a Marilyn Monroe infotainment product. To industry veterans, there may be a sense of deja vu in the Fox announcement. Prior to the cartridge crash in the mid-'80s, Fox, media giant CBS and super-conglomerate Gulf + Western (then parent to Paramount Pictures and book publisher Simon & Schuster) had software companies to publish their specific properties. 20th Century Fox Games even published a M.A.S.H. cartridge and an ATTACK OF THE KILLER TOMATOES game. By the late '80s, however, out-licensing (where studios let others use their creative properties for a fee) had become the most efficient means of dealing with creative properties for software products. Now, with the information superhighway on the horizon, studios want to take direct control of their properties once again. Master of Orion (MicroProse) SimCity 2000 (Maxis) Elder Scrolls: Arena (Bethesda) Pagan Ultima 8 (Origin Systems) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) X-Wing (LucasArts) Civilization (MicroProse) Fleet Defender (MicroProse) . Gabriel Knight (Sierra On-line) \"ULTIMA VIII is great, Notable Quotes \"Doom is...what I but it features too many mean is...words fail arcade-like aspects, Wit, wisdom and caustic quips me. There are insuffisuch as an arcadish from gaming's harshest critics --you! cient words in the combat system and the English language to stupid jumping puzzles. adequately describe What happened to havmy opinion of Doom.\" ing a party?\" Calin Culianu, NY, NY J. Hamilton, State College, PA I'd like to see a role-playing game where you could be the Evil One who pillages the nation, kills heroes, and casts all those cool Dark Mage spells, for a change. -Paul Lombard-Johnson, Carol Stream, IL \"Where is SimDog? Chasing squirrels, avoiding baths, foraging for food think of it. The different breeds, smells, the perspective, CATS!\" Karl Kindt, Webster Groves, OH Mindcraft & Mallard R.I.P. \"ULTIMA VI was beautiful, ULTIMA VII was indifferent, ULTIMA VIII is a disappointment. Where is Origin going?\" Gilbert Brahms, Richmond, CA \"FLEET DEFENDER is one of the most fun flight sims I've ever flown! What a great flight model. I love flying it around so much I forget about combat!\" Richard Ordway, Boulder, CO Mallard, the publisher of FLIGHT SIMULATOR add-on products, and Mindcraft, the award-winning publisher of THE MAGIC CANDLE, have closed their doors. Mallard's assets have been assumed by the Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd., the original developers of the FLIGHT SIMULATOR products, and BAO will be distributing such products as Mindcraft, following on MECHAMANDER strategy game FLIGHT SIMULATOR FLIGHT SHOP, hard times and disappointing for that company. MECHAMANTOWER CONTROLLER, AIR RESCUE sales, was forced to file bankDER may well be named MECH 911 FOR FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5 ruptcy. However, its founder, COMMANDER before the project and REAL WEATHER PILOT UPAli Atabek, is now a producer ships, but Ali's original vision DATE under the BAO Simulation at Interplay Productions and is still expected to reach the Products label. is expected to finish the market in 1994. JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 17 "


"READ.ME Rupert Murdoch Buys Again Kesmai, Air Warrior's Parent Becomes Part of News Corp Kesmai Corporation, developer concerns. \"Number one, it is most of the onof Compuserve's Island of Delphi's intention to become line game develKesmai, GEnie's Air Warrior the number one consumer seroper's games will and Multi-Player BattleTech, vice. Number two, we believe become accessible has become part of the Rupert that interactive games will be via the Delphi Murdoch empire. Murdoch's the driving force to get us there. Service. MULTINews Corporation recently Number three, we believe that, PLAYER BATstaked out its position on the in Kesmai, we have acquired the TLETECH will coming information superhighnumber one multi-player oncontinue to be a way by purchasing Delphi Interline game developer in the Genie exclusive net Services. Ben Feder, world and that they will serve as hat they will serve as the in the United m e DRAGON'S TALE: VOR Technologies' On-line RPG to be Director of Interactive Media a cornerstone in building the States, but the distributed by Kesmai for Delphi, expressed their misservice.\" other games (insion statement in sequential With the purchase of Kesmai, cluding HARPOON ON-LINE which is nearing a beta test launch on GEnie) will soon be found on other networks (intion's Alone in cluding Delphi and CRISthe Dark games, Concentric Research Informabut Origin is re2 tion Services). John Taylor, placing 1-MoPresident of Kesmai, says the BIOFORGE tion's blocky company's ultimate goal is to be rigin takes its turn at inpolygonal creaable to use their ARIES infrateractive movie productures with texstructure (their own base nettion with BIOFORGE, a ture-mapped work in Virginia) as the host science fiction action story in actors, animatenvironment for providing the which you play a geneticallyed with a new SUROVIwer same universe across products crossed man/machine. Unlike and highly efon all networks. So adventurers other so-called Interactive fective animation technique. REALM. The high concept is es in the Island of Kesmai using Films, where the interaction inCinematic camera angles, cut sentially that of a multi-player CRIS might run into adventurvolves setting non-interactive scenes, and plenty of playerCASTLES 2, but the detail level ers using Delphi and Comvideo segments in motion, Oricontrolled combat will keep in the economic model is con puserve. gin is creating beautiful 3D sets the plot of this science fiction siderably higher (assigning Taylor also said that Kesmai in which you will control a adventure rolling. Projected specific numbers of laborers to will be assisting third-party de\"synthetic actor.\" The concept Release: August. specific tasks as opposed to ac velopers in reaching audiences has been tried before in I-Motion points, selecting individ on multiple services. Kesmai LORDS OF THE REALMual fields and crops, will provide this service for Fans of the determining when to let fields Richard Bartles' MUD II: THE books Life in lie fallow, and more). The final QUEST FOR IMMORTALITY and a Medieval version is supposed to allow for newcomer VOR TechnoloCastle and Life in you to send custom insults to gies (a group of programmers a Medieval Cily other opponents, enable you with Bell Labs experience), a should enjoy the to build alliances with other company which will soon offer medieval manplayers, and provide you with THE DRAGON'S TALE, a firstagement options built-in tools for performance person perspective, DOOMin Impressions evaluation. Projected Release: like dungeon crawl, to begin LORDS OF THE September. internal testing 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1994 "


"MediaVision On Corporate PAPPATRS R O G Rollercoaster HAUSTIEGYBURES Quality Products Overshadowed By FBI And SEC Probes New CGW Forum On ZiffNet Brings You Wild «Wrld» of Gaming The FBI confirmed on May 9, which were needed in order to 1994 that it was engaged in a assemble those fabricated shipjoint investigation with the Secuments would not even arrive in rities and Exchange Commisthe United States until a week sion over alleged securities later. Such inventory tamperviolations. According to the San ing/fabricating was reputed to Francisco Chronicle, one charge have been a mode of operation would likely be that MediaVifor MediaVision CEO Paul Jain sion juggled their inventory to at another high-tech company show that millions of dollars at which he served, Video 7. worth of product had shipped On May 17, MediaVision's top when, in reality, the stereo four executives resigned. They speakers from Hong Kong included: CEO Paul Jain, COO Russell C. Faust, CFO Steven J. Allen, and Michael Humphreys, V-P of Worldwide Sales. Jain claimed that the allegations reported in the San Francisco NAME OF GAME, COMPANY RELEASE DATE Chronicle were unfair and untrue, 11th Hour Virgin ..7/94 blaming his resignation on the Aces of the Deep Dynamix................8/94 negative publicity. In the wake of Across the Rhine MicroProse...........8/94 the resignations, a creditors Armored Fist NovaLogic ...............8/94 committee was established to deAll-Pro Football Accolade............ 10/94 velop a plan in which MediaViBattledrome Dynamix............ 10/94 sion could avoid filing for Bioforge Origin ..........................8/94 bankruptcy. Blitzkrieg (working title) New World.......9/94 Meanwhile, MediaVision's Brett Hull Hockey Accolade............ 10/94 publishing group has wrapped Celtic Tales Koei...........................10/94 up camera work for THE Colonization MicroProse .................10/94 DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER, their latCommand & Conquer Virgin.........11/94 est interactive movie on CDFPS: Baseball Dynamix..................7/94 ROM. The product will feature Heroes of M&M New World...............8/94 Tia Carrere who played the Inferno Ocean... ................8/94 love interest in both Wayne's Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech..............9/94 World movies. It is also more Jorune: Alien Logic SSI........ .....7/94 than three times as large as LodeRunner: A Legend Dynamix.....8/94 CRITICAL PATH, the first interacLords of the Realm Impressions.......8/94 tive movie which MediaVision Masters of Magic MicroProse ........10/94 published from developer MetalTech: Earth Siege Dynamix......8/94 MechaDeus, and more puzzleNCAA Basketball Bethesda .........9-10/94 intensive than the earlier game. Noctropolis EA. ............9/94 Gamers should hope that MediPhantasmagoria Sierra ............10/94 aVision's corporate troubles will Wings of Glory Origin ... ........ ..7/94 not endanger such future develZephyr New World.........................8/94 opment. in the words of one of our first To join the CGW Forum, if Forum users, Computer Gaming you are a CompuServe or World now has its own lane on ZiffNet member, type Go the information highway. HowGameworld at any CIS prompt. ever this section of the superZiffNet members pay a monthly highway only allows names with membership fee of $2.95 for 26 or fewer characters. So come access to all ZiflNet services. join us on the «Computer GamIf you're a new subscriber, set ing Wrld Forum\" running on your communications software ZiflNet on CompuServe. (We to 7 data bits, even parity, 1 wanted to call it Computer stop bit and full duplex, and Gaming World 4Rum but they call CompuServe at (800) 848wouldn't let us). While there are 8990 (US) or (800) 635-6225 still a few bridges that need (Canada) for a local access widening, the fast lane is ready number. for access to download files and Once you get online, you can exchange information with GO ZIFFSOFT and download CGW editors and other gamers. WinCIM or DOSCIM to make Use the command GO navigating around the system GAMEWORLD to see all the easier. Then type GAMEdirectories about entertainment WORLD in the dialogue box to software, hardware and serhead for the games highway. vices. One of the first areas you Download the file CGWmay want to visit is \"Hey, EdiNEW.HLP, a Win Help file, in tor!\", where you can query our Library 1, General Files, to get staff, including On-Line Editor a quick overview of the forum Alan Emrich, who prowls there and background on the sysops each work day. Other sections and Computer Gaming World edinclude News, Views, Issues; itors. Adventure Role-Playing: ArIn addition to joining ZifiNet cade Action; Simulation Sec-on CompuServe, CGW is also tion; Sporting Life: War & Prodigy's on-line games expert. Strategy; and The Hardware You can find us in the Game Zone (a favorite of Technical Center, where we post three Editor Mike Weksler). new articles a week, two hint arIn addition, you can downticles per month, and adminisload shareware games and reter the Top 10 Game Poll. We views, game demos and game plan to expand into ZiffNet on patch files. Find that worthy adProdigy, and we are working to versary you've been looking for develop an on-line companion in the Opponents Wanted secto the magazine with Intertion, where you can search for change, a new online service opponents by zip code. from Zifl-Davis Interactive. JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 19 "


"To Hell esquite lies one gallon of rental car gas outside of downtown Dallas. By the side of the freeway is a large Black box of a building that looks strikingly out of place in this Southern suburbia. Here in a modest office on an upper floor of this obsidian block, id Software created the intensely violent action games that cut deep marks in computer gaming: WOLFENSTEIN 3D and DOOM. Stories abound from the early days of computer gaming when people sat in their living rooms pouring their dreams into 8-bit computers, selling them in zip-lock bags and watching in amazement as the checks piled in, sometimes turning these pioneers into millionaires. When I stepped into the modest offices of id Software and saw how democratically and, often, anarchistically these 10 people ran their operation, and when I heard just how successful their games and their shareware marketing approach have been, I couldn't help but think that I had stepped back into the wilder and woollier days of the computer gaming Gold Rush. I was met by id CEO Jay Wilbur, who gave me a tour of the grounds: a spartan reception area with a shelf packed with awards, offices for the programmers, tech support, and the two artists, a storage room and kitchen occupied by a foosball table, an entire pallet of caffeinated drinks, a large box of chips, and a fridge filled with ice cream treats. Roughly at the center of the space is a \"living room» area with couches and a pool table. As we finished the rounds, the small talk was cut short by a scream, \"Sonofabitch!\", and the sound of something like a wrecking ball attacking a wall. Jay smiled. It was only programmer John Romero and betatester Shawn Green in the first of many daily network DOOM sessions. The level of competition is vicious, I would soon find out, and the textual taunts that fly across the network during play are like to fry a preacher's profanity circuits. Nearly four months after the release of Doom, the id guys are still obsessed with their creation. I've heard the statement, «We just set out to create games that we want to play,\" but I've never been so convinced that this was true. Assuming Jay to be The Boss, I asked to meet with him one-on-one for the background on id. He flatly refused. «Everything is run democratically here. We all have a say.\" So he gathered the majority of the id group, and we pulled up chairs around the pool table-turned PingPong table, currently the site of a Battle Masters fantasy-miniatures game. Setting my tape recorder on a well-defended hex of the Milton Bradley game, I shot the breeze with: 26 year-old John Romero, tools programmer, level designer, and the best Doom player in the world; Sandy Petersen, a long-time paper game (CALL OF CHTHULU) and computer game designer (HYPERSPEED) who now does the majority of the level design; Kevin Cloud, a solt spoken southern gentleman of 26 years and one of two id artists, and finally, Jay Wilbur, the bleachblond 33-year old who handles operations and manages the finances (a BIG job these days). John Carmack, the 23 year-old programming 20 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"savant and the man behind the core id technology, was making a special effort to come in \"early\" for the meeting, but at 2:00 p.m. he was nowhere to be found. A half hour later, he would walk in bleary-eyed, explaining that he'd been in \"vampire mode\" for the last week, programming WOLFENSTEIN 3D for the Atari Jaguar. ID THE BEGINNING... Id Software is basically a collection of pilgrims from a company called Softdisk out of Shreveport, Louisiana. Softdisk put out a monthly disk of arcade games, and in 1989, Romero, Wilbur, Cloud, Adrian Carmack, and Tom Hall were a part of the game development group there. John Carmack, an Apple IIGS programmer, came to Softdisk in 1990, lured by the opportunity to learn IBM programming under Romero's tutelage. In 1990, Romero began to get fan mail for one of the arcade games his group had programmed. He would tack the goofy, though worshipful, fan letters proudly to his wall, ignoring the many requests to call his fans back. So proud was he, he failed to recognize that, though the names on the letters were different, the address was the same. Then, he made a connection. While reading about a piece of shareware in a computer magazine, Romero saw a contact address that seemed strangely familiar. Looking up at the fan letters, he noticed the address was the same. Scott Miller, head of Apogee software, had written all of the letters, each with a different variation on his name. He was impressed with Romero's work and wanted Romero to work for him. But, knowing that all of the mail at Softdisk was screened, he couldn't contact Romero directly, so he wrote the letters. After Romero got over the disappointment (he was proud of his and Back Again CHRIS LOMBARDI ventured deep into the heart of Texas to visit id Software, the creators of the infernal DOOM He came back with a story, but had to trade a piece of his soul for it. "


"game called Tom Hall had developed a design for CASTLE WOLFEN Doom that the rest of the team didn't like. STEIN and de Basically, Hall wanted to inject a story into cided that the Doom and make the environment more setting of this interactive, but the rest of the team didn't classic (a cap want a story to slow down the relentless, tured U.S. sol visceral action. So Hall and id parted ways, dier trying to making way for designer Sandy Petersen. escape from a The group hired Petersen in July of 1993, Nazi fortress) and he immediately began working with would be a Romero's design tools, developing many TESTOSTEROSSA \"My mom stopped hassling me to get a real job when I bought my great game in of the levels in the final version of DOOM. first car,\" Carmack says. His other car is a Testarossa, too. 3D. They huntA few months later, id added Dave Taylor, ed down the a UNIX hack for IBM, to program the infan club), he called Miller back, and ideas original designer, Silas Warner, only to termission screens, automap, and sound were thrown about. In December of 1990, find that he had sold the rights. The rights a group of programmers at Softdisk pro trail led through three or four long-dead posed COMMANDER KEEN to Miller. They companies, finally ending with a guy sell DOOM'S DAY began moonlighting, programming Keen ing the original game out of his basement. As Doom progressed, word of its wonders out of the bedroom of a really cool lake The copyright on the game had long since began to spread through the press and house. We could go out in the middle of lapsed, so they applied for the copyright the on-line networks. Anticipation in the the day and go kneeboarding for a while, themselves. gaming community reached a fevered and then come back in and start programWhen WOLFENming,\" recalled Romero. STEIN 3D was reCOMMANDER KEEN sold very well for a leased, all hell broke shareware game, and when they got their loose. The tremenfirst check from Apogee, Romero, John dous 3D environCarmack and Adrian Carmack (no rela ment blew the minds tion) decided to leave and form their own of people who had company. The original name was IFD Sofi come to expect a ware, or Ideas From the Deep, but it was certain level of prolater shortened to ID, which originally duction value in stood for In Demand. Not pleased with In shareware games Demand («it was lame\"), someone suggest The cry from the cd the connection with the Freudian term press \"I can't beid. They liked the connotations and lieve it's shareware!\", adopted it. echoed the senti AMMO HEALTH LARWS AMOR A few months later, id hired Tom Hall ments of players HEAVYWEIGHT HELLION Weighing in at 500 lbs. and with a reach of two from Softdisk and moved to Madison, Wis everywhere. The erratically firing plasma guns, this hefty chum is going to be a tough consin. After a hard winter programming game logged opponent in the ring. the remainder of the COMMANDER KEEN Se 150,000 registraries, the group moved to their current lo tions as shareware, and sold 150,000 pitch when the company announced a cation. They hired Jay Wilbur and Kevin copies in retail stores as Spear of Destiny. December release. Id advertised that the Cloud from Softdisk, and began working Id estimates worldwide shareware distribu shareware version would be released on on WOLFENSTEIN 3D. tion to top one million. the 10th at midnight on the University of WOLFENSTEIN 3D followed a Carmack As the fame of WOLFENSTEIN began to Wisconsin's computer system. The system project called CATACOMBS 3D. The group build, the group started a few new projects allowed 125 users on its FTP site, and all wanted to fold knowledge gleaned from and began working on a new graphics en 125 slots were full that night. Wilbur CATACOMBS into a fast action 3D gine that they would license to Raven Soft couldn't get on the system to upload the game called «It's Green And ware (for Origin's SHADOWCASTER), and game. Pissed,\" where the player they began a conversion of WOLF 3D for When Wilbur requested the sysop to would hunt mutants in a biothe Nintendo. Their experience with Ninclear the system, the sysop complied and research lab. They remitendo was a bad one, being forced by the raised the user limit by 50. Despite this, nisced about an old Apple II company to change the game to elimi users started pouring in again, and nate the Nazis and turn the German Wilbur barely made it into one of the last Shepherds into rats. Once this dis slots. figured version of WOLF 3D was In addition to the users on the Wisconfinished, they vowed never to sin system, hundreds of others \"watched\" work for Nintendo again. Jay upload Doom through the IRC chanAt this time, the ideas for nel. The second Jay completed the upDoom began to percolate, but load, thousands of people on the IRC there were troubles in the devel channel slammed the Wisconsin system opment team. Creative director and crashed it... twice. ARTE "


"Take the Challenge SHARE IT WITH THE WORLD Despite the success of their games, id continues to surprise the market by sticking with shareware distribution (although the sequel to DOOM will be a commercial release). But there are advantages to marketing via shareware that the group supports, not the least of which is a healthy profit margin. id also likes the fact that people can try out their games before they buy them, and they like being able to distribute their games immediately after they're finished. They especially enjoy not having to deal with marketing and retail pressures. \"I don't think you can be any closer to the consumer than in shareware,\" said Cloud. \"Yes, but the main reason for being in shareware is greed,\" replied Petersen, half joking, Though id is rolling in the fruit of their labors, it doesn't seem to have affected their day-to-day lives much. Several of them are buying or building houses, except for J. Carmack who still lives out of a one bedroom apartment; he sees no need for a big place because he spends most of his waking hours at id. Instead of a home, Carmack has bought not one, but two Ferrari Testarossas, the second of which is currently undergoing an 800hp twin turbo transformation. \"I want dangerous acceleration,\" he said with a nervous laugh. Romero has since turned a green eye on Carmack's machines and lias bought his own yellow Testarossa. ooooo Commandant 3553 cams WADAU NOSO AMMO | HEALTH ARMS SERGEANT SLAUGHTER A new sergeant is there to greet you with open arms and make you dance the chaingun boogie. Aside from enabling Carmack to buy new toys, the money seems unimportant to him. What is important is programming — crcating better and better games by creating better, tighter, faster code. He talks about WOLFENSTEIN as if he's embarrassed. \"It was just a simple piece of work,\" he says dismissively, «Doom was just so much better.\" Yet, Doom is already starting to lose his favor. He's looking forward to the next project, where he can turn his obsession into the next huge leap in immersive gaming. SHAKIN' AND QUAKIN' What is the next huge leap? They wouldn't say much, still in the idea phase and reluctant to build expectations too carly, but they did tell me this: the name is QUAKE, the game engine will be completely brand new, and the 3D world will be so complete that creatures and characters will have depth, rather than being flat sprites. The current setting (notice I didn't say the evil s-word, \"story\") is a fantasy world where the player becomes a Thor-like being wielding a giant hammer, which he can throw at or bludgeon anything that moves. The world will have some real physics, so that characters will tumble when they fall from heights, and be knocked flat on their backs. As Romero was describing the multiplayer QUAKE of his imagination, he was literally hopping out of his seat and pantomiming the violent drama between two warrior gods, puncCircle Reader Service #192 "


"sion are a skeleton that shoots stood in the central square of one guided fireballs that will track cityscape and looked around. In seconds, you, an extremely obese chum there were at least 15 fireballs and a hailwith plasma launchers for arms, storm of gun fire flying at me from every and the ArchVile. The ArchVile direction. is a truly hideous thing that at Along with the increase in monsters tacks by conjuring hell fire from comes slightly higher system requirements the ground. If the ArchVile gets for optimal play. Lots of active monsters a bead on you, he'll go through and multiple projectiles can bog down a a conjuring hocus pocus with processor, so if the first Doom ran a bit his hands. If you're in his line slowly on your machine, Doom II may bog of sight when he's through con down to the point of irritation. juring, you'll be frozen in your No decision has been made yet on the THIS'LL JUST KILL 'EM John Romero — tools programmer, level tracks and take the equivalent subject of new weapons. A few of them exdesigner, and DeathMatch deity — shows off a new Doom II level of a BFG attack on your mortal pressed their disappointment with the in progress. flesh. Ugly stuff. And that's not BFG and suggested that it might be all — he has the power to raise changed, but there wasn't a majority opintuating the action with sound effects dead creatures. ion on the subject, which is what is re(which he is given to in most conversa As if the creatures weren't nasty enough, quired for action at id. tions). If they can calm Romero down long the level designs are downright devious. As enough to get some work done, id hopes Petersen said, «We learned a lot about de THE EDITOR'S DEMISE to start working on QUAKE in September signing levels in Doom, and we'll put what As my day with id drew into a windy Texas and release the game for Christmas of '95. we learned to use in DOOM II.\" Apparently, evening, I found myself in Episode 1 Level what they learned was how to put the play5, an id favorite, in a network DeathMatch DOOM II DIE er in more perilous In the meantime, id is working on the sepredicaments. I played quel to DOOM — Doom II: HELL ON about 10 of the new levels, EARTH. If you haven't yet finished the first and each has a few very game, I'm going to have to spoil your fun. sticky moments. In a parAt the end of DOOM, your marine escapes ticularly hairy scenario, the the pit of Hell, along with a couple of our player is locked inside a friendly demons. In DOOM II, your marine small arena with both a Cyreturns to an Earth city to find that it is berdemon and the Masteroverrun by nasties. Nastiness is essentially mind Spider the what the new game is about. endlevel creatures from Doom II uses the same engine as the the registered version of 832 original, but offers 27-30 new levels popu DOOM. You enter this areAMMO | HEALTH ARMS lated by six new evil creatures and it's na with little in the way of going to be tough! Carmack told me, \"It's weapons, and the creatures TIPTOE THROUGH THE TITANS The two end-level badasses from the not going to be an easy thing. We want to immediately turn their registered version of DOOM make a guest appearance in the sequel. please players who have played all of the tremendous firepower on shareware stuff. We're going to include you. If you hesitate, you're giblets. The with Romero, Cloud, and CGW columnist episode one (shareware DOOM] so that key is to run around the arena, frantically Paul Schuytema. Over the next few hours, if people find Doom II too dodging rockets and machine gun Romero taught us the delicate art of tough, they can go back and spray, and try to get the two crea slaughter, racing around the map at supertrain on that.\" And train you tures to fight each other. Once natural speeds and using the mouse with must, inexperienced ones, they're going at it, you must creep such skill that he could, literally, run cirbecause the first few levels up on the platform where cles around us while keeping his weapon of Doom II saw my charthey're battling and inch aimed at our spinning heads. We even acter in death throes your way around them teamed up against him at one point, but more than I'd care to to get to a lever that he continued to annihilate us, racking up count. opens up the exit door. 99 \"frags\" in no time. I managed to get The new cast of charThe feeling you get is Romero a dozen times, but most of these acters for Doom II is of a little mortal run kills were suicidal, short-range rocket atan interesting and ning between the legs tacks that took us both out. deadly lot. In the Juof two battling titans. Humbled and hobbled by hand cramps, nior Badguy division Since the game takes I said my goodbyes and headed out, glad are a chaingun-wielding sergeant, place on Earth, there are a number of to have discovered this small group of peothe Hell Knight (a junior version of city scenarios. There are tall buildings ple posessed by a vision, blessed with the the Baron of Hell), and a new Cawith imps peeking out through the talent to make the vision a reality, and abcodemon that shoots Lost Souls windows, machine gun sergeants solutely loving the process and the fruits of (the screaming heads) out of its tucked in doorways and on ledges, creation-a perfect picture of what this mouth. In the heavyweight diviand demons on the rooftops. I hobby is all about. DOO aus AFSMORE! 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Air 22. DELE idseth Realm | side view North Surmer AD 1281 AmeSSaege fruITE Th roll dooms It is a shame we meet SSLEE HE both hold to our vows of chivalry. Plales, This summer CE Sixart of Summer 38% HASSEL | 50HDT Filtrality | EAT Stolen HT Weddha UEFAman Destroyed Labours 95, | Gold | FANTIL 91 119 HBL 1387 Bought 1185 End of Summer | Souping times | TSSsor n 70 Redieval England 1268 A.D. time 485 The n this time of castles and conquests the throne sits empty. Serfs are restless; rebellion is in the air. The Lords of the Realm invite you to join their ranks: Build your castles. Marshal your resources. Test your troops in siege and battle. Behold! Your lands grow and your serfs prosper. Your armies swell and your castles dot the hilltops. On bended knee, your knights swear eternal fealty So for the Crown. Impressions Impressions Software, Inc. 22 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #77 "


"The Designer's Dilemm a THE EIGHTH ANNUAL THE EIGHTH ANNUAL COMPUTER GAME DEVELOPERS CONFERENCE Illustration by Brian Clarke hen Chris Crawford asked both Sid Meier, game designer par excellence, and Greg Roach, theorist of the virtual cinema, a hypothetical question about being stranded on a desert island, it polarized the audience. \"Which would you prefer to be stranded on the desert island with: a) Marilyn Monroe, b) the Library of Congress or c) the hot rod development system of your dreams and an unlimited power supply?\" Greg Roach answered honestly enough, \"I'm human... Marilyn Monroe.\" Yet, Sid Meier also answered honestly enough, \"The development system, but I'd probably have the Library of Congress on a CD.\" The question, oversimplified and ridiculous at it may be, underscores the constant tension between human need and technological possibility that is faced in computer game design. Game design is not a question of whether to reflect life and the human condition as much as it is a question of how much of life and the human condition should be portrayed. In like manner, game design is not simply a matter of an all-empowering \"Can we do it?\" but often a question of «Why should we do it?\" When designers get together, their concerns range all the way from that which is merely human to that which is purely technological. It is amazing, however, how often these two poles come together in a magnetic attraction. CGW's editorial staff attended the Eighth Annual Computer Game Developers Conference and the summaries which follow reflect some of our editors' views of the most interesting sessions. TRANSCENDING THE BOX In addition to the hypothetical question which set the stage for this article, moder26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"DETTAY TM CENA SE DENARO L. MONTGOMERY General Sr Bernard L. Montemery. Monly.led the 21. my Group and wally commanded med e forces in Normandy. Hangery was flyven at the time of D-Day and had the reputation of being in foresan! Fighting comvider. Reallelongitudent and prache , Menly distrusled amateurs, and few d a y andere could matches Iraining and coal experience the 12th, 1942 as corpi commander of the cloth an ovet. Montgomery made the Materie proclamation here we a land fight there can be no further THE BEGINNING OF THE END As Supreme Allied or Axis Commander, the fate of Europe hangs on your decision. The challenge to the Allies: Establish a beachhead and smash through to Berlin. To the Axis: Break them and preserve the Reich. olay here alive, then let weilandere dead ESOT SHOW FRESHED O O WARNING: Historically Accurate Personalities This is a wargame with a difference! and D ont, LG US Weather Paratrpro HT Dankly V. Od M S.400 Pork Diskotery Status None E TUTTE Play real-time animated battles within turn-based strategic campaigns from June 1944 through the end of the war. D-Day: The Beginning of the End\" is the latest in Impressions Micro-Miniatures series. It even surpasses \"The Blue & The Gray\" in strategic complexity, and packs in the 'historical detail you demand. DEOREGOEDE 63 NOGGRESO Destroy Structure GBE city. HRSKA ru supply Turn-Based Campaign Level  Historically accurate army organization  Leadership capabilities & Personalities  Enhanced A.l.  Naval/Air Bombardments.  Accurate Field Weapons  Supply & Reinforcements  Detailed rural and urban terrain Micro-Miniatures Battle on Detailed Terrain BATTLE OF: Caen Succent B LED TOTALS -MENTIT FOR DRITY T weet antry Active 61.000 Leil 1.159 a > 12 Porto de B.RO Increase Up to 1000 enforce DIVITION Divirtom Ries CU Ardery Us CETIMIN TOTILLS   Divine 19 770.404 Infantry Retive 14,030 T02.004 sor wery C ) THE ALLES WIN T To Orders Reinforce and Build your Divisions Battle Results: Win or lose? 01994 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions comm S Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 "


"COMPUTER ator Chris Crawford asked Interactive other. Hence, he opted for convergence. Filmmaker Greg Roach and Computer Meier also opted for convergence, noting Game Designer Sid Meier some more sub that digital video is already fun to look at, stantive questions in the session entitled, but will become more of a tool than a fea\"Multimedia versus Game Design.\" Roach ture as we move forward. was asked to define great multimedia and -Johnny L. Wilson Meier was asked to define great games. The former answered that it takes an emotional connection that transcends the HOW THE OTHER SEX HEXES box. The latter agreed that, even in A larger representation of women at this games, the best experience is when the year's conference wasn't lost upon the games leave the screen and enter the playmostly male conferees. Regarding their er's imagination. growing numbers and attractiveness was a After that basic agreement, however, popular pastime during breaks between the answers began to diverge. For exam seminars. Perhaps their entry into the inple, \"What design problem makes you dustry will engender (pun intended) new sweat the most?\" Roach focused on the re games designed for women and girls, bealities of digital video and trying to cir cause the hobby is sadly underrepresented cumvent them. Meier insisted that by females. Two speakers explored this discovering the elusive quality of fun is the topic in detail to suggest methods for detoughest part of design. signing games for girls and women. Asked to describe their development The first, Heidi Dangelmaier, a former environments, Greg described a bank of computer science student, brought the 22 programmers and artists working on fruit of her research on children and Quadras and SGI machines. MADNESS OF ROLAND used HyPERCARD and MACROMIND DIRECTOR, but now his products require low-level machine language coders to manipulate the necessary digital images. Sid uses a 486/66 with Microsoft C. Roach spoke o the dialogue between programmer and artist as one of compromising between vision and limitations. Meier spoke of the necessity for synergy within the office and the new ideas that he can ROGER'S HEAD Inspirational speaker Roger Van Oech try that eventually benefit breaks down the creative process into the stage version each project. of \"Herman's Head.\" Asked to look toward the future, Roach visualized the next breakvideo games to our attention. She found through coming with real immersive ex that boys and girls play games for differperiences becoming possible for ent reasons, want different things from mainstream audiences (he called them the games, and have different reactions to the \"Potato Family\"). Meier surprised veteran same gaming stimuli. Interestingly, she \"Sid-watchers\" by suggesting that interac found that girls do not consider gaming tive television will be the major revolution machines inherently \"male.\" Rather, it's of the future. He perceives that game de the games they consider to be primarily signers will become more facilitators of an \"for boys.\" experience than the creators. «Making en It comes as no surprise that girls considvironments where people can create their er games involving fighting to be for boys, own fun\" is Sid's goal. Meier also said that and the same for games that don't have he thought the design process would be strong female characters. 85% of females come easier in a multiplayer environment said video games would be fun to play if because Al issues would diminish. more games were designed for them. In conclusion, Crawford asked the two With today's video games, boys who play to offer their best \"hunch\" on whether them tend to be twice as alert and excited multimedia and computer games will as when involved with any other media; merge or diverge. Roach stated that he girls were more excited watching televididn't think either side could ignore the sion. Girls think most video games are \"a waste of time\" and prefer to play games that are purposeful, practical and/or complete a task. When boys think of playing games that are purposeful or practical, their stress levels go through the roof! Boys and girls want different feedback from a game, as well. Boys often turn the sound and voice off in a game, but girls want more feedback, not less. In one study, some children were given positive feedback for effort, while others were rewarded for ability. Effort-based feedback gave girls more confidence and motivated them to finish. Boys said that being rewarded on effort and not ability was condescending Boys prefer recognition for their ability because boys play to win. So, rules are important. Girls play to have fun. If the rules get in the way of having fun, they will bend the rules. As a result, girls play with custom rules until they get bored. Boys play until someone wins. Finally, she said that the subject matter of the games separates the sexes. Boys enjoy combat, but they also have a predilection for finance and resources, science fiction and space. Girls? STORIES. Stories about people, characters, plots, and dilemmas. Barbara Lanza, a game designer/editor at Byron Preiss International, explored the idea of stories in her lecture on \"How The Other Half Plays.\" She considers interactive adventure games to be the best province for appealing to women. Girls like games which tell a story with what she calls \"enhanced realism,\" meaning an interesting location, characters and plot. And since girls don't compete in life for points they compete for affection and popularity — they would prefer games where winning accords higher social standing rather than a higher score. Girls want fast startup times (no long rules to learn); fast play without emphasis on simulating boring procedures; a progressive plot that doesn't stop regardless of branch taken; and most importantly, no extended playing time with brain-teasers that aren't plot-related; and \"hooks\" which bring the player further into the game, instead of \"locks\" which require special knowledge or items to go beyond them. -Ken Brown HOLLYWOOD BABYLON There was a new group of attendees at this year's CGDC, and they were easy to spot. They weren't the ones with \"Beer Is Food\" T-shirts, creative facial hair experi28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"ments, or a mouthful of technical terms. They were snappily dressed, reserved, and obviously out of their element. They were, as I overheard them named in many conversations, the \"Hollywood types.\" Many in the game community look warily at Hollywood's new-found interest in interactivity. The TV/film industry is seen as a major threat to creativity, true interactivity, and all that is held sacred in gaming. But at least one person was resigned to the inevitable invasion by Hollywood, and he stood at the gateway to the Land of Interactivity, waiting to greet these newcomers with a smile...and a message. Ernest Adams, one of the CGDC board members, is a short, stout man with a wild beard who wouldn't look out of place in a lineup of renegade Old Testament prophets. So, it was appropriate that he chose to deliver his message, «Celluloid to Silicon\" as a sermon directed toward the «Hollywood types» to both introduce them to the industry and to explain the resistance that they may have felt, or may yet feel, from the game design community. First, he tried to explain what the software creation process is all about. He bemoaned the fact that there is no quick and dirty metaphor to explain the process of programming, saying that the only suitable explanation can be found in another name for programming—software engineering. Engineers, he explained, are faced with problems and asked to solve them in novel ways, whether it be building a bridge, cramming an unheard of number of transistors onto a silicon chip, or creating a unique game world. Since an engineer never tackles the same problem twice, he or she has no idea how long a new task will take, or even how to do it. Software engineering is especially difficult, because unlike other forms of engineering, there are no rules, no code of ethics, and no standard practices. Software engineering is a young and trouble-ridden discipline. The warning of the sermon was that software engineering is the essential ingredient in game creation—no software engineering, no dice. As Adams put it, \"Engineering is the hub of the product...and engineering is awkward, and unpredictable, and slow, and it is unavoidable.... Engineering isn't a metaphor for what we do: it is what we do. And if you're going to come into this industry, you're going to have to learn to deal with that.\" Having given that warning, Adams proceeded to tell a brutal but honest truth: \"The interactive entertainment industry is suffering from a grave shortage of creative talent.\" \"We make a lot of noise about story \"The Kiss\" would have to be veiled to protelling in this industry. But just look at the tect family values. Finally, he paraphrased things we are pleased to call 'stories'. Our movie critic Roger Ebert, who once said plots are thin as tissue paper; our charac that it is now more acceptable to show ters are two-dimensional at best...our so someone's breast being sliced off, than it is called stories are utterly without meaning, to show someone's breast being caressed. moral, or message.\" \"A damning indictment of a very sick state This is where Adams welcomed Holly of affairs,\" said Adams. wood with open arms. He welcomed the Although Adams' rant may have been a story telling expertise Hollywood has debit misdirected, as one could argue that veloped over its long history. He wel. the movie rating system is only a symptom comed plotting, pacing, and directing and/or reflection of skewed societal values techniques. He welcomed realistic dia as a whole, it was nonetheless powerfully logue and talented actors, but his invita presented and insightful. tion to Hollywood was not unconditional. The exhortations given and the Book of Before Hollywood and gaming are united Ernest read, Prophet Adams gave the in creative matrimony, Adams wants a benediction. \"When you join us, bring with prenuptial agreement. \"As much as we you all that is good about Hollywood, and need you, we're also afraid of you.\" leave behind the bad. Leave behind the chains.\" It was a strong and important message — too bad he was preaching to the choir, with only a handful of Hollywood types dotting the audience. Never fear, though; Adams will have plenty of opportunity to spread his word as the Hollywood invasion intensifies over the next few years. Let's hope his is not a lonely voice in the creative wilderness. PISTOLS AND PIXELS CGW Editor-in-Chief Johnny --Chris Lombardi Wilson expresses his concerns about the Video Games Rating Act of 1994. WINNING WITH WING Adams has three fears. His first is the The technical buzz at the CGDC seemed fear of any small community that is being to be a rush by the big boys (i.e., Microsoft, Intel, etc.) to get APIs (Applicalosing its identity. He is afraid that \"our tion Programming Instructions) into the wonderful, wild, and woolly culture is go development environment. We thought ing to be submerged beneath acres of ox the most exciting new API unveiled at the ford cloth and power neckties.\" conference was WING, a 32-bit DLL from Secondly, Adams fears the corruption of Microsoft, designed from the ground up advertising. He looks on the deplorable with game development in mind. Mistate of television as the prime example of crosoft will be giving away WING to build how advertising can stifle creativity and momentum for gaming in the control programming. \"The Madison Av Chicago/Windows NT environment. As a enue creeps who keep your creativity in result of this effort, we should expect to fetters want to do the same thing to us.\" see universal installation routines, hardIn the same vein, Adams fears the ware independence, and, for movie industry's single-letter rating sys Chicago/Windows NT native games, an tem. To illustrate his rant against the end to the 640K memory configuration hypocrisy of the system, he presented haze that places a minimum technical expertise barrier over our hobby and keeps stricted from public viewing because of out the novice user. \"full frontal nudity.\" Michelangelo's To drive this point home, Microsoft had \"David\" would have to be modestly none other than the code masters at id breached. Renoir's \"The Bather\" would Software port DOOM as a native Windows have to finish her ablutions behind closed application to Windows via WING. Suffice doors (\"Hasta la vista, Renoir! That young it to say everyone in the room was blown lady's vulva just blew Network Standards away watching Win Doom run in a and Practices' tiny little mind!\") Rodin's scaleable window in 640x480 resolution! I JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 29 "


"played WINDOOM on a 486DX2/66 and the speed approached playing Doom under DOS. Chicago and WING could usher in a whole new era for computer based entertainment. For those of you who will be buried with your copy of MS-DOS, Rational Systems (the DOS/4G DOS extender guys) announced an API designed to utilize your low level MS Windows drivers. Via your WIN.INI and SYSTEM.INI files, a game written using this API would be able to take advantage of low level Windows drivers. This would be a boon for high performance games because the pinata of MS Windows accelerator graphics cards could be cracked wide open, sprinkling hitherto unknown performance down upon DOS games. To demonstrate this, CGW saw an impressive special version of Doom running in high res and taking full advantage of a Diamond Viper VLB Windows accelerator on a Pentium rig. -Mike Weksler ligence, it seemed expressly apropos for Al is primarily used so that gamers may Dave Menconi to host a roundtable on play solo, and will continue to be until telComputer Opponents. Of course, where egaming possibilities improve. So, for we usually use AI as a catch-all term to deBaldwin, modem play should be included, scribe computer opponents, Menconi because the audience expects it—but that avoided the discussions of neural network doesn't allow him to neglect the Al. Rather ing, fuzzy logic and subtleties of computer than expect an opponent limited to 640K code usually associatto consistently beat ed with AI. Instead, he a human, Baldwin steered the discussion simply tries to de towards what could be sign an Al which done to make the will challenge and computer opponent be unpredictable more challenging and over a long period enjoyable for the averof time. Roger age gamer. Keating chimed in Mark Baldwin, dewith the fact that signer of EMPIRE DUNE II totally neDELUXE, commented glected AI, yet was that he aims for sostill perceived as a phisticated designs challenging oppowhich will appeal to nent. the more hard-core Menconi reWHAT-ME-WORRY? Chris Crawford gamers, with enough satirizes the current philosophies within minded the group \"fun\" elements to apof the old Atari the computer game design community. peal to a larger mardays and Chris ket. One of the main Crawford's EASTERN ways he does this is to give gamers con FRONT game. Since there was no way an trol, so that they feel that their decisions Atari 800 was going to significantly impact the game. on anything like even terms, the game was OPPONENTS UNDAUNTED Since most hard-core gamers feel that the way in which most recent computer games have failed to improve is in Artificial Intel"


"modified accordingly. For example, they found a bug in the game where the Russian units controlled by the computer would advance into better positions during the retreat phase. They left the bug in to make for a much more challenging game. Roger Keating at SSG is renowned for challenging Al. One of his keys is a system to stop the design in progress at any point and see what the Al is doing. By isolating the AI from other aspects of the game he is able to have a better strategic Al. For instance, it is simple to get one unit to perform realistic and competent autonomous operations. When cooperation is necessary between several units, most Als begin to break down, but this is where Keating's games shine. Roger uses \"screw points\" to balance the game, and continues turning the \"design screwdriver\" until the game plays in a challenging way. Keating uses a hard-coded map to let the AI know what routes for advances are available, then randomizes the avenues of approach by unit type, so that air units may show up on one flank and ground troops another, with the timing realistically coordinated. Much the same approach is used in the CARRIERS AT WAR system, where the reinforcements vary, and strategic goals are chosen from a Warcard deck. Roger reminisced about a bug in his classic REACH FOR THE STARS, where if the human player did nothing, he would amass great wealth while the computer opponents warred among themselves. Roger added a feature that kicks in when the human player has accumulated 20,000 credits, whereupon the Al opponents rise up and stomp him. Menconi, Keating and others commented that most designers were essentially honest people, but that it does get difficult listening to gamers complain about \"cheating AI.» Worse, gamers get upset at honest computer opponents, and defeat them using tactics they would never use against a human. The rules of the game may still be \"fair\" but written to reflect the strengths of the AI, rather than being biased towards the player. Some good examples of this would be the diplomatic systems for both WARLORDS II and MASTER OF ORION, where the randomness keeps things lively game after game. Another suggestion was to make victory points variable to a small degree, or other similar changes, which keeps the \"numbercrunchers\" from cracking the code easily. Menconi and company left would-be designers with the following action points. First, AI should be the focal point of the design, changing as the rest of the game changes, instead of being a last-minute \"enhancement.\" Second, whether using real-time or turn-based play, don't end the human player's turn \"without permission.» Third, don't let the AI cheat so obviously that a human player feels he must \"look behind the curtain,\" but don't be afraid to tweak the AI in ways that make it seem that a human opponent is attempting to drive your forces from the gaming field of battle. -Terry Coleman NO GAMER IS AN ISLAND So, if you were stranded on a desert island, would you want: a) a change of address for your CGW subscription; b) the latest Sid Meier game, but no computer; or c) Sharon Stone with a big knife in her hand? Well, you'd think we learned enough about game design to write a question where we're likely to win, wouldn't you? After all, there's no point in attending a conference if you don't learn something. O If it were any more real, you'd be drinking Tang. New Microsoft Space Simulator is so authentic, the Johnson Space Center at NASA has asked for it. Select your spacecraft from our fleet and blast off. Once in space, command your ship in our free-flight mode. Explore the fiery red canyons of Mars, or the explosion of a supernova, all based on actual satellite data. It's just one of the realistic simulations we have waiting for you to take control. To get off the ground, shuttle over to your reseller and pick it up. Microsoft Lolt Home 1994 Microsoft Corp. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. "


"O THERE GOES THE E E E E "


"NEIGHBORHOOD, D oom. Earth is destroyed by a D catastrophic event, and you're responsible for rebuilding civilization on another planet. Lucky you. Where you go and if you survive is up to you there's a galaxy of possibilities. the robominers and monorail systems you'll use on the planet surface, Outpost's photorealism and 3-D rendered animation are unprecedented. Based on NASA research in planetary science, robotics, terraforming, and interstellar spacecraft design, Outpost places you in control of the most comprehensive strategy simulation ever developed for the PC. No kidding. From the colonization starship to Develop agriculture, mining and manufacturing to survive, and then invest in research and recreation facilities to make life more comfortable for your colonists hopefully they'll be around long enough to enjoy it. Because, in the end, the decisions you make will determine the destiny of mankind. OUTPOST BUILD MANKIND'S FUTURE IN SPACE ASIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 Circle Reader Service #111 "


"A SKYREALMS OF JORUNE« ADVENTURE COMING SUMMER '94 TEVE '90 LEAVE YOUR WORLD BEHIND SRL "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ADVENTURE/FRP Virtues And Vices PAGAN, THE PURPORTmajority of players I've talked to have been able IN ULTIMA VII. LORD ED ULTIMA VIII, IS to run the game with their standard setups. UNLIKE ANY OTHER The game itself is remarkably bug-free. It nevUltima you may er crashed or locked up on me, although there BRITISH AND THE have played, and that were a couple of instances where the Avatar beincludes both UNDERcame stuck and couldn't be moved. I am not sure WORLD) games. Il you what caused that, but it was very rare. Overall, PAAVATAR TRY TO CUT A were expecting charGAN is a very clean game. acterization, rich story, Unlike the previous ULTIMA, items placed in role playing-you're expectthe Avatar's backpack will stay where they are, in NEW PATH FOR THE ing it from the wrong game. stead of being jumbled around at random. EvenThere are, in fact, so many things wrong with tually, of course, you'll be carrying so many PAGAN that it's much easier to start with what is objects that they pile on top of one another, but RPG SERIES. IS IT THE right. First, most of the technical problems assothose used often can be kept on top, and they will ciated with the previous ULTIMA are gone. The stay there. Voodoo memory manager has finally been As in SILVER SEED, there is a key ring that keeps ROAD TO RUIN? dumped; as a result, the game runs under my all your keys together. You just put keys on it as regular system configuration (DOS 5 and you find them, and use the ring to try and unlock QEMM) without a hitch. While a few people have a door. If the right key is on the ring, the lock mentioned configuration problems, by far the opens. RPG SERIES. IS IT THE SORY SIGHT No official announcement has been made yet, but sources close to LucasArts Games indicate that a new Indiana Jones movie may be in the works and that a computer game may be developed parallel to the film production. ... Bethesda Softworks has announced that the sequel to THE ELDER SCROLLS: ARENA will not be THE ELDER SCROLLS: MOURNHOLD. Instead, the next installment will be THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL. ... Sir-Tech Software expects STAR TRAIL, the sequel to REALMS OF ARKANIA and second in the expected trilogy, to reach store shelves by year's end. ... Pepe Moreno, designer of HELLCAB for Time Warner, has agreed to develop an as yet unannounced multimedia entertainment product for MediaVision. ... New World Computing is working with Andre Norton on WITCH WORLD, based on the Andre Norton classic novels, and will be developing the game with something of the look and feel of BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR, but using bitmap graphics instead of polygons. FEELING LONELY? For the first time since ULTIMA II, the Avatar goes solo, a strange experience for an ULTIMA. At least we are spared the idiot parade of companions that blithely walked into obvious traps and campfires, whined incessantly for food, and usually hit each other in combat. Eating, by the way, is no longer a requirement in the game. While there is food around, it isn't necessary to chow down every so often to stay alive. Saving and restoring are faster than in SERPENT ISLE. Saving a position is still a little slow, although nowhere near the minute or more we JULY 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 35 "


"endured in the previrate. Here, you actually enchant spells into ous game. Restoring a an item at a pentagram, a process whose position is, comparatedium and frustration cannot be adetively, quite speedy, and quately conveyed by mere words. First, a good thing, too, as you read the spellbooks in the library and frequent restoration is a write down the directions for each spell, necessity. because these are not contained in the After that, sad to say, game manual. The books only mention it's all downhill. You've the placement of red candles around the probably heard that pentagram. You have to infer (from readthere is running, jumping another book) that black candles must ing, leaping, climbing be placed at any point that doesn't have a and dodging in PAGAN, red one. If you don't realize this, enchantand that is true. The ing can be even more of a nightmare than game might easily have it already is. Next comes the placement of been called, as a friend AM I BLUE? Touring the Den of Skulls is a vacation only a necromancer the reagents. These are also put at various of mine put it, \"Mario: could enjoy. points around the pentagram. Then the The Avatar.\" If the item to be enchanted is deposited in the name \"Ultima\" wasn't on the box, you belong to a particular magic organization. center, and you click on the pentagram might think you'd picked up the latest \"You want to be a Necromancer? First, and hope for the best. Sega or Nintendo game by mistake. you must be tested!\" \"You want to be a If nothing happens, you have to run In fact, after playing for awhile, I could Theurgist? First, you must be tested!\" down a mental checklist to see what went n't help feeling that Origin had ideas of \"You want to be a Sorcerer? First, you wrong. Are the right candles in the right marketing this on the Sega or 3DO, and must be tested!\" put in the ludicrous arcade action to ap Worse yet, magic peal to the console crowd. There certainly here is cumbersome doesn't seem to be any other reason for and awkward. In a misincluding arcadish antics in a series that guided attempt to make has become famous for the maturity of its it as different as possistorylines and approach towards comput ble from the magic of er role-playing. Brittannia, Origin creDoes all this leaping around add real ated a nightmare of STR: 25 ism to the game, increase the power of the multiple systems with INT: Dex: story, or enhance playability or fun? No, it dillering requirements. ARMR: HITS. simply makes PAGAN a frustrating experi Forget the handy spellMANA: ence, especially since judging angles and book that did all the WGHT: 75 distances is very tricky, and one mistake mixing for you and means restoring the game and trying made spellcasting simagain. I have never, in any other CRPG, ple. Now it has become saved and restored as much as in this one. a chore. ADVENTURER'S PAK 3000 You may not be able to pack all your troubles in Necromancy spells the old kit bag, but it sure makes it easier to keep track of your inventory than in previous Ultimas. REMEDIAL SPELLCASTING require reagents, an That might have been acceptable, barely empty bag, and a magic tolerable, if the rest of the game were sub item. You put the reagents in the bag, places? Are the candles lit? Are the right stantial. As it is, PAGAN could well be subti then use the item on it to create a token. reagents placed at the right points, and tled \"School Daze,\" as a good 75% of it is Clicking on the token releases the spell, are they properly placed? The game is having the Avatar prove he is worthy to and of course the token is used up. Each very picky about that; if a reagent, espespell requires a different token. cially one next to a candle, isn't exactly Ultima VIII: Pagan Theurgy spells use magical foci. First right, the spell won't go ofl. Finally, is the System: IBM you have to gather the silver ore, then you right item being enchanted? Not all items Requirements: take it to the blacksmith who forges the can hold all types of spells. When every486-33MHz or ore into foci—one focus for each type of thing is at last correct, the enchantment better, 4MB RAM spell. Clicking on the focus releases the goes off and the item is filled with a vari25MB hard drive Ultima l spell, but in this case, fortunately, the fo able number of charges for that particular space, mouse; cus doesn't vanish and can be used as spell. You have to go through this inane supports AdLib. General MIDI and many times as you wish. charade for every spell you want. There Sound Blaster Miscellaneous spells, sold by the hermit are a couple of places where you can find sound cards on the plateau, require books and pre-enchanted items, but you still have to Price: $79.95 reagents. As you probably guessed, it takes make up at least four or five of your own. Protection: None one book per spell. At least mixing This is fun? Publisher: Origin Systems Austin, TX reagents isn't necessary for these. (512) 335-5200 Sorcery spells are the ones that will dri THE PLOT THINS! ve you crazy, as they are the most elabo The story, such as it is, can be summed up 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"A maniacal, carnage-loving Kzinti Patriarch, a paranoid fleet of Puppeteer worlds, and the entre Kzin and human races want you dead Imagine the secret to spate s grupeist mystery, too. The ultimate game of hide and seek! ROM RETURN TO You're a 29th-century fugitive, hunted by every society in Known Space. But that's what you get for preventing Puppeteer. INDWIU genocide and averting another interstellar  Man-Kzin war. In Return to RingworldTM, the Based on the award-winning book ' breathtaking sequel to. Ringworld: Revenge series by celebrated author Larry Niven of the PatriarchTM, your heroic adventures force you to run and hide for your life. That is, until you seek to uncover the greatest mystery of Known Space. This riveting featurelength adventure lets you instantly alternate the action between three main characters, all within a massive play area designed for endless exploration. VGA-rendered, 3-D cinematic graphics-plus full-motion animated effects and digital stereo sound-turn science fiction into reality. Welcome back to Ringworld...and to the ultimate game of hide and seek! RETURN TO RINGWORLO LARRY NIYEN K -ROM Distributed by TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE 2210 Olive Avenue, Burbank, CA 91506 Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-482-3766 D47108P2 Circle Reader Service #186 "


"as «Homeward-bound Avatar Wrecks The word \"robot\" is World. Film at 11.\" Pagan is a shattered used deliberately. You land, crushed centuries before by the never see the screen Guardian through the actions of the four character's face; the enElemental Titans (Earth, Air, Fire, and tire head is hidden by a Water). Over time, however, matters im lielmet. Whenever he proved a bit. The two obstreperous Titans, stands still, he comes to Hydros and Pyros, were magically bound, attention, awaiting the so they cause little or no trouble. Lithos next order. There is receives the dead and is content; Stratos, nothing human about the benevolent one, shares her power with it. For the first time the Theurgists for purposes of healing. ever in any CRPG, I felt Pagan may not be a happy place, but at no identification whatleast the inhabitants have achieved stabili soever with the characty and can survive. Along comes the ter. It was only a thing Avatar and blows it all away, in a very Unon the screen I maneuRING OF FIRE Upsetting a Thaumaturge is a sure-fire way of getting a very Avatar fashion. vered to get through warm reception. He lies to become a Necromancer; joins the game, and nothing the Theurgists solely to steal an item more. It's just as well, then, that the all the mancuvering yourself. If the char(thereby negating their spellcasting abili \"Avatar\" can only be male. acter is not lined up precisely right with ties); betrays a Sorcerer who trusted him Movement and combat have their draw the oncoming critter, he just smacks emp(thereby becoming an accessory to murbacks as well. The mouse button has to be ty air while the monster shreds him. Forder); kills in supposed self-detunately, almost all the fense) the Master of Sorcerers monsters are stupid and slowto obtain another needed item; moving, so they are easy to and frees the two bound Tiavoid except in the most contans, so the world is wracked by fined spaces. continual violent storms and In a departure from all previlava rain. Then he goes on his ous ULTIMAS, there are no charmerry way to the Void, where acter levels here, no experience he destroys all four Titans, with points. Instead, the three attribhardly a thought for the conseutes of Strength, Dexterity, and quences of all these activities. Intelligence are increased, to a Then again, given the arcade maximum of 25, by engaging in atmosphere, shallow charactercombat or casting spells. The izations, and emphasis on acreal purpose of fighting, theretion over thought, it is perhaps fore, is to bring up strength so not surprising that the Avatar the character is able to carry has been reduced to nothing DANCE WITH DEATH Get used to a lot of combat, as the Avatar is a veritable more stuff. Once strength has more than a self-serving robot. magnet for creatures with a bad attitude. reached maximum, combat In fact, the very term \"Avatar\" serves no purpose and should has degenerated into being only a tradeheld down continuously to make the charbe avoided unless absolutely necessary. mark of Origin Systems; it has lost all acter walk; you can't simply click on where There are other things I could go on meaning insofar as the game and the spir you want it to go. Speed is controlled by about: weak points in the plot, hollow conit of Ultima is concerned. the length of the arrow cursor; the longer versations, cardboard-character NPC's, it is, the faster he monsters that ignore everyone but the moves. This is not al Avatar, the amazing apathy of the inhabiways easy to control. tants (no one seems to notice the terrible There are times when storms or lava rain), but just mentioning the arrow suddenly them is enough. elongates, sending the Overall, PAGAN is a disaster, and an character into a run in embarrassment to Origin, Lord British, locations where it is and ULTIMA fans everywhere. It tries to hoe humanisthissha COSCE og fore 67c? dangerous do so, such go in two directions at once, and sucas cliff edges and fire ceeds only in tearing itself apart, failing mushroom caverns. dismally on all fronts. It may have \"UltiThe simple act of walk ma\" on the box, there may be an ing through a door can \"Avatar\" (of sorts) in it, but that does not be an exasperating ex make it an ULTIMA. Given what I experiperience as well. enced here, I am not looking forward SEEKING AUDIENCE WITH THE KING As you approach this powerful ruler, Combat is much the with any eagerness to ULTIMA IX. If you'll get stony looks in more ways than one. same. There is no auto there is one, we can only hope it will not mode; you have to do be anything like this. 38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Robinson's Requiem is a survival/adventure simulation set in a startling realistic virtual environment the like of which has never been seen before. The Scenario Imprisoned on an alien planet your aim is to escape. If you have to amputate one of your own limbs to stay alive, then that's what you must do. Features more than 100 variables managed in real time: your body temperature, stress, fatigue, pain, disease, gangrene, hallucinations... The Prison A spectacular world mapped in 3D, computed and displayed in real time. Over 3 square miles of play area includes: canyons, hills, waterfalls, and caves. The Challenge Hunt and gather food, find water, make your own 1.* clothing and weapons, deal with health hazards and fight off predators, test your survival skills to the very limit and get the hell off the planet WERE on Available for: PC CD-ROM Mac 3.5\" Mac CD-ROM 3DO 3DO For more information contact: ReadySoft Incorporated 3375 14th Ave., Unit 7 Markham, Ontario Canada L3R 2L6 Tel: (905) 475-4801 Fax: (905) 475-4802 Now available from: CHIPS & BITS P.O.Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Dep. 10073 Call: (800) 699-4263 Fax: (802) 767-3382 Int'l: (802) 767-3033 Source 10073 Silmarils REAVOA READYSOFT Distributed by ReadySoft Incorporated. 1994 Silmarils All rights reserved. Robinson's Requiem is a trademark of Socicte Silmarils. 300 the 3DO logos and Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of the 3D0 Company Circle Reader Service #55 "


"GAME HINTS The Straight & Narrow Path Of Pagan Scorpia Takes You On A Walking Tour Through Ultima VIII HIS MONTH, WE OPEN THE DOORS ON A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT TALE. FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER, WHAT FOLLOWS are not hints, but explicit directions on getting through some of the tougher parts of PAGAN (if you don't want to see this, better stop reading now). I have taken this step mainly to help anyone playing it to finish quickly and move on to better things. So, let's get on with it. Combat is generally best avoided whenever possible. Still, you want to bring your strength up to maximum quickly to carry more stuff. The easy, if tedious, way to do this is to find a quiet place (the palace cellar, for example), and just stand there bashing away at a wall or door for awhile. Eventually, your ST and DEX will reach their maximums of 25. However, the only way to increase INT is to cast spells, and plenty of them. Money isn't all that important. You will need 250 coins at the end to purchase Ethereal Travel from Mythran, so make sure you have that much put aside. You do NOT need any of the other spells he knows, so if you want to save money, don't buy them. You do need to buy the secret door scroll, though, as it's needed in a couple of places later on. As for all the jumping, I don't have any tricks to share. It is wise to save after every jump when possible (never save on any. thing that isn't stationary). Angles are of ten tricky, and it isn't always easy to judge distances correctly. The path to Lithos is the single worst sequence in the game. Ar south of the graveyard entrance (the stone ter that, it's not so bad, but you will be doarch). A couple of changelings wander ing leaps and jumps right through to the around in it. The hood is in the center; the end, so get used to it. leaves are hard to see, so look close. The Tenebrae: Find the library and talk to sticks (they look like twigs) are under the Bentic. This is the beginning of the main tree by the burned-out house in West path through the Tenebrae. No other wood will be accepted. game. Talking to him Catacombs: This is a nasty place, with will trigger certain re plenty of undead roaming around, traps sponses from Mythran that here and there, and floors that occasionalotherwise do not appear, so ly give way, dropping you to an unpleasmake sure you find the liant death. Be careful where you walk, and brary and have that chat. save often (it's usually safest to stick close Hermit: Leave by the to the walls, but that isn't a complete guarnorth gate and follow the antee of safety). road up to the cave that leads Find the small, freestanding, roofless to the Plateau. The cave is a room, with a ghoul and a jewelry chest instraightforward path, al side. When you enter, the floor gives way, though do be careful at the jumping stones. sending you down to the beginning of the To open the southern gates in the cave, path to the Necromancers. cross the bridge to the ruined building. Do One troublesome place is the lava. Jump not touch the single lever standing apart over it and climb to the top of the rock isfrom the others. Pull all levers that do land. Walk north, watching for a big single NOT have bones or bodies in front of rock on the right-hand side. Jumping to that them. Then recross the bridge and pull the will teleport you to the next Necromancer. lever by the winch. Continue on and out to the plateau and Mythran's house. Mythran will give you the recall device, which can teleport you instantly to any active receiver on the island. It will work anywhere except one place: the Sorcerer enclave. You CANNOT teleport out of that area, although you can 'port in. You have to go all the way back to the double doors before you can teleport. Special Reagents: The exeLOST AND LONELY? If you feel a little too much like a hermit in cutioner's hood is in a pit Ultima 8, read on. 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"Now Includes an MPEG Version of THE HORDE OPGUN You've got the sound. You've got the CD-ROM. Now get the picture with ReelMagic Lite! 1 Muli You've got the 16-bit sound card and CD-ROM drive-now all you need is ReelMagic Lite to join the MPEG revolution! ReelMagic Lite is the world's first Reel Maca MPEG video MPEG video playback card. It will change the way you look at multimedia V heel Maglie forever, at a price you can afford today. IMPED The MPEG process delivers 200:1 monster data compression for full-screen, full-motion TV-quality video, along with CD-quality audio playback30 fps MPEG (D acity Ad L, DOS video playback MPEG cudis game compatible RealMagic Lite ReelMagic ReolMagic Multimedia Kit *Plays popular Sound Blaster compatible games. if can affor all from your standard CD-ROM drive. That's what gives your interactive MPEG entertainment \"walk-in» realism and puts your GE favorite movies on CD-ROM.* The MPEG experience sets the new industry standard in visual excitement-send Top Gun rocketing across your entire screen or watch the first lunar landing on Compton's interactive encyclopedia! And many more next-generation ReelMagic MPEG interactive entertainment and movie titles are on the way. As an added bonus, when you get ReelMagic Lite you'll also receive the MPEG version of a thrill-packed, live-action adventure game FREE! Call 1-800-845-8086 ext. 407 for your nearest ReelMagic dealer-and blaze into the future now SIGMA with MPEG! DESIGNS Duel Speed Drive Stereo Speckers  blaze into the future now IGMAS VASHATURE-UNTINI Quaranya ZORK/ WATO *PRETE Comptons Fwvlin These are just a few of the many exciting Rec/Magic titles available now. *Call Sigma Designs to inquire about CD-ROM drives compatible with movies on CD. MPEG, the Motion Picture Experts Group, is the industry standard for data compression and decompression. 1994 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs logo is a registered trademark, and ReelMagic is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. All other brand and product names are property of their respective owners. Specifications subject to change without notice, Circle Reader Service #128 "


"TY Path to Lithos: In the catacombs, enter makes answering the questions properly lever outside makes one door go down the small door leading to the caves. Go somewhat difficult. and the other come up. Ignore the lever generally southwest and then west, until The key to the correct answers is to and find the hard-to-see switch on the leftyou reach an area with two stone bridges, keep in mind the precepts of honesty, hand wall; this lever opens up a secret Cross the lower one, and continue to door to let you through. the fire dart trap with a wall in front The game manual doesn't have of it. In the center of this area is a much to say about the details of Sorpedestal with a switch. Pull it, then cerer spells. You will have to write climb the pedestal and jump over to down on your own the constituents the door that leads to Stone Cove. of all the spells, as well as the placeIn the cove, call up a golem to ment of candles and reagents. open the double doors. You must cast Things to keep in mind when enthe spell on dirt, not stone. Rememchanting: All the points of the pentaber this is an earth golem and it can gram that do not have red candles only be created from earth. must have black ones. All candles Go northeast to the ruined house. around the pentagram must be lit. Be careful; part of the ground here is Reagents must be placed exactly right, unstable. Pull the lever outside, then especially when next to candles. COMBAT CHAOS Death and destruction are everywhere, as the climb in and pull the other one. Go Obsidian Fortress: The spells you bodies pile up in classic arcade style. around and up to the northwest, need to have are Flash, Armor of passing a large rock with an \"A\" rune Flames, Endure Heat, Extinguish, on it. Dodge the fireball spitters and concompassion, and humility. For instance, if Ignite, Banish Demon, Flame Bolt, Explotinue up to the end of the passage. A you're asked about the dying commander, sion, and Summon Demon. There is a talbridge has now appeared across the you tell him honestly the battle has been isman for Summon Demon in the tests, so chasm to the left. lost. Likewise, if you get the one about the you don't need to make one. However, a This is the start of the jumps. You must prodigal, you welcome him back. If others talisman with several Banish spells is pass the disappearing bridge, the sliding are boasting about their favorite Titan, handy. Be sure to pick up and keep an explatforms, the vanishing platforms, the you keep your mouth shut and say noth tra red candle. forcefield area, the fire mushroom cave, ing about Stratos. And, of course, you The tests are fairly simple in themand then the sinking stones. would prefer the breezy porch (Stratos beselves, as long as you are reasonably carePast the stones, as you go up north, stay ing an air deity). ful. I found that using Fade From Sight close to the west wall and watch for two Thief: Talk to both Xavier and Stellos, was helpful, as not even demons can see narrow passages (these are very easy to mentioning that you have talked to Tor you when you're invisible. miss, so watch carefully!). The first pas win. Then find Cyrrus, cast Hear Truth, Endure Heat & Flash: these are relasage leads to a chest with some potions, and question him about Torwin. You'll tively easy, both having short, straight under which is the key that unlocks the learn that Torwin has gone to Windy paths to the symbols. door in the second west passage. Point. NOTE: Torwin does not appear at Armor of Flames: There are two things That door leads to more sliding you want to find. One is the Summon platforms. After you get across, simDemon talisman. The other is a penWell... Discipleidis nos que ply walk north between the rows of place cosinformPCO comerloh tagram with a demon shield on it. this place: softice it to bogie undead, and have your little meeting is callca Sorcerer's Enclave, and The symbol is due south of the shield with Lithos (whew!). if sits Jin Daemon's Crag. (functions as an AoF spell when Pit of Death: Reached by going equipped). through the small door in Stone Extinguish: Find the flaming penCove (Scion Key opens it), and headtagram and use extinguish on the ing west. You'll come to the Convencandles, not the big flames. When the ticle of the Dead pretty quickly. Walk last candle goes out, all the flames right up to the building. Cast a will go out as well, allowing you to golem spell on the dirt patch inside take the magic helm and the symbol and have the golem open the door. below it. Use Open Earth on the center of the DIALOGUE DILEMMA Even with the arcade sequences, you must still Tongue of Flame: Unfortunately, dirt to get the Heart of Earth. Once get a lot of info the old-fashioned way-interacting with NPCs. the only way to get it is by killing you have that, you are finished with Malchir, as he has the Tongue on his the Pit of Death. the Point until you hear about it from person. Be certain to read the book, «The Fate Door: Open with the Scion Key. Cyrrus. Destruction of The Temple.\" It has the Summon up golems to open locked doors. Devon: After Devon has been arrested, only mention of the \"Tear of Seas.\" Until Drop the Zealan shield to animate the you have to read Bentic's journal, which is you have read the book, you won't be able statues. Use the secret door scroll to get in the evidence room (far right) in the to get the Tear from Devon. into Khumash-Gor's room. palace cellar. Use the secret door scroll to Freeing Pyros: Co to the big outdoor Argentrock: The test of wisdom is get in and read the journal. pentagram and toss the Tongue into it. tricky, as there are NO books in the li Sorcerers: Devon will send you to them After the fireworks stop (Pyros has been brary about their philosophy; all the readafter Hydros is free. In the caverns, find freed), take the Tongue back. ing material is about the air spells. This the double door with spikes on top. The Tear of Seas: Find Devon in the palace 42 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"Plug In And Hang On For The Multimedia Ride Of Your Life. INTRODUCING TWO NEW SOUND GALAXY MULTIMEDIA UPGRADE KITS. This ain't no dude-ranch ride. It's complete, high-tech, plug-and-play multimedia like you've never seen before. The Sound Galaxy Voyager and Asteroid Multimedia Upgrade Kits blast out of the gate with everything you need for multimedia action. Both come with our multisession Photo CD compatible double speed CD-ROM drive, and a Sound Galaxy Nova 16 sound board with support for all major sound standards. On top of that, Asteroid gives you stereo headphones, software, 4 CD-ROMs and more. And Voyager throws in a pair of powered speakers, a microphone, tons of Windows sound and productivity software and 7 of the hottest CD titles including Macromedia Action 2.5\", Indiana Jones and Comanche CD So if it's high-performance multimedia action you want, ride down to your retailer and saddle up the Sound Galaxy Multimedia Upgrade Kits. They're packed with a lot more technology for a lot less than other kits. Making them one high-tech ride that's worth the buck. Call now for a dealer near you and get a free Space Quest IV CD ROM coupon.* Every 50th caller wins Space Quest IV instantly! Call 1-800-781-1188 Ex. 12G EN AZTECH *Free CD ROM title with proof of Sound Galaxy upgrade kit purchase, see coupon for details. One call per person, while supplies last. Aztech, the Aztech logo, and Sound Galaxy are trademarks of Aztech Labs, Inc. (510) 623 8988 01994 Circle Reader Service #188 "


"and ask about the blackrock fragment. Eventually, he'll recall the odd rock he found and give you the key to the chest, which is in a room on the left-hand side of the palace. Only Devon's key can open this chest. End Game: Show Mythran the Tongue of Flame. Then talk to him a second time (new conversation), and say you want to recreate the gate. He will offer you the Ethereal Travel spell (he will only do this when you have all the pieces, the two titans have been freed, and he's seen the Tongue). There is no return from the Void (recall will not work here), so be sure you have everything you need/want before leaving. The Void has a large pentagram and four paths off it. These, of course, lead to the four titans. You can do them in any order. After each blackrock fragment has been powered, put it on the pentagram in one of the following locations: Breath SW, Tongue NW, Tear NE, Heart SE. Hydros & Stratos: These are not too difficult, as for both you just need to do some FOCUS POCUS Theurgical magic requires transforming silver symbols into magical foci upon this altar. ENGINEER Quick Pick Up Datry HII II II Abracadata, the publisher of Design Your Own RailroadTM introduces ... Ground-breaking Cab-view Simulation! — Design Layouts — Add Scenery Run Trains from the-Engineers' ViewpointD ut on your engineer's cap (grasp your computer mouse tightly) and get ready to drive down the tracks!  Simulates operation of a powerful locomotive from the cab view. Speed: Stop jumping across stones. Be careful on the way to Stratos, though; some of the stones break away when stepped on. Pyros: Jump north across the lava from where you start. Go east, then south, and cross the second broken bridge. On the other side, go east, then north to the dead forest. It's safest and fastest to walk along the forest's outside southern edge. At the end is a box with ten white balls in it. Be careful; the ground is not stable, and you might fall into a lava pit. Take the box, go back the way you came, over the bridge, and north to the design with flashing colors. Put one ball on each color, then Jump/Flash across the stones to Pyros. Lithos: This one is perhaps the most difficult, as you have to make your way through a series of caves. Keep going until you come to the place with the lava and stones. You can walk around the edge of the lava and reach the other side without jumping. Continue on, until you come to a cave with a triangular corner in the north wall. That is where Lithos appears, so be sure the Heart is ready. Once the four activated blackrock fragments have been placed on the pentagram, along with the obelisk tip, double-click on the tip, then on yourself. This activates the tip, and automatically brings the black gate into existence. Step through, and your long odyssey is finally over. That's it for now. In the meantime, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Group & Clubs menu). On Genie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (include a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! The program you've all been asking for. Yes...it can use Design Your Own Railroad track layouts! Includes dozens of elaborate railroad layouts!  Includes animation sequences and REAL train sounds. Retail....... $49.95 Retail .... Available for Windows/DOS & Macintosh  View your layouts' colorful scenery from the engineer's viewpoint. User-controlled: weather conditions, pickup/delivery schedules, response to train collisions, and cargo. To Order, Call... Abracadata: 1-800-451-487 Abracadata\" the source of plan-making software SINCE 1985 P.O. Box 2440 Eugene, OR 97402 (503) 342-3030 ng 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Reader Service #159 "


"Mac Owners, Your Ship Has Come In. Let's face it. All this time you've spent staring holes into your monitor, you've really been yearning for swashbuckling adventure on the high seas. Well, shore leave is over. Sharpen your longsword and climb aboard Pirates! Gold, the award winning classic action/adventure game from MicroProse. losing it all as you cross swords with scurvy rogues. You'll sail the Spanish Main, a world created to take advantage of all the graphics and sound capabilities of your Macintosh. Pirates! Gold from MicroProse. The Golden Age of Buccaneering has arrived for the Macintosh! To order your copy, call 1-800-879-PLAY today! Look for these additional MicroProse titles for your Macintosh: Sid Meier's Civilization and F-117A Stealth Fighter 2.0%. www As a courageous privateer, you'll lead a crew of wild buccaneers into distant harbor towns. Plunder valuable goods in bold attacks on enemy ships. Bombard enemy ships with hull-crushing cannonballs. And risk MICROPROSE A Division of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc.  1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #173 "


"REVIEW Necromancing The Throne 00W 65WS MicroProse's Dragonsphere Marries Magic And Politics by Allen L. Greenberg the castle for reasons which you will discover as the game progresses. A surprise revelation, midway through the game, complicates the plot even further. To complete the game, you must extricate yourself from the various snares which have been laid out by many different and devious plotters. NE OF THE MOST INTERESTING YET destroys, pillages and generally makes a LEAST READ JOURNALS OF THE MOD nuisance of himself. When Sanwe makes ERN AGE IS THE LEGAL NECROMANCER, his deadly cameo appearance, he arrives a review of satanic, demonic and on Earth in a mysterious tower. Unbeother unspeakably horrible pow knownst to our evil lord, however, an imers, and how they relate to modern law prisoning bubble has been conjured into and politics. That this publication has re place around the tower by Ner-Tom, a mained largely unknown may be attrib good (\"not morally-challenged\" in politiuted, in part, to the various incantations cal terminology) wizard working for the which have rendered it invisible ever since previous king. As the end of the twenty its embarrassing right-wing editorials duryear cycle comes closer, it appears that the ing Watergate. The magic sphere is bemain reason, howevDragonsphere ginning to fracture, er, for the journal's Price: $69.95 and that Sanwe is System: IBM anonymity is its large ADVENTURE about to break free number of contributwith CD-ROM Oragonsphere despite Ner-Tom's Protection: inghell-spawn efforts. Thus, the None demons, who are reyoung king must Requirements: luctant to reveal that 386-16 MHz or follow certain they are also practic better, 2MB prophetic instrucing lawyers and RAM, VGA tions in order to politicians. It should graphics, 12MB MICROPROSE eliminate Sanwe be no secret to fantahard drive space more permanently. Publisher: MicroProse sy game players, While King Hunt Valley, MD however, that gov(410) 771-0440 Callash's task seems ernment leaders and simple and straightsorcerers have often forward at the attempted to use each other to advance game's beginning, you will soon realize their mutual quests for power, and that that there is a lot more to DRAGONSPHERE this has almost invariably led to the death than was originally presented. Sanwe may of either one or both parties. DRAGONnot realize it, but many in the king's castle SPHERE, an engaging adventure game have conspired to use the wizard's foul from MicroProse, provides yet another presence in order to increase their own example of explosive results when magic share of power in Callahach. At the top of is carelessly mixed with political ambition. the list are the king's mother and wife, DRAGONSPHERE boasts an imaginative who discuss the hero's progress in hidden story in which you, as King Callash of the whispers even as they provide protective fairy tale realm of Callahach, are charged gifts to aid him. The king's brother, Macwith freeing the land from the abuse of Morn, is far less secretive about his aspirathe evil wizard, Sanwe. Compared to a tions, and even goes so far as to plant his dragon throughout the game, our villain conniving derriere on the royal throne beappears for one year out of every twenty. fore the king so much as departs on h During that year, in the tradition of many quest. Meanwhile, the royal wizard, Nerpoliticians and evil mages, he murders, Tom, has mysteriously disappeared from RACES, COLORS, CREEDS The kingdom of Callahach is home to several different races, and in order to penetrate the game's many mysteries, it will be necessary for you to earn the trust and friendship of each of these races. A race of Faeries, anxious to stay on good terms with the king, yet unable to resist the urge to tease him into frustration, possess a tremendous amount of knowledge. They will only give up their wisdom after an exhausting round of trivia and IQ questions. Elsewhere, a race of shapeshifters are forced to live in what can only be described as a fairy tale ghetto. For fear that these creatures might escape and steal the identities of others in the kingdom, humans permit no one to enter or leave this oppressed area of Callahach. Yet, it is with the shapeshifters you must negotiate in order to solve more than one mystery which arises on your quest. A desert-dwelling race calls their land \"Soptus Ecliptus,\" where their recreationloving Caliph is the ruler. The Caliph does not appear to take his responsibilities as leader at all seriously, but his position does allow him to play games with anyone who enters the tent. This \"Monty Hall of the Desert\" will also reward winning players with valuable and useful prizes from his treasure bag, so it is certainly a good idea for you to \"come on down.\" Problem is, the people of Soptus Ecliptus speak a different language than the rest of the 46 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"VOCABULARY ENHANCEMENT POLITICAL CORRECTNESS CATCH UP IN ALL YOUVE MISSEDL SPIRITUAL AWARENESS Tull BUTT-KICKING EXCITEMENT ILIPOISHIMIHIM NITI Grand Prize Winner: The Apple-Japan CD-ROM Award Chosen over IRON HELIX, HELL CAB, and MYST. \"Downright outrageous.\" 12 Inside MacGames MacHome Journal Lelcome to the future. America's on close-out sale. Everything's going to hell on afterburners. The Skins and the Neos have stolen the last qene samples of Earth's wildlife. If you ever want to hear a bird go tweet again, you'll have to do something fast. Fire up your hovercraft and blast through an incredibly realistic, grungy 3-D New Yorkof-the-future in a non-stop firefight. Your hand-picked co-pilot is screaming with attitude. Your custom-chosen soundtrack is turning your brain to plasma. The Weapons Lady has 24 different forms of destruction for your selection... if you can handle it. All you've got to do is stay alive long enough to save the world...and make a few bucks while you're at it. FROM THB AWARD-WINNING CREATORS OF LUNICUS Inquiries please call 415-813-8040 AWARD-WINNING CD-ROM MACINTOSH ADVENTURE NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS X . Paramount Interactive Circla Pandor Sonica #102 "


"restoration of normalcy in the choose one or two commands that are specifkingdom. Each race's village ic to that item. must be visited several times DRAGONSPHERE's story is tightly conbefore the game is over, but structed so that the tedium of travel from there is no set order in which one location to another is kept to a minithese visits need be accom mum. My only complaints arise towards plished. the game's climax, when the number of objects in the hero's inventory grow someGHOST OF GAMES what unwieldy. At this point, it becomes Walk to Brynn-Fann PAST necessary for you to switch from one obThe Kingdom of Lallanach DRAGONSPHERE is presented ject to another in rapid-fire succession. Click on the icon of the place you want to go using the same interface me The keyboard remains useless, as it does chanics as those found in Mithroughout the game, which prevents WHENCE CAME I? Your trusty AAA map of Callahach uses icons to croProse's REX take you anywhere in this richly defined fantasy world. NEBULAR and RETURN OF This is a protected land. kingdom, requiring that you take a crash THE PHANTOM: ten verbs What is your business? course in Soptus Ecliptish from the faeries alongside a scrolling list of or shapeshifters. inventory. By using the The last race to be found are the Shak. mouse to point to the While they appear to be a collection of verbs, objects in the inventalking birds, they actually claim to be hutory list, and whatever or mans who somehow acquired the gift of whomever appears on the flight. Unfortunately, they just happened graphic screen, DRAGONto make their home on the same moun SPHERE allows a healthy Dam the Ring. Step aside and let me pass. Dusust look around then, thank you tain on which Sanwe's foul tower ap number of commands to i'll be leaving, then. peared. The Shak are understandably be constructed. In addibitter at having been trapped inside Ner tion, pointing to a specific WHAT SAYEST THOU? Choose carefully, as you cannot simply scroll Tom's confining bubble, but nonetheless object in the scrolling in through all the choices for the one most favorable. make an important contribution to the ventory list allows you to Ion Papers LAYER *3411** 23oyuta 21717 00 "


"shortcut commands and more rapid access to the inventory. The mouse interface may be altered from standard to easy, while another option allows you to change the game's difficulty level, although the results of this change may not be immediately obvious. As was the case with RETouch Dragonsphere TURN OF THE PHANTOM, Fool Talk to Invoke signet ring Amulet Polish DRAGONSPHERE features such eye-opening animation eflects DARE YOU APPROACH? Every action taken has a distinct effect on as can only be described as the outcome of the game. true-to-life. Characters walk, run or even shift position with such naturDRAGONSPHERE is a moderately dillicult al grace as should only seem possible with exercise to complete, though some very human muscle in action. The back experienced game players may find it too grounds are drawn in pleasing detail, and brief or simple. There is a lot of conversacolors are muted so that the graphics are tion in the game, and much of DRAGONgenerally realistic. The compact disc fea SPHERE's challenge involves choosing the tures the digitized voices of each of the correct response to another character characters, although you must still read from a list of possible statements. The the game's extensive narration for your penalty for choosing a less than ideal reself. Despite some amusing efforts to en sponse may be to delay certain events in hance the non-human voices with special the story, or to make certain tasks more effects, the game's vocal sounds, unlike difficult. In these cases, however, the overthe graphics, are somewhat hollow and all flow of the story is not disrupted. These lifeless. are not the type of conversations that may be repeated until all choices have been selected, so you only have one chance to select the proper response. There are several opportunities for the hero to die, but the program quickly resurrects him and allows you to continue the story from the moment prior to committing the fatal error. In addition to its much appreciated lesson that mages and public servants should stay away from each other's line of work, DRAGONSPHERE features some interesting puzzles with a story worth following. In general, an enjoyable and satisfying piece of work. The tools MicroProse used to create Dragonsphere were recently sold to Sanctuary Woods. Though MicroProse is apparently finished with adventure games for the time being, hopefully Santuary Woods will put this now-mature game system to good use. -Ed DRAGONSPHERE ** * PROS Rich fantasy cultures, solid graphics, non-repetitive conversations, seminal story CONS Mediocre voice performances, sometimes hollow sound effects The only thing it doesn't simulate is ear popping. If it were any more real, your chair would be in a 30° bank. Our new Microsoft Flight Simulator has four planes, each with its own instrument panel created digitally from actual photographs. There are storm clouds and sunsets to fly into. Crashes are scarily real. And you can fly to airports anywhere in the world. It's just one of the realistic simulations we have waiting for you to take control. Everything is at your reseller. So, take off. COMPR55 1141 STROBES 200M 2.00 LIGHTS Microsoft AUTO P. 1 20.30 NAU L10.50 1994 Microsoft Corp. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp, Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. "


"Holy Sphin QUEALOND AUTO TIME ARVIOUR O SCOACoos200 LD Hang on. Tight. You're about to enter the dark and foreboding world of Microcosm. Super-realistic, computer generated graphics inject you into the body of Cybertech's president, Tiron Korsby. Your mission: to find and eliminate a deadly and elusive brain manipulation droid. Experience a whole new realm of adventure gaming as CD ROM-based interactive cinema effects transport you inside the heart-stopping action. SCORE.0014126 VY "


"MICROCOS cter! SEGACD MISWADAM Available for Sega CD, PC CD ROM, and 3DO at your local retailer. Over 500 megabytes of brilliant SGI graphics and an original sound track by Rick Wakeman, formerly of YES, crank up the intensity to levels you've never before encountered. Step into the latest high-tech micro-submersibles and pilot your way to the edge of your imagination. But don't forget to pack an extra pair of shorts. 675 Massachusetts Avenue Psygnosis Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Circle Reader Service #193 "


"REVIEW Blount Goblin, Ace Reporter Ou Es Goblins Lose Two I's But Come Back To Get The Story by Jeff James game. OBLINS QUEST 3 (GQ3), THE LAT labyrinth-a fearsome chap named Be tracting goblin guards, etc.). You'll get the EST ITERATION IN Coktel Vision's horn—has kicked the bucket, losing the opportunity to use other Goblin characLINE OF LIGHT-HEARTED PUZZLE/AD key to the entrance of the maze in the ters (such as Princess Wynnona) in some ventures, continues in the three process. More alarming is the disappear instances, and they behave just like toed footsteps of the previous ance of Behorn's beautiful daughter, Blount. Most of the game screens that two Goblins games, but takes a few tiny Wynonna. Thrust into this maelstrom of Blount and friends must traverse are covsteps toward the more GoblinsQuest 3 rapidly unfolding ered in obstacles and objects. In order to traditional adventure events is Blount, advance to the next level, an object must Price: $29.95 Systems: IBM, IBM CD-ROM journalist extraor be retrieved or an escape route must be In the first Goblins Requirements: 386 or better, 2MB RAM. dinaire for the es found. Most levels will usually have a leergame (Gobliins), three VGA graphics, teemed Goblins ing guardian or two which Blount must goblins were at the 9MB hard News. A curious, outwit in order to pass. player's disposal, each drive space; tenacious rewith a unique set of supports porter-far from a NO HOBBLIN' GOBLIN AdLib, Sound capabilities, and they cowardly \"yellow\" Ordering Blount and his colleagues Blaster, and were used cooperaPro Audio journalist-Blount around is an exercise in point and click tively to overcome sound cards. leaps aboard a fly simplicity. Click on a character to take many obstacles. In Protection: ing ship and sets control and then point at the location GOBLINS 2, only two None his sights on un you want him/her to travel to, an object goblins, Fingus and Developer: raveling the mys to be retrieved, or a character with Coktel Vision Winkle, were availPublisher: Sierra On-Line tery of Mount whom to banter. Blount and his compaable. Fingus was po Bellevue, WA Foliandre. Your triots are usually rather adept walkers, lite and mannerly, (800) 757-7707 task is achieving his goals with tact and diplomacy, while Winkle op guide the intrepid Blount erated with trickery, deception and a swift through a series of puzzles to bash to the skullcap. In GQ3, only intrepid rescue the princess and unadventurer/reporter Blount begins the cover the mysteries of the catquest. Although he does need assistance acombs. from a variety of characters in order to Although Blount is the priemerge victorious, he is undoubtedly the mary character in the game, star of the show. several other creatures will drop by to give him a hand. TO PUT IT BLOUNTLY... The first is Chump the Parrot, Situated between the rival kingdoms of seen in the first area aboard Queen Xina and King Bodd, the maze the flying ship. Ooya the Sage under Mount Foliandre has been the and Fulbert the Boa Constricsource of conflict and vicious squabbling tor make cameo appearances between the two kingdoms for centuries. later. Unlike Blount, most of GOBLIN NEWS TRAVEL SERVICE You control the destination of Whichever kingdom can successfully these secondary characters Blount, Ace goblin reporter, as he travels in his flying boat to the send a representative through the maze cannot pick up objects, but habitats of several cute characters, in this easy-to-use interface will win untold riches and other rewards. they can manipulate the enviscreen. Unfortunately, the guardian of the ronment (by pulling ropes, disto 52 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1994 "


"Goblins series, GQ3 feahis armpits while waiting for the player to tures a large dose of plot perform an action; Chump flaps awkwardtwists, unexpected obsta ly in the air for a few moments and then cles, and other story elelands soundly on his noggin. There's a silments like those found ly, good-natured air around all of the in a conventional advencharacters in the game. The CD version is ture game. Within the exceptionally colorful, with loads of carfirst few scenes of the toon animation and animated cut scenes game, Blount is attacked which segue into nearly every level. For by a werewolf and afllict example, after vanquishing the puzzles of ed with lycanthropy. Sevthe first level and jumping off the flying eral episodes later, ship in a bucket, Blount plunges from a Blount's ability to turn great height and impacts the ground with into a hairy, smelly, a tiny puff of smoke (and a hat tip to Wily WORKING ALL THE LIVE LONG DAY Creatures you meet on your journey slavering werewolf allows E. Coyote). Blount also offers spoken carry on in ways that Saturday morning cartoon characters might envy. him to pass otherwise in hints, thoughts, and suggestions to you surmountable obstacles. during play, spoken with a voice that fits able to intelligently pick their way Most of the puzzles can be overcome the animated character to a 'T'. through on-screen obstacles to reach with a healthy dose of trial and error, al At its heart, GOBLINS QUEST 3 is a light their destination. Directing more than though some leave common sense bab adventure of grand comic proportions. It one character at a time is sometimes re bling and drooling in a corner. The jokers would make the perfect game for the adquired, so precise timing is often essen can be a lifesaver, but they let tial. For example, Chump the Parrot the cat out of the bag with one must pull on a rope so Blount can snatch great leap. Puzzles that at an umbrella hanging from the other least gave a nod to convenend. For additional control options, an tional logic, or, better yet, a icon-covered tool bar resides at the top help system that provided an of the screen, not unlike the one found increasingly more specific sein more conventional Sierra adventures. ries of hints would have been These icons allow access to game op preferable. tions, \"jokers\" (game hints), inventory, What 63 shares most with the latest issue of the Goblins News, a its predecessors is a healthy game map and a miscellaneous options sense of humor, with innumenu. The jokers are designed to help merable sights, sounds and you out of a jam, and selecting one will animation to amuse and enprovide a complete walkthrough for the tertain. In one animation, current level. Although only five jokers Blount tugs on a rope only to are available, savvy gamers can save their be whisked upwards, followed ALL TUCKERED OUT? Even a goblin would welcome a chance to game position before using the hint, by the resounding clang of a catch his breath during some of the colorful segue sequences. then reload their saved game to gener large bell. Blount drops into ate an endless supply of game hints. If view in monkish garb, hanging onto the venturing initiate, although novices you're less willing to \"cheat,\" perusing rope as if ringing the morning bell at a should be aware that some of the puzzles the Goblins News section will give you a monastery. He zips upwards once more, are wacky to the point of being unsolvable brief rundown of the current dilemma then returns as the original Blount. Such without assistance. Still, the hints are there facing Blount. slapsticky bits pervade the game, and (and though they're often too tempting, Unlike previous installments in the more than once I found myself laughing they're better than a 900 hint line), and out loud. gamers can choose to use or lose them depending on their skill level and taste. But THE REST no matter what your experience is with OF THE STORY puzzle games, it's the charming characters GQ3 is the most visually and goofy plot elements that will keep you impressive in the Goblin hacking away at the puzzles to get the series to date, with bright, next scoop. Blount Goblin, Ace Reporter, expressive 256-color VGA will be proud. graphics in almost all scenes and segues. As in GOBLINS QUEST 3 earlier Goblins games, ***1/2 each character is imbued PROS Excellent animation, wacky with a unique set of man puzzles, nice tongue-in-cheek story, Jse CLUB on nerisms and characteris great value for casual gamer WHO NEEDS A SAND TRAP? You'll have to work on both your short irons tics. Blount occasionally CONS Obscure puzzle solutions, lacks and mental game to get through this puzzle. scribbles on his notepad, cooperative puzzles taps his foot or scratches JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 53 "


"Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10073 PO Box 234 Dept 10073 Rochester, VT 05767 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE SoundMan 16 $99 Thrustmstr Driving Sys $114 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thsm FCS Pro UProm $14 Thrustmaster FLC Sys $125 Thrustmaster Flight Sys $59 Thrustmastr Game Card S26 Thrustmstr Rudder Sys 599 Thrustmstr WCS Mark 2 594 Thrustm WCS2 UPROM $14 Universal Cockpit $219 Video Blaster $299 Virtual Pilot $65 Voice Blaster $39 \"SINK OR SWIM You play the hero, Rork Storm, who has the unenviable job of rescuing the dim-witted passengers of the S.S. Lucifer. You must weave your way through 60 puzzles included in the game. Offers compelling graphics, music and sound effects, 5-7 puzzles per level, and password code features. $19 'THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS' A versatile stick with virtually unlimited programmability. It looks and feels like it was ripped out of the jet. The ultimate edge for any flight sims. Offers a grip modeled after the F-16 Fighting Falcon, four 8-way hat switches, a dual stage trigger and 3 strategically placed buttons. $125 $219 IBM ADVENTURE $34 BENEATH A STEEL SKY' Jack into the world's first computer-based animated comic book adventure and enter a future where Earth as we know it is on the verge of Ecological Sunset. Features cutting edge virtual theatre environment, over 100 different locations and futuristic sound effects. CD $39 COB SYSTEM SHOCK' You receive a neural implant that allows you to enter cyberspace. Upon awakening, you dis. cover that a super-intelligent computer has seized control of the station and is planning to release a deadly virus. $48 $42 Acoustic Resrch P 22 $72 Acoustic Resrch P 42 $159 Acoustic Resrch P570 $319 Acoustic Resrch P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $34 Advancd Gravis Ultrsd $129 Altec ACS 100 Speakrs $69 Altec ACS 150 Subwfr $109 Altec ACS 200 Speakrs $209 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 Altec ACS 300 Sp wSb $249 Altec ACS 50 Speakers $79 Auto Cockpit $169 CH Weap Control Sys $69 Cyberman $79 Fighter Stick $79 Flight Cockpit Flight Control Stand $18 Flight Stick $35 Flight Stick Pro $57 Game Card 3 Automatic $25 Gravis Analog Joystick S29 Gravis Anolog Pro Jystk $34 Gravis PC Game Pad S19 Jet Stick S24 Labtec CS-1000 Spkers $75 Labtec CS-1200 Spkers $84 Labtec CS-1400 Spkers $99 Labtec CS-150 Spkers $14 Labtec CS-550 Spkers $24 Labtec CS-700 Spkers $32 Labtec CS-800 Spkers $30 Labtec CS-900 Spkers $69 MV 2000 Family Dlx $315 MV 3000 Super Dix $389 MV 400 Prm Pit CD Drv$240 MV 4000 Premium Dix $489 MV 5000 Pro Deluxe S689 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $59 Maxx Control Yoke $54 Maxx Ruddr Pedals FLT $38 Mdia Concpt Sbistr Clon $39 NEC3XE MS EXCD Dr $599 NEC3XI MSn InCD Drv $499 Notebook Gameport $42 PC Symphny Adlib Cmpt $29 Pilot Control Stand $19 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $139 Pro Audio Spect 16 Bas $104 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus $89 Pro Audio Studio 16 S169 Reel Magc CDROM Up $599 Reel Magic Vid Upgd $385 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $214 Sound Blastr 16 Basic S119 Sound Blaster 16 MCD $179 Sound Blaster Deluxe S79 SBlastr Discovr CD 16 $315 SBlastr Gmbistr CD 16 $399 SBlastr Omni CD Drive $220 SBlaster Powrd Spkers $25 Sound Blaster Pro Dlx $89 SBlastr Vid Spigot WIN $199 S Blaster Voice Assist $42 Sound Galaxy BX2 $49 Sound Galaxy NX2 $59 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $109 SGlxy NXPRO 16 MMD $299 SGalaxy NXPRO 16 S139 SGlxy NXPRO MM Kit $249 Sound Machine 594 Sound Machine Pro 16 $139 Sound Man Wave $195 Sound Star Snd Enhner $9 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE 007 James Bond Stih Aff $12 7th Guest CD $48 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $54 Advent Will Beam VGA $24 Advent Will Beamish CD $24 Alien Legacy $42 Alone in the Dark Alone in the Dark CD $48 Alone in the Dark 2 $34 Alone in the Dark 2 CD $48 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon $9 Animation Classics $39 B.A.T. $6 Beneath a Steel Sky CD $39 Beverly Hillbillies $19 Bioforge $48 Bioforge CD $52 Blake Stone Blake Stone Episode 1 $9 Bloodnet $39 Bloodnet CD $43 Blue Force: Next of Kin $42 Blue Force: Next Kin CD $39 Blues Brothers $25 Buccaneers CD $48 Castle Wolfenstein CD $42 Castle Wolistn-Spr Dest $29 Chaos Continuum CD $44 City 2000 CD $34 Companions of Xanth $32 Compans of Xanth CD $36 Conan CD $26 Conqust Robin Hd VGA S24 Conquests of Camelot S15 Conspiracy CD $39 Corridor 7 S36 Covert Action \"Crime Does Not Pay $12 Critical Path WIN CD $48 Cruise for a Corpse $19 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 \"Dark Half $9 Dark Seed $36 Dark Seed CD $39 Day of the Tentacle $35 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Death Gate CD $35 Deja Vu 182 WIN $34 Don't Go Alone $6 Doom $45 Doom CD Doom Episode 1 Dracula $34 Dracula CD $35 Dracula Unleashed CD $47 Dragon Knight 3 S46 Dragon Knight 3 CD $48 S6 Dragon's Lair 2 Tm Wrp $34 $48 Dreamweb $36 Dune CD $49 Earth Invasion WIN $24 Earthrise S9 El Grito Di Jagr CD WIN $46 El S24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready $24 Eric The Unready CD S35 Escape Dead Zone CD 548 Evolution S39 Evolution CD S39 Fascination CD S39 Flashback S32 Fourplay WIN $19 Fred Phrks Front Phrm $24 Fred P. Front Phrmct 2 $44 Free DC Freelancer 2120 $42 Freelancer 2120 CD $42 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight $39 Gabriel Knight CD $45 Gamma Force S6 Gateway S13 Gateway 2 CD $32 Gateway 2:Homeworld $32 Gateway Collct 182 CD $36 Gobliiins CD $19 Gobliiins 2 CD $19 Goblins 3 CD $19 Guy Spy CD S29 Hand of Fate S29 Hand of Fate CD $39 Harvester CD $46 Heart of China EGA $34 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hell Cab CD $49 Hired Guns $36 Hook $32 Horde $42 Horde CD $49 In Extremus $42 Inca $19 Inca CD $19 Inca 2 $34 Inca 2 CD $19 Indy Jones 4 Ft Atlantis $29 Indy Jones Ft Atintis CD $42 Inherit the Earth $45 Inherit the Earth CD $45 Innocent Until Caught $34 Inspector Gadget $34 Iron Helix CD $56 Isle of the Dead S34 Jack the Ripper $39 Jagged Alliance $48 Jonny Quest $26 Journeyman Project CD $46 Journeyman Projct 2 CD $52 Jurassic Park $39 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA 532 King's Quest 5 WIN CD $41 King's Quest 6 CD $39 King's Quest 6 Upgd CD S24 King's Quest 6 VGA S45 King's Quest Anthlgy CD $49 King's Ransom Myst CD $48 King's Ransom CD $38No Mouth & I Must Scrm $44 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $36 No Mth & I Mst Scrm CD S44 L.A. Law $9 Noctropolis $48 Labyrinth of Time CD $48 Noctropolis CD $52 Lands of Lore 2 $42 Nomad $35 Lands of Lore 2 CD $46 Out of this World $19 Laura Bow 2 $24 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Laura Bow 2 CD $24 Peppr Adv in Time VGA S29 Leather Goddesses 2 $39 Phantasmagoria CD $59 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Police Quest 1 VGA $19 Legend of Kyrandia CD $32 Police Quest 3 VGA $24 Leisure Suit Larry 1 EGA$16 Police Qust 4 DOS/WIN $39 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA$19 Police Quest 4 CD $39 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $34 Prince of Persia $25 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA $24 Prince of Persia 2 $42 Leisure Suit Larry 6 S42 Quantum Gate WIN CD 545 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $39 Quest for Glory 1 $18 Loom Quest fr Glry 1 VGA CD $39 Loom CD $39 Quest for Glory 3 $24 Lost Files Sherlck Holms $26 Quest for Glory 4 Lost Treasrs of Infocom $32 Quest for Glory 4 CD $39 Lost in Time $19 Red Shift WIN CD $47 Lost in Time CD $19 Return of the Phantom $34 Lunicus CD $42 Return of Phantom CD $38 Magic Death CD $26 Return to Zork Magic Pockets $18 Return to Zork CD $44 Man Enough CD $39 Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Manhole $24 Ringworld $35 Maniac Mansion $18 Ringworld CD S38 Mario is Missing CD S44 Robinson's Requiem S42 Martian Memorandum S24 Robinson's Requiem CD 542 Mixd Up Faery Tale EGA S14 Robocop 3 S32 Mixd Up Faery Tale VGA S29 SDI S6 Mixed-Up Mother Goose S29 Sam & Max Hit Road S34 Morph Man CD $29 Sam & Max Hit Rd CD S42 $9 $39 $44 $12 "


"Visa/MC Accepted Chooks Hold 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. All sales final. Call for details. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING IN US SA per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order. 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 peritem. Handling $2 per shipment. FREE GAME OFFER* IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES SCREENSAVERS ANIMATED REMINUES AND A GREAT BASEBALL GAMES 'MICROLEAGUE TIME OUT SPORTS BASEBALL' is a combination of utilities and games meant to turn your work station into a stress-relieving retreat. Offers stressbusting software with a sense of humor, Bernie and his dog Jock, 5 games designed to be quick, fun and easy, and screen grabbers and savers $25 CD INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT' the world's first CD MAG, is an episode of interactive television for your CD Rom. Devoted to entertainment software, IE features full-motion reviews, talking previews, multimedia hints and tips, and interactive video interviews with key figures in the gaming industry. CD $9 NEW $34 DO 335 Pleil P-80 Shooting Star P-38 Lighting HE 162 Volksjager Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $34 Spellcasting 101, 201,301 Spellcasting Bundle CD $32 Task Frc 1942 WRSR CD$35 The Victory Pack Turning Point $29 Gettysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $59 Ultima Trilogy Ultima 1-3 Ultima Trilogy 2 Ulrima 4-6 Wing Commander 1 Dix S48 Wing Commander Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commndr 1 Dlx CDS29 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry 1-3 Wizardry Trilogy 2 Wizardry 4-6 WINDOWS *FREE GAME OFFER ENEMY UNKNOWN Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from June 1st through July 31st or while supplies last. C ANDELETWEERGEN AGAINST THE ALIEN TIERCE SPEND $60 GET $33 \"UFO: ENEMY UNKNOWN' You control XCom; formed by the world's governments to fight the alien menace. Once you've shot them down you use soldiers to investigate the crash site. Make all the crucial decisions, complete ground missions, and tackle the aliens with automatic rifles and rocket launchers. CD $48 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhall3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 25.25, MacArthurs War 5.25, Crime Doos Not Pay 5.25, Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5.25 IBM ROLE PLAYING SPEND $100 GET MICROPROSE Airborne Ranger 5.25, Tegel's Mercenarios 5.25, Command HQ 5.25, F15 SE 2 5.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 $49 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE Kings Quest 5, Red Baron, Rise of the Dragon Combat Classics $19 F15 Strike Eagle 688 Attack Sub Team Yankee Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 Heart of China Stellar 7 Eye of Beholder Collctn $52 Eye of Beholdr Trilgy CD $51 Falcon 3 wThrstmst FCS $99 Gateway Collectn 1 & 2 $36 Land Sea Air 2 $19 Command HQ Red Storm Rising F15 Strike Eagle Lost Treasurs Infocom $39 Infidel, Lurking Horror, Deadline, Witness, Suspect, Ballyhoo. Hitch Hiker's Guide/Galaxy. Suspended, StarCross, MoonMist, PlanetFall. StationFall, Enchanter, Sorcerer, SpellBreaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero Lost Treasurs Infocm CD $39 Lost Treasurs Infocom 2 $29 Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Bureaucracy. Cutthroats, A Mind For Voyaging, Hollywood Hi Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewels, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert, Trinity Lost Treasrs Infcm 2 CD $29 Lucas Classic Advent $36 Indiana Jones, Secret Monkey Island 1. Maniac Mansion Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $16 Fish, Corruption, Guild of Thieves Marvel Trilogy $12 Max Pac $16 Star Control, Hoverforce, Test Drive 3 Maximum Overkill wDisk $45 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Megafortress Megafortress Mis Disk 1 Megafortress 3-D Editor Perfect General Trilogy $36 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 20th C WW2 Battles Power Hits: Battletech $32 Battletech 1, Battletech 2. Mech Warrior Power Hits: Movies $17 Rocketeer, Hare Raising Havoc, Die Hard, Ghostbusters2 Power Hits: Sci Fi S19 Prophecy, Tongue of Fatman, Circuit's Edge, Mines of Titan, Death Track Power Hits: Sports $19 Face Off, Pro Tennis Tour. M otoCross, Powerdrift Secret Weap Luftwi CD $39 $32 $6 $12 $29 S47 $24 $39 $38 The Prophecy $19 Treasure Huntrs, Inc CD $48 Tuneland CD $36 UFO: Enemy Unknw CD $48 Ultimate Domain $39 Ultimate Domain CD $44 Under a Killing Moon CD $55 Uninvited $6 Voyeur CD $48 Walker $32 Warriors of Legend $18 Where in Spac Crmn Dix $39 Where in Time Carmen $29 Where in USA Crmn Dlx $45 Where in USA is Crmen $29 Where in World Carmen $29 Where in Wrld Crmn Dlx $44 Where in World Dix CD $54 Who Killd Sam Ruprt CD $24 Wing Commd Ultm 6 CD $24 Wing Commd UUW CD $55 Wrath of Gods CD WIN $44 Yserbius Zombie Dino CD S48 Rise of the Robots $45 Rotox $9 S.C. Out Silverball Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Street Fighter 2 $34 Super Cauldron $25 T2:Arcade Game $29 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Teenage MNT ManMiss $12 Teenage Mut Ninja Turtl $12 Tetris Gold CD $32 The Tinies $29 Titus Fox $25 Tristan Pinball $19 Vaxine $12 Who Shot John Rck CD $36 Wild Streets $24 Winball WIN $28 Wrath of the Demon Xiphos Zool $34 $32 All Character Editors $16 ADD Collectors Edition 3 $19 Access Super Bundle $34 Al-Qadim:Genie's Curse $45 Al-Qadim CD Amberstar $19 Arborea Journy Inr Snct $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls $44 Bard's Tale Construction $29 Black Crypt Bloodstone Captain Blood Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $39 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $12 Cobra Mission $34 Corporation $9 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $16 Cyber Space Cyber Space CD Daemonsgate $32 Daemonsgate CD Dark Queen of Krynn S12 Dark Sun Dark Sun Grey Isl Ex Pk $34 Dark Sun CD $49 Darklands $29 Darklands Mstr Ed wbk $51 Daughter of Serpents $19 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Disciples of Steel Dragon Strike Dragon Tales CD Dragons of Flame Dungeon Hack Dungeon Hack CD Dungeon Master $29 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $16 Eternam $19 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Eye of Beholder 3 CD $42 $38 S12 Titan Screen Antics WIN $19 Secret Monky Isind VGA $23 Secret Monky Islnd CD $39 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster $34 Shadow of Comet CD Simon the Sorcerer $32 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 CD $37 Space Quest 4 VGA $28 Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Space Qust Anthlgy CD $45 Spawn $44 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spirit of Excalibur CD $22 Star Reach $34 Star Trek 25th Annivrs $26 Star Trek 25 Annivrs CD $54 Star Trk: Judgment Rites $33 Star Trk: Star Fleet Acad $36 Star Trk: Str Fit Acad CD $52 Starship $29 Stellar 7 CD $24 Suprhro Legu of Hobokn $34 Suprhro Lg Hobokn CD $34 System Shock S48 System Shock CD Teenage Mut Ninja Turtls $9 Terminator 2029 $29 Terminator 2029 Op Sor $19 Terminator Rampage $42 Terminatr Rampage CD $45 Terror of the Deep $36 Terror of the Deep CD $36 The Dig $40 $47 $33 Dragon's Lair CD $34 Dragon's L Esc Sng Cst $34 E-Motion Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fast Action Paq $24 Finale $3 Fire & Forget $24 Gobliiins VGA $16 Gobliiins 3 $19 Gold of the Aztecs $12 Guy Spy Highway Patrol 2 $29 Incredible Mach 2 WIN $29 Incredible Toons $29 Innocent Jurassic Park CD $44 Kye Deluxe WIN Mad Dog Mcree CD $35 Mad Dog Macree 2 CD $39 Metal & Lace $29 Metal & Lace Upgrade $5 Microcosm CD Microsoft Arcade WIN Mirage Thunder $39 Mortal Kombat $36 Ms PacMan Never Mind Obliterator Pac Man Pick'n Pile $6 Pinball Fantasies $29 Predator 2 $9 Prehistorik $29 Punisher $12 Raiden Rebel Assault CD $44 $26 $49 $29 $12 $9 2282 IBM ARCADE IBM BUNDLES $19 $4 500 CC Race Bike $29 Alien Breed Aliens Ate My Babysitter $27 Artura Crazy Cars $25 Creepers $34 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Air Combat Classics $39 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap of Luftwaff Allied Forces $9 M1 Tank Platoon, Gunship Award Bundle $44 $32 "


"S &B ITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10073 PO Box 234 Dept 10073 Rochester, VT 05767 inhell 802-188-3088 Fax Source 10093 IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING Ultima 7.5 PL 2 Silvr Sd $20 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima 8 CD Iltimaan $47 Ultima 8: Pagan $48 Ultima 8: Speech Pack $17 Ultima Undrwrld 182 CD $59 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrinth $48 Ultima Uwrld Stygn Abss $21 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures S37 Veil of Darkness War of the Lance $9 Waxworks $14 Wing Comd 2 UUW CD $34 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Forg $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $29 World of Xeen CD $40 «AUTococ from Simulations Systems is the most functional and toughest constructed auto sim control system available. It is designed to emulate the current McLaren F1 cockpit setup with left foot braking and pushbutton shifting on the back of the wheel spokes, thus allowing the driver maximum efficiency. $169 PASSES THEO Ains50153 0 907 S29 \"LINKS PRO CASTLE PINES' Set in the land of Colorado is the Castle Pines Golf Club designed by Jack Nicklaus This course offers 7,495 yards of golfing challenge, the longest PGA Tour course, and beautiful graphics S19 COMPUTER BATTLES IBM SIMULATIONS TESTINY $9 $6 'ACQUIRE' the classic board game is now available for your computer. Buy hotels, create chains, and trade stock in those chains to become the richest player in the game. The rules are simple and the possible winning strategies unlimited in this fast paced game. Play against the computer or with 2 to 6 players. S9 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' In order to conquer the world you must seek out and destroy up to three opponents. Features modem play: air, ground and naval combat; 22 different units to construct; more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history $15 $19 Fire King $24 Flames of Freedm MWII $24 Forgotten Castle S49 Forgotten Castle CD $55 Four Crystals of Trazere $16 Gateway Savage Frontr $32 Gods $16 Hero's Mght & Magc CD $45 Heroes of Might & Magic $45 Intrplay's 10 Yr Anthi CD $48 Joan of Arc $12 Lands of Lore Lands of Lore CD $41 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $39 Legend $22 Lord of the Rings CD $38 Lord of the Rings V1 $15 Lord of the Rings V2 $32 Lord of the Rings V1 & 2 $19 Lords of Midnight $48 Lords of Midnight CD $55 Loremaster $19 Lure of the Temptress $16 *Magic Candle 2 $9 Magic Candle 3 Matrix Cubed $9 'Mega Traveller.Zhodani Mega Traveller 2 $12 Megatraveller S18 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 S37 Might & Magic 5 $36 Mines of Titan $9 Pirates Gold $39 Planet's Edge S22 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness $38 Protostar $39 Ravenloft:Strand's Pssn $48 Ravenloft CD Realms of Arkania $36 Red Crystal $21 Riftwar Legacy CD $25 Rome: Pathway to Pwr $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Caster CD $45 Shadow Sorcerer Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD $51 Skyrealms of Jorune 948 Skyrealms of Jorune CD $50 Sleeping Gods Lie $6 SpellJmr:Pirates Spc $16 Spellcraft:Aspct of Valor $19 Star Saga 2 Star Trek Deep Space 9 $52 Star Trk Dp Space 9 CD $52 Startrek Next Gener CD $56 Stonekeep $46 Stonekeep CD $48 Stronghold $36 Summoning $16 Sword of China $42 Syndicate $39 Syndicate CD $42 Tales Magic:Prphc Shad $16 Terran Envoy $9 Treasures Savage Frontr $ 9 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Ultima 5 Warriors of Dst $38 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $47 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $16 Ultima 7 Series CD $42 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS ATP 2.0 $29 ATP Flight Sim 1.00 $12 A.T.A.C $30 A320 Airbus $29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 Aces Europe Mis Disk 1 $27 Aces Pacific Mis Disk $19 Aces of the Deep $39 Aces of the Deep CD $39 Aces of the Pacific $44 Aces of the Pacific CD $39 Aces over Europe $39 Aces over Europe CD Across the Rhine $48 Air Combat Pacific 1942 $48 Air Duel $33 Air Warrior SVGA $34 Airport Facilities Dir $12 Armored Fist $44 Armour Geddon $32 Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Art of the Kill Assignment Miami $19 B17 Flying Fort Classic $19 B17 Fly Fort w SS2 CD $37 Backroad Racers CD $29 Battle Command $6 Battle of Britain $34 Battlecruiser 3000 $45 Blue Max Aces Great War $9 \"Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 \"Cardinal of the Kremlin $9 Chopper Pack CD S40 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS in Toolkit $34 Falcon 3.0 $46 Indy Car Racg Add On 1 $22 Falcon 3 S 1 Fghtg Tiger $24 Indy Car Racg Add On 2 $22 Falcon 3 S 2 MiG 29 $32 Inferno S39 Falcon 3 S 3 FA 18 Hmt $32 S FA 18 Hrnt 832 Inferno CD S39 Falcon AT $16 Iron Angel $39 Falcon Gold CD $49 Iron Angel CD $39 Fast Attack CD $48 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Fleet Defndr F14 Tomcat $48 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Flight $52 Jet Pack CD $44 Flight Adventures 825 $39 Jetfighter 3 $44 Flight Planner $24 Jump Jet $39 Flight Sim Flight Shop $29 Jump Jet Aces Pack $46 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Jutland CD $44 $6 Flight Sim T-kit Ex Dk 1 $28 Lawn Mower Man CD $39 Flight of the Intruder $16 Life and Death $19 Fly the Grand Canyon S32 Life and Death 2 $24 Flying Circus $39 Lightspeed $9 Formula 1 $24 Loderunner $39 Frontier Elite 2 $38 Lunar Command $24 Grand Canyon Scenery $18 M1 Tank Platoon 2 $44 Great Nav Bat Ships Atl $19 M1 Tank Platoon Classic $19 Great Naval Battles CD $52M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Great Naval Battles 2 $44 Mantis Exp Speech Pak S19 Great Naval Battls 2 CD $42 Mantis Experim Ftr VGA $28 Great Nav Bat Sc Build $24 Maximum Ovrkill Bal CD $59 Gunship 2000 Scen Dsk $24 Maximum Overkill MD 2 $32 Gunship 2000 VGA $34 Mech Wars $48 HAW.C. $32 Mech Wars CD $48 Harrier Assault $19 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Harrier Assault SVGA $47 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $19 Harrier Assit SVGA CD $44 Mechwarrior 2 CD $46 Heatwave MegaFortress $12 Heroes of the 357th $14 Megarace CD S39 Hyperspeed $16 Metal Tech: Battledrome $29 Indy Car Racing $35 MiG 29 $44 Combat Classics 2 $19 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Cyber Race $19 Cyber Race CD $39 Das Boot Submarine $12 Delta V Elite Plus $19 European Racers CD $29 Evasive Action $34 Evolver $38 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stih Fighter VGA $29 \"F15 Strike Eagle 2 $15 F 15 Strike Eagle 3 $34 F15 Strk Eagle 3 Acs Pk $52 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD $48 F19 Stealth Fighter $18 F40 Pursuit Simulator $29 FA 18 Hornet $54 FA 18 Hornet CD $54 MS Flight Sim 5.0 $46 MS Flight Sim 5 Ls Vegs $29 MS Flight Sim 5 Nw Yrk $29 MS Flight Sim 5 Paris $29 MS Flight Sim 5 Sn Fran $29 MS Flight Sim 5 Portind $32 MS Flight Sim 5 DC $29 MS Flight Sim Fit Shop $32 Microsoft Space Sim 1.0 $44 Mig 29 Gold CD $49 MigN29 Fulcrum $29 Mule 2 $44 New Facilities Locator $9 Nomad CD $36 Operation Airstorm CD $42 Pacific Strike $49 Pacific Strike Spch Pak S17 Power Politics WIN S12 Praxim $32 Privateer Privateer CD $56 Privateer Special Opertn $19 Privateer Spec Opertn 2 $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Rally $29 Reach for the Skies $19 Real Weather Pilot Red Bin A10 Tnk Kill CD $34 Red Baron VGA Road & Trck Grand Prix $19 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Sailing Sm 3 East Coast $32 Sailing Sm 3 West Coast $32 Scenery Collection Set A $9 Scenery Collection Set B $9 Scenery Colltn California $9 Scenry Collin Grt Britain $9 Scenry Enhancemnt Ed S21 Sea Wolf S44 Sea Wolf CD $52 Seal Team $36 Secret Weap Ex He 162 $21 Secret of Dinosaurs CD S44 Semper Fi $44 Shuttle $26 Shuttle CD S24 Silent Service 2 $21 Space Racers CD $44 Spectre VR CD $45 Spectre Virtual Reality $38 Speed Racer $26 Starlord $39 Strike Commander Strike Commander CD $55 Strike Commdr Sp Op 1 $22 Strike Commdr Spch Pk $19 Stunt Island $37 Sub War 2050 $35 Syndicte S1 Amer Revit $22 TEX CD TFX: Taclcal Fightr Expr $39 Tank $16 Task Force Admirals Pck $45 Team Yankee 2 $19 Team Yankee 2 CD $29 Test Drive 2 $12 Test Drive 2:Collection $19 Test Drive 2:Euro Chall $6 Test Drive 3 $19 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 The Big One CD $29 $42 $6 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD $8: Delectives replaced with same product. Most Items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change All sales final. Call for details OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada PR HI. AK, APO, FPO $4 petarder 4-8 day Worldwide shipping S6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment FREE GAME OFFER* Prince Morison IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS Disguesit MUSTELE 2 ng ticare $10 24 SUPERHERO LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN' Lead a hilarious band of mutant superheros into battle in the post-nuclear wasteland of Hoboken, NJ. Your party in cludes Captain Excitement. Zaniac, and Tropical Oil Man. Your arch-nemesis is the evil Dr. En tropy, determined to thwart the rebirth of civilization. $34 S12 River ICON ecamanh Baichaay 23 Snakemean 218A To all the action pres3 SPACE Star Trek Judgemnt Rits $10 Strike Commder Official S14 Stunt Island S16 Summoning $16 Treasures Savge Frontr $10 Tunnels & Trolls S16 Ultima 6 S10 Ultima 7 Ultima 7 & Uworld Book S16 Ultima 7.5 Balancg Scis S16 Ultima Avatar Adventurs S16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima UW of Lab Book $12 Wizardry 6 Cosmc Forg $12 Wizardry 7 $16 X-Wing Officl Strat Gde $16 Yserbius $12 \"LORDS OF MIDNIGHT' Luxor, the ruler of Midnight, was taken prisoner by Boroth. Rescue the ruler and twelve pris oners held in the Citadel. Has 3D landscape, almanac of characters, and a point and click interface to move around. $48 *FREE GAME OFFER IBM STRATEGY Change of the LIGHT BRIGYDE Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from June 1st through July 31st or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET 'THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE' During the Crimean War, was one of the bravest, and saddest incidents in British Military History. Of the 673 men who began the charge only 195 were fit for action at its end. Features a large game area, 2 player mode, animated graphics, & tactical maps. $12 $16 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5. Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25. Gunship 5.25. Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25. Magic Candle 25.25 MacArthurs War 5.25, Crime Does Not Pay 5.25. Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET FORGET RORKE'S DRIFT Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HO 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5. Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM HINT BOOKS Indi Jones 4 Fate Atlantis$10 Indy Jones Grfx Adv $10 Inherit the Earth $16 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 1 King's Quest 2 $10 King's Quest 4 $10 King's Quest 5 $10 King's Quest 6 $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 S9 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $10 Lemmings /disk $18 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 S12 Lost Files Sherlock Hims $10 LucasArts Adventure Bk $16 LucasArts Air Cmbt Strat $16 Manhunter San Francsc $10 Master of Orion Off Strat $16 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 1 & 2 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 5 $16 Might & Magic Cmpnum $16 Off Bk Leisr St Larry 2nd $14 Off Bk Ultima 2nd Edtn $16 Off Gde R. Wilco's Advis $14 Off Gde Kngs Qust 3rd $16 Outpost Strategy Guide $16 Pacific Strk Playtstr Gde $12 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Off Strat $16 Power Monger Strategy S16 Powermonger $10 Privateer Playtstr's Gde $16 Protostar $8 Quest For Clues 2 $21 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Quest for Glory Strategy $19 Questbusters $18 Realms of Arkania $14 Return to Zork $9 Return to Zork Advt Gde $16 Rise of the Dragon $10 Rise of Dragon SEGA CD $9 Sam and Max $10 Sea Wolf Strategy Guide S16 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Shadow Caster $18 Simcity 2000 Strat Gde $16 Simearth $16 Simfarm Strategy Guide $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Simon the Sorcerer Gde $10 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Space Quest 1 $10 Space Quest 2 $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 S10 Star Trek 25th Aniv S12 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 X-Wing Mission Disk 2 Zephyr $19 $19 $45 IBM EDUCATIONAL $34 Theme Park Theme Park CD $48 Thunderhawk S6 Tie Fighter $48 Tie Fighter Mis Disk #1 $24 Tie Fighter Mis Disk #2 $24 Top Gun Danger Zone $12 Tornado $48 Tomado CD $42 Tower $42 Tracon WIN $28 Train Engineer $29 U-Boat 2 $36 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $36 Vette $15 Voice Commander Bndl $18 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission $20 WC Secrt Mis 1 & 2 Bdi $20 WC Secret Missn 2 HD $20 Wild Blue Yonder CD S49 Wing Armada $54 Wing Commander $21 Wing Commander 2 $26 Wing Commander 2 Bdi $29 Wing Commdr 2 Dix CD $29 Wing Commander 3 $52 Wing Commander 3 CD $54 Wing Commander Acad $25 Wings of Glory $49 Wolf Pack CD Wolfpack $26 World Circuit $29 World Circuit CD $34 X-Wing S42 Mavis B. Tchs Typg WIN $34 $10 MS Gallery: London CD $45 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Microsoft Dinosaurs CD 542 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $10 Mmedia: Vivaldi WIN CD S24 Castle of Dr Brain S10 Orbits: Voyge Solar Sys $24 Champions of Krynn S10 Oregon Trail WIN $34 Civilization S16 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 Codename Iceman S10 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Comptr Adv Gm Secrts $16 Print Shop Dix Bus Grph $26 Conquests Robin Hood S10 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Conquests of Camelot S10 Putt Plt Gs to Moon CD $44 Curse of Azure Bonds S10 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Pult Put Joins Parde CD $48 Doom S10 Putt Putt's Funpack CD $34 Dracula Unleashd strat S16 Putt Putts Fun Pack $19 Dungeon Master S10 Qurky Quays's Sci VGA $29 Dynamix Grt War Planes $16 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN S29 EcoQuest Srch for Cetus $10 Rodney's Funscreen S19 Eye of the Beholder $10 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Scootr's Magic Cstl CD $34 Eye of the Beholder 3 $12 Secret Isind Dr. Quandry $29 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Slater & Charlie CD 942 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm $8 Slater & Chrl Go Cmpng $29 GEN Secrets of Game $10 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Gabriel Knight $10 Softwr Tlwks Retrnc CD $79 Gateway Savage Front $10 Stickybr Parts of Speech $32 Globl Conqust Strat w/dk S21 Stickybear Reading S24 Gobliiins S10 SS: Gizmos & Gadgets $26 Gold Rush S6 Wacky Funster Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate $10 Harpoon $16 IBM HINT BOOKS Harpoon 2 Strategy Gde $16 Heart of China $10 A-Train $16 Hillsfar Advent Willie Beamish $10 IE Episode 0 CD Magzne $9 Alone in the Dark2 S 10 IE Episode 1 CD Magzne $9 Circle Reader Service #54 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 A Train Construction Set $9 A Train W Constrctn Set 836 Advanced Civilization S35 Air Force Commander $9 Airbucks 1.2 Ambush at Sorinor Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $34 Arctic Baron $29 Arctic Baron CD $29 Armada $22 Ashes of Empire $29 Battle Isle $32 Battle Isle 2 CD $45 Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 Battles in Time $36 Battles of Destiny $12 Black Beard $36 Breach 2 $12 Breach 3 $34 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $26 Buzz Aldn Rac Spac CD 554 Caesar Campaign 2 Cannon Fodder $22 Cannon Fodder CD $25 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carrier Command 59 Carriers at War S24 Carriers at War Const Kit $16 Castles $19 Castles 2 $19 Castles 2 CD S48 Castles Northrn Cmpgn $12 Celtic Tales: Balor of Evil $42 Chessms 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN Clash of Steel Cohort 2 $18 Colonization $48 Colonization CD $48 *Command HQ $19 Command HQ Classic $18 Command and Conquer 542 Conquer for Windows $19 Conquered Kingdoms $12 Conquered Kingdoms $15 Conquered Kingdoms 2 $36 Conquered Kgom Scn 1 $12 Conquest $36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $12 Aesop's Mmdia Fbls CD $30 Alge Blaster Plus $32 Ancient Empire $25 Annabl's Ancnt Egpt CD $52 Auto Insight S29 Auto Map $39 AutoWorks $39 Body Insight $29 Boom Box $12 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Childrn's Writg & Publsh $42 Clock Works $19 Dinopark Tycoon $34 Dinosaurs CD Don Quixote CD $24 Dyno-Quest EcoQust Srch Celus CD $29 EcoQuest VGA Fatty Bear's Bday Surp $32 Fatty Bear's Funpck CD $34 Fatty Br's Wrld Gms CD 544 Fatty Brs Bday Surp CD S38 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Island of Dr Quandry $26 Jack and Beanstalk CD $34 Last Chance to WIN CD $38 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Mario Tches Typing CD $48 Mavis B. Tches Typing $29 $48 $48 $39 S29 $9 $33 "


"CHIPS&BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10073 PO Box 234 Dept 10073 Rochester, VT 05767 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $42 AGA of localStar $39 'HANNIBAL' takes history out of the history books and into your PC. Experience the life and times of one of history's most controversial heroes. You are Hannibal. Based on the actual history of Roman and Carthaginian campaigns. Offers over 700 towns, go to market to equip your army, and negotiate peace or siege. $29 'DISCIPLES OF STEEL' Your sa cred quest is to save your once rich and vast land from total destruction. You must unite the people of Lanathor to defeat the evil hordes. Offers amazing 3D adventure, control up to 8 disciples, stunning graphics, huge array of magical spells, and hundreds of quests. $35 $21 OISCIPLES f Steel ELVIRAIL Whelawcof(erher 'ELVIRA II: JAWS OF CERBERUS' An evil force has penetrated our universe, possessing Black Widow Productions in Holly wood. Your must rescue Elvira, the studio's owner, from three craven worlds. Offers over 120 hours of suspense, over 700 deadly weapons and fully animated opponents. $16 CONQUERED KINGDOMS Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forests to your advantage. Features nine scenarios, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, and complete game scoring his $15 $44 tory. Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Darklegions Darklegions CD $38 Dead Zone CD $52 Detroit Discovry Stp Columbus $34 Dominion: 1 King's Life $41 Dominus $39 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dune Dune 2 $34 El Fish $34 Empire Builder $36 Empire Deluxe $34 Empire Dix Mstr Edit CD $45 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Empires CD $45 Fantasy Fieldom CD $18 Fighting for Rome $12 Fort Apache $19 Gemfire $37 Genesia $0 Genghis Khan 2 $34 Gettysburg $29 Gettysburg: Turning Pnt $24 Global Domination $34 Gobliiins 2 Princs Buffn S16 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $35 Great Nav Batt Admir Pk $49 Hannibal $29 Harpoon 2 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Harpoon Chalinger Pak $24 Heirs to the Throne $21 Hollywood Mogul $39 HUMANS $24 Humans CD $28 Humans: Insult to Injury $9 Incredible Machine 2 $28 Incredible Machine 2 CD $29 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $36 Kingmaker $34 Koshan Conspiracy $36 Koshan Conspiracy CD $48 L'Empereur $37 Lase Squad $12 Lemmings 2: Tribes $29 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings ODCP Lemmings W Didisk CD 545 Liberty or Death $37 Lords of the Realm $39 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral 2 $39 Lost Vikings $15 Maelstrom $32 Master of Orion $39 Medieval Lords Mega Lo Mania Merchant Colony $17 Merchant Prince $39 Millenium $6 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Objection $19 Operation Combat $12 Outpost $39 Outpost CD $39 Outpost Missn Disk CD $19 Paladin 2 $34 Patrician $34 Patrician CD $36 Pax Imperia $42 Perfect General $21 Perfect General 2 $36 Perfect Generl Sc 2 20th $24 Perfct Gnrl Sc Dk WW2 $12 Populous 2 $28 Populous 2 Challenge $19 Powermonger $19 Protostar CD $39 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $16 Red Ghost $39 Red Zone $32 Renegde Legion Intrcptr $12 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $39 Rules of Engagement $16 Rules of Engagement $9 Rules of Engagement 2 $34 Rules of Engag 2 Cpgn $19 Second Conflict WIN $34 Serf City: Life is Feudal $39 Seven Cities Gold 2 $19 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Siege $12 Siege With Exp Disk $19 Sim Ant $29 Sim Ant WIN $34 Sim Ant CD $47 Sim City $27 Sim City WIN $29 Sim City CD $47 Sim City Classic $26 Sim City Classic Win $26 Sim City 2000 Sim City 2000 Wind $42 Sim City 2000 CD $45 Sim City 2000 Grt Disstr $14 Sim Earth $29 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Earth CD $47 Sim Farm $29 Sim Life $29 Sim Life WIN $29 Sim Town $44 Sim Town CD $44 Smokin' Gun WIN $28 Space Hulk $19 Space Hulk CD $42 Space Miner Spaceward Ho! $36 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Star Control 2 $39 Star Legions $9 Strike Squad Stronghold CD $36 Sub Version $36 Tank $36 Task Force 1942 $36 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 $44 Termintr 2 Chesswrs CD $27 The Complete UMS $44 Theatre of War $16 Ticonderoga $46 Unnatural Selection $29 Victory or Defeat WIN $42 Viking Conquest $36 Vikings 2 $36 IBM STRATEGY IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS $9 $39 $3 Vikings Fields Conquest $19 Visions of Aftermath $12 Walls of Rome $39 War in the Gulf $9 \"Warlords $12 Warlords 2 $38 Warlords 2 Scen Editor $29 When Two Worlds War Worlds at War $19 $34 $34 IBM SPORTS $19 RBI 2 RBI 2 Road to Final Four 2 $41 Sporting Triangle Summer Challenge The Games Wintr Chall $29 Tie Break Tennis $9 Time Out Sports BB $25 Time Out Sports Bsktball $39 Tom Landry Football $29 Tom Landry Football Dix S29 Tony LRss Classic Stad S12 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Tony La Russa BB 2 $35 Tony La Russa BB 2 CD 546 Tony LRss BB 2 92 Tm 514 Tony LRss BB 2 Fan Mn $14 Tony LRss BB 2 Stadm $18 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Tony LaRussa NL Stad $15 Tony LRss BB 2 '93 Tm $16 Unnecessry Roughness $33 Wayne Gretzky Hocky 3 S42 Weaver Baseball 2.0 S17 Weaver Commssnr Dk 2 S16 Weavr Tm/Playr Stats 89 $3 $36 Hardball 3 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Disk S16 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $16 Hardball 4 Hole In One Mini Golf $6 Hole In 1 Mini Gif Crs Dk $3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix S12 International Sports Chall S6 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 1 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 3 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $4 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $6 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 $4 Jack Nicklaus Signtr Ed $27 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 2 $16 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Links Crses 2 Firestone $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro 486 CD $42 Links Pro C 1 Muna Kea S19 Links Pro C 2 Pinehurst S16 Links Pro C3 Banff Spr $19 Links Pro Crs 4 Belfry $19 Links Pro Crs 5 Innsbrk $19 Links Pro C G Firestone $20 Links Pro C 7 Pebl Bch $24 Links Pro C 8 Cstl Pines $19 ML 1950s World Series S17 ML 1960s World Series $17 ML 1970s World Series $17 ML 1980s World Series $17 ML BB 4 USAT Fan Man $25 ML BB 4 USAT Gen Mn S19 ML Baseball All Stars S12 ML BB Pro Teams ea $20 ML BB Manager's Ch $12 ML Football 2 $12 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Madden Player Stats 89 $8 MicroL BB Seattle 13 $12 MicroL 82 BB Season $17 MicroL 83 BB Season $17 MicroL 84 BB Season $17 MicroL 85 BB Season $17 MicroL 86 BB Season $17 MicroL 87 BB Season $17 MicroL 88 BB Season $17 MicroL 89 FB Season $17 MicroL BB 4 USA Today $28 Microsoft Golf CD $48 Microsoft Golf WIN $48 NFL Chall Col Almn Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 91 $9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Chall Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club $34 NFL Cches Club Ex Dsk $19 NFL Cches Club FB CD $34 NFL Proleague Football $12 NFL Video Football $12 NHL Hockey $43 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Pga Tour Crs 1 WIN S17 Playmaker Football $12 ProFtball Analyst 92 Ed $9 Proleague Football '94 $29 QuarterPole $26 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Baseball Innovator$34 APBA BB Statmastr 2.0 $29 APBA Bowling $14 APBA Hockey $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 All Amer Coll Fball '94 $42 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $46 Bball Chall 1987 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1988 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1989 Teams $9 Blood Bowl $39 Brett Hull Hockey $42 CD-ROM Baseball CD $24 David Robnsn NBA Actn $44 Dirk's Baseball Encyc S19 Face Off Front Page Football Pro $45 Front Page Sports BB $42 $18 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $19 $12 $19 IBM TRADITIONAL 3D Pinball $12 Acquire Armada Villa Crespo $9 Baseball Card Collector $6 Baseball Facts Battle Chss 4000 SVGA $26 Goal $9 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Delectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. All sales final. Call for delails: OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR. HI, AK, APO, FRO $4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment FREE GAME OFFER* IBM ADULT IBM ADULT MUUTTUU WARLORDS 2 SCEN EDITOR Contains routines which automatically smooth the transitions between terrain types. Offers complete control of scenario creation and 24 new scenarios. Create new maps, edit existing maps, set city revenues and descriptions, build roads. and place ruins and temples. $29 \"UNDER A KILLING MOON' Transports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices & sound effects and an amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually & aurally stunning CD $55 UNDER Scenario Builder ROOR RUSSELL MEANS *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from June 1st through July 31st or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET \"WARLORDS 2' brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. $29 $21 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhall3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 525, Magic Candle 25.25. MacArthurs War 5.25. Crime Does Not Pay 5.25, Warlords 5 25, X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HQ 5.25. F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL Baby's Got Butt CD $32 Bare Assets CD $32 Best of Debtntes V1 CD $49 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $36 Best of Barlw Affairs CD $44 Best of the Best V. 1 CD $19 Best of the Best V.2 CD $29 Best of the Best V.3 CD $34 Best of the Best V. 4 CD $34 Betrayal CD $36 Beverly Hills 90269 CD $39 Beyond Explicit CD $34 Blond Justice CD $25 Bodacious Beauties CD S36 Bodycello CD S12 Bra Busting Babes CD $29 Busting Out CD $39 Busty Babes 2 CD $36 Buttmn's Euro Vactn CD $39 CD Brothel CD $36 CD Rom Collectbles CD $26 Cafe Flesh CD $29 California Daydrmer CD S29 Camp Double D CD $29 Cat and Mouse CD $48 Centerfold Squares Centrilds & Covrgirls CD $32 College Girls CD $36 Come Play With Me CD $36 Condo Cuties CD $34 Creme de la Creme CD $29 Curse of Catwoman CD $26 Dangerous Blondes CD $34 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 Deception CD $39 Deep Throat CD $36 Deep Throat Girls CD $49 Digital Dancing CD $36 Digital Dreams 2 CD $22 Digital Seduction CD $34 Dirty Adult Cartoons CD $38 Doors of Passion CD $36 Double Play Vol 1 CD $36 Double Play Vol 2 CD $36 Dream Girl CD $32 Dream Machine CD $59 Dungn of Dominnce CD $36 Ecstacy CD 534 Endangered CD $29 ErotiCafe CD $48 Erotica CD $34 European Erotica CD $34 Exotic Girls 3 in 1 CD $24 Expose CD $24 Extreme Delight CD $28 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 1 $18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 2 S18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 3 S18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 4 $18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 5 $18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 6 $18 Femme Fatale WIN $29 Flame CD $29 Frat Girls Double D CD $39 G.I.F.s keep on Givg CD $27 Giffy Gold CD $28 Girlfriend Suzie $44 Girlfriend Teri $49 Girls Steven J Hicks CD $29 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $39 Girls of Risque CD $34 Girls of Vivid V. 1 CD $32 Girls of Vivid V. 2 CD $32 Girls, Girls, Girls CD $29 Glamour Girls 1943 CD S36 Heavenly Bodies 2 CD 345 Hidden Obsessions CD S32 High Volume Nudes CD S28 Hooter Heavens CD $36 House of Dreams CD $24 Hs Sleepg Beauties CD $39 Insatiable CD Intract Adlt Spl WIN CD $12 Intract Symore Butts CD 549 Interactive Lovers CD 545 Kama Sutra CD $38 L.A. Strippers CD S34 Legends of Porn 2 CD $25 Loads of Fun CD $32 Local Girls V. 2 CD $22 Lovely Ladies II CD $39 Maddams Familly CD $44 Main Street USA CD $26 Mark of Zara CD $38 Massive Mellons CD $39 Model's Memoirs CD $48 More Northrn Delght CD $34 Murphy's Brown CD $39 My First Time CD $29 Mystique of Orient CD $39 Neurodancer CD New Wave Hkers 1 CD $29 New Wave Hkers 2 CD S32 Night Trips CD S48 Nightwatch Intractv CD $44 Nightwatch Intract 2 CD $54 Northern Delights CD $32 Nova Collection V. 1 CD S26 Nova Collection V. 2 CD $29 Overexposed CD $39 Pandor....AAAH'S CD S27 Paradise Club CD $49 Penthouse Intractive CD $75 Penthouse Jigsaw PG $21 Phone Sex CD Audio $15 Playboy Electrnc Datebk $34 Porkware V.2 CD $29 Princess of Persia CD $29 Racquelle Released CD $34 Rimfire Pacific Video CD $32 Scissors N' Stones CD $49 Secrets CD $34 Sex CD $28 Sex Olympics $19 Sexual Obsession CD $34 Symr Buts Blwn Awy CD $36 Symr Buts Insd Shn CD $36 Symr Butts in Pardis CD $36 Symr Buts Honeymn CD $36 Sinfully Yours CD $29 Sizzle CD $29 Southern Beauties CD $34 Steamy Windows CD $25 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 1 S16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 3 S16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 4 S16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 5 $16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 6 S16 Strip Poker Professional $34 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 1 $16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 2 $16 Strip Poker Pro D1 Dk 3 $16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 4 $16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 5 $16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 6 $16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 7 $16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Dk 8 $16 Strip Poker Pro DI Dk 9 $19 Strip Poker Pro DI Dk 10 $19 Supr Modi Go Wild CD $34 $25 $9 $27 S9 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $19 Battle Chess CD Battle Chess EGAVGA $19 Battle Chess WIN $19 Beat the House $29 Blackjack $9 Bridge 2: W/Omar Sharif $28 Bridge 2: W/Omar S. CD $52 Bridge 7 $24 Bridge Baron Windows $34 Bridge Olympiad $29 Bridgemaster WIN $29 CD-Romix 1 Hardcase $16 CD-Romix 2 Prime $16 CD-Romix 3 Free X CD $16 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casino Mastr Gold WIN 843 Checkmate WIN $36 Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus S9 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 539 Chessmanc 5 Bill& 1 CD $34 Chessmaster 2000 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Classic 5 $19 Classic 5 WIN $24 Classic Casino WIN $16 Classic Solitaire WIN $16 Coffee Break Collect CD $29 Combination Lock 99 Demon Blue S9 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong's Jcks/Vid Pkr 5 $9 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Gambit, Kasparov's $39 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 949 Go Mstr Dix V 5 WIN 53 $79 Go Mastr Jr V 5 WIN 53 $19 Go Master Tool Kit $26 Go Master T-Kit WIN 53 $26 Go Master Ver 4 WIN S39 Gofrs Winkl Adv CD WINS12 Grandmaster Chess CD $32 H. Barbara Anim Wkshp $39 Hard Day's Night CD $25 Hearts $12 Hong Kong Mh Jong Pro $32 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Bk Gms Classic $29 Jeopardy 2 Joseki Genius $39 King's Table $23 Lawn Mowr Man SS CD $36 Lexicross $24 Lucky's Casino Advture $38 Monopoly Deluxe Monopoly Deluxe WIN S29 Oligopoly Omar Sharif Brdge WIN $19 Omar Sharif on Bridge $19 Omar S. Bridge Dlx CD $46 On Target Origamo $29 Pictionary $12 Pinball Dreams $29 Pool Shark Positronic Bridge $30 Puzzle Gallery 1 S9 Risk $28 S9 Risk WIN $26 Video Cube CD $45 Rodeo Games Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Russian Six Pack $15 Videogame Solution CD $29 Russian Six Pack WIN $19 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Sargon 5 $13 Welltris $15 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Wheel of Fortune $6 Scrabble Deluxe CD Wheel of Fortune 2 S6 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $19 Wheel of Fortune 3 Shanghai 2 $29 Word Tris Solitaire Royale S19 Wrath of the Demon CD $29 Solitaire WIN S19 Zig-Zag $29 Solitaire's Journey WIN $38 Solitaires Journey $34 IBM ADULT $12 Sorry Space Vegetables Spot $6 101 Sex Positions CD $39 Stan Wongs Video Pkr $19 101 Sex Positions 2 CD $39 Star Wars Chess $38 3D Beaties CD $19 Star Wars Chess CD S44 3D Darling CD $34 Super Tetris $29 3D Dream Girls CD $36 Swap $29 9495 CDX Calender CD S29 Tactical Wizard $39 Adult Movie Almanac CD569 Take-A-Brk Crswrd WIN $19 Adult Palate CD $28 Terminatr 2 Chess Wars $37 Adult Palate 2 CD $29 Tesserae WIN $12 Adult Reference CD $29 Tetris $15 After Dark Trilogy CD Tetris Classic $26 All Beauties CD $24 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Amateur Allstars CD $29 *Trump Cast 2 DD1 Amateur Models CD $22 'Trump Castle 2 DD2 $4 Amateur Video WIN CD $22 Trump Castle 3 $29 American Girls 2 CD $34 Trump Castle 3 CD $29 American Girls CD S32 Trump Cast Collect CD $14 Amorous Asian Girls CD S32 Turn.n-Burn $9 Animatd Fantasies 2 CD $34 Vegas Entrtnm Pak WIN $21 Animatd Fantasies CD $34 Vegas Games Pak WIN $21 Asian Palate CD $34 Circle Reader Service #54 S9 $34 $9 $4 $18 "


"CHIPS&BITS antes Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10073 PO Box 234 Dept 10073 Rochester, VT 05767 IBM ADULT IBM WAR GAMES FIGHTET 300BAD $36 Super Smulware CD $22 Superstars of Porn CD $24 Surfer Girls CD $39 Sweet Dreams CD Temptation CD $28 Devil in Miss Jones CD S34 Fisherman's Wife CD $38 Othr Side of Chelsea CD S29 Sexiest Women on CD $24 Too Nauty to say NO CD $44 Toy's Not Boys CD $29 Tracy I Love You CD $29 Treasure Chest CD $24 Tropical Girls CD Urotsukidoji CD $39 Virtual Vixens CD $59 Volcano CD $34 Weekend at Ernies CD $26 Wickd Q-Time Movie CD $42 Wicked Whispers CD $36 Winner Takes All CD $39 Womn Who Lov Men CD $32 Women of Venus CD $22 X-Rated Bloopers CD $27 \"BATTLECRUISER: 3000 AD' You command a mighty Battlecriuser in order to thwart the attack of the power hungry Gammulan Empire who hover on the brink of galactic conquest. Offers advanced 3D modeling, texture mapping, interaction with 12 alien species, and extra credits earned by trading. $45 \"TIE FIGHTER' Sequel to the acclaimed X-Wing, players fly under the direction of the Dark Lord himself, Darth Vader. Defy the Rebel Alliance in training, combat missions & tours of duty that strength en the Emperor's hold on the galaxy Six Imperial starfighters to fly under the strategies of the Empire. $48 VIDS:20 MEGATRAVELLER 1 THE ZHODANI CONSPIRACY $14 IBM WAR GAMES 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun & excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks pans & fades. Fully digitized voices & sound effects. $9 Harpoon Challnger Pak $19 Harpoon Designer Srs $7 Harpoon Designr Srs 2 $25 High Command $45 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine Kursk Campaign $36 Line in the Sand $12 Long Lance $39 \"MacArthur's War $9 Main Batt Tank C Germ $36 Main Batt Tank MidEast $36 Main Batt Tank N Germ $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Midway $24 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacifc Strm Midwy Cpgn $36 Pacifc Strm Solmn Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $19 Patriot $12 Patton Strikes Back Prelude to Jutland $24 Red Sky Morning Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $24 Rd Sumtr to Appomttox $45 Rommel Batt for N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 The Great War $39 Third Reich $34 To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 $12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $9 Under Fire $12 V Victory Market Garden $19 V Victory: Gld, Jn, Swrd $34 V Victory: Utah Beach $19 V Victory: Velikye Luki $19 V-Victory: Market Gardin $12 V-Victory: Velukye Luki $12 Victory at Sea $48 War in the Falklands S24 Warpoint $36 Warship Changd History S26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW2 Batt South Pacific $21 \"MEGA TRAVEL LER 1: ZHODANI We left the Starship Races feeling pretty arrogant. Jurgen's flying earned him a ton of Imperial credits. Now someone has pinned us down on a floating chunk of rock. Offers over 70 talents and abilities, 28 worlds to explore, and over 30 weapons and weapons skills. S12 $36 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $6 $9 Action North Atlantic S26 Action Stations Scen 1 S3 Action off River Platte $26 Aegis: Guardn of Fit CD $53 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 American Civil War V1 S24 American Civil War V2 S24 American Civil War V3 Banzai $9 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz $24 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blue and the Grey $38 Borodino Napoln Invads $24 Bravo Romeo Delta $24 Campaign $32 Campaign CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Civil War No Grter Glory $21 Conflict: Korea $19 Decision at Gettysburg $18 Dreadnoughts $29 Dreadnoughts $34 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pacifc War $36 Gary Grigsby War Rssia $45 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Turning Pnt $24 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $19 $9 S6 88 S9 Battle Command $6 Battles of Destiny $12 BB Chall 87 or 88 Tms ea $9 Bball Chall 89 Teams $9 Blackjack $9 Blue Max Aces Great War $9 Breach 2 $12 Bodycello CD $12 Boom Box $12 *Cardinal of the Kremlin S6 Carrier Command $9 Castles Northrn Campgn $9 Captain Blood Champions of Krynn $12 Charge of Light Brigade 512 Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus S9 Combination Lock Conquered Kingdoms $12 Conquerd Kingdms Sc 1 $12 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Corporation $9 Covert Action $6 Crime City Crime Does Not Pay $12 \"Dark Half $9 Dark Queen of Krynn $12 Das Boot Submarine Demon Blue Don't Go Alone $6 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong's Jcks/Vid Pkr 5 $9 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord 59 Dragon Strike $12 Dragons of Flame 59 EMotion Earthrise Face Off $9 Fighting for Rome $12 Finale Free DC Gamma Force $6 Gofr Winkl Adv CD WIN $12 Gold of the Aztecs $12 Hearts $12 Heatwave $6 Hole In One Mini Golf $6 Hole In 1 Mini Golf Cr Dk $3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix $12 Humans: Insult to Injury $9 Intract Adult Spl WIN CD $12 International Sports Chall $6 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S3 Jack Nicklaus Cr Dk 1 S6 Jack Nicklaus Cr Dk 2 S6 Jack Nicklaus Cr Dk 3 $6 Jack Nicklaus Cr Disk 5 $4 Jack Nicklaus SE Crse 1 $4 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Jeopardy 2 Joan of Arc $12 Killing Cloud $6 L.A. Law Laser Suad $12 Lightspeed $9 Line in the Sand $12 \"MacArthur's War Madden Player Stats '89 $8 \"Magic Candle 2 $9 Magic Candle 3 $9 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Marvel Trilogy Bundle $12 Matrix Cubed $9 Medieval Lords $12 MegaFortress $12 \"MegaTraveller:Zhodani $6 Mega Traveller 2 $12 MicroL BB Seattle 13 $12 Millenium $6 Mines of Titan $9 ML Baseball All Stars S12 ML Baseball Mangr's Ch $12 ML Football 2 $12 Ms Pacman Never Mind S9 New Facilities Locator $9 NFL Chall Col Almn Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $9 NFL Chall 91 Pre Season $9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Proleague Football $12 NFL Video Football $12 Obliterator $6 Oligopoly On Target $9 Operation Combat Pac Man $9 Patriot $12 Perfct Genrl S Dk WW2 S12 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Pick'n Pile $6 Pictionary $12 Playmaker Football $12 Power Politics WIN $12 Predator 2 $9 ProFtball Analyst 92 Ed S9 Punisher S12 Puzzle Gallery 1 RBI 2 Renegde Legion Intrcptr $12 Rodeo Games Rotox $9 Rules of Engagement $9 S.C. Out $12 Scenery Collection Set A $9 Scenery Collection Set B $9 Scenery Collin California $9 Scenery Collin Grt Brtain $9 SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 Shadow Sorcerer Siege Sleeping Gods Lie Snoopy's Fun Pack Sorry Space Vegetables Sporting Triangle Spot 'Star Legions Storm Across Europe $12 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Teenage MNT Man Miss $12 Teenage Mut Ninja Turtis $9 *Tegel's Mercenaries $9 The Tinies $12 Terran Envoy $9 Tesserae WIN $12 Test Drive 2 $12 Test Drive 2:Euro Chall S6 Test Drive 3:Road & Car 9 Thunderhawk SG IBM BUDGET $12 $12 $9 $9 $12 $12 S9 007 James Bond Stlh All $12 3D Pinball Acquire S9 Action Stations Scen 1 $3 Air Force Commander $9 AirportFacilities Dir $12 Allied Forces Bundle Amazon Armada Villa Crespo $9 Artura B.A.T. $6 Banzai Baseball Card Collector $6 Baseball Facts S9 $9 $9 $4 $9 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cashCOD $8. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. All sales final. Call for details OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI. AK, APO, FPO $4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. FREE GAME OFFER* NEO GEO TURBO GRAFX THE 1898-INS GUMO $119 Top Players Golf View Point Windjammers World Heroes 2 $199 $199 $199 '7th GUEST: 11th HOUR' Sequel to 7th Guest except the stakes are higher, the puzzles more clever and the return visit even more unsettling. Solve puzzles and investigate clues that take you through Stauf's haunted house with movie-like plot twists, special effects and music soundtrack. CD$54 ACES OF THE DEEP' Between September 1939 and May 1945, Germany launched over 1,000 U-boats into combat against the Allies. Dive deep to avoid at tacks and measure your success in tonage as you take command in the most realistic and advanced WWII German U-boat simula tion created. $39 $14 JAGUAR JB Harold CD $29 Jack Nicklaus Golf $14 Jackie C. Actn Kung Fu $19 Lords of Thunder CD $44 Monster Lair CD $29 Parasol Stars Raiden $29 Riot Zone CD $36 Samurai Ghost $19 Shadow Beast CD $36 Soldier Blade $19 Somer Assault S26 Splash Lake CD $14 Turrican Vasteel CD S43 Ys Book 1 & 2 CD ACES of the DEEP $58 $54 $14 $36 MEGALOMANIA *FREE GAME OFFER GAME GEAR Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from June 1st through July 31st or while supplies last. $29 SPEND $60 GET * Jaguar System $249 Jaguar CD System $299 Jaguar Controller $24 Alien Vs Predator Barkley Basketball $46 Baseball $54 Basketball Battle Wheels $54 Battle Zone 2000 $54 Brett Hull Hockey $46 Brutal Sports Football $56 Bubsy $46 Car Wars $49 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Checkered Flag 2 $58 Club Drive $52 Crescent Galaxy $44 Dune $54 Dungeon Depths $54 European Soccer Chall $56 Evolution:Dino Dudes $44 Hardball 3 $46 Hosenose & Booger $54 Jack Nicklaus Golf $46 Jaguar Formula 1 Racg $54 Kasumi Ninja $54 NFL Football S54 Raiden S44 Star Raiders 2000 $52 Tempest 2000 $52 Tiny Toon Adventures $52 Ultimate Brain Games $56 Ultra Vortex S54 'MEGA LO MANIA' Battle three ruthless adversarles for supreme control of the planet. Begin your quest at the dawn of time, go through the present and finally fight in the distant future. Direct your followers to build castles, mines, and laboratories. Also invent, develop and manufacture advanced weapons. S19 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 525, Magic Candle 25.25. MacArthurs War 5.25, Crime Does Not Pay 525, Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5.25 38 SPEND $100 GET Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HQ 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM BUDGET 3DO 3D0 NEO GEO $39 $56 Bas MACINTOSH GG System Sonic 2 $129 Aladdin GA $32 Andre Agassi Tennis $29 caesars Palace Choplifter 3 Cool SPOT Desert Strike GA Dolphin Formula 1 GA GP Rider Incredible Hulk Itchy & Scratchy $32 Jeopardy Sports Edition $32 Jungle Book $32 Jurassic Park $36 Klax $14 Majors: Pro Baseball $34 Marco's Magic Soccer $42 Monster Truck Wars $32 Mortal Kombat $36 Mortal Kombat 2 Ms Pac Man $28 NBA Bball Dave Robnsn $32 NBA Jam Session $38 NFL Fball Joe Montana $36 Outrun:Europa $32 PGA Tour Golf GA $32 Pac Attack $29 Pinball Dreams $32 Poker Face Paul's Poker $24 Pokr Fac Paul's Solitaire $24 Prince of Persia S24 Psychic World $14 Ren & Stimpy Show S32 Scratch Golf $38 Side Pocket $32 Smash TV $16 Super Battle Tank GA $32 Super Battleship $29 Super Golf $16 Terminator Trunski $32 Wheel of Fortune World Cup USA X Men $9 Tie Break Tennis $9 Tony LRss Classic Stad $12 Tony LaRussa BB '90 $12 Tony LaRussa BB '91 $12 Tony LaRussa Bsball $9 Top Gun Danger Zone $12 Treasres Savage Frontr $9 'Trump Cast 2 DD 1 $4 *Trump Cast 2 DD 2 $4 Turn-n-Burn Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $12 Uninvited $6 Under Fire $12 Vaxine $12 Video Poker Villa Crespo 9 Visions of Aftermath $12 V Victory Markt Garden $12 V Victory: Velikye Luki $12 Wacky Funster War in the Gulf War of the Lance Warlords $12 Weaver Tm/Playr Stat 89 $3 Wheel of Fortune 1 Wheel of Fortune 2 $6 Wheel of Fortune 3 Wrath of the Demon $12 Xiphos $49 Harpoon Scenario Editor $14 Jack Nicklaus CrDk 1-3ea $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 5 $6 Lexi Cross Omar Sharif Bridge Dix $19 Out of this World $19 Shadowgate $19 Sherlock Holmes OnDt 2 $19 Sim Ant Test Drive 2: CA Chaling s6 Test Drive 2: Super Cars $6 WordTris $19 $52 Aces over Europe $52 Sewer Shark $52 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Air Warrior $52 Shadow Caster $52 Baseball Stars Pro 599 Alone in the Dark $52 Shock Wave Baseball Stars Pro 2 $149 Battle Chess $46 Shuttle $46 Blues Journey $129 Conquered Kingdoms $52 Space Ace $52 Burning Fight $149 Demolition Man $56 Space Pirates $52 Crossed Swords $129 DinoBlazer $56 Star Control 2 $52 Cyber Lip $129 Doom $52 Star Trek Next Genertn $54 Fatal Fury $99 Dragon Tales $46 Star Wars Chess $52 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Dragon's Lair Stellar 7 $49 Fatal Fury Special $199 Dragons Lair 2:Tm Warp $52 Syndicate $52 Football Frenzy $129 Escape Monster Manor $52 Theme Park $52 Ghost Pilots $129 Gridders $52 Total Eclipse $52 King of the Monsters $99 HUMANS $49 Troddlers $49 King of the Monsters 2 $169 Horde $52 Twisted $49 Last Resort $149 Incredible Machine $52 Way of the Warrior $52 League Bowling $129 Intelliplay Football $52 Who Shot Johnny Rock $49 Magician Lord $99 Jurassic Park Wing Commander $49 Mutation Nation S149 Kingdom:Far Reaches $52 WorldBuilders, Inc $52 Nam 1975 $99 Lemmings $49 Neo Geo Control Pad $46 Lost Files Sherick Holms $49 Neo Geo Gold System $569 Mad Dog McCree $52 AMIGA Ninja Combat $99 Mad Dog McCree 2 $52 Riding Hero $129 Madden Football $49 Fast Break Robo Army S99 Megarace $44 Heatwave Samurai Shodown $199 Microcosm $52 Jack Nicklaus Course 1 S6 Sengoku $129 Night Trap $52 Test Drive2:Muscle Cars $3 Sengoku 2 $199 Oceans Below $44 Soccer Brawl $129 Orion Off Road $52 Spin Master $199 Out of this World $49 NEO GEO Super 8 Man $99 PGA Tour GA $52 Super Sideks Soccer $169 Pataank $522020 Super Baseball $119 Super Sideks Soccer 2 $199 Red Baron $52 3 Count Bout $189 Super Spy $99 Rise of the Robots $49 Alpha Mission 2 $129 Survivor $199 Road Rash $56 Andros Dunos $199 Thrash Rally $129 Robinson's Requiem $52 Art of Fighting $199 Top Hunter $199 Circle Reader Service #54 TURBO GRAFX $18 $32 $3 $6 $3 $9 LYNX $9 Addams Family CD Ballistix Bonk's Adventure Boxyboy Bravoman Buster Brothers CD Cadash Camp California CD Chase HQ Darkwing Duck Dead Moon Falcon Final Zone 2 CD Ghost Manor Impossamole $19 $14 $19 S9 $14 $19 $19 $19 $42 $19 $14 $19 $19 $19 $19 $89 544 3DO $38 Lynx System Alien Vs Predator Battle Zone 2000 Castle Wolfenstein 3D Checkered Flag Dracula Eye of the Beholder 3DO System 3DO Gun 11th Hour $499 $36 $59 $39 $36 $44 $44 "


"CHIPS&BITS het Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10073 PO Box 234 Dept 10073 Rochester, VT 05767 GENESIS HARDWARE GEN ADVENTURE J.R.R. Tolkien's THE THE NEXT GENERATION FONOET ON THE MAST: 4 Way Play Adaptor $29 6 Button Arcde Powr Stk $39 6 Button Control Pad $19 Cleanng Kit ELIMINATOR $9 F-16 Wirelss Cntrl Pads $42 Genesis Activator $79 Genesis CD Sys 2 CD $229 Genesis CDX System $399 Genesis System 2 core $99 Genesis Sys Sonic 2 $129 Genesis Team Player 2 $32 Mars 32X System $149 Mega Mouse $32 Power Plug $34 Remote Arcade Pad S19 Remote Arcade System $36 SG Program Pad 2 $32 Sega Steering Wheel $129 GENESIS Volume 1 STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION' The future of the Federation is in your hands!!! The USS Enterprise races an evil Romulan force for control of a law and order device. Probe hundreds of strange worlds and alien vessels with the ship's sensors. Join forces with the Enterprise to solve the \"Trinity Test\". S49 $44 SUPER NINTENDO \"LORD OF THE RINGS' Prepare yourself to embark on an epic adventure to destroy the ring that has the power to end Middle Earth. Characters move in thousands of frames of fluid animation with real-time combat. $54 SEGA SI SA AWESOME 16-MEG CARTI SEGA VIRTUA GEN ADVENTURE Pitfall $52 Popeye $46 Prince of Persia MA-13 $49 Puggsy CD $49 Radical Rex $49 Rebl Assault 3D CD GA $46 Ren & Stimpy Show $46 Return to Zork CD $49 Roar of the Beast $46 RoboCop 3 Rocket Knight Advent $39 Rocky & Bullwinkle $46 Rolling Thunder 3 $44 Secret Monky Island CD $42 Shadow of Beast 2 CD $52 Shinobi 3 $42 Socks the Cat $46 Sonic Hedgehog CD $42 Sonic Hedgehog 3 GA $54 Space Ace CD $52 Space Pirates CD $49 Spiderman & X-Men S42 Spidrman vs Kingpin CD $36 Splatterhouse 3 $49 Star Trek Next Gen GA $49 Stone Protectors Strider 2 $39 Sunset Riders $39 Switch CD $49 Sylvester & Tweety $54 T2 Judgement Day Terminator CD GA $49 Time Killers $56 Time Trax TimeGal CD $39 Tin Head $49 Tiny Toon Adventures Tom & Jerry $49 Vikings GA $39 Wonder Boy/MonstrWrld $39 X MEN $44 Young Indy Jones Chron $43 Zero Kamikaze Squirrel $52 S46 GENESIS 'ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT Step up to the plate with ESPN Baseball the most realistic fast-paced baseball game ever created You'll feel like you're in the center of the action during a live ESPN broadcast. Features over 10.000 frames of digitized player animation and pre-and post-game reports and highlights. $54 GENESIS 'VIRTUA RACING The incredible challenge of Formula 1 racing just went 3D! Sega's new SVP chip makes pos. sible a thrilling new vision of auto racing. Join the pack of world-caliber drivers wheel-to-wheel in the ultimate F-1 racing game. Features three tracks, race against 15 cars, four different playable views, and real 3D effects. $79 $39 ST $52 SEWA $44 GEN ROLE PLAYING GENESIS SHOOTERS GENESIS SPORTS GENESIS SPORTS $56 Skeleton Krew $46 Soldier of Fortune GA $52 Soul Star CD S44 Subterrania GA $49 Thrd Wld War CD MA-13539 Total Carnage CD $49 View Point $54 Wimbledon Tennis GA $39 Winter Olympics $54 World Chmpnshp Scr 2 546 World Cup USA CD 546 GEN KICK & PUNCH GENESIS STRATEGY Addams Family $44 Advent Will Beamish CD 542 Aladdin $46 Alien Trilogy CD $52 Alien Vs Predator $49 Astrix & Grt Rescue GA S49 Batman Returns CD S42 Batman:Revnge of Jokr S34 Beavis & Butt-Head S54 Blades of Vengeance S42 Bubba & Stix GA $48 Bubble & Squeak GA $42 Bubsy 2 $52 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Castlvnia Bloodlines GA $44 Chuck Rock 2 CD GA $44 Cliffhanger CD $49 Cool SPOT GA $45 Cosmic Spacehead $39 Demolition Man CD $54 DinoBlazer CD Dolphin CD $42 Dracula Unleashed CD $43 Dragons Lair or CD $49 Dragons Lair 2 CD $52 Dune:Battle for Arrakis 549 Fido Dido $46 Fire Team Rogue $59 Flintstones Golden Axe 3 $49 Goofy $49 Hook CD $42 Hurricanes $52 Impossible Mission Incredible Hulk $54 Incredible Toons CD $49 Indiana Jones CD $39 Indy Jones Ft Atlntis CD 544 Interplanetary Lizards S49 Itchy & Scratchy $43 James Pond 3 $29 Joe & Mac $46 Jungle Book $56 Jurassic Park CD GA $49 Justice League $56 Lawnmowr Man or CD S52 Lion King $54 Mad Dog McCree CD $49 Mansn Hiddn Sls CD GA $49 Matrix Runr Virt Reality $49 McDonald Land $42 Mickeys Magical Quest $54 Out of World or CD GA $49 Pirates of Dark Watr GA $54 $49 Dungn Mstr Skull Kp CD $44 Eye of the Beholder CD $56 Genghis Khan 2 $59 Heimdall CD GA $44 Lord of the Rings $59 Lunar 2 CD $52 Might & Magic 3 $59 Phantasy Star 4 S69 Powermonger CD $43 Revngrs Vengeance CD $44 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $56 Shadow Run MA-13 $49 Shining Force 2 Star Quest $49 Technoclash $42 Treasures of Isis CD $49 Vampire Killer $52 Vay CD $49 GEN SIMULATIONS $59 $29 $39 $54 Best of the Best $49 Brutal Clayfighter $52 Double Dragon 5 $56 Dragon $56 Eternal Champs MA-13 $56 Fatal Fury 2 MA-13 $56 Juggernauts:New Breed $56 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Kung Fu:Legend Contns $56 Matrix Prime $56 Mazin Saga $39 Mortal Kombt CD MA-17 546 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors CD $49 Power Instinct $52 Rise of the Robots CD $46 Streets of Rage 3 $59 Super Street Fighter 2 $69 TMNT:Tournam Fighters $56 World Heroes 2 $56 $54 Andre Agassi Tennis $39 Barkley Basketball GA $49 Brett Hull Hockey $54 Brutal Football $49 Championship Pool $46 College Football 94 $52 Double Dribble $52 ESPN Baseball CD GA $49 ESPN Football CD $49 FIFA Internatnl Scr GA $52 Greatest Hywght MA-13 $49 Hardball 4 $56 Jamm It $56 Kick Off 3 $52 Links Pro Golf CD $56 MLBPA Baseball $52 MLBPA Grnd Sim Bsball $54 Marco's Magic Soccer $46 Mutant Lg Hcky MA-13 $44 NBA Basketball CD $49 NBA Jam Session GA $54 NBA Showdown GA $52 NHL Hockey 94 CD $49 PGA Tour 2 GA $46 PGA Tour 3:Europe GA $49 Pebble Beach Golf GA $44 Pele Soccer 2 $49 RBI 94 GA $52 RBI Baseball 4 CD 549 Tecmo Baseball S54 Tecmo Hockey $54 Tecmo Super Bowl GA $44 Unnecessary Roughnss $56 Vitale Basketball $52 WCW Super Brawl $49 WWFSW:Rg Cg CD GA $42 GENESIS SHOOTERS $44 $36 AH-3 Firehawk CD GA S44 Al Unser Jr Racing S46 Battle Corps CD S44 Choplifter 3 $49 Combat Cars $39 F117 Night Storm GA $34 Formula 1 GP CD GA $49 Harrier Assault CD $49 Jaguar Racing CD $42 Megarace CD Monster Truck Wars $49 Nigel Mansell WCR S46 Outrunners $52 Powr Modler:Aircraft CD $44 Powr Modl:Euro Rcr CD 544 Rock & Roll Racing $49 SeaQuest DSV $56 Skitchin' MA-13 $42 Speed Racer $49 Super Battletank 2 CD $44 Tomcat Alley CD MA-13 $49 Top Gear 2 $46 Virtua Racing GA $79 Wing Commander 2 $56 World Champ Rally CD $44 Aero Biz Supersonic Art Alive Caesars Palace $49 Cascade $49 Clue $44 Columns 3 GA $46 Crue Ball $36 Dragons Fury 2 MA-13 $46 Dune CD GA $49 Family Feud $49 General Chaos $34 HUMANS $36 Jeopardy 2 $49 Jeopardy CD S49 Liberty or Death GA $59 Nobunaga's Ambitn GA S49 Operation Europe $62 Risk CD $52 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $59 Shanghaii 2 GA $44 Sonic Spinball S43 Star Wars Chess CD Super Battleship $43 Virtual Pinball $39 Warrior of Rome 2 $54 Warrior of Rome 3 CD $54 Wheel of Fortune CD $52 Wheel of Fortune 2 S45 Blaster Master 2 Crime Patrol CD $49 Drug Wars CD $49 Exo Squad $56 Gauntlet 4 $42 Lethl Enfror w/gn MA-17 $66 Lthl Enf w/gn CD MA-17 $59 Lode Runner CD S46 Mad Dog McCree 2 CD 519 Mega Turrican Microcosm CD MA-13 $49 Nuclear Rsh Virt Reality $49 Robo Aleste CD $36 Silpheed CD $43 GEN ROLE PLAYING Battletech Buck Rogers Dark Wizard CD Dominus $54 $39 $43 $49 "


"Visa/MC Accepted Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD S8. DelecIves replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. All sales final Call for detais. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PB, HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order 4.8 day Worldwide shipping s6 per item Handling $2 per shipment FREE GAME OFFER* SNES ROLE PLAYING SNES SPORTS Clintonuck! $56 $54 'STAR WARS REBEL ASSAULT by JVC lets you take control of a T16 Skyhopper, an X-Wing starfighter and a A-Wing starfighter. After being a trainee, pilots defend Tatooine against Imperial at tack. Features 3D graphics, full motion video, complete musical score and over a dozen levels. Has a GA rating. CD 546 CAPCOM Golden Empire $59 Inindo King Arthur/Knights Jstc $59 Lord of the Rings Lufia 2 $56 Might & Magic 3 $59 Obitus $58 Runes of Virtue $59 Secret of Mana $59 Shadow Run $56 Ultima 6 $59 Ultima 7:Black Gate $64 Uncharted Waters $59 Unchartd Watrs Nw Horz $59 Warrior of Rome 3 $52 SUPER NINTENDO 'SUPER STREET FIGHTER II' You take control of the original 12 street fighters with all new looks and special techniques. Also four new fierce challengers. Offers 1 or 2 player, and upgraded special moves for the 12 classic warriors. $69 SNES SHOOTERS THE ULTIMATE ARCADE JAM COMES HOME *FREE GAME OFFER $52 Champnship Wrestling $54 Diamond Challenge $52 ESPN Baseball FIFA Internatnal Soccer $52 Football Fury $36 Hardball 3 $56 International Tennis Tour $44 Jamm It $56 Kick Off 3 $49 Kirby's Tee Shot $52 MLBPA Grand Slam BB $62 Madden Football 94 952 Mega Man Soccer $56 NBA Jam Session $62 NBA Showdown $54 NFL Team Heroes $54 NHL Hockey 94 $49 NHL Stanley Cup $42 Pele Soccer $52 Power League Baseball $52 Power Pro Baseball $52 Pro Sport Hockey $54 RappBall $49 Riddick Bowe Boxing Slam Masters $59 Soccer Shootout $56 Super Bases Loaded 2 $59 Super Goal! 2 $54 Tecmo Baseball $56 Tecmo Hockey $56 Tecmo Super NBA Bball $54 Tiger Mask Wrestling $56 Troy Aikman Football $62 Virtual Soccer $49 WWFSW2:Royal Rmble $59 Winter Extreme $54 Winter Olympics $54 World Soccer 94 Zoo Ball \"NBA JAM', the ultimate sports, ar. cade game is now available for home play. From Tomahawk jams to wild full-court shots, this game is packed with incredibly detailed, digitized graphics of 54 of the league's hottest players and the amazing moves, lightning-fast steals, in-your-face rejections and ultra slamdunks. GENESIS Contra 3 S46 Cybernator $39 Exo Squad S56 Fire Striker S52 Galactic Defenders S56 Kaboom S44 Lethal Enf w/gun MA-17 S64 Strike Gunner S44 Super Metroid $56 Super Sonic Blastman 2 $54 Total Carnage $49 View Point $54 Wild Guns $54 Buy 3 in stock Super Nintendo games and choose a 4th game from the list below. Offer subject to change or cancelation without notice. Valid from May 31st through August 31st or while supplies last. ARENA MIDWAY GA Bulls V Blazers (SNES), Gunforce (SNES), Kendo Rage (SNES), Super Play Action Football (SNES), Hook (SNES), Battle Blaze (SNES). $54 SNES SIMULATIONS $46 SNES HARDWARE SNES ADVENTURE SNES ADVENTURE SNES KICK & PUNCH $54 SNES STRATEGY $56 $59 $52 $52 $58 Championship Joystick $56 Cliffhanger $52 Comp Cpcm FP Stk SF2 $59 Cool SPOT $44 .ethal Enforcers Gun $18 Crazy Chase $52 Power Plug $34 Death of Superman $59 Pro Action Replay $79 Demolition Man $56 Program Pad $32 Dracula $46 Super Link (5 Playr Link) $29 Dragons Lair $36 Super Multitap Eek the Cat Super Nintendo Systm $139 Fire Team Rogue $59 Super Scope $54 Flintstones Movie $54 Wireless Control Pad $42 Generation 2 $54 Ghetto Blaster $49 Home Improvement $52 SNES ADVENTURE Hurricanes $52 Impossible Mission $56 ActRaiser 2 S48 Inspector Gadget $46 Addams Family Values $54 James Bond Jr $32 Kero the Acrobat 2 $52 Jetsons $49 Waddin $54 Joe & Mac 1 or 2 $49 Alfred Chicken $49 Jungle Book $56 vien vs Predator $46 Justice League $59 Aliens 3 $49 Knights of Round Table $56 mericn Tail:Feival West $49 Arcus Odyssey $54 Legend $49 Tattle Toads $35 Legend of Mystcl Ninja 2 $56 leauty & the Beast $56 Lion King $54 leavis & Butt-Head $54 Magic Boy $46 lebe's Kids $46 Mario & Wario Siker Mice $52 Mega Man X $56 Hack Thorne $52 Metal Combat $48 tonk's Adventure $54 Out of this World Subsy 2 $56 Pirates of Dark Water $52 lugs Buny:Rabt Rmpge $56 Pocky & Rocky 2 $52 astle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Porky Pig $54 Chuck Rock 2 $49 Power Rangers $59 laymates $49QBert 3 9 8 Hours $52 Aero Fighters $52 Air Strike Patrol $52 Al Unser Jr Racing $52 Battle Cars $49 Choplifter 3 544 F-1 Pole Position $52 Freeway Fly Boys $49 Jaguar Racing S49 Lamborghini Amer Chall $46 Mario Andretti Racing Mechwarrior $49 Monster Truck Wars Nigel Mansell WCR $46 Pilot Wings $42 River Raid 546 Rock & Roll Racing 49 Spectre VR $52 Speed Racer $52 Star Fox $46 Star Trek:Starfleet Acad $56 Super Battle Tank 2 $49 Super F1 2 $58 Super Off Road:Baja S49 Top Gear 2 $49 Transformers 2 $56 Turn & Brn:No Fly Zone $52 Wild Trax $56 Wing Commd Secrt Mis $49 World Champ Rally $56 Radical Rex $49 Clayfighter $56 Ren & Stimpy Show 2 $52 Double Dragon 5 $54 Robocop Vs Terminator $56 Dragon Rocko's Modern Life $49 Fatal Fury 2 $59 S.O.S. $49 Fighters History $58 Scooby Doo $54 Final Fight 2 $49 Simpsons:Krustys Hse $44 King of Dragons $59 Sky Blazer King of the Monsters 2 $54 Space Ace $52 Kung Fu:Legend Contins $56 Spiderman & X-Men $49 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Star Trek:Deep Space 9 $59 Ninja Warriors $56 Super Adventure Isind 2 $52 Peace Keepers $54 Super Empire Strks Bck $55 Power Instinct $54 Super Godzilla $54 Ranma 1/2:Hard Battle $54 Super Return of the Jedi S59 Samurai Showdown $59 T2:Arcade Game S49 Shadow of the Ninja 2 $54 Tales of Spike McFang $56 Streetfighter 2 Turbo Ed $59 TazMania $46 Super Combatribes $49 Terminator $44 Super Street Fighter 2 $69 Time Killers $56 Survival Arts $54 Time Trax $52 TMNT:Tournam Fighters $56 Tom & Jrry:Chase is On $56 WCW Super Brawl $49 Untouchables $52 World Heroes 2 $59 Virtual Bart $57 Wolf Child $46 Young Merlin $56 SNES ROLE PLAYING Zombies Ate Neighbor $49 Zool $49 Brain Lord $59 Curse of Azure Bonds $64 Dragon Warrior 5 $62 SNES KICK & PUNCH DragonView $59 Equinox $52 Akira $52 Eye of the Beholder 2 $69 Battle Blaze $36 Final Fantasy 3 $64 Battle Toads/Dbl Dragon $49Gaia Fantasy $59 Brawl Brothers $49 Genghis Khan 2 $56 Circle Reader Service #54 Aero Biz Supersonic Chessmaster Clue Cyber Slider Fun N Games Jeopardy 2 (Deluxe) S52 Jeopardy Sports Edition $52 Lemmings 2 Liberty or Death Loopz Metal Marines Nobunaga's Ambition Operation Europe Pac Man 2 $49 Pinball Dreams $49 Risk $52 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $59 Shanghaii 2 $44 Sim Ant SimCity $46 SimCity 2000 $56 SimEarth $56 Super Battleship $44 Super Bomberman 2 $56 Super Caesars Palace $46 Super Conflict $49 Super Solitaire Utopia Vegas Stakes $46 Wheel of Fortune 2 Dlx $49 Where Time Crmn SD Wild Snake $49 Yoshi's Cookie $46 $42 $54 SNES SPORTS $43 $49 $44 S54 Barkley Basketball $56 Baseball Stars 2 Bill Walsh College Fball $44 Brett Hull Hockey $49 Brett Hull Hockey 95 $59 Championship Pool $49 S54 $29 "


"REVIEW A Flood Of Realism Disciples of Steel Drowns in Details by Petra Schlunk fully completed and as battles are won, characters will earn experience points. These points can be allocated to raise skills and statistics. Skills that are \"natural\" to a character's class, such as armor skills for warriors, require fewer experience points to increase than those that are not natural to the character's class. OISEEN GW EXPECTS ITS REVIEWERS TO FIN fending your home village of Farnus from ISH THE GAME. UNFORTUNATELY, AF an attack by the \"evil army\" at the end of TER 50-PLUS HOURS OF PLAYING the game (over a year of game time). Megasoft Entertainment's Disci Don't expect to build this army in a reaPLES OF STEEL, I'm not even close sonable amount of time, however. Fortuto finishing the game. So, this time, the nately, for those of us less milieditors made an exception. They would tarily-inclined, DISCIPLES OF STEEL offers like to hear from anyone who's finished it, more than one way to successfully comthough, because this game is the most in plete the game. credibly detailed role-playing game I've Before raising armies, you must assemgrappled with, also one of the most repetible a party of worthy adventurers (discitive. For those who ples). Character like big games and Disciples Of Steel generation in DISCIlots of combat, this Price: $59.95 PLES OF STEEL promay be a plus. For System: IBM ceeds along Requirements: me, it was a minus. 386 or better, 2 standard lines; you DISCIPLES OF STEEL MB RAM, choose gender, race has a combat system 7 MB hard drive and class and then similar to that of the space, VGA, the computer AD&D gold box se mouse; supports \"rolls\" the characries and a heavily staSound Blaster Oisciples ter's statistics. Feand compatible tistically-oriented male characters sound cards character developProtection: have a lower ment system which is Documentation look-up strength potential something of a cross Designers: Megasoft Entertainment than males, albetween those in Publisher: FormGen, Inc. though they make REALMS OF ARKANIA Scottsdale, AZ up for this deficit (800) 263-2390 and DARKLANDS. The with corresponddownside is that these features are embed ingly higher values for intuition and ded in a matrix of obsolete graphics, charm. (It's okay, myths are important.) sound and movement capabilities. The most important thing to achieve durThe ultimate objective is to defeat the ing character generation is a balance beevil that has beset the world of Lanathor. tween fighters, spellcasters and special To perform this noble task, you must as classes in the starting party. You can make semble a band of eight heroes and devel up for some initial mistakes in character op their skills through the completion of selection because all characters are theoquests and the destruction of the many retically capable of learning any skill, from monsters that stand in your way. Eventual wearing armor to administering first aid ly, you will build a large army of troops or casting spells. The only exception is for from captured villages (if you have suc the ability to repair armor and weapon., a cessfully assassinated a lord or laid siege skill that is the exclusive province of the to a castle) or from friendly ones (if you blacksmith. have completed enough quests for the lo Characters do not develop by levels in cal lord). This army will be critical in dethis game. Instead, as quests are success GETTING YOUR BEARINGS After you have created your party (or after you have discovered the \"quick start\" party), the soon-to-be-legendary Disciples of Steel will find themselves encamped outside the city of Farnus. Before breaking camp, the adventurers must agree on an appropriate battle formation (which can always be changed). You may also alter the composition of the party and rest your characters while camping. Resting is used to recoup hit points and spell points and to heal injuries of various types. Spell points and health will also recover with time as you wander, while your blacksmith is repairing the party's weapons, etc. Finally, your cager disciples are ready to begin their grand adventure! Well, maybe not quite yet. First, you have to become familiar with the game's interface. Although almost every command can be accomplished via point and click, it requires a considerable amount of experimentation to learn how to access some of the menus and options. The sparse documentation is of little help. In the interests of realism, there are a huge number of menus and things that your party can do under different circumstances. These things include replenishing food and water supplies, examining and repairing items, healing wounds on dillerent body parts, looking at pictures of the wounds (who needs good taste?) entering buildi ngs, buying and selling items and stealing 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1994 "


"IN CYBER STRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. AND THEN DESTROYED. Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike the wild new multi-player game on Genie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour. So strap yourself inside a Pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter JOINGENIE then press RETURN 4. At the key code prompt enter AKG423 5. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. LE ITLE amamlanan \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in non-prime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri., all day Sat. and Sun. and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. . Circle Reader Service #67 "


"STEEL PRT SPLS  MAG SPLS ILL SFLS UNVIL BLA   FISTS FEL ILL 150 VRS STRENGTH INTELLIGENCE HISDOM ACCURACY INTUITION CONSTITUTION CHARM LUCK HITS 618 FOOD WATER KARMA ESSENCE 2a PLATINUM GOLD SILVER COPPER 415 EXIT DOO 100 fighting, casting spells, heal do the numerous secret doors. In fact, the ing and moving around the only way to find a secret door is to bump UNVIL battlefield. In addition to into them, hoping to walk right through these standard combat op them. At least the dungeons have an autotions, you may surrender, mapping feature, which shows the party, NO SPLS FOS pick up treasure, allocate ex walls, stairwells and exits, making exploLTD ATT POS perience points and look for ration of these areas a little less frustrathidden opponents. Unfortu ing. nately, there is no \"quick Worse, DISCIPLES OF STEEL can easily fight\" option so every round overburden a player with minutiae. Alcag) requires a new set of deci most nothing happens automatically. The sions. gamer must micro-manage everything: alSHORELINE Even at the \"easy\" setting, locate every experience point, mold every WANDERLUST Those hardy adventurers determined to complete the monsters in DISCIPLES OF character, heal every wound, fix every DISCIPLES OF STEEL will spend countless hours traversing the STEEL are quite formidable. It piece of armor and every weapon, and derolling lands. took my party several actual cide every move in combat, with nary a days of repeatedly fighting the shortcut in sight. Although such attention things. The trick is finding the menus; af easiest monsters in the game (to build ex to detail is laudable, the emphasis on \"reter that things will run fairly smoothly. perience) before it could successfully complete one of the NAME : GARA STEES THE HAZARDS OF HOOFING IT earliest quests! Note that Now your party is finally ready to begin its characters only gain experijourneys. Except for traveling in dun ence points when they actively geons (where the perspective is first per participate in combat-hangson), you will have an overhead view as ing out on the fringes does you make your way through the world. In not count. Be sure that you case you get lost, you have access to a allocate experience points to POOL MONEY world map when you journey overland be offensive and defensive skill POWER FOOD OPTIONS tween towns and other noteworthy locales. areas early. Higher levels in OUT OF ALTER DISCIPLE Getting lost, however, is the least of your these skills translate into problems. As your party journeys through more accurate, damaging and Lanathor, it is beset by savage monsters frequent attack capabilities as BAD KARMA Most character stats amount to little in terms of with the gleam of destruction in their well as the ability to take more gameplay, as the data is immersed beneath a morass of minutiae. beady little eyes. In typical FRP fashion, damage. Fighting battles is some of these encounters will be random, also the best way to collect useful weapons alism\" is so overbearing that it detracts others predetermined. Unless the mon and armor and to make money from fall significantly from the enjoyment of the sters have surprised the party, you may en opponents or from selling loot. game. The player is also burdened with a talk to them or try to run away before busy interface, since every option imagincombat begins, with the latter course rec A NIGHT ON THE TOWN! able must be accessible at any given time. ommended for most encounters at the be During their travels, your intrepid adven Aside from the questionable design deginning of the game. turers will thankfully encounter more than cisions, primitive graphics and lifeless Combat in DISCIPLES OF STEEL is turn just monsters. Towns provide shops, tav sound effects mark this game as being based and takes place on an invisible grid erns for food and gossip, inns for resting, very out of place in today's marketplace. from an overhead viewpoint. In each com guilds for storing items, temples for heal Worst of all, the time investment to make bat round, characters have a certain num ing, and even dungeons. Boat shops allow a party strong enough to complete some ber of moves (determined by you to purchase passage to and from is of the easiest quests is simply tedious, and encumbrance and injuries) to allocate to lands or to buy boats, should you desire. ruins whatever charm DISCIPLES may have Palaces are convenient places possessed. Statistics are the best thing where leaders can be assassi about this game, but only those looking nated, besieged, or asked for for a \"Stat-O-Matic\" role-playing game quests (if you are in a less ad will be satisfied with the assiduous versarial mood). attention to uninspiring detail in That many of the quests re DISCIPLES OF STEEL. quire visiting dungeons is hardly a surprise. What is a DISCIPLES OF STEEL OF TIONS shock is that graphically and 1/2 otherwise, the dungeons of PROS Fairly non-linear, character DISCIPLES OF STEEL are a skills not limited by class SELECT DISCIPLE EAVE TREASURE throwback. Movement in CONS Questionable \"realism\" dungeons is limited to turn over-emphasized, obsolete graphics TREASURE HUNT While your party may discover a pot of gold, ing and walking straight and sound effects, few interactions ahead. Monsters remain invisfinding the end of the proverbial rainbow is elusive indeed. with NPCs. ible until you step on them, as HEAPED UPON THE GROUND ARE: ITEM(S). MONEY ITEMS 66 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Finally. A Sound Card from a company that knows sound! SOUNDSAK 19 anos SENSONTO SoundscapeTM by ENSONIQ. The first wavetable sound board that gives you professional 16-bit sound and compatibility with today's hottest game titles and multimedia applications at a price you can afford. SOUN SALS For $279 (suggested retail) you get: 100% ENSONIQ ENSONIQ is a leading manufacturer of high-quality synthesizers used by top recording artists. Now, the same wavetable technology that drives our $3,000 keyboards is available for your PC. Genuine ENSONIQ wavetable synthesis 16-bit sound with 32 voice polyphony Award-winning sounds. Our commitment to sound is unequaled. With Soundscape, you'll hear sounds created by Grammy Award-winning musicians, renowned orchestral players, and top studio engineers. Supports the broadest range of games and multimedia standards, including: SoundBlasterTM AdLibTM MPU-401, MT-32, General MIDI, MPC Level 1 & 2, WindowsTM 3.1, Windows Sound System No host CPU overhead; no TSR's 3 CD-ROM connectors for maximum flexibility 60-day no-nonsense refund, plus a three year limited hardware warranty Maximum compatibility. Great sound doesn't matter if your board won't work with your software, so we've made Soundscape compatible with virtually all PC standards. Whether you're in the game room, the classroom, or the boardroom, Soundscape will provide unrivaled sound quality for all your applications. MIROIDIT Make the right choice. ENSONIQ LEADING THE WORLD IN SOUND INNOVATION Call 1-800-942-0096 for more information. Soundscape is now available at all Electronics Boutique and Waldensoftware locations. With the exception of the few titles that use ADPCM All trademarks property of their respective owners. 1994 ENSONIQ Corp. 155 Great Valley Parkway, Malvern PA 19355-0735 Circle Reader Service #191 "


"REVIEW Shoot The Moon! And Everything Else Astro Chase 3D: Interplay's Galactic Shooter For The Mac by Christopher Breen T IS THE DISTANT FUTURE OF OUR It should come as no surprise that the GALAXY. THANKS TO THE DEVELOPMENT responsibility for piloting the Ultraship OF THE FASTER THAN LIGHT DRIVE, and blasting each and every Mega Mine earthlings are finally able to pack up out of the heavens falls to the owner of their troubles and blast off to the four ASTRO CHASE 3D. Atomizing these slowcorners of the Milky Way in a celestial ren moving pyramids wouldn't be a particularly dition of manifest destiny. Real estate and difficult goal to achieve if it weren't for a resources are plentiful and cheap, wars large number of hostile alien craft, various and conflict are but memories, and the asteroids, and the Ultraship's nagging enwhole shebang is run from Mother Earth ergy requirements. by the benevolent United Confederation of Planets. S.A.G.E. DEVICE Regrettably, this galactic love fest is not The game opens with an introductory destined to last. From the far reaches of scene that highlights its proprietary techthe cosmos comes a testy alien force that nology, the Software Accelerated Graphics quickly throws up a Astro Chase 3D Engine (S.A.G.E.). force field around According to the the Confederation Price: $59.95 manual, \"S.A.G.E. System: and, in a particularMacintosh manipulates ly unfriendly disRequirements: bitmapped graphics play of its might, System 6.07 or so quickly and with vaporizes a chunk higher, 3.5MB such memory elliof a neighboring RAM, 6MB hard ciency that it can star system. This drive space; render highly desupports Gravis one-sided engageGamePad, tailed and realistic ment is followed by MouseStick 11 environments in real weeks of protracted and monitors up to 21\" time.\" Translation: battle between the Protection: None The graphics, alcuddly ConfederaDesigners: Richard Spitalny. Peter Jablon, though a touch tion forces and the and Ofer Alon grainy, look darned Publisher: Interplay evil interlopers. Irvine, CA cool, and motion is Meanwhile, back (714) 553-3522 incredibly smooth. at the lab, ConfedAt the beginning eration scientists are working feverishly on of each of the 40 rounds, you are tucked a heretofore secret weapon-the Ultra behind the controls of the Ultraship and ship-a spaceship capable of violating given several options. You can select a levmany physical laws of motion (the sucker el, adjust volume, pick the gender of the turns and backs up on a dime), while deal voice that announces such things as ing massive doses of death to its oppo \"Watch your energy levels!\", view high nent. Unfortunately, due to mounting scores, and/or quit the game. The Ultramarket pressure and the fact that the ship's environs consist of a control panel aliens have lobbed several Mega Mines to that indicates weapon stores, energy levward the old home planet, only a single cls, number of lives, and condition of Ultraship could be built. shields, and a radar screen showing the location of Mega Mines, alien ships, and Earth. Once launched in the great beyond, you must seek out and destroy the Mega Mines, and if you have the time, kick booty on the marauding baddies. As you get bashed about, your ship's energy level decreases, which can only be restored by a trip to a nearby Energy Generator. These generators are large red portals scattered about the solar system. To receive a power boost, simply fly through the portal (or better yet, do a little do-si-do maneuver that backs you in and out of the ring until your ship is fully charged). In addition to the Energy Generators, you will find light blue portals called Shield Depots that provide temporary shielding when they are flown through, and Power Up Stations-multicolored spheres that, when fired upon, cough up the zippy Warp Drive, decoy mines, and weapons such as the Cosmic Energy Weapon and Energy Seeking Missile. Each round is completed when you have destroyed all of the Mega Mines. THE MOUSE IS A LOUSE The Ultraship can be controlled in a number of ways: via the mouse, keyboard commands, the Gravis MouseStick II, or the Gravis GamePad. The manual suggests that the proper way to pilot the ship is to use the mouse as a duel-function controller. Before I take exception to this suggestion and offer tips to our more dexterous readers, let me explain how this is supposed to work. When the mouse-controlled cursor is on-screen without the mouse button depressed, the Ultraship travels in whichever direction the mouse points. When the mouse button is pressed and held, the ship continues to fly on a locked course 68 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"ULTIMATE CAME L'ERFORMANCE U PEDALE Patent Pending AIRPLANE/CAR PEDALS & REVOLUTIONARY SWITCHING CENTER Coupling/decoupling system to mechanically switch between car and airplane modes Stylish, durable steel enclosure pe, SOM Designed with safety in mind by eliminating all \"pinch points\" Mode select switch Expansion port for use with 3 modules (expansion modules sold separately) COMING Four game device input ports for joystick 1, joystick 2/throttle, IDD's PC Stick ShifterTM and IDD's PC Steering Wheel SOONI adds a realistic stick shift for use on outomobile PC STICK SHIFT computer games and simulators. Works with PC PEDALS EXPANSION MODULES allow connection of new peripheral products through your PC PEDALS switching system. automatic (See photo above) Solid State, 8-way switching system with LED mode indicators Three durable steel pedals with individual long life-cycle sensors Press the clutch and shift into first gear. The engine starts to whine as you press the accelerator pedal. The light turns green. Drop the clutch and the tires begin to squeal. You timed it just right as you shift into second gear. Your in first place right off the starting line! \"...Maverick you've got a boggy at 2 o'clock! Quick, you don't have time to maneuver to him, just point your nose and fire!\" You push your right pedal hard to slew the business end of your FA/18 at the enemy just in time, \"FOX 1 OFF!\" The missile was right on target, \"Splash 1!\" These are just a few of the exciting times you can enjoy with the new PC Pedals. Only from InterACTIVE Digital Devices! PC Pedals provides realistic auto clutch/brake/accelerator and aircraft rudder pedal control. PC Pedals can be used with many types of games including flight simulators, car simulators, action/adventure games and many morel No more plugging and unplugging peripheral devices, the PC Pedal's internal, solid state switching center automatically activates the desired devices at the touch of a button. OTHER FEATURES INCLUDE...  Resume moderemembers mode last used for easy resumption of play. Full range sensor travel for exceptional electrical resolution  Enjoy upgrade capability by adding up to three expansion modules Circle Reader Service #168 Dealer Inquiries Welcome UDD MasterCard Foreign Sales Welcome For more information or to order these and other exciting products, contact: InterACTIVE Digital Devices, Inc., 6730 West Chicago Street, Suite 5, Chandler, AZ 85226 VISA Phone: (602) 940-0340 BBS/FAX: (602) 940-0031 \"InterACTIVE Digital Devices, Inc. is a diversified company developing, manufacturing and distributing computer and panummar nadute. All tendanurkennd treden met he "


"OU and fire. Your left hand uses oll 9 the Control and Shift keys to switch between forward and reverse and to select different weapons. To fly in a particular direction, hold down the appropriate key; for instance, 7 or T turns the ship 90 degrees to the left. Press the Space Bar to toggle into gunner mode and press a key to fire; 7 and T now shoot forward and to the left at 45 degrees. As you can see, the directions for navigation and weapons control are not ARTSY ARCADE ACTION Battle hordes of bit-mapped alien invaders, matched, and this adds an unrendered in extravagant full-color art deco stylings. necessary level of dilliculty. Using this setup requires that and never stops moving. The currently se you reposition your hand every time you lected weapon then fires in steady bursts move from navigation to weapons mode. in the direction indicated by the cursor Not particularly strenuous, I admit, but in until the mouse button is lifted and navi the later levels it could mean the differgation control resumes. If for example, ence between life and death. you are zipping about the solar system To really rip through ASTRO CHASE 3D and find yourself surrounded by enemy you need to use only the four cursor keys ships and one or two cosmic dirt clods, for navigation and the left-hand controls you'd spray one and all with deadly fire by to fire the weapons, flip from forward to pressing and holding the mouse while reverse, blast into Warp Drive, and toggle moving the cursor in a circle around the between the standard Solar Plasma Beam ship. and Cosmic Energy Weapon. True, this In theory this system sounds workable, does change the strategy a bit and means but I found it rather clumsy. The mouse that you can fire only in the forward direcjust isn't a precision device, and all too of tion, but you can win this game without ten what I thought was a minor naviga ever shooting from the sides or behind, tional adjustment sent me several parsecs deploying one of the exotic weapons, or out of my way. Instead, I opted to investi stopping at a Shield Depot. gate keyboard control. The manual suggests that when flying NINTENDONITIS FLARE-UP and fighting by keyboard you use the nuAfter becoming accustomed to the game meric keypad or the letter keys located mechanics, I found Astro Chase to be around the T, G, and B sector to navigate pretty easy to play. And I wasn't the only one—a 12-year old equipped with a Nintendo controller wiped me out in under 15 seconds. Even so, I progressed to Level 34 before even considering the use of the much more powerful Cosmic Energy Weapon or a Shield Depot. With just six levels remaining, it dawned on me that piloting the Ultraship in this way makes the game a little too easy. That's not to say that the last ten levels are a stroll in the park, as the cramp in my firing finger will attest. At Level 30, for example, the Mega Mines sport a satellite known as a Mega Mine Guardian, which orbits rapidly around the mine. One touch from this guardian and you're shrapnel. But it was relatively easy to stay out of range of the Guardian, moving to and fro-remember, the Ultraship never stops moving in one direction or another—and knock out the mine. Once you settle on a comfortable playing style, ASTRO CHASE 3D is a fast-paced, engaging, and not overly taxing diversion. The game features great graphics and fluid motion but ultimately suffers by making things too easy for seasoned arcade players capable of independent hand-and-finger motion. A skill-level option would ameliorate this problem, but until the day it's added, I'll look to Nintendo brats for new action challenges. O ASTRO CHASE 3D **1/2 PROS Nice graphics, fast arcade action CONS Squirrely mouse and keyboard control, very repetitive, too casy, lack of dilliculty settings Screen boredom annihilated!!! THE STAR WARS YOU'VE NEVER SEEN Beyond screen savers: film secrets revealed THE STAR WARS YOU'VE NEVER SEEN You meet ALL kinds here. Nobody asks what's your sign at the Cantina. SCREEN ENDE TANNIENTI For Windows and Macintosh  At your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-STARWARS 70 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"The Invasion has begun. Technology licensed from ID Software, creators of WOLFENSTEIN\" 3D CORRIDO Alien Invasion At a software dealer near you or call (305) 591-5900  (800) 468-7226 BBS (305) 471-8962 (2400-14.4 Baud Rates) Capstone\" Wolfenstein is a trademark of Id Software. All Rights Reserved. Corridor 7: Alien Invasion and Capstone are trademarks of IntraCorp Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"AEGIS CD SUPRAFAXMODEM 14.4LC EXTERNAL COMPUTER _Express = Since 1985 Guardian of the Fleet navel simulation. Pushes you to the limit of real time strategic and tactical combat simulation. Puts the latest in military Technology and the ultimate high tech warship at your fingertips. Features historically accurate battle sequences. Based on newly declassified military information and historical accounts of actual battles. Challenges you to use the arts of deception, intelligence and warfare in this high tech, Lughtill malitory simulation Time Womer DOSCO External 14,400bps dato ond 14,400bps send/receive fax/modem. V.42bis data compression for up to 57,600bps throughput, SilentAnswer supports receive fox and voice colls on one phone line. Caller ID, when supported by the phone compony, displays information about incoming calls. LED display lights truck modem uctivity. Package includes WinFor lite, FoxTolk COMit and CompuServe Information Manager software. 5 year warranty! Supra Comp.:WN/DOS, MAC 800-228-7449 EXT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $53 $159 AUDIO MAGICIAN 16CD FREE SAECO 16CD SUBWAK HARS 2050 BENEATH A STEEL SKY In the not too distant future, you have two choices: live in the giant City slules controlled by six vast corpo rations or reside in a wasteland known as The Gop. As Gop dweller Robert Fostor, your peacelul existence is decimated by the arrival of security forces intent on taking you to the city. The route to solving this scili mystery and freeing this city of oppression is littered with logical problems to solve, security clearances to forge and military forces to evade HARPOON II Take control of your navy in this exciting sequel to the award winning game Harpoon Modern naval warfare simulation that puts the user in command of a variety of modern combat ships, submarines, and aircraft. Realistic military style vector maps provide a high tech look that is sute lo please even the most die hard armchair admiral True 16 bit card with 16 bit stereo sound Integrated 16bit A/D D/A Converters. Built-in Joystick Port with 2 Joystick capabilities. Four operator, 20 voice FM music (Yamaha Synthesizer OP13). Internal CD ROM Audio Interloce. Microphone jack and amplifier Sound Bloster and Adlib Compatible Compatible CDROM Drives: Panasonic CR523B/CR-562B, Sony CDU 31A/CDU 33A, Auto CRMCU005S/CRMCFXOio, Weares CDD-110. Includes 3.5\" disk for Wolfenstein 3D SUBWAR 2050 As a mercenary sub pilot, light Bierce battles for corporate territory deep beneath the waves Explore thousands of square miles of accurately mapped 3D underwater  in MICROPROSE four different multi-mission campaigns: the Antorctic Ocean, the North Atlantic, the South Chino Seo and the Sea of Japan. Simulated Combol mode lets you master moneuvers like Knuckles and Deep Dives before entering a mission. Pilot four types of submarines, including deep seo exploration vessels, reconnaissance subs and highly manos verable lighter subs. Microprou: DOS this city solving ed with Virgin: IBM $39 Three Soo, DOS, MAC $42 Ca:  $98 $35 GUES IBM CD-ROM WOW Flying Circus... Freelancer 2120 FreePhone Fun CD Pack Gabriel Knight Gateway II. Gettysburg Global Explorer Great Novol Bottles ..... Great Naval Barles Pack.. HAM Radio Shareware.... Hand of Fote.......... IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM Lost in Time... Funicus Lyric language French........... Lyric language Spanish ..... MPC Wizard Diagnostie........ MPEG20th Century Video Alminac.... MPEG Dragon's Lair MPEG Horde MPEG Lord of the Rings ..... MPEG Mon Enough.... MPEG Police Quest IV MPEG Return to Zork...... MPEG . Sound Trock MPEG Space Are... MPEG Sportiv News..... MPEG-V: ubu Spxce... Mad D Man amily Hr 38 ...... Hell Cab......... Horde in Colulator.. a Inc mit lo h JFK As. FREE LOTTERY TICKET WITII ORDERS OVER $75 Request Your Labyrin. Lands of Lawnmower Leisure S 35 3 10.Y. Anthology ........ 11th Hour... 1994 Guiness Disc of Records .... 20th Century Video Almonoc ........... 3 Balloons 3D Dinosaur Adventure.......... 7th Guest.... .... ...... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands AD&D: Dungeon Hack AD&D. Eye Beholder Trilogy .. AD&D: Genie's Curse ....... Aces over Europe....... .. Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet..... Air Works Alone in the Dark Art Gallery Windows.......... Arthur's Teacher Trouble....... Artic Baron. AutoMap 3.0................ Battle Chess Battledom Beethoven The Ninth Symphony 1.1.. Beneath a Steel Sky...... ... Berlitz Think & Talk French Berlitz for Business: Japanese... Better Homes Healthy Cooking ........ Bibles & Religion Shoreware..... BioForge Interactive Movie Blood Net.... ..... Bookshelf Windows '94... Budget Guide USA 1993. Buzz Aldrin's Space....... CNN Time Capsule 1993 Castles Il..... Challenge CD Pock.. Championship Pinball Cinemania Movie Guide '94 Comanche w/Mission Disks 182 Command Starship ............. Companion of Xanth.... Compton's Inter. Encyclopedia '94 Conspiracy..... Coral Reef.. . Crime Patrol Critical Path Curse of Enchantia......... Cyber Race.. Cyberplasm Formula D&D Fantasy Empires....... D&D. Stronghold ......... D ay Operation Overlord Daemonsgate.... Dare to fly...... . Dark Legion Day of the Tentacle...... Deathstor Arcode Bottles Dinosaurs Encyclopedia ...... DirectPhone Discovery CD Pack Dracula Unleashed ....... Dragon's Lair DrogonSphere Encarta Encyclopedia '94 Evolution... F-15 Strike Eogle Ill... Falcon Gold... Five on 5...... Flight ATP w/East & West..... Flight Simulator Toolkit Mig 29 Gold...... Might & Magic World of Xeon Millennium Auction Monopoly Deluxe... .. Morphmon Multimedia Dinosours... Multimedia Morart Multimedia Stravinsky Musical Instruments ...... Myst Newsweek Interactive #1 Newsweek Interactive #2 Newsweek Interactive #3 Nomad.. Oceans Below.. Outpost Pacific Strike & Speech Pack. .. Penthouse Interactive... . Photo CD Access Plus WINDOWS PhotoEdge Color WIN.. Police Quest IV..... .... Porky Pig Publisher 2.0...... Quantom Gole ROMIX Comics Freex al. ROMIX Comics Hardcase ROMIX Comics Prime 81.. Raiden. Kompoge. Ravenloh.. Rebel Assault Red Boron/A 10 Tank Redshift ...... Return of the Phantom... Return to Zork.. SSN 21: Sea Wolf... SVGA Harrier. Som & Max Hit the Road Sourus Science Adventure II...... Scrabble Deluxe Secret of Monkey Island ... SelectPhone.. Shodow Coster... Shadow of the Comet SimAnt Enhanced SimCity Enhanced SimEarth Sitting on the Farm...... Soft Kill . WIN... Space Hulk .... ... Speco Duel Anthology Spoce Quest IV Space Shuttle MPC.. Spear of Destiny Super CD POR Spectre VR...... Spellcasting Party Pak.. Sporting Nows Pro Football... Star Trek 25th Enhanced Star Trek: Collectibles Guide Star Trek: DSN The Hunt ..., Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual Star Trek: The Next Generation Street Atlas 2.0 USA............... Strike Commander/Tactical. Superhero: league of Hoboken..... Syndicate Plus........... .... Terminator Rampon Terror of the Deep... Tetris Gold Compilation....... Lyric lang CALL 48 CALL 51 Our CALI Two Dollar Instant Lottery Ticket Lyric Long MPC W MPEG For Domestie Customers Only MPF While Supplies Last or the Mon Eno MPEG Police Q Pacific Stre MPEG Return to 46 Penthouse Inter MPEG . SoundTr Photo CD Access Plus DOWS MPEG Space Ace......... PhotoEdge Color WIN MPEG Spotling News... Police Quest IV Hell Cob. MPEG Horde Horde .... MPEG. Lord of the Rings... Human Calulator .............. MPEG Mon Enough.... Humans MPEG Police Quest IV... Incredible Machine........... MPEG. Return to Zork.. Indiana Fute of Atlantis...... MPEG.Soundtrack.. Inherit the Earth MPEG Space Ace........... Iron Helix MPEG. Sporting News... JFK Assassination... MPEG Video Cube Space...... Journeyman Project........ Mad Dog McCree... Man Enough... Jutland... Maniac Sports... . King's Quest Anthology Mayo Clinic Family Health 1.2....... King's Quest VI....... . Mayo Clinic Family Phormocist... King's Quest VI Upgrade.. Mayo Clinic Total Heart...... Labyrinth of Time MochWarrior II. Lands of Lore... Mega Race.... luwnmower Man... Metaltech: Earth Siege .......... leisure Suit latry VI. Merco Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA Microsoft Baseball WIN Lord of the Rings... Microsolt Goll........................... IBM CD-ROM WOUD Wal IBM ROM IBM CD-ROM 58 CALL "


"AIR COMBAT PACIFIC 1942 CRIME PATROL SPECTRE VR GRAVIS ULTRASOUND MAX CRIME ULTRASOUND This multilevel live action thriller challenges the pluyor to progress though police ranks, banling variety of criminal elements. As a Tookie the player tukus on gang members, armed robbers and other street criminals Promotion to detective will mean working undercover ugainst drug dealers and car thief rings Be prepared to confront bank robbers and terrorist once you're selected for SWAT team assignment Only the better player will be able to reach Delta Force and tangle with a criminal element threat ening national security PATROL In this soquel to the bust-selling smash hit, you can soci above it all with hovering capability. And you have a whole new pantheon of enemies to deal with, like slicers and smart acid pools. Fortunately, you have smart weapons like pulse bursts, spinners. smart missiles. proximity mines, cyberblasts and scattershots! Escape through transporter gates! Submerge into negative cyberspace! And finally, by using the optional virtual reality editor, you can even design the Virtual Worlds to play in later and share with your friends Take on the challenges that WWII fighter pilots faced, Performing high speed dives upon heavily defended carriers and chasing down Wildcats. Corsairs, ond Zeros Challenge the enemy of the battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomon's, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea Command U.S. or Japanese forces, or experience the thrill of head to head dogfights with a friend via modem connection, Pilot any of ten historically accurate planes, each with its authentic cockpit and Right characteristics The future of sound and music. UltraSound Max incorporates 32 voices of true Wavelable Synthesis, a process used by today's top studio synthesizers. Sounds are created using digital recordings, or samples, of actual musical instru ments of sources (.e. grand piano, bird chirping, violins, etc.) FEATURES: 16 Bit, 48 kHz stereo playback and recording. Expandable 192 General MIDI Instrument Set. $49 Asterion Laser Game: BMCO $ CALL Macprote: DOS Velocity. BM CD, MAC CD $42 $199 Advanced Gravis BM U-BOAT EMPIRE SOCCER ARGENTINA If you've always dreamed of spending months at sea in the claustro phobic confines of a WWII submarine, this is for you. Bring olonga good book to while away the off wolch hours. Also bring the nerve to withstand incessant barrages of depth charges rottling your teeth at 200 meters Bring the intelligence not to venture a surface shot on a capitol ship in broad daylight. Bring the skill to navigate treacherous waters MICROLEAGUE TIMEOUT SPORTS Four fun, fast baseball games hosted by two zony chorociers Bernie and his dog, Jock, ore here to brighten your life with their ible antics. They're on 24 hour duty to prevent your screen from burn in und your mind from burnout Random, hourly, or pro set ottention grabbers featuring Bernie and Jock pop up on screen to remind you to take a break with any of the four fost and fun filled baseboll game included Batting Practice, Funga Fielding, Sign Calling 101, or Umpire orguing Microlooge: WN POLICE QUEST IV The highly si in anticipoted A D uter fourth chapter in the best seller Police Quest series is herel The nation's most experienced cop brings DARYL E GATES you the most realistic police POLICE QUES simulation over Features call now ultro realistic digital photography taken throughout California, video captured actors, and digitized Crime scenes. State of the art sound effects and music, including rock, rap, and hip hop. You can't get any closer to the crime scene without a badge. Windows compatiblo for fast, point and click gameplay All the excitement and fast paced action of the World Cup competition. Take total control of all the teams vying for the Worlds most coveted sports honor. Each of the 24 national teams has been neticulously studied and rendered so that they mirror the strengths and playing styles of the actual squads. On the field, perform all the moves that these elite athletes the best soccer players in the world, Deady Gome: MAC $34 $24 Empico Software: DOS $29 Siena: IBM CD $45 IBMD-ROM HSOINDYW The Patrician ..... .. Theme Park Three Stooges... Tony lakussa Baseball 1 Total Distortion UFO Close Guide ........... USA Today, the 90's Vol. Ultima I.V....... Ultima Underworld I & II Ultima VII: Complete Series ......... Ultimo Vill Pogon w/ Speech Under a Killing Moon.... Vegas Games Deluxe...... Video Cube Space.......... Video Cube Sports... Viper: Assault on the Outfit Where in World Deluxe Who Shot Johnny Rock Wild Blue Yonder ........ Wolf Pack... Works 3.0..... World Atlas 4.0... World Circuit Grand Prix... With of the Gods Air Warrior.......... Alone in the Dark American Civil War III Astrochase........ Axis the Gamecheater Caesar... Coesars Palace ........ EXT. VOICE508 403-61.15 0002220 444 333 FAX:508493-5646 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 ERORIDOT-*! *SC FAX:0011-508-443-5645. Xit.CompuServeID: 70007, 1534 9 AD+F  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS 61 30 CALL After Dark 2.0 WIN..... AutoMap 3.0 WIN AutoMap Upgrade 3.0 WIN Bubsy TM: Screen Saver WIN ........... Chaules Barkley. Screen Savur WIN Corel Draw MC 5.0 Disney Collection Screen Saver ............. Get Wired WINDOWS....... Gifs Galore Shareware CD... Holy Bible King James Version..... Home Survival Toolkit.. 41 43 SimCity Classic......... SimCity Graphics: Ancient Cily........ SimCity Graphics: Set Il..... Simlile..... ... Solitaire Antics .......... Spectre VR... Sit Truk 25th Anniversary Stor Trek: DSN The Hunt Storymotion 2 Strip Poker Pro W1 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk Strip Poker Professional Sword of Sodan..... Terror of the Deep Theme Park Thrustmaster Flight Cont. MK1 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals. Thrustmaster Weapon Markl.... Train Engineer... Valkyrie....... Vegas Gomes Entertainment Pack Virtus VR..... Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White......... World of War On Chunder Zig Zag. Ith Hoo 3 Balloons 7th Guest... Chessmoster 3000... Cyberplasm Formula Dare to Fly... Dark Seed...... Dracula Unleashed Evolution.... Flying Nightmares........... Freelancer 2120.. Gabriel Knight Gus Goes to Cybettown. Holl Cab...... Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis... Iron Helix. Journey Mon Project... Jump Raven Lolsyrinth of Time............ lawnmower Man....... Lunius Modness of Roland ........ Monioc Sports ............... Mys!.. . Penthouse Interactive I... Planetary Taxi Police Quest IV... Rebel Assault Redshift..... Return to Zork Sitting on the Form... Soft Kill Spectro VR Star Trek: DSNThe Hunt.. Star Trek: ING Toch Manual... Street Arlas USA Syndicate Theme Park Viper: Assault on the Outfit Virtual Tarot... Wild Blue Yonder Wrath of the Gods Xplora Peter Girl World 30 38 116 MACINTOSH MACINTOSH CD-ROM 58 SEGA/SNES/3DO Aladdin SEGA Animals 300 Art of Fighting SNES Blades of Vengenance SEGA Cliffhanger SLGA. Dragon iaitan Dungeon Master SNES........................ Escape from Monster Munor 3DO...... Eternal Champions SEGA Hardball III SNES. Horde 300 John Madden NFL '94 3DO Jungle Strike SEGA Jurassic Park SEGA Kombot Cars SEGA leathal Enforcers SEGA Leathal Enforcers SEGA CD Lemmings 3DO......... MIBPA Baseball SNES Mad Dog McCree 3DO Micro Machines SEGA Mortal Kombat SEGA Mortal Kombat SEGA CD Mortal Kombat SNES NBA Jam SEGA NBA JO SNES NBA Showdown 94 SEGA NHL '94 SEGA Normy's Beach SEGA Oceans Below 3DO.... Out of this World 3DO Pele II SEGA...... Pelel Soccer SNES........ Shadowrun SEGA... Sonic the Hedgehog 3 SEGA Space Shuttle 3DO Star Control II 3DO Star Trek: TNG Echoes SEGA......... Star Trek ING Future's Post 3DO.. Star Trek: TNG Future's Past SNES Street Fighter II SEGA...... .......... Street Fighter II SNLS.............. Super NBA Basketball SEGA Super Olf Road Baja SNES. Super Wing Commander 3DO. Tomcut Alley SEGA CD Virtua Racing SEGA. Virtual Pinball SEGA ......... X Men SEGA.................. Castles Il... Citadel of the Dead Civilization Cyberkoce.... Dark Seed Detroit Empire Deluxe.. Evolution... F-117A Stealth Fighter Flight Commander Flight Simulator 40 Flying Nights Freelancer 2120. GNetix............. Gabriel Knight Harpoon l... Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Jeopardy Sports Edition ..... Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck King's Quest VI................. legend of Kyrandia.... Leisure Suit lorry VI.. MA Sherman Tank Mac Attack... Moc Full O'Humans .... More Incredible Machines Oxyd Magnum PGA Tour Golf .......... Pathway into Darkness Police Quest IV...... Powermonger Quest for Glory IV ... Raiden.... Royal Flush.. SimAnt.... SimCity 2000. SimCity 2000 Great Disasters IBM PRODUCTIVITY 30 IBM PC DOS Upgrade 63 Key CAD Complete.......... Libris Brittannia Shareware CD.. Lotus 123 Release 4 Upgrade WIN Norton Desktop 3.0 WIN Ollica Standard WIN 42 Personol Golf Analyzer.. Photo CD Auto Racing. Photo CD Fireworks Photo CD Sailboats... Photo CD WWII Aircraft. Plan a Paradise WIN.... Print Shot Deluxe CD Ensemble Print Shop Deluxe WIN.... Procomm Plus WIN Publisher 2.0 WIN QEMM 386 7.x................. Remind Me Scenes Impressionists Collect Scenes Outer Space Collection.. Scenes Sierra Club Collection... Star Wars Scren Saver ... WinFax Pro WIN 4.0..... Windows 3.11 Upgrade Word 6 O WIN........ AD&D Dark Sun Shattered lands............48 AD&D Dungeon Hack AD&D:Eye of Beholder Trilogy..............49 AD&D. Genie's Curse ...........................41 APBA Baseball WIN Aces Over Korea. .CALL Aces of the Deep ..................................41 Aces over Europe... Aces over Europe:Mission #1.. ...CALL Aces over Europe Mission #2......... .CALL Across the Rhine........ 53 IBM RECREATION Circle Reader Service #56 "


"REELMAGIC LITE ReclMn ORIGAMO tulee COMPUTER Expres MPEG D No more jerky video. Thanks to the MPEG standard, you'll enjoy full motion, fullscreen playback on your PC. Reel Mogic lite brings a dazzling array of entertainment and interactive learning software to your desktop. Use ReulMagic Lite for a variety of applications, including entertainment Video CD, interactive learning, Karaoke CD, business presentation and training software. Thirty frames per second video playback gives you TRUE full motion Full screen video for real movie like experience ORIGAMO Enjoy this enticing visual puzzle game. Explore the graphically nich moze with unique puzzles in every room Forge through the moze by Successfully completing each puzzle. As the conveyor belt moves along with a myriad of block and shapes, you must place the block on the puzzle of your blocks will stack up and time will run outl Continuing through the moze you will discover beautiful and sensational graphics and animation throughout this exciting multi leveled puzzle. GOP: DOS Since 1985 800-228-7449 Tou FREE ORDER LINE $299 Sigma Design: ISM $30 THE 11TH HOUR DISCIPLES OF STEEL THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK II User program mable throttle and weapons functions Compatible with 5 pin keyboard connectors Program yout joystick for any current or future game Your gaming peripherals ljoystick and WCS) will be instantly compatible with current or future gomos. Features: LED lighting systom indicates when certain functions are activated; Screwdown connector; Handle moves fore and aft for throttle control; Sturdy seven loot cables, Allows joystick programmability through joystick interface; Digital/Analog mode toggle switch User programmoble functions: One year warranty MORPHMAN CD You are the super hero Morphman and it's your job to rescue the kidnapped Professor destroy scient tific experiments, and blow up a research Fortress. The world is depending on you and your Morph technology to accomplish this task before the experiments teach civilization. Your only weapons are your wit and the molecular sampler on your sleeve that allows you to alter your own molecular structure and that of objects Ground you Features realistic 3D animation with Microsoft Video for Windows. Realistic 3D explosions, disintegrations, glowing and other special effects seen only in movios The Eleventh Hour is the eagerly awaited OUR sequel to one of the best selling CDROM enter tainment products ever In the seventy desolate years since the horri fying murders chronicled in The Seventh Guest, the rotting mansion of evil you maker Henry Stauf has been ominously silent. Only when reporter Rabin Morales vanished while investigating the house do events resurrect the malignant past. As Morales' colleague and lover, you explore the tavoged estate and strangely quiet town to look for her The disap pegrunce of your father has left tanthor without a leader Factional infighting in the resulting power vacuum has left the realm in chaos! Save your once-rich Disciples land by re establishing Steel the supremacy of the guilds. Choose your disciples and strategies, build vast armies to conqueror delund, heed the counsel of the lords, or assassinate them everything is under your controll Control and develop up to 8 disciples large array of powerful weapons. Huge selection of magic spells. FormGon: DOS Thrustmaster $92 Dynoma Dimensions: DOS CD $28 Vugin Game: BMCD, MAC OD $51 $34 * ** IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Grand Slam Bridge II WIN Grandest Fleet...... Great Naval Battles II Great Naval Battles Pack Great War. HAW.C Honnibal. HordBall iv ........... Elonam... Evasive Action............ Even More Incredible Machines Evolution... 14 Fleet Defender.... F-15 Strike Eagle Ill. Falcon 3.0. Falcon 4.0 Falcon: FA-18 Hornet........ Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary Fields of Glory... FlashBack... Flat Top... Flight Lighl........ Flight Screen Se Flight Si Flighy Flig Flig Flig IBM RECREATION BM RECREATION Head Coach Football WIN Heavy Hockey Heirs to the Throne....... Heros of Might & Magic.... NNNNNNWNSWE WE LOOK! ..29 34 35 35 CALL CALL 32 Request Your Free America Online Membership (includes 10 Hours Online) With Any Purchase CALL inwe CALL Advanced Clvilization.... Adventure Pack ....... Air Combat Classics.. Air Warrior Alien Legacy Alone in the Dark Arborea 2.... Archon Ultra Arctic Baron... Art of the Kill........... Axis the Gamecheater. Borkley Basketboll. CALL Battle Chess 4000 WIN Battle Cruiser 3000AD Bottle of Britain 2.WIN 35 Battledrome... 130 Bicycle Bridge WIN..... Bicycle Poker WIN Big One WIN......... Bioforge Interactive Movie Blackjack for Windows 3.0 Bloke Stone Blitzkrieg ........ Blood Nel... Blue & the Gray.... Body Blows. Breach 3.. Bridge Olympiad Brutal Sports Football Caesars Palace WIN. Campaign il.......... Cannon Fodder..... . Carrier Strike........ Carriers at Well Castles II: Siege & Conquest......... Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eye................. Civilization... Clash of Steel WWII 1939.45 Classic 5 WIN Coaster ............... Comanche & Mission Disk #1 Comanche: Mission Disk 1. Comanche: Mission Disk Il.. Command Starship............ Command and Conquer ..... Corrigger cf gip Corridor 7...... Cyber Race..... Cyber Spoce........ D&D Fantasy Empires D&D Stronghold .............. D Day Operation Overlord. D Day: The Beginning of End Daemonsgate.............. Dark Legion Down of Aerial Combat Day of the Tentacle: Maniac Il... Delta V Detroit Dimension.......... Disciples of Slool.......... Doom Episode 1 DreamWeb Dune l.. Dungeon Master Earth Invasion Arcade WIN Elder Scrolls Voll Arena Empire Deluxe............... Empire Deluxe Scenario... Empire Deluxe WIN LEESUBT508855555 39 35 CALL Kingdoms of Germany...... Kintimaker ... Klotski Kronolog Kye Deluxe ... Leisure Suit Larry VI. Lemmings. Lemmings Il.............. Links 386 Pro Links:Banff Springs SVGA Links Belfrey Course SVGA Links:Firestone Course SVGA Links:Innsbrook Course SVGA... Links:Mauna Kea Course SVGA Links:Pinehurst Country SVGA. Lord Of The Ring Two Towers... Lord of the Realm.. Lords of Midnight................. CALL Lost Treasures of Infocom! Lucas Arts Classic Collection Lucky's Casino Adventure ........ M4 Sherman Tank .... Magician's Castle CALL Master of Orion MechWarrior II.... ... MechWarrior II Add On ... Merchant Prince... Metal & loce PG13.... Motaltoch: Earth Siege ... Metamorph.. Microleague Timeout Sports WIN... Microsoft Arcade WIN, Microsoft Space Simulator Mig 29 Stand Alone Version Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen .......... Might & Magic DarkSide of Xoon..... Monopoly Deluxe..... More Vegas Games WIN...... Mortal Kombat....... .. Mortal Kombat/GamePad Bundle NFL '94... NFL '94 WIN NFL Coaches Football ...... NEL Pro League Football... Nano Tank Nomad Open Dialogue WIN.... Operation Combat 2 Outpost...... Oxyd Magnum... . Pacific Air War: 1942.. Pacific Strike Pacific Strike Speech Disk Pacific War. Perfect General Trilogy... Phantasmagoriu... Pirotes! Gold Police Quest IV. Pool Shark ........... Prince of Persial 11 Privateer ..... .... ...... Privateer Operations 2....... .CALL Privateer Righteous Fire Addon Privateer Speech Pack Pro Tennis Cup... Quarter Polo Quest for Glory IV........... Rolly: The Final Round Ravenlott 46 Gred 37 su IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Hannibal HardBall TV. Flashback Flat Top Flight Light Flight Screen Saver Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Paris Scenery.. Flight Simulator 5.0..... Flight Simulator Guide Flight Simulator Toolkit.. Flying Circus Formula One Grand Prix 2 Four Play Freelancer 2120 Front Page Sports: Baseball Front Page Sports Football Pro.... Frontier Elite il Game Maker 2.0 Genghis Khan 11 Gettysburg WIN... Global Dominations .... Global Response Goblins Gobliiins II...... Gobliiins !!! NOUVERD Wal Kye Deluxe... Heros of Might & Magic. High Command Horde Human's: Insult to injury Human's: Like You've Never Seen. INCA.. INCA 2.. Incredible Toons..... ... Indiana Jones Fale of Atlantis ....... IndyCar Racing IndyCar Circuits: Expans. Pack......... IndyCar Indianapolis Speedway....... Inherit the Earth Ob Quest Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf....... Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Jagged Alliance......... Jeopardy Deluxe WIN Jeopardy Sports Ed. WIN Jeopardy Sports Edition Jurassic Park Kasparov's Gambit. King's Quest V.VGA.. King's Quest VI King's Ransom...... IBM RECREATION .49 41 No Raiden... "


"MICROCOSM forebut PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL America's National postime. With the warmth of springtime sports fans witness a new birth every year. It comes with a feeling of excitement and that excitement means baseball. Enjoy baseball excitement year round with Pro League Baseball Supports true modom play with chat mode. Includes both Simulation und arcade play modes. Complete statistical printout capabilities. League leaders maintained for all major categories. Create your own teams or edit existing ones. COMMAND ADVENTURE STARSHIP Buy a sleek slarship to explore regions unknown and extract untola riches from distant galaxies Avoid pirates and blood thirsty alien beings who wonder the universe, randomly attacking ships like yours. Never the same game twice. Completely regenerate the universe al will. Custom configure more that 50 ships to your require ments, with more than 80 weapons, shields und engine systems A cinematic adventure of exploration and deadly hide and seek It's a light for control of the free will of Tiron Korsby Duringo routine operation, on implanted, minicalutired brain manipu lation droid is threatening to take control over Korsby's mind. A countering operation must be performed, and thus your mission begins Features over 500MB of graphics and sound for a rich, varied and litehke inner. body experience. Multiple frame rates of up to 30 frames/second for smooth gameplay and non Hop action HARDBALL I DIAMOND COLLECTION Features digitized players and 256 color VGA graphics har frem Compile stats as you play Actual outfield dimensions test your power Five cameras over the field Watch instant replays and save the best for your Highlight Reol. The league's best double play combo Cutoff men take throws Outfielders back each other up. Team and player editors let you alter everything from team logos to a player's ability Diamond collection includes Hardball III, Big League Ballpark and MIBPA Player's Disk MICROCO Micro Sports: DOS $35 Merit Software: DOS:18M CD $39 $45 $39   Aeloda: DOS INHERIT THE EARTH: ORB QUEST Join Rif the fox nhe and his companions Okk and Eeah on the adventure of your life Inherit the Earth will transport you to a world of beauty and intrigue Earth! The Orb of Storms has been stolen, and Rif is accused You only have days to help Rif get to the bottom of the mystery of the mission Orb. Your journey takes you to the Wild Lands, through hostile territories and ultimately to the ancient ruins of the legendary Humans CARRIERS AT WAR II CARRIERS AT WAR II TRATEGIC STUDIES VROUE Fleet carrier CARRIERS operation in AT WAR . Southeast Asia 1936-1946. This sequel to the hugely Successful CARRIERS AT WAR uses a much improved version of the original mechanics Sponso decade that changed the world. Offers more tension, more excitement, tougher opponents and more dramatic Carrier battles. The uncertainty of war is vividly recreated. Eight scenarios included, some hypothetical, others controversial. Explore all aspects of tactical and strategic combat between Japan and the United States and Great Britain ISLE OF THE DEAD A South Pacific Island hopping udventure takosa strange twist as you're forced to crush-land on ujungle island. The good news is you survived the plane crash. The bad news is you're on the Isle of the Dead, which is inhabited with ghoulish zombies and a host of terrifying creatures Traverse danse jungles and treacherous caves, while exploring the local village to unlock riddles that could aid your escape. If you're lucky, you may even rehabilitate a beautiful comblo babel STAR WARS: TIE FIGHTER The rebels think the force is with them. Explode the myth. Now you can experience Star Wars from a new point of view. From the creators of X Wing comes TIE Fighter, the sequel that lets you fly for the Erraiie ii through the rebel front in six unique Imperial starfighters, New heart. stopping interconnected batles will envelop you Enhanced ultro realistic 3D graphics and gameplay. The dark side of the Force beckons...dare you respond? New World Computing DOS BM CD $35 $39 SSG: DOS $32 Mert DOS Lusas Arts: DOS $45 30 IBM RECREATION BM REGREATON OU\" 20\" 800-228-7449 EXT: VOICE:508-443-6125 333 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 *0#1890 -y-*** * FAX:0011-508-443-5845. XIX.CompuServe ID:70007, 1534 Antan , FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS CAUX Wolipack 468 471 230 349 308 392 524 Realms of Arkania.......... Red Crystal Red Ghost........ Return of the Phantom... Return to Zork Romance Three Kingdoms Ill Royal Flush... . . Rules of Engagement Il.... Russian Six Pack Russian Six Pack WIN........... SSN 21 Sea Wolf SVGA Hartier. Sam & Max Hit the Road Seif City Shadow Castor Shadow of the Comet 2.... Sim Ant WIN SimCity 2000 Sin 2000 WIN SimCity 2000. Great Disasters.............15 SimCity Classic WIN... SimCity Graphics: Ancient City... SimCity Graphics: Set II. Simfarm... SimHealth Simlile WIN.... Smokin' Guns... Soccer Solitaire Antics WIN... Solitaire WIN......... Solitaire's Journey WIN Space Hulk... Space Quest V......... Spaceword Holl... Spear of Destiny Spear of Destiny Mission 2 Spear of Destiny Mission 3 Spectre VR... Spiral Arm.... ... Squad Leader Star Reach 35 Star Trek: 25th Anniversary............. Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt Star Trek: J.R. Movie & Sound..... Star Trek: Judgment Rites Star Trek Starfleet Academy................CALL Star Trek: The Next Generation Star Wars Chess..... Stonekoep. Street Fighter II. Strike Commander Strike Commander Speech Pack Strike Commander Tactical #1 Strike Squad... Subwar 2050 ....... Superhero: League of Hoboken Syndicate...... Syndicate American Revolution.... System Shock Terminator 2029 Terror of the Deep The Patrician....... Theatre of Death Theme Park Third Reich... Tie Fighter Spoce Combot. Tony LaRusso Baseball II... Tornado Train Engineer.. 26 Train Engineer WIN... USCF Chess... Ultima Underworld... Ultima Underworld Il:Labyrinth Ultima VII: The Black Gato.... Ultima Vul Pogan Um VII. Pagan Speech Pak Ultimate Domain..... . .... Victory of Seg... Video Poker for Windows......... Vikings: Fields of Conquest... Virtus VR WIN. Wargame Con. Set It: Tanks...... Warlords ...... Warlords Il Construction Kit........... Wheel of Fortune Deluxe Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WIN When Two World War....... Wing Armada Wing Commander Academy Wing Commander ll w/Speech...... Wing Commander II....... Wings of Glory 1917-1918.... Witchworld. Wizard.............. .. Wizardry Trilogy (VN/VI) World Circuit Grand Prix..., World War II: Battle S Pacific World War Op. Crusader X Wing X-Wing B-Wing Tour of Duty X Wing Imperial Pursuit Zephyr Zig Zag WINDOWS........ Audio Mogicion 16CD Audio Manicon Plus AudioMan Digital Sound Pro 16..... Digital Sound Pro 16 Plus........ Game Blaster CD 16........... Gravis Ultrasound.... Gravis Ultrasound Max Gravis UltraSound Midi Adapter Jo22 Soundcard SCSI....... Port Able Sound Plus Premium 3 D Multi CD Premium 3D SCSI2.... Pro 3-D SCSI2 w/ Wavetable Pro Audio 16 Basic... Pro Audio Studio 16 Pro Audio Studio 16XL ... Pro AudioSpectrum 16/US Atlas ... ReelMagie lite ReelMagic Multimedia Playback...... Roland RAP 10 Audio Producer....... Sound Blaster 16 Basic....... Sound Blaster 16 MCD Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2 ASP Sound Blaster 16 Value Edition Sound Blaster AWE32... Sound Blaster DigitalEdge 3x...... Sound Blaster Pro Valve Ed..... Sound Blaster Value Edition .... SoundMan 16....... . SoundMan Wave... . JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS Flight Stand Flight Stick Flight Slick Pro..... Flightstick PRO Mac GForce Flight Yoke............. Gamo Zapper GameCard III MCA Automatic Gameport 2000 Up to BOMHz ....... Genovation Parallel Game Port.... Gravis Analog Pro Joystick Gravis Eliminator Card Gravis Gamepad Mac Gravis Mouse Stick Il MAC Gravis PC Gamepad...... Thrustmaster ACM Game Card..... Thrustmaster F. 16 FICS..... Thrustmaster Flight Control... Thrustmaster Formula 1 Thrustmaster Pro Flight Control....... Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Virtual Pilot Yoko Y Cable for 2 Joysticks...... AR Partner 570 Speaker System ... Altec ACS100 Speakers Alee ACS200 Speakers Koss HD 1 Speakers........... Koss HD 4 Speckers.... & UPGRADE KITS CD DRIVES, SPEAKERS Koss HD 6 MPC Speckers....... Lutto CS-1000 Speakers Labtec CS 800 Speakers............. Labtec CS 900 Speakers... Labtec SS 700 Speakers.............. 4PLEX Quad speed Int. Drive............ CDU33A/LCD Complete Kit... CDU33A/L CD Starter Kit DigitalEdge CD Mult. Kit... Family Deluxe Multimedia Kit ......... Fusion Double CD Internal Kit Game Blaster CD 16. Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195ms... MullSpin 3X1 Int. 195ms . Mul Spin 3XP Portable 195ms. MultiSpin AX Pro EXT....... OmniCD Upgrade Kit OmniCD Upgrade Kit EXTERNAL... Premium Deluxe Multimedia Kit Pro lo ll Multimedia Kit Pro 16 il Triple Speed Kit............ Pro Deluxe Multimedia Kit Reelmagic CD ROM Kit Reno C ROM Portable Player.. Sensory Starter Upgrade Kit...... Sensory System Int. MM Kit...... Super Deluxe Multimedia Kit.. .613 516 465 CALL 34 NYUWO 440 417 145 270 92 127 329 126 385 IBM RECREATION SUVONNOS 462 105 SOMOS 191 800 228-7449. Orders Only, 508 443-6125 all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday BAM till 8PM. Saturday & Sunday 10AM till 5PM. All other Business Monday Friday 9AM till 5PM. Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 por order up to 6 lbs, $1 per ib above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling charge-$5 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoull's, tape back-ups, printers, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawaii, outside continental U.S., APO FPO call for information Pricus subject to cungo without notice. Some product not V avalable outside the US. Please call for more information. Not responsible for errors or omissions. Mastercard, Visa Discover, American Express, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted Personal and Company checks now 14 days to dear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped. We check for stolen credit cards. Al returns for credit repar, or exchange must have a return authortation number. Returned orders or ordered wrongtems are subject to a 15% restocking fee. We ship latest versions of software avalable. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manutacturer's warranty Detective items replaced immediately. All hom numbers represent 3.5 floppy, except where noted. Educational, government and corporate purchase orders welcome The Dig 181 734 ...83 106 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"BUG ADVENTURE DELL BUGO COMPUTER Express ODELL DOWN UNDER Unlock the mysteries of the exotic undersen world of Australia's Great Barrier Reof. Features facts about any of the B1 life forms from an animal's predator and prey to its spe cial abilities and social behavior. Create your own fish, giving it the perfect balance of speed, endurance, agility and size to increase its changes for o long, healthy life in the Great Barrier Reol. Encourages users to exercise thinking skills and deductive reasoning, while improving reading comprehension. Illustrates a living ocosystem and its daily struggle to say in balance. MECC. WINMAC $34 UNDER Since 1985 This program is crawling with bugs! Pick from ants, bees, beetles, butterflies, flies, or spiders. Young readers can even improve reading skills with a Talking Storybook. Find out which bug is the loudest, the longess, the fastest, and many other amazing facts. Knowledgo Adventure DOS, WN, IBM CD 540 800-228-7449EXT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE KID CAD FOR WINDOWS For ages 7 and up. This 3-D design studio lets you creole houses Kid CAD with electronic building blocks that click into place. You can point and decorate everything in sight, includ ing the kitchen sink! Then Fill your cus tomized creation with a huge assortment of people and pats, furniture and forns or even a dinosaur. Take a look around! 3D virtual environment lots you change your perspective. View your house from the back yard or peek through the front door. Davidson: WN 1994 GUINNESS DISC OF RECORDS Explore the world's most definitive source for extraordinary facts and feats, Bosed on the 1994 Guinness Book of Records, this remark oble CD-ROM GUINNESS contains every word, record, and picture from the world-renown book. Discover unique facts on diverse topics such as Earth und Space, Science and Technology, Arts and Entertainment, Human Achievements, and more. With pictures, movies, and details of every imaginable fact at your fingertips, discovery becomes entertainment itself. COMPUTER CARNIVAL DATI The computer literacy  grom for chil dren that entertains as it engages them in learning keyboard and mouse skills, Creation of computer graphics, com puter vocabu cao. COMPUSERNACIAS lary, computer care and even beginning programming skills. Presents excil. ing games and activities in the context of an irresistible storyline that brings kids back to play again and again. FEATURES: 4 new arcado gumes. 2 fun interactive carnival booths, 6 sunsotional shows under the big top. Hall of Fume displays child's name and winning tickets. COMPUTER CARNIVAL JEOPARDY1 DELUXE EDITION Gametek's new Jeopardy! Deluxe Edition featuring Alex Trebek puts & DELUXE EDITION you on stage ht orts puter general ed opponents or up to 2 friends Choose a cote gory and on amount, and you can ring in fast enough with the right response     way to becom ing the new champion. Over 8.000 questions and answers from televisions longest running game show will provide you with hours of onder tainment from your first question through the Tournament of Champions Gamat DOS, Windows $29 Groler: 12M CD $31 ATI: DOS $35 TEST PREPARATION ACT w/Cliff Notes...+++++++ Biology Studyware.... Calculus Studyware... Chemistry Studyware......... GMAT w/Cliff Noles......... GRE w/Cliff Notes.. SAT w/CL Notes Physics Studyware. SAT I NEW Personal Trainer WIN... SAT I Studyware......... .. Score RX for ACT at Home. Score RX for GRE at Home... Score RX for LSAT at Home ............ Score RX for SAT or Home ...... Your Personal Trainor/SAT2 CD MACINTOSH Multimedia Workshop My First World Atlas...... My Own Stories Odell Down Under Oregon Trail Playroom 2.0... Puti Pult Goes to the Moon Reader Rabbit L............... Reader Rabbit Ready for Letter SATI Studyware.... Spell It Plus StickyBear Reading Room ....... 99983 MAC O ROM 88-88-3898 Advanced Spelling Tricks... Alphabet Blocks Animal Tales Basic Spelling Beginning Reading ....... Cuckoo Zoo... . Eagle Eye Mysteries london Early Math....... Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Folly Bear's Fun Pack Kid's Zoo..... ... .. Lilemap: Animals ... SCIENCE & HISTORY Admit One Free GO TO THE MOVIES IBM REFERENCE FREE For every $100 purchased, request a free movie pass from COMPUTER EXPRESS. American Heritage Dictionary Americans in Space CD........ Animals San Diego Zoo CD BodyWorks 3.0..... Body Works 3.0 CD CNN Newsroom Global View CD.... Compton's Encyclopedia CD. Creop Crawlies CD. Cute 'n' Cuddlies....... Dictionaries & Languages CD. Dictionary of Living World CD... Dinosaur Adventure CD... Dinosaurs Multimedia Windows 1.0. Dinosaurs MPC Encyclopedia CD..... Discovery CD Pack............... Encarta MPC Encyclopedio CD... Forever Glowing Garden w/SEEDS... Greatest Book Collection CD InfoNation. Rating USA to Z..... J.FK Assassination CD..... Key Dictionary Plus... MS Dinosaurs Multimedia CD Orbits Voyage the Solar System Webster's Dictionary..... Advanced Spelling Tricks... Algebra.. Algebra Blaster Plus... Alphabet Blocks..... Amazon Trail Basic Spelling....... ........... Beginning Reading .... Body Works 3.0....... Calculus Studyware.. Dinosaur Adventure.. Early Moth...... Fetty Bear's Birthday Surprise Falty Bears Fun Pack Fine Artist Kap'n Karaoke...... Kid McGov.... Kid Pix 2.0 Kid Pix Fun Pack.... Kid's Art Center..... Kid's Studio Kid's Typing........ Kid's Zoo.... KidDesk...... Mac USA 2.0..... Mario Teuches Typing, Math Blaster Plus Math Rabbit 2.0...... Millie's Math House Mind Castle Amazon Trail Body Illustrated Bug Adventure. Bug Adventure CD Company of Whales CD ComputerWorks Concentrate.... Dandy Dinosaurs CD.... DinoPark Tycoon Discover Space .... .. Discovetens CD EZ Cosmos 4.0.... Earth Teeks... Eco Quest Search for Cotus CD.. Ecology Treks.. Great Computer Adventure.... Jurassic Dinosaur CD Jurassic Dinosaurs WIN... Kid's Zoo CD ........... Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN... Login About the Human Body Mario's Time Machine No. 11 Downing Street..... Oceans Below CD......... Odell Down Under WIN Oregon Trail Deluxe. Oregon Trail Deluxe CD Pepper's Adventures in Time... Planetary Taxi CD.... Prehistoria CD.. Quarky & Quaysco's Science Science Adventure 2.0... Science Adventure II CD Space Adventure ... Space Adventure CD. Space Adventure i CD Team NFL Magazine CD... Time Lapse CD Time Riders American History Time Treks.... ... Undersea Adventure WIN Webster's Dictionary WIN...... Where in America's Past Carmen.. Where in Space Carmen Deluxe Where in Time Carmen?.... Where in the World is Carmen2.... Wild Science Arcade w/T-SHIRT.... Zoo: Behind the Scenes CD. Zookeeper... Zugs Race Through Space... 2nd Math. Alge Blaster 3 . Alge Blaster Plus....... Algobro...... Algebra By Example Bull's Eye Math... Calculus WIN Championship Blackjack... Chemistry Works DOS/WIN .. Cruncher WIN............. Dinosoft Addition & Subtract.. Dinosoh Math Flashcards. Dinosoft Multiply & Divido. Early Math WIN.. Geometry Concepts .... Kid Cad WIN... . Learn to Add and Subtract Learn to Multiply and Divide.... . Line & Shape Eater CD.... .. *8468828ENNW8ONS Fatty Bears Birthday Surprise ....... Folly Bear's Fun Pack Kid's Zoo Lifemap: Animals.. . Lifemap. Animals w/Bockbones... Multimedia Workshop..... My Silly CD of ABC'S. My Silly CD of Counting Super Solvers:Out Numbered. Super Solvers:Spellbound. Treasure MathSioemi TreeHouse.. Typing Tutor 6.... . Vocabulearn French ..... Vocabulearn Italian I.. Vocabuloarn Spanish ........ Where in America's Past... Where in Space Deluxe..... Where in Time is Carmen ...... Where in the World Dolixa Where in the World is Carmen ...... Word Attack 3. Word Attack 3 Zookeeper..... EZ Losmos 4.0............... Lifemap: Animals w/Backbones Multimedia Workshop My Silly CD of ABC's.... My Silly CD of Counting ... Now Kid on the Block... Peanuts: Yearn to leam Richard Scarry Best Neigh.. Richard Scarry Busiest Neigh. Vitsie Visits Outer Spoce.. Vitsie Visits the Ocean....... World Alive... ...... ... Zoo: Behind the Scenes......... MACINTOSH MACINTOSH MATH TYPING Easy Working Typing........ Easy Working Typing WIN Mario Teaches Typing ........ Mavis Beacon Teoches Typing CD Mavis Beacon Typing 3.0 Mavis Beacon Typing CD Typing Tutor ............. Typing Tutor V Plus Typing Tutor V Plus WIN.... Typing Tutor WING... 999 "


"GAMEZAPPER JONNY JONNY QUEST Take off with team Questos they follow the trail of the stolen Splinter of Heaven What does this uncient bit of meteorite hove to do with the suddon fluctua tions in the Earth's magnet ichield? Why hos The Splinter of Heaven and other Mayon artifact disappeared from the jun gles of Guatemalai Is this all pat of some sinister plot? FEATURES: 3D raised perspective for exploration, an icon controlled interface, combat sequences, a full cost of interactive characters, a full soundtrack, Stunning graphics, and literally hours of entertainment Converts tha VGA output from your PC to a video sig. nal so you can play all your favorite PC games on any TV set. Display online ser vices like Prodigy, America Online, and CompuServe Includes $150 worth of FREE games: Prince of Persia, Jetfighter II, and Spectre Challonger supports 640x480 VGA resolution in 256 colors, outputs NTSC video in RCA com posito and SVHS Super video standards Includes A/C Power Supply, 6 foot RCA cable, ofoot S-VHS cable and a VGA Y cable. Supports TV Auto Blonking, Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display ADS, BM 20TH CENTURY MURDER A powerful educational tool, teaching law enforce ment, criminal justice, psychol ogy, and histo ry, Five Thou sand plus pages of the most sensation al murders of this century Follow each shocking case the crimes, investigations, trials, and pun ishments of ZCI I C D-ROM criminals like Ted Bundy and Jeffrey Dahmer. Dynamic multimedia presenta tron offers a chilling glimpse into the dangerous world of murders and the twisted motivations behind their unconscionable acts PowerCD BMD Moc CD Cowboyam Casino you te lough COWBOY CASINO Five wisecrack ing card sharks Nooch you high takos poker in a real Old Westsaloon Get hit with a stream of Imanolock romarks every time you make o mistoke And while you're lough ing, you'll leorn: Five card Drow. Fivecord Stud, Sevencard Stud, Texas Hold'em and more. Learn the odds of filling o range of witing hands, when to open, raise or fold, and when and how to bluff, Easy to use controls te! you cover all aspects of each game one step at a fime, os oiten as you want I Per BMCD ury Store & Associate DOS $26 $79 $20 $33 STAR TREK COLLECTIBLES GUIDE CD Print STAR:TREK HUMAN CALCULATOR Math is essen tial and math is cool. Can you figure cube roots instantly in OM your head of people tell you their date of birth, can you tell them on what day of the week they were bom. Let The Human Calculator teach you how in a row, fun way. As a result, kids can solve addition, sub traction, multiplication, and division problums in their head, and learn some great math tricks which will impress everyone. SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD Grab your nightstick squeal like a siten, and hit the road with Sam & Max, Freelance Police, as they attempt to crack their toughest case. Sam, a canine shamus, and Max, a hyper kinetic rabbity thing, are tray eling across America, hot on the trail of a fun uwuy carnival bigfoot. A deranged animated adventure. Endless hours of fun playing mini games like Wak A-Rat and Carbomb. CD ROM version includes live action dialogue between characters. Free handbook inclosed (while supplies lost). LucasArts: IBMCD Designed for all types of  GREENBERG'S . Star Trek collectors. Browse from over 400 color and black & white COLLECTIBLES. photos of col lectibles from the original Star Trek TV series, tix Stat Trek movies and the current Star Trek: The Next Generation TV Series. Detailed list ings for over 3000 col lectibles, including the issue and current market prices Need to learn about a Tricorder mode by Mego? Just click and browse! PRINT ARTIST Print Artist will help you get the messago across-eas ly, beautifully expressively It's so simple that beginners can easily moke beautiful and useful cards, signs, posters, ban ners and more. And, it's so flexible, it grows with your ability. Quickly. easily create your own signs, cards, banners, and more. No drawing skill required. Choose from over 500 professionally designed layouts in both color and black and white to use \"as is\" of customize to your heart's content. Export grophics and layouts to popular graphic for mats, Nads: DOS, Windows Compton's New Media: BMCD $26 $39 MCS:BMCD $32 $35 Math Blaster Spot WIN... 29 MATH Math Blaster WIN Math Rabbit Enhanced Mathology .... Mego Moth Mental Math Games 2.0 Millie's Math House ..... Operation Neptune.. StickyBear Maih Tutor Super Solvers:Midnight Rescue.. Super SolversOut Numbered........ Treasure Math Storm! WIN... Treasure Mountain........ What's My Anglo ................ Young Math...... CREATIVITY 889: EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 OVU\"220\"/44 606 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 *O R DO -Y-ARI 45 FAX:0011-508-443-5645. XIX.CompuServe ID: 70007, 15340 1 ).  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS &d 30 Aladdin Print + Animation Studio WIN Betty Crocker Boys & Girls... Children's Writing/Pub Center 1.5. Creation Stories CD Creative Writer WIN Fine Artist -... Hanna Barbera's Animation Shop Kap'n Karaoke WIN... Kid Cuts.... Kid Doodle WIN Kid Fun CD Kid Pictures..... Kid Pix 2.0 Kid Pix Fun Pack........ Kid Rhymes Kid Works II. Learn to Play Guitar CD. Lenny's Music Toons WIN. Logo Writer...... .... MetroGnomes' Music Miracle Piano System ........ Multimedia Starter Pok... My Computer Diary WIN My Own Stories ................. PC Crayon... Peter Pan:Story Painting CD... Print Artist WIN.... Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 Print Shop Deluxe Comics...... Print Shop Deluxe Companion............ Print Shop Deluxe Companion WIN.. Print Shop Deluxe Sampler Show & fell for Kids Sound Source.................... Story Book Weaver............. Student Writing Center CD Wild Learning Safari.... Advanced Spelling Tricks CD...... Advanced Spelling Tricks WIN Alphabet blocks WIN Basic Spelling CD... lan Words WIN.... Mario's Fun with letters......... Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Spell : 3 Spell i Plus... Super Solvers: Spellbound CD Word Attack 3 Word Munchers......... Word Tales CD... Yobi's Spelling Tricks WIN.............. Across the USA.............. Discovering America.......... Eagle Eye Mysteries London CD. Export Mops... Lost Tribe My First World Atlas......... ..... Mystery at Museums w/T-SHIRT... PC Globe Maps & Facts CD. PC USA 3.0 Picture Atlas of the World CD... Scavenger Hunt: Africa CD.... Speed CD...... Where in USA Carmen Where in World Deluxe CD........ Where in the USA Deluxe... World Atlas 40 WIN EARLY LEARNING Aesop's Fables CD.. Aladdin and His lamp CD Always Arthur CD... Amanda Stories CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD Bailey's Book House Beauty and the Beast CD... Beginning Reading CD........... BookMaster for Speed Reading Cinderella CD .............. Dinosoft Phonics .............. .. Dragon Tales CD Follow the Reader... Gus Goes to Cybertown CD. Heather Hits Homerun CD. Just Grandma & Me CD Learn to Read in Wordland. long Hard Day at the Ranch CD Mind Castle Mud Pubble CD Now Kid on the Block CD. Once Upon A Time II....... Paper Bag Princess CD Peter and the Wolf CD Phonics Plus Reader Rabbit Reader Rabbit I WIN... Reader Robbit ill... Reading Adventures in Oz Reading and Me Talking .. Ready, Set, Read WIN Richard Scarry Best Neigh. CD..... Richard Scarry Busiest Nuigh. CD.. Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WIN. Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WIN Scary Poems for Rotten Kids CD.. School House: 30 Programs.... Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD Sound li Outland II CD Speed Reader WIN.. StickyBear Reading Tutor. Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD. Tale of Peter Retbit C.. Talking Classic Tales CD Tolking Jungle Safari CD Talking Phonics Plus... Tell Tale Heart CD Thomas' Snowsuit CD... Tortoise & The Hare CD. Treasure Cove.... Ugly Duckling CD...... Who Wants Arthur CD Zugs Dinosaur World AJ World of Discovery... Alphabet Blocks CD Animal Tales CD.... Backyard Barney Bear Goes to School Borenstain Bears Fun LunchPak Berenstain Bears Junior Jigsaw..... Berenstain Bears Learn At Home Buster's First Thunderstorm CD Computer Carnival... Cuckoo Zoo CD ........... Dr T's Sing Along Kids CD Dr. I's Sing Along WIN..... Fatty Bear Fun Pack Fatty Bears Birthday Surprise Fatty Bears Fun Pack CD First letters and Words First Shopes ........ Fisher Price Classics... Fisher Price Picture Dictionary... Kid Desk... Kid Keys... Kid M.Ge Kids Stuff Learning At Home Vol. Two CD Legend of Oz CD..... Maria Early Years Collection CD Mario Preschool Fun....... EARLY LEARNING Mario's Fun with Numbers.... Megee Series Bundle... Memory Lane..... Mickey's 123's Enhanced Mickey's ABC's Enhanced.. Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles Mixed Up Fairy Tales..... Mixed Up Mother Goose CD .... My Letters, Numbers and Words My Silly CD of ABC'S CD My Silly CD of Counting CD Number Munchers......... Peanuts: Yearn to learn CD Playroom 2.0.... Power Hits Kids .................. ..... fut Pult Goes to the Moon CD....... Put Putt Fun Pack ............. Puti-Putt Joins the Porade...... Roce the Clock CD Scooter's Magic Castle........... Slater & Charlie Go Camping.. Snoopy's Game Club Stickyboar Preschool Stickybeat Preschool CD...... Treasure Cave CD....... TreeHouse..... Vitsie Visits Outer Space CD Word Munchers READING ONTES 30 ..15 34 .12 GEOGRAPHY B00 228-7449. Orders Only, 508 443-6125. all other business. Sales Dupt. Hours Monday Friday 8AM till 8PM, Saturday & Sunday 10AM till 5PM. All other Business Monday Friday 9AM till 5PM. Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some eleo tronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs. $1 per lb. above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling charge-$5 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoulli's, tape back-ups, printers. Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawaii, outside continental U.S., APO/FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notion. Some product not available outside the US Please call for more information Not responsible for errors or omissions Mastercard, Visa, Discover, American Express. pre paid orders. purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted. Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped. Wo check for stolen credit cards. All returns for credit, repair, or exchange must have a return authorization number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subotto a 15% restocking fee. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manu facturer's warranty Defective items replaced immediately. All item numbers represent 3.5\" floppy, except Where noted Educational government, and corporate purchase orders welcome. Circle Reader Service #56 "


"NO MORE Galers You're finished with training... Had your fun and games. Now TACTICAL FIGHTER EXPERIMENT i t's time to face reality in the most sophisticated aerial combat simulation ever created for your PC-TFX: Tactical Fighter Experiment. Equipped with ASRAAMs, Mavericks, M615, laser-guided GBUs...you're fully loaded to tackle more than 200 «realworld\" campaigns, based on today's geopolitical realities. And to keep you sweating bullets, from Somalia to Sarajevo, the skies are swarming with Al-programmed bogeys that'll make you pay for your mistakes...with your life. Log on and engage in TFX. This time, you're not just playing games. Grab the controls of any of three USAF-spec flight models and spread democracy over five million square miles of topographically accurate landscape. Oceano Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 Suite D.102 TFX 1993 Ocean of Amonca. All rights reserved. Ocean is a rogistered trademark of Ocean Soltware Limited Circle Reader Service #97 WIN the TFX Contest. \"Be A Real Fighter Pilot\" See Package for Details. "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SIMULATION Turnin' and Burnin'On-Line BOGEYS WELCOME TO BOGEY'S REACH OUT AND ATTACK SOMEONE TIRED OF FLAMING BAR & GRILL, AN Demand for multiplayer flight sims continues to INFORMAL SALOON grow, despite less-than-enthusiastic support from for fighter pilots most game publishers. Fortunately, three on-line COMPUTER PILOTS BY and sim drivers of services, CompuServe, Genie and The ImaginaBAR & GRILL all stripes to gather tion Network, offer a variety of flight simulation the latest intelligence services with varying features, reliability, and prices. THE DROVES? CHECK between missions. Although we'll focus on military and civilian flight RED BARON simulations, we'll occasionally look at naval war(THE IMAGINATION NETWORK) OUT THE MULTIPLAYER fare simulators, submarine simulators, and driINN supports Dynamix' RED BARON WWI Night ving simulators. We'll discuss FLIGHT SIMULATOR sim in multiplayer mode. Although an older sim, 5 navigation techniques; talk about evading RED BARON continues to hold its own in terms of FURBALLS THAT ARE Russian torpedos in SEAWOLF; see how the real realism and game play. AWG-9 radar works versus concessions made in Once you've logged into INN, moved to the F-14 FLEET DEFENDER; and talk about handling appropriate \"land\" (an INN term for an individHEATING UP THE the killer turns in INDYCAR RACING. Essentially, ual forum), and selected a \"place\" (a particular if it's a vehicle the player controls in the first section in a land), you can jump into a queue. In person and it attempts to model the real world the queue, you can issue challenges for 1 on 1, 2 NETWORKS. to some extent, it's fair game. This month, the on I, or 2 on 2 matches. The challenging player game is combat simulation and it's on-line. Sets several options, including aircraft type. If the challenged player(s) accepts, INN places the players on a waiting list. While waiting, you can chat with other playSpectrum HoloByte plans to release an as yet untitled flight sim by Christmas of ers in that place.\" '94. Expected to be of moderate difficulty, it will feature a multimedia approach Once in the electronic air, to training, offer a storyline between missions like that in STRIKE COMMANDER (but RED BARON players will find with more emphasis on character interaction), and involve the MicroProse design that the on-line version is quite different than they are team in handling the avionics. It may even have a MicroProse aircraft within the used to. Most of these dillerSpectrum game. Spectrum is also working on a flight sim with a high level of ences are negative ones, alcomplexity. FALCON 4 (working title) will ship sometime in early '95. It will use the though the current INN same basic Al as FALCON 3.0 for air-to-air encounters, but the air-to-ground en version (ver 2.3) is somewhat counters will be significantly upgraded. Ground units will follow the standard milibetter than its predecessors. The first problem is that bultary doctrine of an integrated defense. Missions will also be more realistic in lets have unlimited range. structure and, as a flight leader, you will be able to follow up on TOOs (targets of Forget trying to disengage opportunity), even if you need to call in a tanker to refuel. Both sims will feature a from a light and run-the new Electronic Battlefield component which will support modem and network bad guy's bullets can find you play. from several miles away. Second, there are no midair collisions. Third, MPRB suffers by Tom \"KC\" Basham ON THE RADAR JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 79 "


"OG joystick ailments, with many people hav as full-realism areas. Supporting Aw's and jargon. Second, not everything is friending problems with two-joystick combina WWII theme, the various arenas are de ly in the electronic skies. While the vast mations. The worst of it, though, are warping fined as either «Pacific\" or \"European» for jority of players are very friendly and and delays. several days at a time, and you can only fly helpful, there is a vocal minority who feel Warping is the sudden erratic movement aircraft that saw service in that theater. pride in verbally assaulting everyone they of an object caused by timing delays be Once in a theater, you choose one of encounter, especially new players. Most of tween two machines connected through a three countries to fly for. You can join a them claim their verbal nonsense is some network. Delay describes events happening squadron of other players from your form of combat tactic. Fortunately, this noise on one machine several seconds after they country, but it is not required. Each can be squelched. Third, Genie is expenhappen on the other machine. At 2400 country has a territory containing several sive. Similar to INN, GEnie charges $8.95 baud, INN's primary connect rate, warping airfields, factories, bridges, etc. On-line per month for 4 hours, plus $3.00/hour for isn't too bad, but the delay ellects can complay is a constant war among the three each additional hour. Playing during prime pletely ruin the experinations to destroy business hours warrants a double-price surence. INN runs RED or capture each charge. Although the complex environment BARON individually on other's bases. You makes on-line Aw very entertaining, the each player's computbegin by choosing steep learning curve and high cost render it er, handling network an airfield and impractical for casual users. updates every few secmoving to \"the For more information, call 1-800-638-9636. onds. For example, say briefing room.\" In you slide behind your the briefing room FALCON CHALLENGE LADDER opponent's six preparyou can chat with (COMPUSERVE) ing to fire, when you other players CompuServe does not support multirealize you're about to TRIPLANES ON HIGH Tailing an enemy should be there or in flight. player flight sims in the same sense as overshoot. Unbeeasy in on-line RED BARON due to the slower frame You can choose You can choose GEnie. More akin to INN, CIS proGenie. More akin to INN, CIS proknownst to you, the rate, but this isn't always the case. from a number of vides a 2400 baud connection service network updates both different aircraft, for FALCON 3.0 players for $3 per hour, player's games at this instant. Next, you cut including bombers. You can even play a alleviating long distance surcharges for throttle to slow down and prevent an over gunner on a bomber flown by someone players in remote areas. Unfortunately, shoot while your adversary also cuts throttle else, drive a tank, or lly as an observer FALCON 3.0 is nearly unplayable at to slow down and force you to lly past him. with someone else. 2400 baud due to warping effects. Since the last update just occurred, though, Once in the air, you'll most likely find CompuServe also supports a \"waiting your machine doesn't know the other player yourself in the middle of the largest clec room\" where you can find willing FALreduced throttle, and calculates his next po tronic furball you have ever seen. There CON 3.0 players around the clock. Fisition based upon his previous velocity. It may be 15 or 20 people flying for cach nally, CompuServe also hosts a FALCON then paints his aircraft flying out in front of country, all at the same time! The radio al 3.0 head-to-head Challenge Ladder. you on your screen. lows communication between players, and \"The ladder is usually played by way of Meanwhile, your opponent's PC doesn't through channel selection you can com 9600 baud modem connection, with know that you slowed down, so it shows municate with all players, only with your CIS being used only as a challenge and your aircraft flying out in front as your ad countrymen, only with your squadron, or records-storage administrator. Compeversary decelerates. Your opponent pulls only with your wingtition is tough and the trigger and scores a hit, prompting a men. Jargon-filled the Challenge Ladder network update. Suddenly, even though messages moves is no place for the the bad guy is in front of you and pointing through your text winsqueamish. away, his bullets hit you. Flying textbook dow calling out bandits, CompuServe rates tactics against the opponent in front of cries for help, all's aren't cheap, however, you will result in your electronic death clear, and kill counts. Prices are either 90% of the time. INN now supports 9600 On-line AW is a com$8.00/hour or $12.80/ baud, which should alleviate some of these plex, highly supported hour for 2400 baud, problems. 9600 baud nodes are rare, system. New players depending on your though, and are often long distance calls. can invest in training, billing option. For INN's pricing scheme is $9.95 per fly at limited realism, or FLY THE UNFRIENDLY SKIES While shooting more information, call month for five hours, plus $3.50/hour for go for the max realism down enemies in Air Warrior, you may 1-800-848-8990. each additional hour. Although these impact. Primarily taunt them at your discretion. In summary, GEnie's rates are competitive with GEnie, the played at only 2400 AIR WARRIOR offers the quality of INN MPRB is not. For more in baud, Genie suffers no delay, but it does most comprehensive entertainment, but formation call 1-800-Sierral. have some warping effects. The warping requires more training and commands a can make shooting tricky, but not impossi premium price. INN offers an entertainSVGA AIR WARRIOR (GENIE) ble. AW has a much steeper learning ing, but flawed, rendition of RED BARON. GEnie supports Kesmai's SVGA AIR WAR curve than RED BARON, but pays off with CompuServe doesn't offer a comparable RIOR (AW). GEnie takes a different ap significantly more complex play. service, but is a host for challenging headproach from INN. Genie supports large GEnie has three main disadvantages. to-head FALCON 3.0 competition. So enlist arenas; some designated as training areas, First, the on-line Aw environment is com where your interests lie, and never let some as limited-realism areas, and some plex, and it takes time to learn the ropes «KC\" Basham get on your six. 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"G H I S CAMERA. "


"BUREAU 13\" There's a plot to undermine the government, through the manipulation of men and their. machines by paranormal and supernatural. phenomena. It's your job to prevent it from. happening. You'll wind your way through a. world full of obstacles. human and. otherwise. where your ability to interpret. the situation at hand will determine your. mission's success or failure.. DON'T BLAME US IF YOU HELL: A CYBERPUNK THRILLER It's been discovered who has the power. ASSAULT ON EVEREST to condemn man to hell: The Government.. This seamless blend of history. They're after you for committing sins. and imagination pits you against. against the state. and on the path to. an intimidating array of. proving your innocence. you must battle. opponents. Ancient myths. lost. demons amid a cyber world of sinister. legends. hidden caves, and the. deceit and ruthless evil. Even in victory. it's a near death experience.. most unforgiving mountain in. the world. Everest. Only the. fittest will survive to discover. the secret of the unidentified. object which has crashed near. the summit.. "


"STAR CRUSADER\" The battlefield is outerspace, which is swarming. with flying battleships armed with futuristic weaponry.. In the middle of stellar chaos, you'll be forced. to choose a side: the territory conquering Gorene. Empire. or the alien alliance. Either one could. lead.to victory. Or death.. CTION NE VER COME BACK TO REALITY hen Take 2 software enters your computer, you go in with it...winding your way through hyper-real environments that push role playing, simulation, and edutainment beyond known boundaries. All created by advanced technologies that enhance the experience in ways you've never seen or felt before. It's a barrage of entertainment, adventure and education emerging this fall that will thrust you into the Take 2 experience. It starts with interaction. You'll find there is no end. BILL COSBY'S PICTURE PAGES From PBS broadcasts to a. Nickelodeon run of nine years to. over 110 million Picture Pages. Workbook sales, one of the most. widely acclaimed and thoroughly. enjoyed children's edutainment. tools is now available on CD ROM.. TAKE 2 It not only helps them learn.. but reaches them how to learn.. INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #184 1994 Take 2 Interactive Software, Inc. STAR CRUSADER. ASSAULT ON EVEREST. HELL: A CYBERPUNK THRILLER BUREAU 13. and TAKE 2 INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE are registered trademarks of Take 2 Interactive Software. Inc. PICTURE PAGES is a registered trademark of Picture Pages Inc. "


"PREVIEW E Predator C 2 Stalk The Seas Of WWII With Dynamix' Aces Of The Deep 1 0 by Kevin Turner T WAS DURING A LONG MEDITERRANEAN PATROL ON THE USS SNOOK, AN SSN 592 FAST-ATTACK SUB, WITH A BOATload of sun-starved submariners, that I first saw the movie Das Bool. As you might expect, submariners are a somewhat irreverent and rowdy lot, the kind of people who can turn Brian's Song into the funniest movie ever made. Das Boot was the first movie we ever sat through in complete silence. ACES OF THE DEEP (ACE) has a lot in common with Das Boot. Not only is it a chilling, historically accurate portrayal of German U-boat experiences in the Atlantic, but, like the movie, it is able to totally immerse you in its claustrophobic world. Even with my many years of experience with submarines, I learned new things about U-boats almost without realizing it, so absorbed was I in the game. With its meticulously crafted simulation model, and its stunning graphical depiction of that model, ACEs has given me new hope for this small genre of games. as the ocean undulates with uncanny realism. The periscope has crosshairs and gradients with an accurate bearing indicator, as one would expect. But the view from the periscope is something I never imagined I'd see on a PC the scope barely peeks out over the surface of the ocean, and the sight occasionally blurs water splashing on the scope, slowly clearing from the top as it drains away! The view from the bridge is enough to make a landlubber queasy. Having crossed the Atlantic five times, I can attest to the fact that it is rarely flat. Submarines, whether old diesel boats or top-ofthe-line nuclear subs, are not designed for surface operations. Relatively small for warships, they bob up and down like corks on top of the waves, all of which is captured wonderfully by the bridge view. After turning off the lights, I found myself doing a slight sway and wishing for an Atlantic breeze to go with the rolling waves. The bridge view, besides its beautiful ocean, contains a couple of noteworthy items. First is a set of \"big-eyes,\" or large binoculars, with a bearing circle for surface attacks. Instead of looking out and seeing a ship, then running down to the conn for a periscope bearing, a handy interface allows you to stay on the bridge and maximize oxygen. You can also make surface attacks using torpedoes, as the same controls are available on the bridge as in the control room. Running synchronously with the clock, the cycle of day and night adds another element of realism to the game. Time compression is a welcome option, allowing you to transit large areas quickly and avoid the boredom that is very much a part of submarine life. Once a target is located, information must be gathered and a target solution generated by calculating your heading and speed, plus the target bearing and range. This information is then fed into the Torpedo Data Computer, which fortunately does all of the number crunching. Historically inaccurate? Yes, to a degree, but this is a design decision that saves the gamer a lot of tedious calculation. (I would person. ally enjoy doing all the work, more from nostalgia than concern over realism.) Once the data is calculated, you have the option of using torpedoes or the deck gun to destroy the target. The deck gun is fired not by you, but by your crew, which makes sense, as it steers the game away from arcade action. The designers of the game are still doing a lot of work in this area, but what I have seen so far suggests that they're on the right track. THE BELLY OF THE WHALE As you enter the control room, you are presented with a true-to-life representation of U-boat instrumentation. Control of the sub is simply a matter of clicking on an instrument, be it periscope, depth gauge, or compass. When surfaced, moving to the periscope or the bridge may have you reaching for your Dramamine, 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"HISTORIC MISSION Bearing Bearing Speed red Sinking the Art Royal Attack on the Barham Courageous at Boy Mission: Torch Convoy Find se 122 & 1229 Range Bongs Heading Hooding 3 sept. 7. 1929. The way only two weeks old. Ond Upon only mechanisoins hoc beer sunt sy U-boats. But le chasing a steame, koleun Schuhart 129) seotted a bigger taget the circraft corrien EMS Courescous 330 33 06 00 A SUB CAPTAIN'S DREAM Choose from a variety of scenarios as you move from submarine novice to legendary skipper. TORPEDOES AWAY! The Torpedo Data Computer may not be the pinnacle of realism, but it makes targeting a lot easier. C E A+ IN HISTORY Although the graphics had me reeling in my chair, the single most impressive aspect of this simulation is the extent to which it captures historical accuracy. I spoke with Mike Jones, the producer of ACES, and was thoroughly impressed with his grasp of submarine technology and U. boat history. In addition, Dynamix employed researcher Dennis Kilgore to ensure accuracy, and he went as far as London to do so. Surviving U-boat crew members were interviewed, archives were stripped of their wealth, and all this information was used to some extent in the game. From rate of depth change to crush depth, from speed to torpedo damage, you'd be hard pressed to find an element that isn't modeled after historical data. To ensure that the game plays as realistically as possible, Dynamix has made some interesting decisions with regard to crush depth and the damage factors. The crush depth (the depth at which a sub may collapse from pressure) is learned exactly once, and no one has ever returned to say what it is. Since the actual crush depth is unknown, Dynamix has left it unknown and somewhat random. Rather than havhistorical missions. The latter are particuing a crush depth, the sub has a crush larly fascinating, allowing you to particirange, and it varies slightly from game to pate in some of the extraordinary exploits game. This prevents the player from of actual U-boat skippers. You may also learning that the crush depth is 210 me embark on a career, where you select an ters, and setting the depth for 209 meters. emblem to represent your boat. I noticed The damage factors are still being im right away that the emblem of the U-boat plemented, but the approach is refreshin Das Boot is present, along with many ing. Damage is not strictly cumulative, others almost as famous. meaning that if a depth charge is detonat In taking on a career, you can choose to ed at a given distance and inflicts 10% start at one of several stages in WWII. damage, 10 more depth charges at that \"Opening Moves\" and \"Happy Times\" redistance may not destroy the boat. The flect pre-1941 naval combat, where Antidamage inflicted by subsequent depthSubmarine Warfare was non-existent and charges may be more, or may be less than convoys had not been developed. \"Stalethe first, ensuring that captains play by mate\" takes place in 1941, where ASW was gut feeling and experience, rather than starting to become useful. The US coast is \"by the numbers.\" the scene for \"Drumbeat,\" where the US is caught unprepared for the U-boat threat MISSION SUBMERSIBLE in 1942. Later that same year, \"CrescenACES can be played in a number of differ do\" shows how the convoy system and ent modes. Degree of difficulty can be var ASW had begun to evolve. The large conied, allowing each player to adjust the voy battles over the Atlantic come into learning curve to their experience level. play during \"Climax,\" in the first half of As in other sims from Dynamix, single 1943. \"Defeat\" continues the game on to missions are available for training, stalkthe end of the war. The difficulty levels of ing convoys, encountering warships, or these scenarios rise and fall like a sea WARSHIP ENCOUNTER WARSHIP ENCOUNTER OPTIONS U-Boot Type VIC Chew elite Wolfoecke targe ip *C| bottiip both time of dayday Secont size: heavy Weathers clear A Cover res Sed setor Theat Period of the wors Happy Times 4X20 to 3/41 GW Panel A WATERY GRAVE If you're lucky enough to nail the enemy, don't hang around for search planes and destroyers to find you. ACHTUNG! DEPTH CHARGES! Try a warship encounter in a solo mission before meeting one in the middle of a campaign. JULY 1994 . COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 85 "


"Speed Konge Headina CE 24123175 UP SCOPE! Stalk your prey over the grey seas of the Atlantic with a periscope which accurately models its real-life counterpart. PREPARE TO DIVE The interior is filled with detailed, realistic and stunning depictions of WWII submarine technology. O E swell, as did the flow of events for the Germans in WWII. This game will prove to be an excellent learning tool, while still being very entertaining. skippers. Also being planned for early 1995 is a mission disk that will allow the player access to the Mediterranean and another U-boat type. Should the design do particularly well, Dynamix is even considering publication of a scenario builder. ACES OF THE DEEP is simply one of the most impressive pieces of software I've had the pleasure of playing. From the opening quote by Winston Churchill and the ghostly image of a submerged U-boat appearing out of nowhere, to the actual nuts and bolts of sub warfare, it is evident, even before the game is complete, that ACES OF THE DEEP will set the new standard for submarine simulations, perhaps even simulations in general. Otto Kretschmer and his fellow submarine aces would be proud.  DIVING INTO DOS VS CD-SUBMARINES Mike Jones informs me that after the August release of the DOS version, an enhanced CD version of the game will be available late this year, and this version may contain interviews with actual U-boat Kevin \"Sumo» Turner (ICI SS/DI) is a former submariner, former DSRV crewmember, and former Navy diver. NEW PRODUCT Finally a tolat Cool that you mond od let you in Your eryoyment and performance covetemes M e dicinboard confusion and trust once and all the exclusive Colored leon key mohet y to locate the Holyot a glance with exclue One loucheter Nomor BASIC PACKAGE Includos Gamos Master Console & Koyboard Normal QWERT Matt Only $69.95 TOP GUN PACKAGE Games Master consola & 6 Matts Included 1. Falcon 3.0 2. Comanche Maximum Overkill 3. Acos of the Pacific 4. Flight Sim. 4.0 5. Strike Commander 6. Koyboard Normal QWERT Only $99.95 KATT GAMES MASTER \"TOTAL CONTROL SYSTEM! Simply! The best way to Play The solution to simulation computer games enjoyment logical test your name and performance tom pomer e will be Come M onero portail change ople Iron and play componenty od gorm onincorhot ploces te ondoritood the bootcomes c a nau Selone but await control panel consigne cobond mon the exclusive Side hond our other makes Gomes Maderant Simply plug in the Comes Ma y out and prethe percrate code number tom the game Mon Na Nasiowth hon so wore and contains Moreover our memory lechures con De upgraded with in posvetom Chosend therebre you Gomes M w ill be ready when the enteng games are reed ( Private Acetowe urolight Sim 50 Wing Commode Academy 1-14 Fleet Defenderete Wer w howh omes Met You will wonder how You gotolong playing the game without MATTS $14.95 Each Edsy Slide in slide out Mall Yes I went to the control of yo ond y Gor Master payable Keyboard and Terminal Technology (VSA) ING 1917 List Place North Brud,NOU, USA Lock Mechanism to hold the Moft securely commande A grouping cond Como Sep P ongpicy product GAMES MASTER Coo Money Burrowd be shipped within 5 con Amount   Top Gun Pockog Mom Scles tax NU Redes Price Bosi Pochopo top Gun Pockage 19 London 0989 LID ligt adout Kalar Shunga Monding Colour Coded y location Ky detox Dome on COO Ada 3450 2 Day Air Delivery A8057 2 doy services Canoda od 800 In add 53500 Fornbond order 1904 297 3390 Present commend trupor 32 mendes Manga Iww e Moneybook gooi 2011 AL DESEOGHS 26 Top Gun Package Gorrow Carn Decision to upgrades ber perise cho will be available about me for populer games and application 6 111111 Cyclic 24 S 2 Allorar 7100 to play due bolo MOR ervice! col forces EFEHERE Aces AS Comanche Kantoord word QWERTI Bons Package in Gone Corse Kod Normal ONETOR Matt Normal ACS 2 bord Name ONIRI bord 4 Aces of the Poch SAC -ut press code formalt INTER ond you create to play 22 bor force 21 U nderworld TOPICMART OVERNING 101 Actul dinero Six 5 2 D No Son Ried Touch mentre on OVO NO Noom stor location dono Conds p5b) oltr portable comptes Combo Valgomon tayo inando on Stron coordo chino incon t ro SED HA os System B ramante IBM AT, 24, 1852 by NaCom | QKATT 111111 Nepherd end Termine Test (UEA). . Circle Reader Service #169 86 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"HARD DRIVE TAKES ON A WHOLE NEW MEANING. INDYCAR. Get a grip-and hang on tight. IndyCar Racing is real-world, 3-D racing! Check out the reviews: \"Phenomenal»Computer Gaming World. \"Scary»On Track \"Fast, furious, brilliant»PC Gamer. \"Nirvana for car racing fans\"Game Bytes. WOMAN ALVIA step son PAPYRUS TVT NEW) Shrestha TOYOTA NEW NEW ANDY CAR D20 053.ca ESTO POINT IN The feel. It's almost too real. Scream down the straight. Crest a hill and your stomach's in your throat. Corner too fast and it's panic. Brake? Gas? Flick the wheel? If you have to think, you're toast. Don't worry, you'll learn. But this is a win you earn. The look. You're there. Cars, tread marks, terrain, billboards even paint schemes and decals on real IndyCars accurate in obsessive 3-D detail. The experience. Tinker with chassis and engine set-up. Fiddle with turbo boost, wing angles and tires. Factor in tire wear and fuel load. All play a part--all can help you go faster. 1.138 .6 Add on 7 new tracks. With our IndyCar Circuits: Expansion Pack, you can race at seven new tracks from Phoenix to Mid-Ohio, Detroit to Queensland, Australia the challenge always stays fresh! Each track has been painstakingly constructed to match the true dimensions of the actual speedway. And now, Indy, too! Our engineers have mastered the feel and thrill of \"The Brickyard so you can, too-with our new Indianapolis Motor Speedway: Expansion Pack. Plus, with this addon package, you get a Customizing Paint Kit to update colors and decals, or just do your car your way. OFFICIALLY LICENSED PAPYRUS« RACING Visit local retail stores, or call: 1-800-874-4607 INDYCAR. . DE Now, Distributed GOLDEN COMPUTE exclusively worldwide TRIAD AWARD CHOICE AZIRD boy Virgin Interactive WINNER Entertainment, Inc. 1 9 9 3 INTERACTIVE 18061 Fitch Avenue entertainment Irvine, CA 92714 ndianapolis 500,\"Indy. and The Backyard are registered trademarks of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation. IndyCar and the helmet ogo are trademarks of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, under exclusive license to Championship Auto Racing Teams, Inc. Papyrus is a trademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Virgin is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises Inc. IBM PC screens shown. Actual screens may vary. Circle Reader Service #153 B New Expansion Packs: IndyCar Circuits, plus The Indianapolis Motor Speedway! "


"REVIEW 0 Aegis: Guardian Of The Fleet 3 Keeper of the Simulation Flame by Terry Lee Coleman AN DIEGO IS IN MANY WAYS THE ARpossibly be accurately simulated with any Sound. The latter is a shame, because CHETYPAL. CALIFORNIA CITY, ITS hope of being played by the average the music is quite enjoyable, having SUNSHINE AND LUSH VEGETATION gamer? The truth is, it wasn't easy, but I just enough of that pompous flair so blend perfectly with breezes from necessary for martial compositions. the nearby ocean which, in turn, Aegis is advertised as having a full-size These errors seem to be confined to a wrap themselves around the eclectic archi 94-page guide. Unfortunately, if this were few systems (ironically, I had fewer tecture to be seen in every visual quadmy guide in a desert, I would certainly die problems on a single-speed CD-ROM rant. Yet, this of thirst. The tutorial than on a double-speed)-nonethedeceptively laid AEGIS: GUARDIAN OF THE FLEET section spends more less, for having only a few errors, the back metropolis is Price: $69.95 time defining what a game certainly has some obvious and also a staunch mili System: IBM laser is than in telling irritating detractions. tary town. The Requirements: the user how to use Despite this, once the learning curve is serene waters of 386/25 Mhz one. Aside from the crested, it becomes readily apparent that San Diego Harbor processor, 4MB obvious fact that most AEGIS (to paraphrase Marlon Brando in RAM, CD-ROM are home to a drive, 20 MB hard simulation buyers \"On The Waterfront\") could have been a flotilla of military know the difference drive space, contender. The icon-based interface is acvessels, from WWII VGA/SVGA AEGIS between a Harpoon tually quite logical, and moving around to aircraft carriers to graphics, mouse; and a Tomahawk, the the various ship systems quickly becomes modern destroyers Sound Blaster less informed need second nature—especially when enemy compatible for digitized sound and support craft. specifics, not general missiles are coming at your ship. From the Amidst this groupDesigners: Software Sorcery ramblings on what bridge, for instance, moving to the threat Publisher: Time Warner Interactive Group ing of past and preBurbank, CA 91506 various systems repre screen allows you to use radar, passive or sent warships rests 619-452-9901 sent. As happens all active sonar, or other sensing devices to the pinnacle of too much in this in locate enemies, which are indicated in naval hardware—the Aegis cruiser. Costdustry, the manual appears to ing between 800 million and one billion have been written by someone dollars apiece, this technological marvel is who has never played the game. as close to the ultimate weapons platform In AEgis' defense, the game as we are likely to see in this century. does include a very good ElecIn one San Diego locale, walking in a tronic Book of on-line informanormal oflice building and strolling down tion, along with an on-line a long, narrow hallway will take you to Warbook, filled with comprehenSoftware Sorcery's Military Software sive data on ships and hardware wing-should you have the proper securi from navies and air forces around ty clearance code. Software Sorcery has the world. As good as this is...the developed several training simulators for frustrating part is that the game the armed forces, so they definitely under tends to crash about 1/3 of the stand the concepts behind military simula time after accessing the electronic tions. Still, the variety of weapon book! platforms and information gathering sys Other bugs mean the 5-inch AEGIS ARTWORK From the opening screens to the digital video tems on the Aegis are so varied as to be gun doesn't always respond, missile launches, the graphics are crisp enough to pass a exceedingly daunting to even the most and the MIDI music has some Navy inspection. avowed simulations buff. How can they problems with Gravis UltraLE BMW CANNON 88 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"LE standard NATO symbology. Fans of RED beat your mouse (and hot keys) to death One major plus for those who like realSTORM RISING will feel right at home. responding to them all. ism (a minus for control freaks) is that your control of these forces is limited to isUP CLOSE AND PERSONAL A SIM FOR ALL SEASONS suing orders; you cannot take control of The weapons screen showcases the almost Frankly, this game reminds me of RED them directly. This is very appropriate, overwhelming amount of weaponry car STORM RISING in that it does for surface since this game is a simulation, and not ried by the AEGIS. Over 120 bays hold ships what the former did for submarines. trying to be a wargame like HARPOON. Tomahawk (surface-to-surface), Sea Lance Sometimes, the Aegis struggles alone To ease the novice captain's anxiety, (anti-sub), and surface-to-air missiles, with against a horde of air units, hell-bent on eighteen training missions are included, all the famous Harpoons forward in separate of which have something to reclaunchers. Marvelously detailed, the game ommend them. After chasing requires that General Quarters be soundL 61 88 enemy subs and fending off aired before weapons can be fired, and you craft, it can be a bit of a shock to will be apprized as to weapons status fight a defecting Aegis crusier in through digitized voice. Similarly, digithe final training scenario. tized videos of launched weapons are Needless to say, this is a more available, although I was disappointed than adequate preparation for that I couldn't see video of the Phalanx the \"real game.\" Close-In Defense System with its reputaOver 100 missions are includtion for firing 3,000 rounds per minute. ed, and in classic simulator style, Firing weapons is simply a matter of you may fight single battles or clicking on an acquired target, then armcarry out a campaign. If you ing an appropriate weapon. Once lock-on choose the ever-popular Desert is achieved, fire-and-forget is the order of Storm, you will fight your way the day, with both lock-on and weapon ac I CAN SEE FOR MILES Numerous screens offer a variety of through all of the battles in curacy depending on range and difficulty information and views of the enemy, using the AEGIS' state-ofstrict chronological and historilevel. The weapon ranges have an authen the art surveillance system. cal order, albeit without CNN tic ring, given their declassified source. along. Just for fun, some hypoThe US Navy fully cooperated in the de its destruction. At other times, it must thetical scenarios are included. My fasign, and it shows. Harpoons are less ver stalk deadly and stealthy subs, or launch a vorite was the Black Sea variant, where I satile than Tomahawks, but they are surprise Tomahawk strike on land targets. got to tangle with the revamped Russkies. realistically tougher to shoot down, as the While the Aegis is an excellent anti-sub One of the nicest things about this system more vulnerable \"pop-up\" of the Toma and anti-surface vessel, its main duty is to is that it doesn't have the forces involved hawk is factored into the design. protect aircraft carrier groups. Often, you casually tossing nukes around (as in RED The heart of the game, however, is the must deal with a sub or surface attack at SKY AT MORNING). The forces don't seem Tactical display. Graphically, it to vary much the second time around in a shows the Aegis afloat, with the particular battle, but playing on higher blue-sea background certainly levels causes them to react differently, so more pleasing than the radar replay value is better than anticipated. screen, among others. Enemy With the vast number of scenarios availships, planes and other threats are able, there is plenty to keep even the most shown in detail, and the view may die-hard naval fan enraptured for months, be zoomed in and out as needed. at the very least. An Exocet missile looks as it Aside from its similarities to RED STORM should, tremendously important RISING, it also reminds me of another visual feedback for the average sim-FALCON 3.0. Even with the bugs gamer. In beginner mode, clicking (which are already being corrected as we on the missile or other enemy obgo to press), this is one of those games ject gives information about warwhich will cause people to upgrade their head size, range, speed, and so hardware in order to play it. Aegis is one forth. On higher levels of comRUN SILENT, RUN DEEP...SOMETIMES A Russian Victor III of the few games for which it is actually plexity/realism, information is submarine is foiled in its attempt to sneak up on the AEGIS worth purchasing a CD-ROM drive. Andoled out only as quickly as sensundetected. undetected. chors aweigh! ing devices can pick it up. Simulation purists will be pleased at the accuracy the same time you are conducting air deof the graphics, but may find the look to fense for the carriers. Unlike a lonely sub AEGIS be too slick for their tastes. (They can of commander, your position as captain of ***1/2 course stick to the weapons screen). Re an Acgis will require you to use a signifi PRO: Lots of detail, accurate naval gardless of which screen the game is cant number of different assets at your hardware depictions, excellent complayed from, the tension is exquisite. disposal, according to your assigned tour mand perspective Time compression is available, but it will of duty. You may coordinate interceptor CON: Poor instruction manual, disrarely be needed. In most scenarios, aircraft, AWACS surveillance, or anti-sub turbing crash bugs threats appear quickly enough that you'll helicopters. VICTOR ITT Tuo EFOON JULY 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 89 "


"mellante NET va CD NEW! VIA Microforum Presents the Latest in CD-ROM The Ultimate Trivia CD Take the Ultimate Trivia Challenge and test your knowledge. The Ultimate Trivia is the most advanced, challenging and exciting trivia game you'll ever play. This advanced multimedia trivia game includes live Video questions, incredible sound effects, breathtaking photography and Over 500 Trivia Questions ! THE ULTIMATE TRIVIA -4995 Y MICE CULINA NEW! NEW! Virtual ESCAP Virtual Escape NE An absolute must for all computer users! Incredible animation will take you into a relaxing virtual world! Select your own virtual animation and music to help escape everyday stress & worries (music selection includes \"Barcelona Nights\" by Ottmar Liebert which has sold over 500,000 copies). This CD also includes \"Super Natural\" 3D photographs which you can view with a newly developed 3D glasses enclosed! Also the latest in fractal animation and a live video personal trainer to guide you through specific exercises designed to tone your body to fight everyday stress. 24Hr Virtual Assistant Access information quickly, efficiently and easily during any Windows application. Receive answers to the most common questions by using live video and an easy-to-use menu. Access help or tips from within any application such as CorelDRAW, Excel, WordPerfect and more! S.R.P. VIRTUAL ASSISTANT 4095 S.R.P. 4095 Melicofecum The Video Game NEW! NEW! G.O.R.G. Experience the adventure of a lifetime and venture into the dark threatening planets of the G.O.R.G. galaxy. This \"Out of this World\" CD-ROM game will keep you playing for hours. Includes an extensive collection of sound effects, animation, incredible graphics and over 35 planets to explore. The Video Game Solution CD This CD-ROM includes easy to follow instructions to use hints and tips on how to solve the most popular games on the market! Also included are special editors which allows a player to have an unlimited number of lives and makes each game more exciting. *3995 (praca MABUTI trungta S.R.P. 4995 ATTENTION PROGRAMMERS : DO YOU HAVE A SOFTWARE PROGRAM SUITABLE FOR CD-ROM? MICROFORUM IS LOOKIN Microforum 1 Woodborough Ave. Toronto, Canada Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 "


"Now With Mis Regume Designer Fonts Explore the latest fonts designed by top graphic designers! This CD package contains an impressive variety of new typefaces for both TRUETYPE and POSTSCRIPT FONTS. Improve you presentations with this incredible font collection. A great way to create a lasting impression ! \"Designer Fonts\"contains over 400 customized designed fonts by top Designers. Simple and easy to use. S.R.P. The Complete Windows Set \"The Complete Windows Set\" is for the Windows lover! The set contains hundreds of the very best Windows Programs carefully selected and fully organized in a menu driven system for easy access. Collector's Elition DESIGNER S.R.P. WINDOWS 34.95 NEW NEW VERSION! FOR WINDOWS The det fordi della by polic 5.mp3 995 OVER 400 FONTS Kancer SUPER RCAD Super Arcade Games The ultimate CD for video games. INCREDIBLE GRAPHICS, SUPER SOUND EFFECTS & FAST ACTION! Have hours of fun. Hundreds of the very best games such as: Doom. Blake Stone-Gotcha.Helius Stellar Defense. Ken's Labyrinth Megatron SeaQuesto Captain Keen and MANY MORE! Sounds of MultiMedia A complete collection of exotic sounds, pictures, animation and video clips for your MultiMedia programs, presentations, desktop publishing, word processing programs, or just for pure entertainment ! You can finally bring your computer to new levels of entertainment ! GAME Sounds of Multimedial Sounds S.R.P. of Multimedia?! S.R.P. ** 2995.NETON 5 NEW VERSION! ATTENTION DEALERS! Dream Girls Do you have what it takes to be with two of the most beautiful models around? Now you can find out thanks to the latest in computer technology! This advanced multimedia game features incredible live video, hit songs, sound effects and amazing graphics! S.R.P. Microfocuin **3995 Get into the Microforum Multimedia Program! With over 20 fabulous titles to choose from, this carousel will prove to be a hot new item among your customers. CD-ROM llection ollection EU SOLUTION Sounds RCADE WORKS OVER 25 CD-ROM TITLES AVAILABLE Circle Reader Service #126 TO ADD TO ITS INTERNATIONALLY DISTRIBUTED CD-ROM COLLECTION. FOR MORE INFO. PLEASE CALL 416-656-6406 TO ORDER CALL 1-800-465-2323 DEALER INQUIRIES ARE WELCOME! ETITER COMPUTER STORES EVERYWILTTEIDEN "


"STRATEGY Keep Your Eye On M . The Sparrows F-14 FLEET DEFENDER TACTICS PART II by Tom \"KC\" Basham 2 HE AWG-9 RADAR USED IN THE F-14 IS EXTREMELY COMPLEX. ALTHOUGH NOT AN EXACT REPLICA, MICROProse F-14 FLEET DEFENDER's simulation of the AWG-9 approximates the real system well enough to appreciate the tasks which real-world Radar Intercept Officers (RIOs) face. In some respects, radar operation in DEFENDER is actually more difficult than in real life, because you must perform both pilot and RIO tasks. To make matters even more difficult, in order to exploit the advantages of the AWG-9 radar in the simulation, you must use the complex, \"authentic\" difficulty settings. At lower difficulty settings the computer-controlled RIO will take command of the radar. The computer-controlled RIO is good at finding targets at long range, but very poor at locking and attacking them, plus it restricts you from utilizing the most powerful radar modes. scan patterns. I usually begin by selectmode! This only signals your intentions to ing a 200 nautical miles (nm) range, the enemy and focuses your view on a sinmaximum azimuth and 4-bar scan, keep gle target. Instead, keep using SRCH ing the elevation centered on the hori mode until the targets are visible on the zon. This enables me to cover a lot of DDD with a 100nm range. Then, select territory in a reasonable amount of time. Track-While-Scanning (TWS) mode. AlI leave the scan pattern alone until it has though limited to a 100nm range, the a chance to complete two scan patterns, TWS modes (TWSA and TWSM) are the then begin to adjust the vertical eleva best radar modes for the AIM-54 Phoenix tion slightly. Each press of the PGUP missile. In the TWS modes, you can moniand PGDN keys adjusts the elevation by tor up to 24 targets simultaneously on the 2 degrees. Adjust the elevation in small Target Information Display (TID) and increments only; pointing the radar up 2 launch Phoenix missiles at up to six enedegrees means raising or lowering the mies. The HL button highlights selected targets, giving you more detailed information. You can even interrogate a highlighted target's IFF (Identify Friend or Foe) signature. Since the 10) 2016 299 200 radar never locks on any single target, your scans will not trigger any enemy radar detection alarms. You and your wingman can conceivably POSRON attack an entire squadron of enemy aircraft without ever setting AS FAR AS THE EYE CAN SEE Visual identification is a luxury. Initiate a off a single \"radar lock\" long-range scan with SRCH mode if you want to survive the mission. warning The TID in TWS mode scan zone by over 42,000 feet at the gives a graphic, top-down display of the maximum range of 200nm! Moving the radar contacts, showing their relative posiantenna up or down, even slightly, could tions, their altitudes, and their headings. move the scan pattern enough to ex Using this information, along with IFF clude important radar contacts. checks and \"bogey dope\" from the E-2C After detecting radar contacts, resist the Hawkeye, you can quickly determine temptation to radar-lock a single target in STT 11 SRCE FINDING BANDITS Generally, everything begins with the Detailed Data Display (DDD). You start by selecting SRCH mode, which uses a long-range, pulse-Doppler search mode. Although it limits the information presented about each target, SRCH mode allows you to look for targets at maximum radar range. Next, configure the scan pattern using three parameters: azimuth scan, elevation scan, and scan bars. The wider the vertical and horizontal scans, the more area the radar searches. Since this makes the entire search pattern extremely slow, you should generally avoid such very large 92 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"ZEPHYR Join THE BATTLE! BEEG CHIUNT LIMI 13-D rendered tanks and obstacles. Intense combat action. Easy to use keyboard, mouse, or joystick interface. Complete network and modem support allow up to six human and/or computer players. OCCOTS OMEWWIVES TI MIKE WARF SPEED DRIVEZEPHYR is the ultimate 3-D, futuristic tank simulator from New World Computing. Strap yourself behind the control panel of a state-of-the-art Zephyr battle craft and blast the competition to atoms. Pilot your Zephyr through subway systems, under water, and over alien Landscapes as you vie for fame, glory, and corporate sponsorship. WORLD COMPUTING, INC P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-5650 outside the U.S.), or by mail: P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078-4302. 1994 New World Computing, Inc Zephyr is o tradunurk of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo oro registered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved IM Kroons shown. Actual screens may vary "


"THSH 100 RAST ALT 2020 E THSH on the DT button, then on in Since the Phoenix is a fire-and-forget dividual radar contacts. A missile in DEFENDER, you can break radar number from 1 to 6 will ap lock at any time and head for home-a pear next to each designated good idea once you've launched your last contact, indicating the firing Phoenix. Although no slouch as a dogorder. Each time you press fighter, the F-14 should avoid knife-fights the missile launch button, a whenever possible. Phoenix missile will be fired at the next designated con THE LAST RESORT tact. You just sit back and Bandits aren't always so cooperative in letwatch the action. ting you bug out, however. Sometimes, it's As an alternative to the best to simply close the range and duke it (RIM) IFF check Megative Possible Hostile TWS modes, if you are within out. If you have AIM-7 Sparrow missiles, WHO GOES THERE? Unsure if that far-off aircraft is friend or foe? 100nm of a Highlight the target with the HL button, and query its IFF friendly AWACS signature, without setting off radar warnings. aircraft or your aircraft carrier, llying fixed patrols, and which ones pose a you can deactivate your radar threat to you or your carrier. and use the datalink mode. Click on the DL button beBOLT FROM THE BLUE neath the TID and it will disNext, comes the true beauty of the AWG play bogey information 9/AIM-54 combination: attacking six tar provided directly from the gets simultaneously at long range. In the AWACS or carrier. Again, TWSA mode, the computer will automati manually designate targets (as cally allocate all Phoenix missiles; you just described for the TWSM push the fire button once for each missile mode) and fire your Phoenix and watch the resulting explosions. In the missiles at the targets without MY, IT'S GETTING LATE Don't waste time when you've identified a TWSM mode, you have to manually desig ever having to turn your hostile. Designate the missile firing order and let 'em fly! nate the firing order of targets. Click first radar on! 0 F ER CORPS PREMIUM TEMPLATES FALCON, MIG OR HORNET COMMANDER UTILITIES\" *Finally! Total control of your Falcon 3.0, MiG-29 or Hornet squadrons and campaigns!! ONLY co/ PER SET! For one low price you get all six: FALCON COMMANDER OR + FALCCALC/MIGCALC/HORNETCALC: Superb campaign intelligence gathering MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES tools. Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info on every site, ground forces & TO U all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint timing, Strategic Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet'. Even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! ONLY $24.95!! F3/MIG/HORNET REQUISITION: Take full command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons! Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status. IMPORTANT!: *FCU is compatible with Falcon.0: Operation Fighting Tiger Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! MOP MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND MIG-29: D.A.F. + FALCON MAPPER: The famous Red Flag Instant Action and HUD customizing HCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND Hornet: N.S.F. utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action. \"Declutter\" HUD. Set default IA difficulty level. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New graphical Premium Templates TM standardized, color-coded layout map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! destroys \"Keyboard Confusion\"!! SHOWF3: Viewer for screen-shots taken with Falcon's secret screen-capture program! View shots individually or in \"slide show. New conversion feature saves screenshots to popular HOA Kirem .GIF OR PCX formats. Includes easy instructions for Falcon's hidden capture commands! ROZI BRBNB KCCMENU: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use ready-to-go menus Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion or customize to your preference. Add new menu items or create sub-menus to add other and increase one's gaming pleasure. -CGW sims, games, TSRS or bat files. Completely unloads from memory while running selection!! ETTETELTEIRO GTC Falcon 3.0/3.01/MIG-29 Aces of the Pacific KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut-wrenching action-packed Red Flag Strike Commander Secret Weapons Luftwaffe missions. Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Privateer MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 Tornado A.T.P. fly these \"Volunteers only thrillers! Strike Eagle III Jetfighter I & II X-Wing 8-17 Flying Fortress To Order Call Computer Express: . DUCOJER Gunship 2000 I&I CY Air Combat Comanche: Max. Overkill F117A Stealth CHECK SIX! 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 8:30-6.30 EST Mon-Sat  All other inquiries to: keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 143 Ave. 402. Davle, FL 33330 300-262-6066 * High-Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * Template Special: 1-$12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! scret Wesimulator 4.0 85.0 orangers 999 5 HABI VISA M Aku M y e ngatasi Tansante Alolakan tand out Nvice are mans of Spectre 94 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Circle Reader Service #80 "


"Drive the Grand Prix Simulation Used by Formula One Racing Teams Actual screens may vary. The key to winning on the Grand Prix Circuit is practice, practice, practice! To practice you need track time but that's expensive, subject to availability, and you could blow an engine. Now, Formula One teams have a better way to familiarize their drivers with the major Grand Prix circuits. They sit them in front of a computer and let them practice with MicroProse World Circuit Sixteen Grand Prix circuits have been so faithfully reproduced that rookie Formula One drivers can become as familiar with the track as experienced World Driving Champions. A slight mistake here will cost you a few seconds rather than a $200,000 engine. Features include realistic Formula One handling and performance and authentic cockpit instruments. You can even change the car's set-up for maximum performance on each circuit; tire selection, wing down force adjustment, brake balance and gear ratios. Various levels and settings allow you to increase the challenge as your driving skills improve. Take on the Formula One driving simulation that challenges the pros. World Circuit from MicroProse. MICROPROSE Division of Spectrum Holo Byte Inc. 1-800-879-PLAY 1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #172 "


"seat; or created an auto-RIO that shuts off when you are in the back seat, but operates the radar as if you were playing at \"standard» difficulty level when you're in the front seat. ES J DEBRIEFING In summary, proper use of the RIO enables you to reduce other birds into ashes with your Phoenix missiles and to shoot down bogeys at shorter range while keeping your eye on your Sparrows. As the program stands now, though, once you start dancing in close, you're on your own. to counter maneuver and maintain the lock. Once you are within 5nm of the bandit, the back seat position becomes totally useless. Although a real-world RIO would continue to work the radar, a single person cannot dogfight the plane and operate the radar at the same time, because the flight conMiG-29 Hit by AIH-54 trols are disabled in the back seat. When in a knife-fight, seLIVING THE GOOD LIFE IN THE SKIES If you're lucky enough to get lect the Boresight radar mode the jump on your opponent, just sit back and watch the targets to immediately and automatidisappear when the missiles hit home. cally lock the closest target directly in move to the front seat and point the airfront of the aircraft. craft at the enemy. Jump to the back seat While Boresight doesn't and select SRCH mode. Then, click on give you much selecthe desired target in the DDD display so tion, it does significantyou can lock the radar to that specific tar ly reduce your get and fire your AIM-7 Sparrow missiles workload. In hindsight, at it. Fire your missile and bustle back to Micro Prose should the front seat. These are not fire and for have: allowed the back get, however, so remember: you must keep seater to control the the radar locked until the missile strikes or the aircraft from there; missile will miss the target. Your intended provided an autopilot victim will no doubt try to break the lock that will dogfight while by maneuvering, so you must be prepared you are in the back 0 E Courtesy of Grumman Corp. Introducing... THE UNIVERSAL COCKPITTM STRAP IN...AN AKE OFF!!! The UNIVERSAL COCKPIT Allows you to Take Command of Your System Three Ways (stick, yoke or steering). Now You can have Complete Control whether on the Track or in the Air. FEATURES:  Tough Aluminum Construction  Free-Standing System. No Clumsy Desk Mounting FLIGHT SIMS AUTO RACING SIMS Clamps or Suction Cups! Stick/Rudder/Throttle Steering/Brake/Throttle (not shown , yoke configuration) Push Button Shifting  3-in-1 Modular System, Easily Converted Coming Soon: The UNIVERSAL JOYSTICKTM \"Complete\" Control of Auto Racing and Flight Sims in an Economical Desktop Package. ASK FOR DETAILS! SIMULATION SYSTEMS 1-800-647-7623 SIMULATION SYSTEMS 791 E. Brokaw Rd.  San Jose, CA 95112  1-800-647-7623  Fax (408)441-0650 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Circle Reader Service #113 "


"COMMIT TO EXCELLENCE VOLUME ONE NO. 1 * * * * PRO EDITION FRONT PAGE SPORTS BASEBALL SEASON STARTS TODAY! Now get all the drama and excitement of life in the big leagues with a new PC game from the makers of award-winning Football Pro. GREATEST LINEUP EVER— OVER 500 STATS FOR EACH PLAYER COLORADO ADMITS TEAM MANAGED BY COMPUTER level or on the disabled list, and 10 in the low minors. So you can work with players not just for a season, but for their entire careersfrom the minors to retirement. With no manager in sight, the team was forced to admit that they've been managed for the last year by a very powerful computer program: Front Page Sports Baseball. The program's Manage-only mode is great for trying out your own strategy, playing head-to-head with other players or against Pilch Zone It happens every Spring. But for you it can happen any time. Because nothing brings you closer to the game than Front Page Sports Baseball. Whether you want to just play the game, manage a team, or both, you get to make the calls. And with 500 statistics on cach MLBPA player, there's plenty to base your decisions on. Front Page Sports Baseball lets you field 48 teams in one to three leagues. What's more, you can have 50 players on each team25 on the big league roster, 15 at the AAA the computer. Switch to Arcade play and take as much control as you want over pitching, batting, fielding and base running-at Basic, Standard or Advanced skill levels. During the season you can play all the games you want, switching from Manage-only to joystick jockey at will. WURDE ERR PLAYERS Wind turns game into home run derby See page 3 MLBPA MSA "


"COMMIT TO EXCELLENCE Teg Rose Main Ossociation Atlatu W a io s Leam o how Help FRONT PAGE SPORTS DUAL SPORTS STAR LOOKS AHEAD TO FOOTBALL SEASON Defonsive lineup vs. LHP Historical data Battery SUB Infield P18 Fred Morint C-Greg Olson 7th 28Mark Lemke Tervu Pendleton 55Jeff Blauser LF-Ron Gant CF Otis Nixon RF-Dave Justice 20 BB 90 DE TRBI 120 101 117 09 Pos Player Name RT Justice, llave 18 MoGrill, Fred 557 LF Gant, Ron 606 166 38 Pendleton. Terry $$ Blauser, Je11 592 102 10 Bream, Sid 277 C Dercyhill, Damon 335 28 Lemke, Mark 493 124 CF Sanders. Deion 272 Front Page Sports Baseball April 3, 1994 ENNANS 02 As exciting as Front Page Sports Baseball is, it's no wonder coaches are saying two-sport sensation Deion Sanders is itching for the football season to begin. After all, the same folks who have translated all the excitement of Football Pro into Front Page Sports Baseball are busy working on the next release of the pigskin's best rendition. It will include new rules such as the 2-point conversion and 30-yard line kickoffs, plus the 1994 NFLPA players and team rosters. Be sure to look for all the details in your box of Baseball. Professional Baseball Develop your own team dynasties using Major League Baseball Players, making trades, managing your team roster and the careers of all your players. CHICAGO TO HOST BASEBALL'S BIGGEST STARS League officials promised today to release the site of this year's mid-season showcase. All 12 of Baseball's realistic, 3-D stadium models are contenders. Officials admitted the stadium choice is really up to the user. The computer chooses teams based on actual player performance. With all the stars in baseball, the action is sure to be felt all the way into the upper deck. WIND 10, PITCHERS O In an amazing game showing the effects of high winds, Toronto and Oakland traded home runs, combining for a total of ten. Mark McGwire, Ruben Sierra, Terry Steinbach, Rickey Henderson, John Olerud, Paul Molitor, Roberto Alomar and Joe Carter all contributed round trippers. It could only happen in a game like Front Page Sports Baseball where temperature, humidity, wind and rain are all part of the game. So you get all the unpredictability of Mother Nature—as well as the chance to display your own skills. In fact, ball flight is based on a real physics model. Where and how far balls are bit is a true combination of pitch speed and the swing of the bat. The better you are, the better your team does. SIERRA "


"   ExcELLENCE FRONT PAGE SPORTS NEW YORK SWITCHES LEAGUES Surprise Move Stuns Fans, Mayor To Investigate HIT IT HERE IT! In a surprise move, New York switched leagues today. The change of allegiance was perceived by many as an obvious attempt to capitalize on the fan appeal of a direct rivalry with the city's other team. Fans already were speculating what it would be like watching a player like Bobby Bonilla face the other league's pitchers. According to sources, Front Page Sports Baseball made the team's move easy. League play can be configured for up to 48 teams in one to three leagues. Talk around the league centered on what it would be like to have Toronto and Atlanta in the same league and division. The move might be completed as early as next week. Puszotice RRE TUUNTO PHILHUIL FLERE 000 B: 0 S: 1 05 O High resolution graphics put you in the batter's box for realistic pitcher-batter duels. Games played in 3-D replicas of 12 top stadiums. OAKLAND CALLS UP TWO PLAYERS FROM MINORS HOME RUN KING IN SLUMP? CHECK LAST SEASON'S AVERAGE Looking for extra offense after eight losses in their last 10 games, Oakland has called up two.300 plus hitters from their AAA team. Key in the decision was the fact that Front Page Sports Baseball lets you have extra players on the injured list, in AAA, or in the low minors. You can also make player trades between the end of post season play and the August 31 trading deadline. Take over all the roster decisions for your team or delegate some or all of them to the computer Coaches and teammates alike were unanimous in their support of Barry Bonds, saying he's always been a streak hitter and will probably start connecting in his next couple of at-bats. The team's batting coach backed up his statement by saying that a player's performance in Baseball is determined by ratings based on actual statistics. Performance factors include situational ratings, including left-handed and right-handed batters and pitchers, home and away games, clutch situations, and Rotoscoped animations give players life-like monthly performance records. action at bat and in the field. PLAYERS MLBPA MSA "


"COMMIT TO EXCELLENCE FRONT PAGE SPORTS MODEL Static TV NO UJUDUVUS | NETWORK TOUTS ELE NEW EQUIPMENT FOR INSTANT REPLAYS Ball    OUT The best part of watching a game at home is the instant replays. Thanks to Front Pages Sports Baseball, this year's instant replays are going to be hotter than ever. Multiple camera angles are available for every ball put in play. Special controls even allow you to follow the ball so you track its every move as each play takes place. VCR-like controls let you slow down, speed up, and even reverse the action. Save unlimited replays to create your own game highlight filmsor put together highlights for the entire season. VCR-like controls for instant replays make sure you catch every bit of the action. Watch from virtually every angle in the stadium. LEAGUE CALENDARS TO COME OUT TODAY TIR Standings: 32-31 15th Placo. NDL Wosti. Huga Hug 12 Aug 13 Aug 15 Fans all over the country are clamoring for their season schedules to start planning the games they'll personally attend. Fortunately, Front Page Sports Baseball makes it easy to generate calendars for all regularly scheduled games. What's more, detailed box scores are provided for simulated games so you can find out what happened and how every player did. A special one-pitch mode lets you view just the critical pitch for every at-bat. In minutes you can review the key plays of an entire game. HOU Ruy 22 SP:33 SP:54 NYN NYN Aug 29 Aug 30 Aug 31 Home Game Ray Dame Open Dat. WHO'S ON FIRST? BE BASEBALL Futurists predict baseball will one day be played by robots SEASON STARTS TREAT! Get the baseball game with all the strategy and action of the big leagues. It's a round tripper for anyone who loves baseball. To get the complete score, call 1-800-757-7707 and ask for D840. BASERALL Pointing to advances in cybernetics, several futurists have predicted the game will one day be played by robots. Until then, Baseball can be played on a 386/33 MHz or higher IBM-compatible computer with 4MB RAM with EMS, MS-DOS 5.0 or higher, VGA, hard drive, and a 1.44MB 3.5\" HD floppy drive or CD-ROM player. A mouse, joystick, and sound card (most supported) are recommended. PLAYERS SIERRA MLBPA MSA Officially Licensed by the Major League Baschall Myers Association, and are trademarks of or licensed to. Serta On Line, Inc. 1914 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. WIRX137412 "


"STRATEGY Playing Your Aces Avoiding The Dead Man's Hand In Aces Over Europe SIM by Michael Rymaszewski \" OE URING WWII, MANY AN EAGER YOUNG PILOT ABOUT TO FLY HIS FIRST MISSION GOT A PERSONAL PIECE of advice from his commanding officer: \"Don't worry about shooting anyone down—just get back in one piece.\" These words might ring particular ly true to heavily decorated sim pilots who have sat down to ACES OVER EUROPE. There has been a dramatic improvement in the Al of flight sims, and the quality of the computer-steered pilots in ACES OVER EUROPE makes your opponents from the Pacific look like bumbling novices. ber of kills, you'll want to choose a Luftwafle pilot since many of their missions involve intercepting bombers over friendly territory-allowing you to bail out, if need be, and defend your skies again. Of course, if you're simply looking for glory, you can fly for the USAF. American pilots are decorated for the second time after only twenty kills, as opposed to twenty five in the Luftwaffe and the RAF. US flyers tend to furthermore, the famous Mustang is very get more escort missions, as well. You can fragile, relatively lightly armed and diffipile up quite a few kills this way, since cult to get out of a spin, and the SpitfireLuftwaffe fighters concentrate on the especially the Mk XIV—will have you heavies rather than the little friends.\" If blacking out every time you attempt a you simply want game points, however, tight turn. you'll want to join the RAF. The RAF flies So, what do you fly if you want a long, as many missions against ground and sea successful career? Here are my choices, targets as against air, and these can quick based on bitter experience: ly fatten your point total. Contrary to what RAF: The Typhoon and Tempest win is said in the manual, Best Careers are hands down as the best choices—and that ranked by the number of points scored, not includes American and German fighters, number of victories for each pilot. too. Both are heavily armed and can take a considerable amount of punishment. GREAT HORSEPOWER, TWIN Both are extremely stable, letting you find CANNON, SHE'S A STEAL the correct deflection angle with ease. AT THIS PRICE! Most importantly, both can outrun GerOne of the strongest points of AOE is the improved flight model. There are vast differences between all those planes, and it's up to you to exploit them. The best fighter planes in WWII were the Mustang, the Spitfire, and the Focke Wulf 190. Choose one of those, and all you need is enough space on the fuselage to mark all those kills, right? Well, all of these fine aircraft can turn on a dime—with the notable exception of the FW190F, which handles like a Thunderbolt. Problem is, the sights are really tough to line MOVE 'EM OUT A P-47 Thunderbolt rides herd on a flight of B-17 up, and what you actually Flying Fortresses, as they strike into the heart of Germany. need is a stable gun platform. GALLANT GALLAND Not only a great pilot, Adolf Galland became the youngest commanding general of Germany's Fighter Command. As challenging as it is, though, ACES OVER EUROPE can be mastered—if you ignore most of the tactics and suggestions in the AOE manual and develop a few useful habits of your own. This is especially true if, like me, you like playing at 100% difficulty level, with no mission replays—the closest a sim can get to the real thing. HE WHO STRAFES AND RUNS AWAY... If you're looking for the maximum numJULY 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 101 "


"\"Pilot quality was the great imponderable factor until combat was actually joined.\" -Luftwaffe Ace Heinz Ber man fighters, helping you out of tight USAF: My American fighter of choice easy airplane to shoot down. spots. The Spitfire comes in next, with the in AOE is, surprisingly, the Lightning. It is A 1955 interview of Heinz Ber-a Mark IX being as good as the Mark XIV. well armed, and the concentration of ar Luftwaffe ace that is featured in AOE-had Although slower and with bad rear visibili mament in the nose makes marksmanship some viewpoints which differ from the way ty, it is a better gun platform of the two. fairly easy. It is wonderfully stable and difthe planes were modeled in the game: Avoid the Mosquito. Although very ficult to damage. Although it wasn't con \"Pilot quality was the great imponderheavily armed, it is next to worthless in a sidered very maneuverable, in Aoe it can able factor until combat was actually dogfight, from which it rarely escapes. out-turn any German fighter (more about joined. In general, the P-38 Lightnings Luftwaffe: Although the FW 190A is this later). Actually, I've managed to do were not difficult at all. They were easy to difficult to aim, it packs an extremely pow better on the Lightning than on any other outmaneuver and were generally a sure erful punch. Its superior armament makes Allied plane, often fighting against vastly kill. The P-47 Thunderbolt could absorb an astounding amount of lead and had to be handled very carefully. The P-51 Mustang was perhaps the most difficult of all Allied fighters to meet in combat. It was fast, maneuverable, hard to see, and difficult to identify because it resembled it the best choice until the the Me 109. Of course, the Dora Nine version puts in quality of the Spitfire needs no an appearance later on in elaboration. They shot me the game. The destroyer down once and caused me at version, the FW190F, is an least six forced landings.\" excellent gun platform, but is slow and turns poorSURVIVAL TACTICS ly, making for a difficult The logical choice would be to time against good enemy join the best unit equipped with pilots. The Messerschmitt the plane you want to fly. The 109 is stable and nimble, right choice is to join a but also very fragile with squadron who's pilots are rated limited ammo. as fair or average. If you join a Flying the Me 262 is the crack unit, you'll find that you worst choice. Despite beare often asked to fly missions ing extremely fast and against expert opponents. One powerfully armed, it turns of the characteristics of expert very poorly, and is easily computer pilots in AoE is that damaged. Climbing into they shoot with great accuracy the cockpit of the Me 262, from all angles and impossible RIGHT-HAND MAN Werner Molders (left) compliments his wingman, Hartmann Grasser, you are often rewarded distances. Additionally, the aces on a recent kill. Molders created the wingman concept with a two-plane formation. with a flight of diving Aland experts in your own flight lied fighters, leaving you can't help you if they have their to take off only after your plane is dam superior numbers. On one mission, I hands full—which is liable to happen if aged. Also, Me-262's rarely enjoy the lux managed to down seven FW 190F's; on your flight gets bounced by the Abbeville ury of a wingman. another, four FW190A's including one boys, or the Wolf Pack. Remember, it's not flown by Priller; on yet anoth up to your comrades on how well you er, I took on six Me 109's, fare—it's up to you. shot down three, and dam The key to survival in AOE is thinking aged the remaining three for yourself, the moment your mission badly enough to turn for briefing appears on the screen. Choose a home without interference. flight plan which is most likely to allow The last of these heroic sin you to reach the target without being gle-handed combats occurred damaged in between, but with enough under the worst conditions fuel to get home. Once you're in the cockat low altitudes, with no space pit, switch all the guns on. You'll have to for a prolonged dive—and watch your ammo, but at least you'll be the Lightning is too slow to ready for action. run away. Switch to autopilot upon attaining the The Thunderbolt isn't a required altitude. When the autopilot bad choice, with its stability turns itself off, reduce the throttle and and good firepower, but han pull on the joystick. Flying just behind DANCE OF DEATH A lone P-51 Mustang is caught in a \"rolling dles worse than the Lightning and above the rest of the flight is the optiscissors\" stalemate with a Focke-Wulf 190. The vaunted Mustang comes mum position, with no risk of collision, in last, because in AoE it's an plus a constant knowledge of which way 102 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"dering you to dump your ordnance and fight after the enemy has opened fire. So, ignore your leader's silly exhortations and assess the situation yourself the flight is going. When sighting enemies, remember that their position is given relative to the direction of the flight, rather than your individual plane. Next, consult the flight map to see whether you can get rid of the drop tank. Generally, it's a good idea to drop everything you're carrying the moment enemy planes come into sight. Then, punch in full throttle and climb while you flip through the side and back views to get the total picture. Now, even though the AOE manual and every war memoir you've ever read have told you to stick to your section leader at all costs, you need to realize that what worked in real life doesn't work quite so well here. Stay reasonably close to your flight so you can both offer and ask for assistance if needed. Then again, if your flight is getting shot to pieces, either run straight for the target or for home. Never treat your flight leader's orders as sacred. The flight leaders in AoE are remarkably stupid, and will always urge you to keep attacking a ground target or a ship even as your flight is being sliced into tinfoil. Sometimes, they'll even tell you that the enemy fighters you've just spotted are friendlies. At other times, they'll acknowledge your report and calmly keep on flying with the full bomb load, only orTHE FINE ART OF DOGFIGHTING During a dogfight, keep checking the sky all around 0310 300 100 you; the side views can be even more important than that of your six, since an aircraft chasing you from behind won't get within firing range as fast as one coming from BULLS-EYE! P-51 rounds caught in mid-flight before slamming the side. Don't use the exterinto an enemy fighter. nal views unless you're sure no enemy planes are nearby; it costs too can also slam down your flaps if you aren't much time. going in excess of 280 mph. This will also My favorite sky check is to break into a help you turn very tightly indeed. The ensharp turn and complete a full circle with emy pilots in AoE are very good shots, and the upward view on. This gives you a they're likely to get you unless you use clear, panoramic picture of the action, your rudder for maneuverability. and lets you make a non-confusing transiMost probably, at some stage you'll find tion to the forward view. yourself going in a circle with one or more Always go into action on full throttle, enemy pilots. If you use flaps in conjuncand keep operating that throttle through tion with the rudder, you'll find that you out the fight. Whenever you want to slow can out-turn almost every airplane you down immediately or turn tightly, cut the come across, regardless of your aircraft. throttle and break into a stall turn. You Also, you won't stall, which is particularly \"It made me feel like I was IN THE COCKPIT.\" Alfred Poor, COMPUTER SHOPPER IHUNDER \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback System Used in Real F-16 Simulators NOW Available to the Public \"A QUANTUM LEAP in realism!\" P.C. GAMES \"VIRTUAL UTOPIA!» Marc Dultz, STRATEGY PLUS HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! Whether its the whine of your Formula 1 Race Car, the clang of Sword against Sword, or the rumble of your.Jet Engines at full after-burner, the ThunderSeat lets you take off to a new level of realism! Compatible with all sound cards and CD-ROM'S For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1.800  8-THUNDER ThunderSeat Technologies 6330 Arizona Circle Los Angeles, CA 90045 310  410-0022 FAX: 310 410-1569 Circle Reader Service #185 JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 103 "


"helpful if you're lighting an ace. They lly very slowly, turning very tightly, sliding onto your tail when you overshoot. The quickest way to get the enemy in your gunsight is to turn constantly while working alternate rudders, lifting your plane into a stall turn, then gathering speed again in a shallow dive. Apart from throwing off the opponent's aim, this will put you on his tail faster than any other tactic. If you do get badly hit, remember this: the consequences of bailing out in AOE defy logic, being designed to punish anyone who doesn't fight 'til the bitter end. If you throttle back, turn upside down, and jump, you'll be killed. On the other hand, if your plane is screaming earthward in a flaming spiral, you'll most likely survive. -)-8& 100 yards. This lets you hit You just shot down a German FW-190A, flown by an expert pilot, them, correct the dellection angle and fire a second burst to finish things off without any risk of overshooting or collision. Shooting down bombers is another story. If you're flying for the Allies and find yourself against Ju-88s (relatively rare), ignore your leader's or0238 300 100 ders, ignore the bombers, 005 0250ANTROA OIL and go for the fighters. You might give a bomber a quick 10p squirt, as «Johnnie\" Johnson would put it, if it happens to pass across your sights. Other DOWN IN FLAMES Bringing down an enemy ace is much harder than that, dont even think than in ACES OF THE PACIFIC, but patience will be rewarded. about them until the fighter escort is dealt with. Although the bombers will be out of sight by then sometimes, the sim will identify plane (the visibility range in AOE is about 3 miles wrecks on the ground as an active flight). in fair weather), you should be able to pinpoint their position on the flight map. BOMBER INTERCEPTION A word about that flight map. Because If there's a fighter escort, make one pass of its scale, plane formations won't show at the bombers, following with a second up unless they are only about a dozen one if it's safe. When armed with Gr.21 miles away. If you patiently click the rockets, dive behind and below the enemouse on the empty land around the little my. The moment the rearmost bomber airplane showing your position, you'll get starts to \"fill out,\" taking the shape of an a window informing you of the location of actual airplane, fire the rockets straight the nearest plane formation (although ahead, without aiming upwards as recomGETTING KILLS VS. GETTING KILLED Don't close to point-blank range before firing, even though both accepted wisdom and the manual say you should. Enemy pilots tend to slow down sharply when they sense you're close behind, and when damaged, will practically stop in mid-air. If you don't collide, you'll overshoot, and the next thing you know they'll be shooting at you. I find the optimum range for opening fire to be around what looks like 28.50 DSP Dual 16 Multimedia $298 Flight Yoke 2000  Western Digital-Paradice 16 DSP Sound Card (Web ) FREE: Sony CDU-33ADI-SCD-ROM Drive Shielded Speakers Ace of the  Microphone Pacific Software Biogrip Joystick  4 CD Title: Chess Master 3000 Features:  US Atlas 1. Functions like 2 separate joysticks World Atlas 1. Full horizontal-vertical control $68  Manis Bescon Teaches Typing  Includes stundy desktop clamp and suction cups Turbocharge CD Rom Now! Sony CDUSA Double SoundBlaster 16 MCD 9 % Top 25 CD Titles Speed CD-Rom Drive 7th Guest.. ..$35.50 CD ROM Drives Sound Cards Animal San Diego 200... ... 2450 Arthur's Teacher Trouble........ 26.50 Chinon CD-535 Int SCSI II.$308.50 Cardinal DSP 16.........$128.50 CHLAO.S. Continuum... 30.50 Chinon CD-535 Ext SCSIL...398.50 SoundBlaster 16 MCD......134.50 Compton's Family Choice... Mitsumni FX-001D.......155.50 Advance Citavis Ultrasound. 128.50 Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia V.2.01.38.50 NEC 210 320ms SCSIL..171.50 Turtle Beach Monterey 398.50 Compton's New Century Encyclopedia ...48.50 NEC CDR-510 3Xspeed SCSI 11388.50 Orchid Sound Wave 32.........198.50 Days of Tentacle: Maniac Mansion Panasonic 562,563... ..158.50 Prometheus ARIA 16SE...158.50 Dracula Unleashed.. 37.50 Plextor (Texcl) 3028 IntSCSI 11268.50 ADS F-15 Strike Eagle III 2350 Plextor (Texel) DM 5028 Ext 378.50 DR GAME ZAPPER Family Doctor 3rd Edition.. . 22.50 Sony CDU-33A.... ..155.50 $81.50 Gabriella's Knight...... ....... 35.30 Toshiba 4101B Int SCSI IL..208.50 Grolier's Encyclopedia V.6.0... 35.50 Toshiba 3401B IntSCSI II ...308.50 Fun Pack $88 Guidebooks to Mathematics... 22.50 1. CILA.O.S. Continuum Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis 38.50 Interactive Storytime III...... 26.50 Children's Pack $692 Dracula Unleashed Iron Helix.................. 3. Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis 1. Interactive Sorytime III Just Grandma & Me 25.50 4. Space Quest IV 2. CD Duo (Maria's Misine World Artas) Mad Dog McCree.......... 35.50 3. Just Grandma & Me Super Fun Pack $88 Master of Orion....... ...Call 4. Macmillan Diction for Children I. Days of Tentacle Moncy Magazine.................... 28.50 Rebel Assault 43.50 Education Pack 3. Space/Dinosaur Adventure Return to Zork................... 27.30 1. Grolier's Encyclopedia Ver.6.0 4. Star War Chess Space Adventure Dinosaur Adventure.......28.50 2. The Animals (Ver.94) Where in the World is Carmen San Diego 24.50 3. Mayo Clinic-Family ilealth Super Duper Fun Pack 4. Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing 1. Gabriella's Knight SOG \"State of the Art of Sight & Sound\" 5. ChessMaster 3000 2. 7th Guest 6. US Atlas 3. Iron Helix 7. World Atlas 4. Jutland W DIRECT Terms & Conditions We accept must 0 WAVE 1.30-day money back guarantee major Credit Cards 2. Not responsible for mirprint 3. All Products come with manufacturers warranty. Open 4. No mercundise accepted for relumn without an RMM. M-F 7:00 am 6:00pm 5. Price and availability are subject to change without notice..... Sal. 8:30 am 5620 East Bridell, Ontario, California 91761 6. Shipping and Handing charges are extra and are non-reludable. 12.00pm PST Purchasing Dept. 1909) 460-2547.7 1909) 460-2389 30 DAY LOWEST PRICE GUARANTEE THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit the 42 games listed below in boldface type. The price for this editor is $59.95. That's under $1.50 per editor. Upgrades will be available for new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3,4,5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasures of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Escape from Hell, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Dark Sun, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania, Challenge of the 5 Realms, Bloodstone, Betrayal at Krondor, Lands of Lore, Dungeon Hack, Disciples of Steel. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1,2,3,4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 32.50 Education Pack $78 2 Mad Dog McCree MasterCard 1-800-882-8108 Circle Reader Service #69 Circle Reader Service #61 104 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"not shoot all of them down, turn to the flight map to plot a new path home. Otherwise, you'll run into the remaining enemy planes again. Adolf Galland, the German fighter ace, enumerated four qualities necessary in a fighter ace. These were: very good eyesight, very quick reflexes, very great self confidence, and a very good shooting eye. In AoE, very good eyesight should be replaced by very good dimensional imagination because of the limitations of the medium. However, the remaining three conditions hold as true as they did in reality. Happy hunting! NIFTY FIFTIES Hubert \"Hub\" Zemke inspects the 50-caliber machine guns on his Thunderbolt. ALL DECKED OUT \"Gabby\" Gabreski was America's top ace in Europe, downing 31 planes. mended by the manual, since they will rise in a parabolic trajectory anyway. You almost can't fail to bring down a bomber this way, and you'll always split them up. If there's no escort and you still have ammo for your cannon, don't make close firing passes at the bombers-the defensive fire is really fierce. Instead, switch your guns to cannon alone and pursue the fat boys below and behind. The moment your target begins to fill out on the screen, cut the throttle, raise the nose, aim carefully, and fire away in short bursts. You will still be out of range of defensive fire, and should be able to bring down several bombers in this manner before you run out of cannon shells. Then, switch to the machine guns, and make a few high speed side passes, aiming for the cockpit. Once, I managed to down a Liberator with just eight bullets from each gun. By contrast, spraying the whole aircraft with fire could use up all your bullets on a single plane. New «Saturn-Ring» technology runs circles around other flight sticks. FILWAX GROUND TARGETS In attacking ground targets, there is only one golden rule: keep below 200 feet on your way in and out. The flak in AOE is dangerous, but it won't fire at you when you're that low. Though you may catch a few bullets from machine guns, you will very rarely have any consequences from these attacks. If you do suffer damage over the target and you've encountered enemy fighters on the flight in, and did | Introducing FlightMAX\", the Advanced Flight Control Console with \"Saturn-Ring\" Direct Drive Technology. This exclusive innovation eliminates the X and Y-axis bias found in ordinary flight sticks. No matter where the control stick is positioned, tension remains equalized for constant 'G 360 degree tracking. 360° The result: Pin-point precision for PC pilots. equalized tracking FlightMAX also features a wide base for extra stability, a Rudder Control, plus a unique Throttle Control for both right and left-handed pilots. FlightMAX. MAXimum enjoyment for flight sim software. The Hardware Advantage for Entertainment Software 6400 W. Gross Point Rd., Niles, IL 60714 UIT TECHNOLOGIES 708/647-4040 Circle Reader Service #182 JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 105 "


"\"A man of war is the best ambassador\"  ARIN EUR WESTERN in the Cartoaraphic So Geoar EMPIRE DELUXE MASTERS EDITION «Nominated: 1993 Strategy Game of the Year -Strategy Plus Magazine Top Ten Wargames) 1os-Compute, January 1994 eauvais ou Compiesne KORES BE Ja CD-ROM (Plug-and-Play Excerpts and strategy tips from the Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Exceptional value: contains Empire Classic, Empire Deluxe DoS and Windows, and Empire Deluxe: Scenarios ead your troops through the trenches in historic, modern, and futuristic battles. Declare war on up to 6 of your friends and fight via modem, E-Mail, network, or serial port connection. Empire Deluxe Masters Edition has everything you ever wanted in a war game, and more. WAR DEPARTMENT JEF RECORDS JAGU Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898. (818-889-6070 outside the U.S.) or by mail: P.O. Box 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302 1994 New World Computing, Inc. Empire Deluxe is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved. IBM scroons shown Actual screens may vary. P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 Circle Reader Service #152 NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC "


"ERMEWAB WARGAMING/STRATEGIES Bridging the Gap From Paper to Pixels MANY READERS OF THIS COLUMN ARES DADSIDES are making a mad dash to convert MEMBERS OF THE OLD SCHOOL 4 the best of their game designs to THE RESURGENCE OF WHOSE WARGAMING PREDATES HOME the PC. computers. I suppose you could It is no secret, for instance, that COMPUTER WARGAMES say there were «computer\" the oldest producer of board wargames before the 1980s, but wargames, Avalon Hill, is making the processor was your brain, and a renewed and serious entry into SHOWS NO SIGN OF the interface was not mice and computer wargaming. Paper-tokeyboards but dice and cardboard. GRIP ESHOT processor conversions from \"The Some converts to computer Hill\" include their KINGMAKER, RETREAT, AS SEVERAL wargaming consider the continued existence of a BLACKBEARD, THIRD REICH and ADVANCED CIVIboard wargaming hobby as \"quaint,\" those paper LIZATION. tigers seeking CPUs, while staunch defenders of However, it is noteworthy that Avalon Hill's PAPER WARGAME the board game hobby see computers as lacking biggest wargame-producing competitor was SPI in sophisticated game designs, historical accura(Simulations Publications, Inc.), under the leadcy, and real opponent intelligence. Recent develership of Jim \"I disavow Victory at Sea\" DunniCREATORS MAKE THE opments suggest that these two camps may soon gan. When TSR, Inc. (the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS be pitching their tents closer to one another, as people) foreclosed on SPI in the early 1980s, several tradimany wargamers saw it as a black day. Now, Dr. SILICON LEAP. tional paper Christopher Cummins of Decision Games, pubwargame lishers of Strategy & Tactics magazine, has accompanies quired the rights to SPI and all its titles owned by TSR, Inc. (and there are scores of them). * Alliance Interactive Software, under their Digital Illusions label, will be What does that mean for publishing Arsenal Publishing's previously previewed TACOPs and EUROPEAN THEwe silicon soldiers of fortune? ATER OF OPERATIONS: D-Day games. They'll also be distributing Big Time Software's Well, all of those great deFLIGHT COMMANDER signs will no longer be rele* Speaking of FLIGHT COMMANDER, designer/developer/janitor Charles Moylan gated to the dusty shelves of says that the IBM conversion will be extremely faithful to the original Mac decollectors. \"Doc Decision» will sign and is \"about two-thirds complete.\" DOS-heads will love its board be sponsoring the release of wargame tactical feel, enhanced by considerable computer panache. an IBM and Amiga version of * In response to an on-line controversy-turned-brouhaha, MicroProse will SPI's classic strategy not allow players to command SS panzer formations in the initial release of boardgame, EMPIRES OF THE their upcoming Across THE RHINE, a West-Front WWII tank simulator. Instead, MIDDLE AGES. This excellent death's head tankers will have to wait for the game's first expansion disk. strategic level game covers * Origins, the national game convention, is putting more emphasis on com about a thousand year chunk puter gaming this year. It's taking place in San Jose on July 7-10 and has been of European history over sevdubbed \"Silicon Origins.\" Besides several computer wargaming companies, eral scenarios. The elegance CGW will be attending. Care to join us? For more information, call (216) 673 of the original Jim Dunnigan 2117. (continued on page 108) boardgame design has not faded with age, so look for by Alan Emrich JULY 1994 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 107 "


"G-2 (continued from page 107) 02 DO SOLO * Why have the Pentagon's \"game\" experts taken a sudden interest in InterPlay's Buzz ALDRIN'S RACE INTO SPACE? Simple. It's a game about procurement and managing scarce resources while deciding which programs to pursue and which ones to cut. That sounds like the military of the 90s to me. * And what of Sid Meier's Civil War? In an interview, CGW discovered that the game's major design hold up has been resolved. Previously, players were having difficulty transitioning from the grand tactical (i.e., brigade/regiment level) combat system back to strategic planning. Now, it seems, the game's focus will shift more toward conducting grand tactical battles, and thus provide for a more consistent playing experience. While not yet back on the front burner, Sid Meier's CIVIL WAR is, at least for now, off the back burner. will be coming out as shareware for the IBM «real soon now.» This was an intriguing game of German global commerce raiding during World War I. Frankly, I expect to see this lead to some \"help wanted\" ads soon, as Decision Games/SPI seeks programmers to computerize their wargame titles and continue empire building on the electronic battlefield. But Decision Games/SPI and Avalon Hill are not the only paper pushers to seek the light of your monitor. Although most wargame companies, I'm sure, would listen to anyone willing to translate their products onto a computer platform, many of them have found a convenient bridge over the gap in AIDE DE CAMP, the award winning play-by-email kit generator from Scott Hamilton's HPS Simula tions. Even as Scott begins work on a massive, backward compatible 2.0 version update, boardgame companies 3W, Moments in History, XTR/Command magazine, and Rhino have joined The Gamers and Decision Games in supporting AIDE DE CAMP with pre-generated PBEM kits for some of their games. With Decision Games picking up the SPI line, we'll be playing WAR IN EUROPE and other classic \"monster\" boardgames by email more and more in the very near future. OLD SSI WARGAMES ARE BACK IN PRINT! Many of us made the switch from our old Apple, Commodore and Atari computers to the present day gaming realities of IBM at a price. We paid more than mere dollars when we converted to the world of MS-DOS, we also made our collection of wargames obsolete. For all those who wish they could still acquire copies of those long out-of-print SSI wargames of yore, here is your chance. Novastar Games has garnered the rights to reprint such wargaming classics as our Hall of Fame winner GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT in the IBM format. These are straight reprints, though, sold in plastic bags and with photocopied manuals. They have not been upgraded or reprogrammed in any way. To obtain a listing of the games available (including such titles as SECOND FRONT, BATTLES OF NAPOLEON, KAMPFGRUPPE, MECH BRIGADE, STORM ACROSS EUROPE and WAR IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC), call Novastar directly at (916) 624-7113. These reprinted games are selling for $15 cach, with a discount for purchases of three or more. That's a great price for these wargaming classics. & this title to be released through RAW Entertainment later this year. While Decision Games is following the route of having their boardgames thrust upon them from out-of-house designers, that has not failed to net them a second silicon conversion. One game included in Strategy & Tactics magazine, THE FAR SEAS, AT LAST, LEARN THE AMAZING STORY BEHIND UTAH BEACH UTAH BEACH       On June 6th, 1994, the 50th anniversary But, the Utah Beach Battlebook is as much of the Normandy invasion during World about the history of the battle for Utah War II, Arsenal Publishing proudly reBATTEEBOOK  Beach and the Cotentin Peninsula as it is leased the long-awaited Utah Beach Batabout the Utah Beach game. Included are tlebook. a day-to-day account of the 1944 campaign, over 70 historical photographs, Written by Ed Rains, one of the original situation maps, and a wealth of informadesigners of the V for Victory series, and tion on the American and German military Jim DeGoey, the author of the criticallyunits, commanders, and weapons that acclaimed Harpoon Battlebook, this book faced each other fifty years ago. about Three-Sixty Pacific's award-winning Utah Beach historical simulation reveals The Utah Beach Battlebook is a limited for the first time the amazing story behind edition available for $19.95 exclusively the game's development, how the profrom Arsenal Publishing. Add $3.50 for gram resolves combat, and the design shipping and handling. VA residents add concepts behind the game's three combat applicable sales tax. results tables. Profusely illustrated with actual game screens, all players will For Visa and MasterCard orders, phone: benefit from the comprehensive scenario 800-247-1877 analysis and tactical guidelines that show Send mail orders to: how to win as either the American or 44901 Falcon Place, Suite 108 German commander. TH Sterling, VA 20166-9531 Arsenal Publishing, Inc. Mail orders require payment in U.S. funds.  1994 Arsenal Publishing, Inc. All rights reserved. All other brand names and products are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders o nde o ano antiv Circle Reader Service #187 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"In 1944, This Was The Only Heavy Metal Touring Europe. American M4 Shermans. Tigers of the Third Reich. These were the tanks that rocked Europe from D-Day to the fall of Berlin in World War II. The same armored juggernauts that you'll command in the explosive new game Across the Rhine from MicroProse. Jump into history's most famous tanks and experience the fierce combat and tough decisions that gripped World War II tank commanders. Take command of U.S. or German forces. Control single tanks or entire Companies. And blast your way through enemy units across the war-torn landscape of Europe. Across the Rhine from MicroProse. And you thought heavy metal started in the 70's. Circle Reader Service #150 MICROPROSE 1993 MicroProso ALL RIGHTS RESERVED "


"REVIEW HeAin't Heavy, | He's My Sovereign Avalon Hill's Kingmaker Puts You Behind The Throne by Terry Lee Coleman plaints to the contrary. But it has a mouseonly interface that reminded me of an Amiga game-due no doubt, to the game's European origins. There was not a hot key to be found. What's a real gamer to do? Kill OR THOSE OF US WHO GREW UP PLAY wargamer's tongue is: \"Will Avalon Hill ING BOARD WARGAMES, AVALON HILL ever really manage to get a classic SEEMS ALMOST A PART OF OUR boardgame converted to the computer, extended family. Games such as and will they do it right?\" Sure, OPERASTALINGRAD and TACTICS II are TION CRUSADER is great, but that was the relics of a bygone age, when wargames guys at Atomic, right? And besides, that could still be found on store shelves next game is currently only for the Mac-what to MONOPOLY or Risk! While many about us real wargamers that own IBMs? wargamers feared that AH would go the We've been jilted so many times, is this way of the dinosaur, the company someour last chance for the big dance? how managed to While many persevere, even disKingmaker gamers wait (not so) covering four-color Price: $59.95 patiently for the artwork along the way. System: IBM IBM version of As the years went Requirements: CRUSADER, they may on, AH began to di286 or better, find their cares VGA graphics, versify with family 5MB hard drive readily forgotten games (shudder), space, mouse; with KINGMAKER, SO sports games (well, supports AdLib. long as they are will OK) and even (say it Roland, ing to contest the isn't so) role-playing SoundBlaster Wars of the Roses in games, the majority sound cards solitaire fashion. Protection: Documentation Check of which sold, and Developers: Paul Cockburn, Graham Lilley For KINGMAKER has continue to sell, Publisher: The Avalon Hill Game Company one great oddity: quite well. With the Baltimore, MD it's a conversion of a advent of computer (410) 254-9200 classic multi-player wargaming, though, boardgame that has AH's adaptability didn't hit a snag, it came no capacity for more than one player, toto a screeching halt. Games such as B-1 tally neglecting hot-seating, modem, and NUCLEAR BOMBER were dated even when play by e-mail. they were released back on the old 8-bit In spite of this, the game is strangely machines. More recently, DIPLOMACY was addictive, and a class act. The first indicaa flop, and COMPUTER THIRD REICH, seen tion that this effort is something fresh is as a potential savior for AH's \"Silicon Sim the striking intro art. The opening screens ulations,\" had one of the worst Als of any offer a spirited narration of the backstory wargame released by a major company. by none other than Will Shakespeare. ObMost damning was that the game couldn't viously, such can be dismissed as mere even model the rules of the boardgame, so in fluffery, but the truth is that this actually adequate wasthe conversion. helps suspend disbelief-especially the authentic British accent, which sounds more A SINGLE, SOLITARY SUCCESS than a little like Malcolm McDowell. Since announcing their re-entrance into To my surprise, the game ran without computer games, the question on every crashing, despite the many on-line comTHE PARCHMENTS OF PLAY Many gamers shun documentation. Nonetheless, those used to 290-page tomes of obscure (and often questionable) design justifications, or worse, virtually no documentation (as with far too many games lately), will find the manuals included with KINGMAKER a pleasant departure from the norm and well worth poring over. Splashed throughout with color and eminently readable, the two manuals (historical and game) have been touched by Avalon Hill's deft graphic hand. Anyone reading the reference manual will have little trouble in play, the clumsy interface notwithstanding. In addition to the «need to know\" information provided in the Reference Manual, AH has wisely included the historical \"nice to know\" information in a separate manual for those interested in the historicity of the conflict. The object of play, for those unfamiliar with the boardgame, is to have control over the last surviving heir to the English throne. To this end, the various forces maneuver nobles of their faction, with their corresponding forces, around the land engaging in combat and attempting to kill off the heirs controlled by the other players, computer-controlled in this case. Simple? In concept, certainly, but the game's real strength, like that of its boardgame father, is in the variety of ways you may achieve this goal. The nicest change from the version CGW sneak previewed in March is the flexibility of the AI. 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"O The latter is one of the most strike directly at the opposing noble or powerful positions in the heir. Since orders in combat are limited to game, as the Chancellor may the number of nobles present at the battlefield, often a group of lesser nobles can two crowned heirs in play. As take down a single mighty force. But their in real life, the clergy also life expectancy is just as short as it is in the have significant political clout, basic combat system. as only an archbishop or two As il battle weren't enough to deal with, bishops may crown an heir, random events appear like the plaguesome for the Red Rose of and said heir must be in a quite literally. Each turn, cities succumb to Lancaster, others for the White cathedral for the coronation the Black Death, along with any nobles or of York, to be valid. heirs which happen to be present. Storms The various computer play may cause ships to find a safe harbor, or A ROSE IS A ROSE Will Shakespeare sets the stage, as you engage ers are rather efficient al as prevent a particular battle. Nobles may in the gleeful pilfering of royal heirs from the York and signing titles and exploiting join your cause, or that of your enemies. Lancastrian houses. their effectiveness. Every of But at least the AI players are subject to fice has its limitations, though the same whims of fate as the human. Early on in development, it was readily as even the powerful Chancelapparent which factions were most dan lor finds the majority of his gerous. Now, the potential silicon oppo strength waning as he moves nents are more random in style and in away from the sale confines of the extent of their deviousness. For in the Tower of London. For stance, one game had Neville ready and nearly every asset, there is a willing to cut deals with me for ransoming counter. In one game, I was captured nobles. The next game, he was boldly prancing all over the unbelievably aggressive, threatening to map with my strongest noble, run me right out of the game. having granted him the office Since gamers always ask if the AI cheats of Marshall of England. Sud(presumably so they can complain if they denly, I ran into a relatively lose), I did notice that they seemed to small noble, Loos, who had know more of what was going on than the the help of Saxon mercenarWHERE DID YOU COME FROM? Computer opponents are rarely human player. Then again, what good vil ies. Ambushed, I could only predictable, making for an engaging and replayable game. lain doesn't know more than the hero? At watch in horror as my brave least the inevitably few cheats are subtle noble was beheaded, with a sonorous voice Actually, KINGMAKER is philosophically for the most part. One of the most obvious bellowing out over my speakers, \"Thus close to, of all things, CIVILIZATION. Like ways of increasing the difficulty of the perish, traitors all!\" Civ, it has a fairly steep learning curve to game is to deploy before the Al players, master, which is mitigated by on-line similar in fashion to having to set up STEEL MY SOLDIERS' HEARTS hints—which, thankfully, are much more forces first in a multi-player human game. Combat is a simple affair in the basic helpful than those found in CIVILIZATION. game, with increasing odds giving propor Those pesky computer opponents play a FORGET ME NOT tionally greater chances to defeat the ene bit more fair than their Civ counterparts, A large part of the strategy in KINGMAKER my in classic «count 'em up and but they are less forgiving. Human players is deciding which titles and assets to be roll-the-die\" fashion. Although easily will have to pay attention to advice from stow on your nobles. While the titles are learned, the disadvantage of the basic sys the manual, such as the suggestion to grab historical, you may choose to have tem is that smaller forces cannot win an an heir on the first turn, as they attempt Cromwell be the Captain of Calais, while outright victory and must hope for an in to juggle the many elements of play. ChalGreystoke is the Chancellor of England. decisive result to fight another day. lenging and fun, despite its lack of highThe advanced combat sys tech glitz or multi-player options, tem has a miniatures feel to it, KINGMAKER establishes a fine beachhead simpler than in the recent for AH's return to the computer wargame FIELDS OF GLORY from MicroProse, but more fun. Each noble is deployed on a tactical battle display, and you decide how the forces will be split be KINGMAKER tween left, right, center and *** 1/2 reserves. You decide what PROS Great subject matter, good each wing of your army will conversion of a classic strategy do, from shooting arrows to boardgame, clever and varied AI closing with a particular ene CONS No multiplayer option, repetiTO ARMS, MEN! Issuing commands is limited to the number of my force. Tension mounts as tive animations that cannot be turned one force attempts to roul the off, awkward interface nobles present at the battle, so plan carefully! other, while the enemy may E Snow Fitzatan is ordered to capture Henry VI 04 Lancaster # market. JULY 1994 . COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 111 "


"REVIEW 30DOE-ED Whiff Of Grapeshot Spectrum HoloByte's Fields of Glory Opens Fire by M. Evan Brooks The Tiger has broken out of his den The Ogre has been three days at sea The Wretch has landed at Frejus The Buzzard has reached Antibes The Invader has arrived in Grenoble The General has entered Lyons Napoleon slept at Fontainbleau last night The Emperor will proceed to the Tuileries Loday His Imperial Majesty will address his loyal subjects tomorrow. Richard Holmes, EPIC LAND BATTLES, p. 51 HEN NAPOLEON RETURNED FROM EXILE, HIS POPULARITY WAS WIDESPREAD, ALBEIT BRITTLE. The Bourbons had not developed any popularity during his absence (Napoleon characterized them as \"never forgetting and never learning\"), but Napoleon himself was no longer the fighting commander of earlier years. More importantly, his opponents had learned from him. The palindrome ABLE WAS I ERE I SAW ELBA holds a great deal of truth. FIELDS OF GLORY (FOG) attempts to simulate Napoleon's Hundred Days campaign with six scenarios: Quatre Bras, Ligny, Wavre, and Waterloo, plus the fictional battles of Nivelles and Wagnee, the former postulating an earlier meeting engagement against the British, and the latter assuming a Prussian attempt to maneuver behind the French right wing. In addition to historical deployments, you may choose non-historic and free deployments, plus five levels of computer opponent complexity. Fog features real-time game time. Time marches inexorably on, requiring you to act rapidly and decisively. As will be seen below, this offers both advantages and dis importance in operational wargames, but advantages, but the final question must be the use of sound in FOG is unusually effecwhether the simulation offers a historically ac tive. In addition to impressive battle curate and entertaining experience. sounds, cavalry charges and recalls, each side has historical military music as an acMANUAL MANEUVERS companiment. The French military airs An introduction by David Chandler, the are the same as those from the movie Waforemost Napoleonic historian, and an ex terloo. FOG is the first wargame that I have tensive bibliography round out the histori ever booted just to listen to the music. cal background for the manual. The accounts of the individual battles are suc TAKING CONTROL cinct but clearly drawn, and the informa All commands are issued with the mouse. tion on how to play the game is similarly You simply point to a unit, and an order well-done. The best part of Foo's docu menu appears. Orders can then be given mentation, however, is the database in the in terms of formation (line, column, game. Details of units, battle honors and square, mixed, skirmish) and movement commanders—even (assault, deploy, down to brigade lev Fields of Glory hold, withdraw). Arel-are easily accesPrice: $59.95 tillery can be directsible from the System: IBM FIELDS OR ed to fire against a program. This is Requirements: particular target. It's one of the best or 386-16MHz, all quick and easy, ders of battle ever 2MB RAM, VGA but maneuvering an developed for the graphics, 15MB army can be a chalhard drive computer, and allenging task. Comspace, mouse; most justifies the supports AdLib. manders are rated in game's purchase by Sound Blaster terms of competenitself. and Roland cy, leadership and The colorful VGA sound cards personality. You graphics offer map Protection: Documentation Check would do well to scales in one, four, Designers: Jim Bambra, Adrian Earle check your commanPublisher: Spectrum HoloByte and eight mile inAlarneda, CA ders carefully, and crements. Having (510) 522-1164 adjust the subordiactually visited nate orders dependHougoumount, I can vouch for the fact ing on the commander's abilities. that the terrain representations are accu It is all too easy to be diverted to a parrate. At the larger scales, troops are repreticular segment of the battlefield, while igsented by battle flags; at smaller scales, in noring the larger picture. While such miniatures fashion, one figure represents attention to detail and its accompanying 70 individuals. The overall feel is good, detrimental impact may be a historical with uniforms and equipment varying ac truism, it still leaves an unsatisfying taste cording to historical appearance. in the gamer's mouth. Time may be Traditionally, sound has been of minor slowed down, but it still passes too quickly 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"Game Database Information Batttc ot Waterloo Guard for the user attempting to fight the battle British leadership would have resulted in a campaign option was a major disapat brigade level. Conversely, time passes a massive defeat. The computer opponent pointment, until I realized that the game too slowly when fighting at the corps level. reacts to the user's input, generally result mechanics were incapable of accurately While you may choose from three speeds, ing in a head-on engagement with rough portraying such an event. The real-time of I'm still uneasy with the time scale. ly equivalent casualties on each side. FOG makes the Waterloo battle itself virtuPlaying for successfully consists of balally too large to manage well; a campaign ancing your time between the brigade and option would simply be uncorps levels. Napoleon himself observed playable. The end result is that he could always regain space, but nevthat Fog offers an insight into er time. Thus, you set your forces in mothe ambiance of the tion and intervene at the moments of Napoleonic battlefield, but crisis. Napoleon was a master at surveying also makes generalized tactiterrain and determining the likely crisis cal solutions dependent on points, as well as visually determining particular events. when and where to deploy his forces. For Al Waterloo, when the you, it is not so easy. Determining when to Prussians arrive, the British form square against cavalry or when to player will discover that he send forth your cavalry can be a momencannot access the allied units. tous decision. Forming a square too early Initially, I found this to be permits the unit to be raked by musketry disturbing; however, upon reand cannon lire; initiating a cavalry A WHIFF OF GRAPESHOT French cannons sound off in unison near flection, I feel it is an inspired charge too far away can break its impact a small chateau. design choice. Coordination on a square's bayonets. Only experience between the British and the will enable you to do this effectively. a difficult task, but one that can be accom Prussians was tenuous at best, and by usMoving against buildings can be a con plished by tricking the computer into ading the Prussians as a non-controlled ally, fusing task. It's difficult to determine vancing into \"killing zones\" with a few the simulation actually better represents when troops can actually move into advan sacrificial units. Of course, the problem in the Prussian role than most games. Thus, tageous terrain, as opposed to merely creating a proper killing zone is that the you must adapt your battle plans to the stumbling around in front of the stone rest of the battle continues on its inex Prussians; usually, this is not decisive bestructures. The historical sand pit and orable course. The balance between cause the overall pattern of the battle will sunken road are present at Waterloo, but hands-on and hands-off maneuver is a generally be apparent before their arrival. their impact seems to be minor. delicate proposition. Victory can be a deceptive goal. Overall As units take casualties, the casualties are not easily accessible, and you battlefield becomes strewn are often left unsure as to the overall flow with corpses and the detritus of battle. While the casualties may be acof battle. Some users have cessed from the database, this is a cumbercomplained that this detracts some process. There doesn't seem to be a from the game, since it beclear breaking point when the opponent comes too confusing to deterwithdraws from the field, and satisfying as mine what is happening. I it may seem to kill the enemy command disagree. A battlefield is a staff, this has little impact on the combat confusing arena, and the troops. sounds and sights in FOG are only a minimal representaFORWARD tion of what is historically ac-FOR GLORY-FOR FRANCE! curate. Those who insist upon Though it has its problems with Al, time an antiseptic battlefield can \"RANK AND FILE Your forces are arrayed on the battlefield with the scale and obscure victory conditions, nonetheless save a game and feel of a tabletop miniatures wargame. FIELDS OF GLORY is both challenging and restart from the saved posiinteresting. I wouldn't recommend it to a tion to remove the distracters. You cannot fight the battle exclusively at general wargaming audience, but those corps or brigade level. The latter clearly is with an interest in the period will find PICKING BONAPARTES too much to accomplish; the former sim much to tickle their Napoleonic fancy. & Unfortunately, the computer opponent ply does not work. Giving a corps comseems incapable of battlefield optimiza mander the order to advance often results tion, even at the highest levels. When in units retreating in order to form a co FIELDS OF GLORY ving the British against the French at hesive corps. You must fight the battle at *** Guard level (the most difficult setting), I different levels, which is both interesting PROS Covers a neglected historical did absolutely nothing, just to see what and aggravating. period, good on-line database, sounds, would happen. At Waterloo, the French In looking at fog, I am reminded of the battlefield graphics did a credible job of battering the British classic boardgame Napoleon's Last Battles. CONS Command schizophrenia, center, but then refused to advance. The With a roughly equivalent scale, the poor AI and play balance, awkward battle ended hours later in an indecisive boardgame offered the four historical bat interface result. Historically, such uninspired tles plus the entire campaign. The lack of M ops Datobese Informotion Battle of Waterlo @ u JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 113 "


"REVIEW SELECT SIDE popis CRACZE) How Does Ironbottom Sound? SSI's Great Naval Battles II Sails to Guadalcanal G by Josh Bruce GUADALCANAL 1342-43 THE NIGHT IS STILL, THE ONLY SOUNDS this has changed with SSI's new release, ga. Worse, the rest of the rules manual AN OCCASIONAL COUGH AND THE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOL. 2. GUADALfails to adequately explain all of the variWHISPER OF STEEL BATTLE CRUISERS CANAL (GNB2). It has enough looks, de ous ship systems and controls, despite its slicing through the midnight blue tail, and enough chrome to choke a claim as a comprehensive naval simulawaters. Patrol in \"The Slot\" requires restored '57 Chevy. But how does it sail? tion. Even after reading the manual twice days of loneliness, and playing all three tutorials several followed by stark Great Naval Battles Vol. 2, SAILING times, it took me more than ten hours to minutes of sheer ter Guadalcanal WITH NEW TRIM learn how to command all the ships effiror. I look in vain for Price: $69.95 The graphics on ciently. our enemies, but see System: IBM GNB2 are simply su Each ship has eight stations that can be nothing in the inky Requirements: perb. Each ship is accessed; task force, bridge, main guns, blackness. Suddenly, 386/33 MHz, 4 presented in stun secondary guns, torpedoes, aircraft, damMB RAM, SVGA, an explosion lights 14 MB Hard ning SVGA graph age control, and lookout. These are theoup the straits with an Drive space, ics, with any and all retically available for every ship, though incandescent fireball, mouse damage visually dis some may be inoperable. For example, an and ships of both Protection: played. There are aircraft carrier carries no torpedoes, and a sides are transDocumentation quite a few period destroyer obviously has no aircraft. As you formed from their look up photographs which command several task forces with a numDesigner: Roy Gibson dreary gray, as the Publisher: Strategic Simulations, Inc. have been digitized ber of ships in each, it rapidly becomes horrifyingly vibrant Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2901 and pressed into obvious why the learning curve is so long. colors of gunfire and (800) 245-4525 service as starshells fill the dramatic 1000 night. The Tokyo Express has arrived, backdrops and there are various 0000 0050 right on schedule. animation sequences on a number For years, while checking out the latest of screens. At times, the graphics wargame releases, my eyes would invari are truly astounding, significantly ably wander to the new CRPG's just to beyond most of the wargame see the pictures. I mean, sure, they were graphics seen before now. full of exploding gnomes, but they al Even the game manual is stunways had the nicest looking exploding ning. It weighs in at 162 pages gnomes. It just never made sense to me and easily half of this is occupied why GABRIEL KNIGHT, a game about by ship, aircraft, and armaments voodoo and New Orleans, could have dossiers. Unfortunately, the hallthese incredible blood-and-violence hearted and very brief historical graphics, while PACIFIC War, a game commentary would make Marvel about blood and violence, got stuck with Comics look definitive, especially READY...AIM...WAIT A MINUTE Micro-managing every detail the \"we'll add pictures if it's in the bud considering that everyone isn't an can be interesting, but it does tend to slow your ship's get\" style of programming. Fortunately, expert on the battle of Tassafaronreactions to opposing vessels. BODIA 10001 GE 00103 BERSY 100 READY 100 READYOO BEADY 00 PORT SPORT 00000 DSY BLOG DRM DEST 1000 3 0000 s0050 curo 00:00 114 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Fail And The Whole Planet's Going To Feel Alienated. Earth has some uninvited guests. Thousands of violent, grotesque aliens have landed, forging a trail of murder, kidnappings, and terrorism across the planet. As the leader of X-COM, the nations of the world are counting on you to crush the alien menace. From bases around the globe, you'll lead the deadly search and destroy missions recruiting and arming soldiers with laser weapons and alien-blasting artillery. Chasing down futuristic UFOs aboard your Interceptors. But it'll take more than man-to-monster combat to defeat these awesome aliens. You'll need a working knowledge of alien technology and solid battle strategy. They may be ugly, but they ain't dumb. X-COM from MicroProse. Get your copy today. Or the whole world's going to regret it. MICROPROSE A Division of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc.  1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 1-800-879-PLAY Circle Reader Service #171 "


"Q.Q.P.'s Strategies of the Month By:Steve Cohen \"Don't do it\", I yelled at the machine as my Flagship sunk to the bottom of the sea. I have finally learned that flagships are not invulnerable. Next time I will protect it with more than just 1 or 2 ships. No more Mr. Nice Guy...I will get more devious. Hmmm...A preemptive strike with 4 or 5 subs will do some serious damage to his front line forces, followed quickly with a clean up force of carriers and battleships. I will, however need to use my PT boats to be my eyes and ears before the ruckus begins. The alphabet box can be a very helpful utility in solving the puzzles. Putting an X on the chart next to the letters that are in the word really lets you see things clearer. Try this challenge; Score over 25,000 points on a 7 letter word without using the alphabet box to aid you. For example, by accessing the main gun station, players can choose what type of salvo to fire (spotting, loose, normal, or tight), what type of ammo to use (star shell, high explosive, or armor piercing) and can go into each individual turret for a view of the targeted ship and manual aiming of the gun. Simple enough in theory, but hardly so in practice. Let's say you have three task forces, each with four cruisers, and each cruiser has three main turrets. That means that there are 36 turrets to choose from, in addition to handling all the other myriad options. What saves you from becoming a micro-manager is that each station can be controlled by the computer. Herein lies the inner beauty of GNB2. While players can control all equipment of every ship in every task force involved in the battle, the computer can adequately handle most of these functions. It is a simple matter of pointing and clicking to change any station from automatic to manual, but most players will find a few stations to call home and leave the rest to the computer. For example, I will normally delegate all stations to the computer except for navigation (to implement tactics), gunnery (to mass fire) and damage control. Why the latter? Because it's a great deal of fun. In fact, this ability that most other games gloss over is one of the high points of GNB2. Ships are divided into two or three levels overlaid with a grid, with each resulting square containing various types of equipment ranging from magazines to propeller screws. When damage occurs, some squares will be destroyed, fires will start, and flooding will occur. Fire and flooding will spread rapidly if unchecked, but can be combated through the use of damage control parties. Water pumps can counter-flood the ship, pump out flooded compartments, or put out fires. This is really a sub-game within GNB2 as you attempt to keep your ships floating, and provides an interesting perspective for any would be admiral. When traversing the maze, remember that you can get past certain obstacles by entering their part of the maze and simply go past him to the adjacent room. You may not be able to play his puzzles, but you can move right past him. Don't panic when playing a faster moving conveyer, just relax and put some blocks in the dump, you do have 50 pieces to throw in the dump Experienced bridge players should try all the bidding conventions. Each plays slightly different, but can add more spice to your own playing style. Also...try the different partners, they do have different personalities and playing styles. Be real careful about your modes. Forced The march, can change the way your troops react in some crucial situations, thus it should only be used in certain situations. The AI is ne quite strong so don't underestimate your opponent. Q.Q.P. 495 Highway 202, Flemington N.J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 CHOPPY SEAS Nowhere is GNB2 weaker, however, than in its handling of the air campaign, which seems added almost as an afterthought. To illustrate how awkward GNB2 can be, in order to launch a search mission you must ready the planes at every available airfield or ship that has them, including battleships and cruisers, which also carry search aircraft. After waiting 30 minutes, you access all of these myriad units yet again to launch the airplanes, pick a spot for them 116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Circle Reader Service #179 "


"SOTNS SECUES SET S W IM TEATRE CLER SUMMARY Try a Titan o OTROCRESTENTION SIDORUNTLESS TOYRVENGER July's Top Picks SUNT TOUTES 1424 I also encountered a problem with the reinforcements, or lack thereof. Sources at SSI revealed that depending upon the difficulty setting, some or all of the scheduled reinforcements will not arrive. This appears to be based on a random factor, coupled with the difficulty level one is playing at, and left me wondering whether Roy Gibson or Nostradamus had designed this game CAPACITY REYNIRITT (when the moons of Jupiter are aligned in Aquarius, then the seas shall run red and the sky shall HIT THE DECK The idea of having planes in GNB2 is nice, but sing, \"Shoho has arrived\"). doesn't really fly in this naval gunnery-based game system. Supposedly, one playtester got = through an entire game and nevto fly to, and select the angle of search. To er received any reinforcements. This nevcall this cumbersome is too kind. GNB2 is er appears in the rules, and I would have many things, but it is not an air combat assumed it to be a glitch in the program, game and shouldn't attempt to be. had my trusty editor not investigated. The seven battle scenarios are quite GREAT NAVAL BATTLES 2 reminds me of good the first time you play them, but suf my High School prom date—all looks, no fer from being too historically accurate. brains. What SSI needs to do is take the Enemy forces will always appear in the superior graphics and detail of GNB2, and same strength, at the same point, at the add these to a solid game design, such as same time every time you play it, which tends to limit replay value. NAVIGATION Without a random scenario creator or a scenario cditor this game is doomed to sit untouched on many a game shelf. However, the game does offer a full campaign game, and this promised to be GNB2's saving feature. Sadly, the campaign scenario looks more like Grenada than Guadalcanal. It is boring, ahistorical, and monotonous. Played in real time, with one second equaling one to four seconds of game time, it presents a bewildering array of opSAILING A STORMY SEA Approach that enemy cruiser in the tions to the player, few of which distance with care, as you can never be sure when (or it) are interesting. Victory hinges on reinforcements will show to help you out. taking Guadalcanal, but this is accomplished through the use of an abstract system, where the player delivers PACIFIC WAR. While pictures will spice up a troops and supplies to the island while the game, they won't carry a poor design that computer handles the land forces. With has no replay and limited entertainment control of the island being so important, value. & more player control over the forces stationed there is needed. My first \"great naval battle\" campaign GREAT NAVAL BATTLES II: ended with the Japanese losing one cruis GUADALCANAL 1942-43 er to airstrikes, and the Americans simply **1/2 occupying Guadalcanal-not exactly the PRO: Outstanding graphics, flexible WWII version of Trafalgar. In addition, control options, excellent damage the Japanese never attempted to reinforce control model Guadalcanal, and provided a very weak CON: Repetitive scenarios, poor AI challenge. This is not the case with the in campaign mode, exasperating scenarios, where the computer is a better manual opponent, until repetition sets in. TUTTON S46 1942 Pacific Air War 42 AD&D Genie's Curse 40 Arena: The Elder Scrolls 45 Battlecruiser 3000 40 Delta V Call Doom 2. New Version! 34 Grandest Fleet 43 llarpoon 2 34 M4 Sherman 46 Mecliwarrior 2 40 Outpost 49 Pacific Strike 40 Romance of the Three Kingdoms 3 41 Sim City 2000 42 SSN-21 Seawolf 48 System Shock 46 Tie Fighter 48 Ultima 8: Pagan We accept preorders. Call for details. July Special: Free FedEx on two or more items. This month only. Complete product listing available. Visit our online store on Genie. Keyword Titan-Games Unless noted, all games are IBM-compatible 3.5\" format. Money orders, personal checks. credit cards accepted. Get that game now! testid ARIOCA LOGO 1-800-247-5447 GAMES One W. Seminary St., Brandon, VT 05733 7am-12pm Eastern Time, Monday-Saturday Circle Reader Service #117 JULY 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 117 "


"REVIEW REVIEW PESMIRACE Now That's Poker Action! 10 Sk 30 OBES Electronic Arts' PowerPOKER Finds Itself In The Chips by Alan Emrich MITTE LLECTRONIC ART: OKER: THERE IS NO GREATER AMERIit on the Macintosh. They will soon follow CAN GAME. SURE, MONOPOLY HAS A up with a Windows version. LOT OF CHARM, AND BASEBALL Using a display representing enough packs 'em in the stadiums, but seating for 10 different players, POWERwhat feeling in gaming can com POKER always cases the solitaire human pete with aces back-to-back? No game is player into the action from scat 1. While more portable, more playable and more the default game when first played is stanengrossing than a stakes game of poker. It dard 5-Card Stud, this product has more is played throughout the world in gam varieties of poker than Heinz has sauces. bling halls and basements, and has seen in fact, a quick count reveals over 100 more homemade poker variations variations than any PowerPOKER ready to play. Sure, thing this side of the Price: $49.95 all the standard kitchen. Systems: Macintosh games that poker Naturally, this Macintosh, IBM players know and great American with Windows love are included. POWER game has also found Requirements: Games like 5and Mac: 1 MB RAM its way onto our PCs. POKER (System 6.0.7). 7-Card Stud, 5-Card Like any traditional 4MB RAM Draw, and Texas multi-player game, (System 7+). Hold 'Em will althe trick when trans 5MB HD space, ways set the poker lating it to solitaire mouse, standards. However, computer play is to PowerBook compatible I was pleased to find Protection: None simulate the action Players: 1-10 (network) such variants as at a busy table and Designer: Todd Ouzts Baseball, 3-Card keep the game excit Publisher: Electronic Arts, San Mateo, CA Monte, 2-Card Stud, ing. POWERPOKER'S (800) 245-4525 Omaha, and even approach to simulatSpit-in-the-Ocean ing poker table action is what sets it above included among the myriad of games. its competitors. There were even plenty that I had never The mind behind this mastery is de heard of. It's evident that the designer signer Todd Ouzts. Between 1986 and read the footnotes while studying all of 1991, his labor of love was to write the those poker books. 50,000 lines of Pascal code that have become POWERPOKER. Todd studied \"a TOOL TIME FOR POWER PLAYERS mountain of poker books and paid his Since poker is America's game, it's only share of 'tax-deductible research expens right that POWERPOKER allow us to enes' in Vegas, Reno and California card gage in another great American pasttime, clubs» during the more than 6,000 hours tinkering. Yes, POWERPOKER allows players it took to complete this game. His hard to customize games to suit local player prefwork, dedication and research have paid erences. To my knowledge, this is a new off. EA was quick to seize upon his home facet in computer poker games, and one grown computer game and have released that I found to be particularly intriguing. POWERPOKER allows players to quickly and easily \"program» the sequencing and nuance of virtually any kind of poker variation. Perhaps you want one or two jokers to be wild, but, if dealt face up, you have to match the pot. Perhaps you want to create a \"lowball\" game with the low-spadein-the-hole getting half the pot at the end. Could you do that? With POWERPOKER, the answer is an emphatic \"Yes!\" The custom game builder is not the game's only great tool. More power is also found in defining each game's various \"house rules\" (antes, table stakes, checkand-raise, raise limits, betting limits, etc.). Each of these variables defines the nature of the table and one's interest in the game. For example, will the game be dealer's choice, favorites only, or a single game such as 7-Card Stud Casino Style? Are jokers wild, or just \"bugs\" for aces, straights and flushes? How many players will you seat at the table? Will they enter and leave the game randomly like they do at the clubs? This game is so flexible with its player-definable variations that the only game I couldn't program was our local version of 7-Card \"No Peeky,\" but then it would probably take a team of NASA scientists to program that game the way we play it. I HEAR THAT The feature that I enjoyed the most in POWERPOKER, however, was the dealer patter. Although it sounded somewhat \"computerized\" on the Macintosh version, the dialogue and slang were exactly right. The program's use of synonyms kept the banter from getting too repetitive, and a male or female dealer's voice could be selected. It called 'em all perfectly, keeping players alert to who had 118 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"THE ONLY THING MISSING IS THE DRIVE TO THE STADIUM. DISK #1 1. BRUCELL CUOCOS CHICAGO FUS .298 JOEY CORA RHC DALLS STRIES 2 The most highly detailed ballparks ever to be created. Each park consists of 9 full screens. Season Replay, Strategy Sheet, Head to Head vs. Human & Computer, and True Modem Play with Chat Mode. Contains full rosters for all 1993 teams with over 40 categories of batting stats and over 30 categories of pitching stats per player Draft module with \"Computer Draft\" Option, Trade module, Team editor module and League Set Up module including the NEW 1994 Division Alignment. 2 The sharpest detailed animation ever in a baseball simulation. Includes both Simulation and Arcade modes. THE Immo Robin Ventura city RODIN VENTURA an GOL 192, L122 LEU LET O 10 12mm WERTY RANGE AIM RAUG DAVC TOYOT WINNYM MIXOL H&cz nix C1 H&CZ N Chicago (A) 91 Screens may vary. MU LEUE TALLER PLAYERS Micro Sports Inc. One Northgate Park Suite 103. Chattanooga, TN 37415 1-800-937-7737 Circle Reader Service #89 MICRO SPORTS "


"' 101 File Edit Rules Deal Action Statistics Options Omaha 30. OO File Edit Rules Deal Action Statistics Options 7-Card Stud, Casino Style S D Nand Strengths for -7-Card Stud, Casino Style Total numre M e s completed: 453 Avere vinnin his hand: The Poirs X OF CUT M W INNIN_ALTWATT ir ne 0.4 100.000 100.000 nuk right Three-of12 14 13.69 ASOSA Or are lying? Answer: Their lips players will find themselves swimming in are moving.) action. Either type of player will find their reward when playing POWERPOKER. STIFF COMPETITION? From the standpoint of statistical Having two distinct sets of analysis, AMARILLO SLIM is also superior, computer player opponents although PowerPOKER keeps track of OIIII to play against was another overall winnings and computer players' nice touch. The first set is play based on past-hand analysis. What the standard artist's rendi POWERPOKER doesn't do is buckle its tion of character faces, players down and really teach them how complete with occasionally to master the game of poker and win changing expressions as consistently against all comers. Players their fortunes change. The seeking to graduate to this level of adoptional set of players fea vanced poker playing will definitely have tured the digitized \"Not to seek out AMARILLO Slim to get the Ready for QuickTime Playlessons and analysis they desire. ANTE UP Strategy gamers and poker enthusiasts alike will enjoy ers.\" This average bunch of the eclectic styles of play shown by the various opponents. nice-but-slightly-nutty THE POT'S RIGHT neighbors appear as digi POWERPOKER is absolutely the right the lead (although not signaling \"possitized mini-movies. Their real-life facial game for all but the hardest of hard-core ble\" straights and flushes as dealers do in expressions and mannerisms are a computer poker players, and even those Vegas, nor ever referring to aces-and pleasant diversion, and they really help players will probably want to relax with eights as the \"dead man's hand,\" but humanize the game and these are just quibbles). The other sound suspend disbelief. Howeveffects, of clacking, rustling chips and er, waiting for them to yak snapping, shuffling cards also added to does slow down the action a POWERPOKER's compelling play envi bit, so impatient players ronment. might not be ready for The real clincher, though, was a feature QuickTime, either. that poker enthusiasts have long desired: These computer players, network play! Although I've played poker while not slouches, are not of several times with others via computer on the more professional caliber The ImagiNation Network, this is not a found in Villa Crespo's feature that I recall seeing in any boxed AMARILLO SLIM'S DEALER'S computer poker game. While there is no CHOICE. This might well be modem option supported, the fact that an because the artificial intellientire office could be goofing off (er, gence in POWERPOKER has \"working\") concurrently over a network to be pretty flexible to deal gives it an added star in my book. The fun with the many variations of is not only in passing the deal, but send play. Players are advised to FOLD OR CALL? The well-informed bettor can see the range of typical ing the messages back and forth that let the computer players play hands with a mere click of the mouse. equate with good old poker patter. (Rid amongst themselves for 20 or dle: How can you tell when poker players so hands before you join the table. This builds up an inter the wonderful features and variations that nal database of winning POWERPOKER has to offer. The charming hands and percentages for sounds and animation add considerably to the computer players to refer the game's power and diversity. Throw in ence when making their play the network play, and you've got office ing decisions for a particular gambling like there's no tomorrow (or, in game variation. Until a de our case, no deadline). For the casual and cent database is built up, their the social computer poker player, POWERplay style is noticeably erratic. POKER has become the one to beat. However, even after a number of games have been logged, the computer players do not evolve into predatory POWERPOKER poker card sharks. While not * ** completely reckless, their PROS Flexible game creation tools, play style remains loose, videos and speech raise charm ante which keeps the action lively MONEY IN THE BANK Keep track of your monetary wins and losses CONS Computer opponents lack with every hand. Tight playwith the player performance chart. A shame you can't take this savvy, more entertainment than iners will be able to make their struction to Vegas! money over time while loose 72.69 67.333 12 16 iph Card Tite tant Robes Deal Action Statistics Options De standing PLAYER PERFORMANCE is eneemme og 2 44 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Robert Siros, Burbank 100 new landscapes. New objects and game elements to explore. Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxyd magnum! is an entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. HABSHPAPPARPFFFFFF Oxydo magnum! for PC, Mac & Amiga Sequel of the award winning Oxyd game! Mac: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5 MB RAM, EGA or VGA monitor, Soundblo, or Adl. optional. OXY. My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We Oxyd Credits: Some fine comments about Oxyd magnum! cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for Game of the Year 1993 I like Oxyd magnum because it's different in every landscape, Creating such an excellent product. R. S., Germantown Australian MacWorld surprising, challenging, compelling and fun! Every landscape is This is without question, the most impressive game I have ever seen. like a new game. It's so tricky! It drives my wife crazy. More Best Brain Game 1993 levels and just as good as Oxyd. You have challenged me! Thanks. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty MacWorld Game Hall of Fame My wife and I like to play puzzles together. It's unique. Great puzzles. It's aesthetically pleasing and exercises the mind. I Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Game of the Year 1992 makes me and my kids think and we don't have to punch or kill One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Computer & Pedogogik 06/93 anything. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Game of the Year 1992 I'm completely hooked! The game is really slick, well designed. Display Compuer Club e.VGermany NOW PLAYING: Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! The variety of play is It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. literally, incredible. One of the most elegant games I've played. Jeffrey Jondah, San Diego Score this game a solid 10 , . Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. I enjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis A must for your games library. AmigaWorld 06/93 Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that Game of the Month. MorWelt 02/93 I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of Top of the Charts the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied Brolo Teoser Category, PC Games German edition, with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes Treat of the Month 6 028843 *** 34 e 30 a 4423-58% each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the Alor Roundtable in GEnis, 12/92 marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling Editor's Choice over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances PC Games German edition, 19/92 like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels. Jeffrey R. Harrow Download free appetizers from SWC BBS at (508) 368-7036 @ 2400-14.4k Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. baud or send a check to Dongleware: I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The 10 levels of the Oxyd game $ 4.00 attention to detail-the sounds, the textures of the surfacesreally adds PC, Mac, Amiga, ST or NeXT. to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. The Oxyd Code Book $39.00 Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not Take 5 demo of magnum! $ 4.00 impossible. Tom Phoenix, Portland for PC or Macintosh. Tubular Worlds episode one $ 4.00 I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a for PC or Macintosh. Dongleware Publishing, 35 Howard Street unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd Shipping & Handling $ 3.00 Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-1130 If your dealer does not carry Oxyd and Oxyd magnum! call us at 1-800-228-6993 Checks, Visa & MasterCard accepted MA residents add 5% sales tax Circle Reader Service #63 122872 "


"STRATEGY 3 0 Tread Upon The Shining Path    Achieving Mastery Of Romance Of The 3 Kingdoms III by Josh Bruce T'S TIME TO SHARPEN THAT POLEAX AND choose which of the many Chinese war form alliances with all neighboring PRACTICE YOUR HUMAN WAVE TACTICS; lords you will portray. Choose wisely, as provinces and any large factions, regardWOULD-BE EMPERORS, PETTY WARLORDS, this decision can mean that the rest of the less of where they are on the map. Once rebellious peasants, and usurping eu game may not be winnable. Dong Zhou this is done, you should work on lowernuchs stand in the shining path to the has a large army, but will have a very diffiing the hostility level of any province throne of Koei's ROMANCE OF THE THREE cult time finding allies. Liu Yan has few that borders your own until it reaches KINGDOMS 3. nearby enemies, but inhabits a very poor zero. The best way to do this is by simply The lands of second-century AD China region of the map. Gongsun Zan is virtu sending envoys to the province to ask for offer a bewildering array of choices and ally worthless, and will present a boring token help i.e. one food or gold unit). challenges as you attempt to reunite the game as the player waits until another The other province will almost certainly Empire after the collapse of the Han Dy warlord decides to blitzkrieg him. When give you this small amount, and its hosnasty. Victory may seem elusive as you bat choosing which character to be, remem tility level will decrease by five. By doing the strange men in stranger cities, but your ber Joshi's Ist Rule of Computer Games: this, you will gain time to build up your chances to win are enhanced by following \"Whenever possible, be the guy on the military forces. some simple guidelines. The first thing cover of the box!\" Cao Cao is a strong Don't be shy about asking other you need to do is get your bearings. Un character, with good leaders, a rich provinces for help, particularly when you less you are very learned in ancient Chi province, and the inside track on winning begin running low on food or gold. It is a nese history and geography, you'll be the game. simple procedure to use, and it can quickstopping at every hut from here to Xiliang In order to fully master RTK3, four seply solve your financial worries. An excelasking for directions. arate spheres must be dealt with: politics, lent financial ploy is the \"Iran-Contra infrastructure, strategy and tactics. Upon Gambit.» If you desperately need soldiers, ON THE ROAD TO LUOYANG picking a warlord to play, you need to but have no food or gold with which to The geography of ancient China is raise troops, then send your best extremely diverse, and needs to be diplomat to a wealthy ally and have considered before beginning a camthem ask for a large amount of food. paign. The West offers broad expansThen, send another officer to sell es of open territory, but these are half of this supply at the market for poor provinces with little agricultural TOVNI gold, and suddenly you are ready to or economic value. Along the coast, recruit more soldiers. This ploy can provinces are worth far more, but are be repeated as many times as you held by strong warlords. In the midSILLOIN have officers. While mastering the Liu Biao Liu Zhang Zhang Lu dle of the map lies the capital city of O Xu Chang Xiang Yang Cheng Du Han Zhong political aspects of RTK3 is critical to Luoyang. This province is extremely winning, learning to manage your wealthy and should be the player's empire is critical to survival. first objective after recruiting and Choose a ruler to play. training a respectable army. Remem Scenario Setup SUN-TZU SCHOOL OF ART ber that when plotting your strategy Two facets of empire management there is a sizable difference between warrant special attention: officers cities, larger ones having far more JOSH'S 1ST RULE OF COMPUTER GAMES Whenever possible, be the and the military. The number of offivalue but many more defenses. guy on the cover of the box. cers a ruler has in his retinue deterAt the outset of the game, you may mines how many actions he may 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Market "


" ZORK PREL ASSAULT FITA STATHTR2D UTVILIZATION OPPOSE CLASSIC MICROSOSE CITY 2000 GROLIER MELITMI ERKIN YLEENA IRON HELIX: THE PLANET'S HOTTEST HARDWARE MEETS THE PLANET'S COOLEST SOFTWARE. INTRODUCING GAME BLASTER CD 16. All the leaders of the gaming universe have joined most outrageous games in the cosmos Rebel forces. And now they're coming to get you. No Assault and Sim City 2000-and for the next six other game experience can prepare you for what's months, no other kits have them. But that's not waiting inside the new Game Blaster CD'16 mulall. Game Blaster also includes Return to Zork, timedia upgrade kit.* You get a Sound Blaster Iron Helix, F-117A Stealth Fighter, Silent Ser16-bit sound card and speakers that make all vice II, Civilization, Railroad Tycoon, and Grolier's your games sound terrifyingly real. A doubleMultimedia Encyclopedia. Of course, all your speed CD-ROM, so all your games run games will sound better because they're made to be faster. An FX-2000 played on Sound Blaster. The question is, can E ET joystick, so you can you handle it? Want more info or the name of a BLASTER CD 16 hone your reflexes. Creative Labs dealer? CREATIVE Not to mention the Call 1-800-998-5227. CREATIVE LABS, INC. \"Suggested Retail Price $54995 1994 Creative Technology Ltd, Game Blaster CD, Sund Blaster and the Sound Blaster and Creative logo are trademarks of Creative Technology Lid. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. U.S. inquiries: Creative Labs 1-800-998-5227 or 408-428-6600. International inquies: Creative Technology Ltd. Singapore. TEL. 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. Circle Reader Service #131 "


"w B E Soldiers Fund Att 138 Food ITHA initiate. It is therefore important to have front war. Once you have established your Tactical considerations include use of several officers with your ruler, but since faction within a safe area, it is time to push weaponry and terrain. There are a variety each must be paid a yearly salary, you on towards Luoyang. of weapons available, but some seem a bit should not do this to excess. The key is Luoyang, the former capital city of the expensive for their battlefield worth, to maximize efficiency through the spe Han Dynasty and richest province in the Horses are very useful, as they increase cial abilities of each officer. Have several game, must be taken at all costs. Though mobility, but they cannot scale walls. officers that handle diplomatic affairs, usually heavily defended, it is far from im Crossbows and super-crossbows allow a some for recruiting troops, and some for pregnable and can be secured with a player to use ranged attacks against an encommanding men in battle. Reward emy, but do not do a great your officers whenever their loyalty bedeal of damage. While gins to sag. Having an officer turn traiHuaiyin players will find some use Jul.201 tor in the middle of a battle can ruin Day 3 in these special weapons, your whole day. Clear they are not enough of a Military leaders assigned to army command 1  factor in a battle to decide should spend all of their time training and ralSun Quan the issue by themselves. Of lying their forces. Begin by putting as many iXiahou Mao far greater importance is Sun Jing soldiers as they can command under their what type of terrain is becontrol. Then, train them until their training Def 3200 ing fought over. Att 10700 level is 100. Next, rally the troops until they Upon attacking a city, reach their maximum morale. Treat training Def 226 the first thing that must be levels and morale very seriously, as they are done is to look at the inthe most important factors in combat. Now Def 40571 telligence window on the Att 30668 that you've learned how to conduct politics right hand side of the and run your empire, you may begin formuscreen. If your enemy outlating your strategy. numbers you, but has litAMBUSH A crossbow disadvantage is much less of a problem if you tle available food, a siege ALLIANCE OF REGRESS surprise your foe in heavy woods. is in order. Place all of The broad strategic considerations of your forces on standby RTK3 focus on making friends and con strong army. Begin by advancing towards and wait while the enemy's food supplies quering enemies. Begin by forming al Luoyang one area at a time, slowly but dwindle to nothing, at which point they liances with all neighboring domains until surely, staying focused on your objective will withdraw. This is a bloodless way to a large military force has been built. Once and crushing any warlords in your way. victory, but can be a time-consuming this is done, decide which domain you The numerous battlefields compromising process as you sit and wait for the enemy wish to conquer and begin threatening the Great Wall, which surround Luoyang, to starve. them until their hostility level reaches can prove to be very tough defensive 100. Then, revoke the alliance so that works. If at all possible, attack Luoyang A STORM IS BREWING your soldiers' morale and officer loyalty from either Wan or Hongnong, as this will The other option, of course, is to take the city will not decrease when you invade the outflank the Great Wall. Once Luoyang by force. The key to storming a city lies in getarea. If you have any allies who border the has been taken, you will be in a strong ting your army into the city as quickly as possiarea in question, arrange for a joint invacentral position, and can proceed to con ble, and then assaulting the castles. Select an sion of the city. Depending oflicer whose forces are trained and rallied to on the strength of your enetheir maximum. Move this group to the head my, you should either push Xia Pi of your assaulting forces, then use them to on until they are completely Day 3 scale the walls near a gate. On the next turn, conquered, or sign an alClear send them circling back to open the gate from liance with them after taking the inside. This is a much better way to gain two or three provinces. FurSun Quan access to a city, unless you get a twill from batther, be sure to sign alliances Cao Ren Sun Jing tering down doors. with any neutral warlords Soldiers Once your army is inside the city, focus Def 7580 who border areas you plan to Att 18056 your attacks on taking the castles. Move all invade. of your forces towards them until they are Def 804 The question of where to encircled with every available unit. Use Dong Xi's move. invade is an issue that dethe attack and simultaneous attack comDef 50288 serves special attention. The Att 27480 mands to storm the castle, then move on ultimate goal of the game is to the next objective. Remember to garriconquering all of China. Two son the castle you have taken, or enemy preliminary goals should suATTACKING ON TWO FRONTS Slipping troops over the wall tends to forces will reoccupy it and you'll have to persede this: forming a front split the defender's forces, and is a great way to open his gate. clear it out again. line, and conquering LuWhen defending a city, don't be afraid oyang. Your empire should have its back quer the rest of China at your leisure. to sortie out and fight in the open if the guarded by the ocean or a map edge so Proper strategy will place your men in the attacker only has a small force; otherwise, you can expand your power away from right place at the right time, but winning use the terrain to your advantage. Put as this zone without being caught in a two battles hinges on mastering tactics. many units in the castles as you can, and 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Rug. 201 iLao Cao DANAS 21 Fund Att 331 Food "


"GETTING TOTALLY INTO IT IS EASY. GETTNG TOTALLY OUT OF IT ISN'T. ONSO SUMBER Enter the deep, dark realm of Hexx a world of twisted paths and one very twisted mind. Guide four adventurers through a labyrinth of texturemapped dungeons in an attempt to free the Gods of Magic from the HERESY OF THE WIZARD grasp of an evil wizard. Where every move is from a first-person perspective. Where every step is action-packed, every graphic out of this world. \"One of the best first player perspective RPG's I've ever played,» says PC Action. Now at your local retailer. For a very small sacrifice. Look for Hexx, Hersey of the Wizard at your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. Psygnosis, Ltd., 675 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139 Phone: 617-497-7794 Fax: 617-497-6759 "


"[Cao Cao trick Me. Feng Ji Att 280 30DOE-EDIO Food This ominous defensive work, ty expensive and not often used, my adwhich roughly encircles Lu vice is to avoid building them, at least oyang, is a great boon to the for your first few games. Concentrating Sep.201 Day 2 defender. Station as many on land combat using the strategies outRainy troops as possible on top of lined above, players will find that they Hil. Of Yu Jin Yuan Shao the wall and wait as the at spend more time conquering China and I cannot believe I let tacker senselessly tries to such a sinpleton less time trying to figure out what is goXun You scale it. When attacking, try ing on. While you will still find the game Soldiers as much as possible to corner challenging, the reunification of China Def 2665 Att 7974 defending units away from will be a much less daunting task. Fund this defensive work and deDer 6162 stroy them before Yu Jin's move. Der 67583 they can get up on it. Att 26004 If you are attacking a Great Wall area and Jul 201 find yourself outDay 18 A RUDE AWAKENING Yu Jin gets off to a bad start, after stumbling numbered or evenly Cloudy into a trap in the rain-drenched fields of Ye. Yuan Shao matched, withdraw Lao Cho immediately and Feng Ji just hope that the attacker runs out of save yourself the time and casuXu Chu food, or reinforcements arrive before you alties. Remember, it is better to Def 3247 are destroyed. If severely outnumbered, lose quickly than to sacrifice Fund don't be afraid to withdraw. You are going your army proving that it can Def 4358 Att 300 to lose the city anyway, so at least you can not be taken. Feng Ji's move. save the army to fight another day. As a final note, after extensive Def 68323 Att 7644 With the exception of the wide diversity playing of this game I have had of terrain, fighting in a non-urban setting only one naval battle. Most is not significantly different from fighting fighting occurs on land and GREAT BALLS O' FIRE A pyromaniac's delight, fireballs will in a city. One type of terrain that does de naval warfare is a relatively rare demoralize your enemies until the rains come. serve special mention is the Great Wall. occurrence. Since ships are pretSoldiers Att 1239 Food \"The Great ORIGAMO sweepstakes\" What got you hooked on Origamo? Let us know in 20 words or less and you could win one of the following prizes: First place-3 QQP products AND $50.00 Second place-2 QQP products AND $35.00 Third place-2 QQP products AND $25.00 Fourth place-1 QQP products AND $15.00 Fifth place-1 QQP product AND $5.00 All entries must be post marked by July 1, 1994. All entries become property of QQP, inc. and are non-returnable. One entry per envelope. Drawing will be held July 15, 1994 and is final. All winners will be notified by mail postmarked by August 1,1994. No purchase necessary. Sweepstakes is not availlable where prohibited by law. Send all entries with your name and address to: QQP inc., Department A 495 Hwy. 202, Flemington NJ 08822 Circle Reader Service #180 "


"FOR GEN INCORPORATED Oisciples Steel The disappearance of your father has left Lanthor without a leader. Factional infighting in the resulting power vacuum has left the realm in chaos! In your heart, you've always known that you were the chosen one — now it's time to act! You've got to save your once-rich land by re-establishing the supremacy of the guilds. Choose your disciples and your strategies, build vast armies to conquer or defend, heed the counsel of the lords or assassinate them everything is under your control! Disciples of Steel is the ultimate role playing game, with stunning graphics and hundreds of challenging quests. Heart pounding sound effects and original soundtrack make Disciples incredibly realistic. It'll amaze you with its fine diftention to detail, powerful weapons, and huge array of magic spells! 1000 NAME I SHEENA ace t ec Spoorbeeld STEEL Tip STEEL Du STEEL ENEENA STRDASTH INTELLIGENCE DG HIEDOM ACCURACY INTUITION YOUR FAKTVES FROGRESS 15 INTERRUPTED EV A GROUP OF FOSSIBLE FCES. YOU HAVE ENCOUNTERED A LIZAROHA, SEVERAL GIATEATS!  000000 HITS 317 COLE WATER KARMA O ESSENCE 42 POMERO FIGHT PARLEY  HT H  POOL MONEY FOOD OPTIONS HATER OPTIONS ALTER DISCIPLE GATANUT SILVER COPPER OUT OF 425 NES Actes Hone your skills and build your strengths -danger lurks around every turn! Fight or flight! Choose wisely, as things are rarely what they seem! MYND Time for talk is pasil! Only the mighty con the cunning ill survive! Game by Megasoft Entertainment. Published by FormGen Inc. (800) 263-2390 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"STRATEGY Machiavellian Machinations How To Lose Friends and Dominate People In Merchant Prince by Tim Carter NY GAME BASED ON MACHIAVELLIAN PRECEPTS IS BOUND TO OFFER AMPLE OPPORTUNITIES FOR RUTHLESS people to air out their strategic ambitions. Of course, while you're courting allies (and plotting to ambush them), your human opponents are devising equally sneaky maneuvers via modem or e-mail. So MERCHANT PRINCE from QQP hinges on cunning diplomacy, and a knack for 14th Century skullduggery doesn't hurt, either To win at MERCHANT PRINCE, you have to build a fortune through trade and politics. So, the game can be divided between trading and political actions, the latter including religious and military activities. Scan NAGASAKT goods and markets for the highest prices. cash runs can be created. You should nevBut don't go in search of the New World, er worry about a financial base, as long as because you'll need to get cash flowing as the milk is flowing. quickly as possible. The major difference between a milk Once your trading empire is up and run and a cash run is the way their profits humming, it is useful to distinguish be are used. Milk runs ought to be used to tween two types of trade routes: milk runs gradually expand trade routes and mainand cash runs. A milk run is usually a tain cash flow. They should not be used, at moderately profitable line between two least early on in the game, to fund politicities relatively close together. A good excal activities. Cash runs represent the ample is glass from Venice in return for cream of the crop, producing the biggest gold from Budapest, one of the best startpayoffs, and they can supply the capital necessary to mount a Nagasaki political campaign. A2Lk Furthermore, funding ACCESS political campaigns outside of the day-to-day cash flow keeps you from overspending and ACCESS thereby hurting your Cancel overall trade effort. Kalanbalish In general, there are Kashgar Katsina a few other trade pracNga sake Nadron tices that can greatly aid gamarkand Access Soffala profits. Don't concenTansiers trate on shipping at the expense of land transLURE OF THE ORIENT Cash runs to faraway cities are riskier, but trading ports. Some land routes wine for silk can be more than a little lucrative. can net bigger profits than sea routes. Roads ing trade routes on the historical map. can make land transportation almost as Milk runs should always be pro fast as shipping, faster in some cases grammed into the computer and then left because roads can often be built straight alone. Their purpose is to generate oper between two cities. ating capital and underwrite cash runs. Mules or camels can be used as wareCash runs generally involve multiple houses in any major hub city. This is partransports and longer distances in order ticularly useful for high value goods or for to see higher profits. As your trading net bare-cupboard tactics (see below.) For inwork and wealth begin to grow, some cash stance, on the historical map a profitable runs will become milk runs, and larger route is usually from Timbuktu to TangIT'S NOT EASY BEING GREEDY As you warm up to your tights, concentrate on exploring and developing trade routes. Before dabbling in religion, politics or military adventures, you'd better have a functioning trade system in place, and a lot of extra cash on hand or on the way. Dabbling in the world of politics and religion early on will only waste money and time while your opponents build a war chest for a sustained political push later. Remember, most games last 100 years or more. You'll have plenty of time in the last few decades of the game for political domination and manipulation, so be patient. Don't be tempted into politics even if the opposition is already active there. Once a major cash reserve is available, any lost ground can easily be made up. What aspiring Marco Polos need to do early on is explore as much of the world as possible, identifying cheap sources of Access 128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"OPERATION CRUSADER The Total Combat Experience TM WORLD at WAR WAR Croto Beda LIBYA ktzoom Middle level zoom map of North Africa. RCEMBRE Tactical map featuring combat units near Tobruk POZITIMET Real-time battle reports from the front. R90 Rete Ball Be PlanPlus PA12119 Hot on the heels of the industry's first «Game of the Year\" for a computer wargame, the team that brought you the award-winning V for Victory series has joined forces with The Avalon Hill Game Company for yet another blockbuster! Atomic Games and Avalon Hill are proud and excited to present OPERATION CRUSADER, the first in the new World at War series covering great campaigns of WWII. Set in the expansive reaches of the Libyan and Egyptian deserts, OPERATION CRUSADER sweeps you into the role of German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel or British General Sir Claude Auchinleck as they commit their nations' finest infantry and tanks in an all-out struggle for the Mediterranean port city of Tobruk. A series of six historical scenarios will show you first hand what open field tactics and desert combat are REALLY like. Experience for yourself the cursed Hellfire Pass and in the end see if you, too, can earn the title, «The Desert Fox». Available at Leading Resellers, including: Babbages. Comp USA Computer City Electronics Boutique Egghead Radio Shack Software Etc. Walden's Software. HEHURIT Time Reference Calendar gives weather forecasts and reinforcement alerts. The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 If Operation Crusader cannot be found locally, call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 Ask for Operator CGW5 Circle Reader Service #44 Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 386 or better. Min. 4MB memory. HD.3.5'' Floppy, Hard Drive, SVGA-VESA graphic card & monitor, support Adlib, Roland & SoundBlaster cards. AND Avuilable on: Macintosh Color Systems. 4 MB RAM. HD req'd. "


"Canel SPD CRG PRICE X 8 8 500 FLORENCE SPD CRG PRICE 8 8 500 VENICE SPD CRG PRICE C... 9 81000 K SPO CRG PRICE I 96 800 ee 154 700 Hoffala SPO CRG PRICE Xi'an FLORENCE NICE Kire 192 MARINE  pear, and it is easier and BUYING THE GRACE OF GOD 5,669 safer to pilfer them the Once a trading empire is established and COST 1,500 farther you are from a large amount of surplus cash becomes onkey BUY Clear Venice. It is actually possiavailable, players should begin to invest in ble to capture enemy ships the Church. Cardinals are a good investLarse los and cargo, leading to a di ment, as they provide cash every turn in rect profit, although profthe form of indulgences. The end goal of Ima  og its rarely cover the this religious campaign is obviously ascen4X12 Szare Group expense of hiring merce sion to the papacy. 5.9 Galley While it is possible to become Pope by I SPO CRG PRICE naries. This tactic can be amarkand Temala very rewarding, however, buying a majority of the cardinalships, the | 53 m  qy I mbuktu if an opponent has connecessary votes can generally be rounded Venece structed a treasure fleet up through negotiation. Becoming Pope loaded with high value is not as important as what you do once LANDSHIPS Camels and donkeys lack the speed of galleys, but function goods. on the papal throne. A clever Pope can as mobile warehouses in hub cities. A more subtle way to control the papacy by regulating the nummonkeywrench enemy ber of cardinals on the market. Since the iers or Tunis. You can make more money, trading is by keeping their cupboard bare. Pope gets 50% of the market price for however, by keeping a unit in the destinaWhen playing against human opponents, each cardinal, if you sell to yourself, cardition city for storage. When high-value it is possible to buy all the goods in a city nals are half-price. items are sold in the city, buy them with a before their turn. COLLEONI storage unit and vector a ship for pickup Usually, this ap. DEF. Mo0. and resale in that city. This is faster, more proach is effective 42_31_ 8 profitable and more direct than sending a only when a limited COSI PER TURN: 1210 ship from Timbuktu to a city such as number of goods are MOVES ANYWHERE Venice, and is much more flexible. available. AdditionalCancel Galleys do not require guards and they ly, the game system are capable of outrunning most pirates. provides limited WEALTH On average, unguarded galleys will suffer quantities of goods UNIT ICONS RTKDEF / HOVEMENT a lower attrition rate than guarded cogs. for purchase by your KNIGHTS Colleoni 53V8 3/3/15 Galleys are usually the best buy early in competitors even if ctangu SIEGE TRAIN FUSILIERS Mardini the game, except for short runs. They are you buy everything 12/10 Kalon SCAVALRY RRCHERS Jabbasid a bit cheaper, and they generate cash during your turn. 7372/10 Alhazen HORSE ARCHER FOOTMEN montefeld much faster due to their speed. They are The periodic 229 X 10 Gupta also much more effective for exploration, plagues that sweep given their ability to sail up smaller rivers. Europe can seriously DOLLARS AND SENSE Mercenaries and Pirates are a quick way to strike at hamper trading efyour enemy's heart, but are about as subtle as assassination attempts. SILK-COLLAR CRIME forts, but can also be There are a number of dirty tricks in trad turned to your advantage. Because the ef As Pope, you may excommunicate cities ing that can be highly useful for building fects of the plague are applied after you or call crusades. The crusades are not rean empire and confounding your oppo have entered the stricken city to buy or ally effective until the popularity of the nents. A word of caution about dirty tricks sell goods, it is wise to sell in plague cities papal faction is high enough to draw a sigin general: they tend to be cyclical in na but not purchase there. Then, if your nificant military force. Excommunication ture and can often result in your own trading units are wiped out, you will have can be put to more immediate use. Exdemise. No one is safe from retaliation, benefited from the inflated prices, without communicated cities pay a much higher which should be foremost on your mind losing valuable cargo to the disease. price for imported goods, vastly increasbefore pretending to be ing the profits of traders who sell there. Caesar Borgia and schemYou might even use your papal powers to ing against your rivals. excommunicate a trading destination imHaving said that, here Rajse Populandas mediately before a shipment arrives, are some ways to go about Wealal 132 Popularity thereby raising profits. doing it, and possibly getting away with it. The casml FROM POPE TO POLITICO iest way to mangle other Once the papacy has been decided, and a trading networks is Vella Church large war chest accumulated, it is time to through piracy. Hire a cost enter the realm of politics. If possible, it is 1.745 Commission a e. K mercenary force and staa good idea to begin a political career by welshe:10 Cancel tion it along a crucial targeting the neutral faction. The main trade route looking for reason for this is that the neutrals don't easy prey. It is often possiCLOCK Tower : Buy Ant hold grudges to the same extent that othble to anticipate where SOCIAL GADFLY If you can't find ways to increase your popularity in er players do, and their potential for retaland when a large number Renaissance Italy, you're playing the wrong game. iation is much smaller. of enemy ships will apThe important thing to remember E DEUS somn of art ITURNII 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Cao Cao Genghis Khan It took 1400 years, but we finally got them together! CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF 1911 311 2 T icture this two of historys most ruthless and ambitious leaders in the sahte room Now throw in the fact that both are looking towards world domi nation with massive armies following their every command. Sounds interesting, doesn't it. This winter Koei's bringing Genghis Khan and Cao Cao romunce together to a store near you, and it's going to be of The Three kingdoms exciting. After all, Genghis Khan is out to lead his DRAGON O DESTINY. Mongol hordes victoriously across Asia and Europe in GENGHIS KHAN II: CLAN OF THE GRAY Wolf and Cao Cao's devising new ways to reunite China after the collapse of the Second Han Dynasty in ROMANCE OF THE THREE SEAL AN ALLIANCE Disease & DISASTER KINGDOMS III: DRAGON OF DESTINY. The contest for world domination is about to begin. Are you ready? Coxo CONQUER THE WORLD Man SEIZE THE BATTLE ADVANTAGE Europe in GEN Crearlously across Asia and VGA color PREPARE FOR Mouse support Sound Blaster & AdLibTM sound support KOEI ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SNES & SEGA. KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415)348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). PC Compatible KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 Genghis Khan it and Romance of the Three Kingdoms Ill are trademarks of KOEI Corporation Circle Reader Service #81 "


"w Ken EDNOJO about politics is that it is essentially a zerosum game; in order for you to win, someone else has to lose. As such, a successful political career is not generally conducive to a lot of lasting friendships. Thus, it is usually a good idea to have one's political alliances established before beginning a sustained drive for power against human opponents. The computer appears unresponsive to bribing, and it is sufficiently weak that a political campaign can be conducted even when all three computer opponents are hostile. Once Doge, always appoint your faction as Council Head. The Council Head effectively controls the senate through his ability to remove senators at will, which offers the power to keep other factions in line. The military posts should be ignored, as you ought to have enough money to hire your own army long before you become Doge anyway. mongering and go straight after your opPapal Election Results ponent's cardinals and Votze SOL senators. Spare cash is sactions not wasted on a smear campaign, however, as Thiene Asolane a low reputation inPisana Genoa creases the cost of buylorence Rome ing political support. Srance Once an attack has Spain been launched, carry it Totals: 0 0 0 24 0017 through to the utmost erance wens! of your abilities and reNext cssage EXZE Reading sources. Go after the opponent's trade as PAPAL DECREE Not to suggest bribing the Pope, but a few timely gifts might well as political posibe in order when election time rolls around. tion. If you can create enough financial problems for him, he may far to go. Against human opponents, it is not be able to afford to retaliate. necessary to carefully judge the likely fall MERCHANT PRINCE is an excellent game out of a dirty trick. Remember, you are as of strategy and intrigue. Against human vulnerable as your opponents, and an all opponents, victory requires skill, diplomaout war is likely to benefit no one. cy and cunning. Going it alone is a sure When you have to knock out an oppo way to wind up destitute and weak, while a nent, make sure you are not going to force careful balancing of opposing interests, all of the other players to align against combined with a strong financial empire, you, then go for his jugular. Reputation is will bring you the power you so richly den't nearly as important as political and serve. So, let's raise a glass to your success! economic power, so forget about rumorBut, please, you drink first.... MORE DIRTY TRICKS The dirty tricks available in the political realm are a lot more overt than in the economic sphere. Assassination, rumor-mongering, and arson are readily available and surprisingly affordable. The only real question here is whom to attack and how The Serious Wargamer Knows His True Allies Tigers On The Prowl Aide De Camp Point Of Attack SWULATIONS HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055 (408)554-8381 The WARGAMER'S Computer Company 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"It ain't kid stuff. Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment Subscribe to America's #1 Computer Game Magazine... and Score Up to 47% Savings! COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Magazine The #1 Computer Magazine 100 GAMES RATED How To Win A Strike Commander Clash of Steel Space Hulk Warlords II and others! Feature Reviews Get serious about playing and winning computer games with Computer Gaming World. In every monthly issue, you'll —  Discover special \"winning secrets\" for your favorite games  Get \"first looks\" and in-depth reviews of new computer games  Explore the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive game environments  Leap into virtual reality with online gaming Turbocharge your system for faster action... and much more! Whether you're into fantasy, action, sports or strategy. Whether you use DOS, Windows or a Mac...now you can start racking up the points with Computer Gaming World. Subscribe now and save! O One year/12 issues — $27.94 — YOU SAVE 41% Two years/24 issues $49.97 YOU SAVE 47% Aces Over Europe Lands of Lore Stronghold SimFarm On-Line Gaming Make the Leap to Cyberspace Gabriel Knight Sierra's Psycho-Thriller Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. PLUS FREE SOFTWARE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD CALL NOW TOLL FREE 1-800-827-4450 PRO TIPS Gaming Secrets Become a major power player with Computer Gaming World's \"PRO TIPS Gaming Secrets\" software. It's the game master's secret weapon that reveals exclusive, just released tips from topranked computer game wizards. Yours FREE with your paid subscription. To guarantee your savings and FREE software, please mention this special 4-digit code to the operator when placing your order: 4794 "


"TORT AS OPPONENTS Call Little Caesar's Nightclub at (416) 238-8238. All wargamers should check out message base #13 for discussions on computer wargaming. Find an opponent or leave a review. All computer platforms wel come. Looking for any opponents for any modem game in the Tiffin, Ohio area. I play The Perfect General, Global Conquest, VGA Planets. Command HQ. etc. Contact Fred Stevens at H-(419) 448-7331. The Elfspire Tome is a Fantasy Role-Playing Game Master's resource bulletin board. We feature role-playing echoes, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more. 1200-9600 Baud. (415) 595-2387 Looking for a Patton to play against your Rommel? Need some fresh meat for network Doom-fests? On the hunt for a gamer's bulletin board system in your arca? Well, you might find what you need on CGW's White Page. If you'd like to place your own ad, send us a postcard, CGW Poll card, letter, FAX [714-283-3444] or email (Prodigy (EXPT40B), CompuServe [76703,622], The Sierra Network at [Box 1018], GEnie or America OnLine at [CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each month you want your name listed. The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples to write your own. However,  Provide at least one telephone number. Do not forget the area code and mention whether the number is Home, Work or Modem.  Include your city and state so that people who call you will know what time zone you are in and recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. Portland, OR wargaming nut seeks other like-minded nuts to play The Perfect General, Empire Deluxe. Command HQ, Seawolf or just about any other playby-modem game available Hoping to set up a sevenplayer PBEM of FTF game of Third Reich within the next two months. Any interested players contact Jeftrey at H-(503) 659-4019 or by email via the InterNet at: jeffrey@teleport.com The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. PlayRPGs (AD&D, GURPS), play-bye-mail games (Diplomacy. ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 5829004 (2400 8-N-11. Free access. Central (Acton) Mass, gamer is looking for local oppo. nents to play F-15 III. Per. fect General, Falcon 3, etc. Contact Jason Cameron at H-(508) 263-6134. NET Computer Gaming World magazine also appears as its own Forum on CompuServe's ZiffNet. To access our editors and writers on-line, just GO GAMINGWORLD. Topics include: Hey Editor! Opponents Wanted, The Hardware Zone, Online Gaming and many more. Join us, won't you? Looking for a local opponent for head-to-head or modem gaming Amiga or IBM clone. Your game or mine. Call H(516) 758-7823. Ask for Nick. I'm in Patchoque, NY. GAMERS BY AREA CODE Stamford, CT Space Marine seeking local cooperative or deathmatch play for Doom. Call me at home. (203) 322-7472. PRIVATE BULLETIN BOARD SYSTEMS The Assault BBS is looking for game players! Play Trade Wars 2002, an exciting space adventure game. Challenge other fighters in The Pit. Go head-to-head in Chess. Play golf or bowling and challenge other players for the best casino score (yes, we have an on-line casino!). New games are always being added. Call (703) 490-8304 al 2400 Baud. Shaun McDonald SYSOP. We need you now! the Pacific, Air Warrior, Falcon F-16. MiG-29 and others, plus a games hint information section, game forums and multi-player BBS games. Check out our large shareware and .GIF library and our fantastic new online viewer section. We support 1200 to 38.400 Baud and offer a free trial period. Call (818) 7690691 Opponents wanted for modem/null modem gaming in Alabama. Call Roger at H(205) 233-8482 or contact me on America On-Line at (Cmdr Foster). Searching for local opponents to do battle in playing Seawoll, Doom, Command HQ. 688 Attack Sub, Falcon 3.0 or any other games by modem. Call David in the Vancouver/lower mainland area anytime at H-(604) 264-7998 and let the games begin! must check out SimNet based in the San Francisco Bay area. This new network is expanding nationwide currently with 20 BBS systems around the country and still growing. SimNet is originating from the Trade Center BBS (SimNet Headquarters). Call (415) 3400197. There are four nodes, 2400 to 28,800 baud, 24 hours per day. Full access on your first call, no fees. SysOp: Gabe \"Joker\" Turk. Modem opponents wanted section online. Over 1.2 Gigs of files, including in. stant support from ThrustMaster, Inc. Local opponents wanted for modem games: Falcon. Empire Deluxe, Perfect General. Command HQ, IndyCar Racing, etc. Call Joe in Lewisville, TX at H-(214) 317-8526 or FAX (214) 317.7937. The Check Six BBS is an excellent source of all the latest flight simulation updates, utilities and mes. sages. The system is registered on the InterNet as I checksix.com). Check Six carries all of the major USENET newsgroups relating to air combat, flight simulations and other PC games like Doom. In addi tion, Check Six provides of ficial customer support forums and InterNet email addresses for Keyboard Commander Corps [kee@checksix.com) and Thrust Master [thrustmas. ter@checksix.com). The system is also the Southern California hub for SimNet, a simulations network carried by bulletin boards around the country. The cost for a full year's subscription is only $25 (120 minutes/day: 4mb/day downloads and an InterNet email address). Limited free access is also available. Modem in at (714) 362-8299 / 8N1 1200-28.8kb: 5 nodes. Check six! Modem player wanted in San Diego area. Seawolf, World Circuit, IndyCar, or other. Call Gary at H-(619) 579-6575 Opponents wanted for Leg end of the Red Dragon and Usurper. Alternately, tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including role-playing. Strategy. trivia and casino games. Call Dimension Z in Queens, NY at (718) 381-1643 where we support 14.400 baud. We have over 400mb of files available to download and access to World Message Exchange conferences. Free access, 24-hours a day, 7 days a week. Seeking local opponents for modem gaming: Falcon 3.0 Hornet. MiG-29. Call me in the Denver, CO area at H(303) 782-5213. Ask for Fred between 7-9pm. seek wargamers for play. by-mail Pacific War, Second Front and play-by-modem Battles of Destiny plus Empire Deluxe. Will consider any other wargame, too. Contact Chuck Frye at H(803) 546-1543. I'm in Georgetown, SC. Modem Gamers Forum BBS: Home of the Game Matcher Door for finding head-to-head gamers like you. A message area devated to every modem.capable game known to mankind. Find opponents for games like 688 Attack Sub, Sea wolf, F-29, Knights of the Sky, The Perfect General, Command HQ, Populous, Powermonger, Tom Landry Football, MechWarrior II. etc. Tournaments, hints. tips, and strategy articles available. along with patch files and updates for your modem gaming software. Two versions of TW2002 on-line (one exploiting the software bugs, one cleaned up game)! Mention CGW for long distance validation. Seeking Amiga, Mac and Atari users to form an even farger opponents base. Running Renegade BBS 7-17 software. Sysop: King Crumb Babylon, NY (516) 893-4120, 14.4k, 8N-1, 24 hours. Seeking modem gamers in the Omaha area for F-15 III, 688, Seawolf, and 1942: Pacific Air War. Call Greg Seewald at H-1402) 5972837 Looking for modem opponents at 2400 baud for The Perfect General, World Circuit and Seawoll. Call Tim Berry in Arlington, TX at H(817) 861-1100 THE NETWORKS The Impress BBS at (918) 437-3754 has the latest Apogee, id. Software Creation and Epic MegaGames. We support 2400 to 14,400 Baud modems. FX/Term is strongly recommended and can be down loaded when you first log on The Dakota Central Telenet BBS in Carrington, ND (58421) is a BBS with many challenging on-line games and over 30,000 files available to download free of charge. On-line games include the massive Land of Devastation postnuclear war RPG with an available EGA graphic user interface, plus you can battle other traders and aliens in TradeWars 2002 (tournaments start frequently). Explare with your character in the combat-happy RPG Wiz. ard's Arena, and make big booms with others like Nuke War and Naval Battle. Trivia and card games are also online. Huge games file area. Free access, with a small fee for total access. 3 nodes: 300-14.400 Baud. 8-N-1. Call (701) 674. 8115. 24 hours a day, 7 days a week Check out the informer BBS at (415) 468. 6713/14/15. We have all of the latest flight sim updates and cracks, plus flight simulations conferences. Find new drivers and diagnostics, attend conferences and more. For more information, contact John Custer. 264 Oriente Street, Daly City, CA 94014-1531. The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Novalink (formally Digital Dreams) Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Hey, Southern California check out the Techno Surting BBS! We have six phone lines available. There are tournaments scheduled for War in Russia, CHO, Con quered Kingdoms, War in If you are looking for the best military PC flight simu Tators coverage, then you 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"Internet Multi-Player Worldwide Games Chat ines PRET Signup for our 4 or 8 hour plan, and we'll waive your first month's subscription fee! Limited time only! And the lowest national online rates going. NVN How to get online: Call our Client Services department at 1-800-336-9096. (In Houston, call 877-4444.) Or register online using any comm software set at N-8-1 and full duplex. Dial by modem 1-800-336-9092. When connected enter CG94WW and press <return>. A SERVICE OF U.S. Videotel Call 1-800-336-9096. Write to us on the Internet: info@nvn.com Circle Reader Service #95 "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE I Xargon and Helium: The Elements of Shareware by Chuck Miller CONSTANTLY LURK ON-LINE IN SEARCH OF NEW SHAREWARE MEAT TO THROW AT CGW'S EDITORIAL BLOODhounds, AND while doing so recently I came across a couple of juicy titles with impressive numbers of downloads from shareware fans. XARGON: BEYOND REALITY from Epic MegaGames is the first part of an action adventure trilogy similar to their JILL OF THE JUNGLE series. HELIOUS, the first of two parts by Albino Frog Software, is a strategy game that's a real gas to play. Both of these games have been around for a while, but that just adds to the seasoning for gamers who haven't had a taste of them yet. ARCHAEOLOGY 101 Meet Malvineous Havershim, an archaeologist of the Indy Jones flavor, on a dig in the forests of Madagascar. Here he discovers the ruins of the Blue Builders, named after the magnificent blue structures they left behind. While inspecting some mysterious writings to understand their language, Malvineous accidentally triggers the release of a noxious green gas (no, not Helious). He soon goes under, and the last thing he can remember is a great brown eagle. When he comes to, Malvineous finds himself in a bizarre, evil world, Xargon, named for its malevolent overlord. Your job is to help Malvineous locate and destroy Xargon's main reactor. That means first, staying alive, and second, scooping up all the gold, gems and bonuses Malvineous can carry. The larger goal of the trilogy is to acquire the three power objects necessary to defeat Xargon and go home. This can take some time as the mazes of Xargon are huge, and they are teeming with foul-tempered creatures han XARGON is an attractive, high energy kering for a niblet of your giblets: two game which took over three years to prolegged grunts, giant trolls, zombie lizards, duce. Even the music and sound effects are enormous spiders, purple hoppers, robots professional enough to add to the experiand other zomboids of similarly nasty tem ence. Graphics are well designed, drawn, perament. Not that the general environ and animated with no complaints save a ment is good for raising a family. There move to high resolution (the current inare enough acid pools, spikes and spears, dustry trend). Overall, the game surpasses rolling rocks, and mechanical mashers to the level of JILL OF THE JUNGLE, a popular ruin even a good pair of boots. Fortunate and respected title in its own right. ly, Malvineous does have a few ways of If you enjoyed JILL OF THE JUNGLE, and dealing with slathering critters, like a laser, other games like Bio MENACE and DUKE fire balls and even a few rocks when the NUKEM, you should check out XARGON. going gets tough. Registration is $30, plus $4 shipping and XARGON employs a dual-mode interface. handling, which gives you the next two volYou travel through Xargon in the Map umes in the trilogy, THE SECRET CHAMBER Mode, a top-down perspective on the world which allows Malvineous to move around. You can save in this mode, and indeed you'd be foolish not to. When our hero reaches a new location, he swings into action, and the game moves to a side-scrolling per | 45550 21000 45550 S FI = Help spective. During BEYOND REALITY these scrolling arcade sections of the SPIDER FIGHTER The Caves of Xargon are no place for those with game (the great arachnophobia or fear of malevolent zomboids. majority of play), you can't save. If Malvineous dies here, he and XARGON'S FURY. The former bids you is returned to the beginning of that level. to locate a special chamber and recover a While this does not count against your magical lyre, while the latter initiates a scoring, and Malvineous has unlimited confrontation with the vile Xargon himlives, it does require that you monitor his self. The game requires a 386 processor or health. Thankfully, some special items are better and VGA graphics. placed in the more dillicult locations to aid To order, send your payment to Epic you in your efforts. MegaGames, 10406 Holbrook Drive, V OLUME ONE --136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"BRING YOUR FAVORITE GAMES TO LIFE ON THE BIG SCREEN! funt III 3770 TM GAME LEPPER ZAPS COMPUTER GAMES FROM PCS TO BIG-SCREEN TVs! LIMITED TIME OFFER! These sensational computer games are FREE-a $150 value-inside every GAME ZAPPER package! Prince of Persia Jet Fighter II\" Spectre Challenger\" GAME ZAPPER turns your living room into a virtual reality gameroom by boosting your favorite PC games from your VGA monitor onto your big-screen TV. GAME ZAPPER converts your PC's VGA output to a video signal and supports 640x480 VGA resolution. So plug in GAME ZAPPER your favorite games will be larger than life! JERCUTERIES GE GAME ZAPPER by Brderbund by Velocity by Velocity Recommended for DOS applications only Circle Reader Service #39 IA DIS ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS 20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (310)865-1432 (310)809-6144 (Fax) (800)888-5244 Available at:  Best Buy  CompUSA. Computability. Computer City Computer Express Egghead Software Fry's Electronics Insight J.D.R. Micro Center Tiger Software USA Flex "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Potomac MD 20854 or order with your charge card in hand by calling (800) 9727434. charge card in hand SAALTARE DIDI D'IDIOT |19|1919 2a DIN gerous obstacles. When a yellow diamond or red circle appear in the center of the balloon, you're the baddest balloon on the block. During this time you can also tackle the nine levels in any order you like. As a general guideline, work clockwise on the levels and avoid pointy objects. Otherwise, hit or shoot it. But the rest I'll leave for you to discover HELIOUS is no vaporware, it's a lot of fun for $12 ($10 plus $2 shipping and handling). Any graphics card will work, but a 386 system or better is required. To order, contact: Albino Frog Software, Post Office Drawer 5822, Hollywood FL 33083-5822. Please send your payment in U.S. funds, check or money order only. ITICIDIO A GASEOUS RELEASE HELIOUS is a strategy game that requires as light a touch as the gas it's named after. It doesn't take a doctorate in physics to understand the concept: guide a gasGAS ATTACK Leaving a trail of vapor in the mazes of Helious. filled balloon from one end of a maze to the other while color joystick, a blast of gas propels it in that lecting all the blue gems and avoiding all direction. In doing so, you're using up the sharp objects in between. Sounds some of the precious gas necessary to maeasy, right? Okay, smarty, see how many neuver through the maze. Run out of gas levels you get through. The shareware and it's \"game over, man.\" Likewise if you version of HELIOUS has nine levels vary hit a sharp object. This is where a light ing in difficulty from \"Okay, that's simple touch comes in handy. Release that gas oh enough\" to \"You've got to be kidding!\" so carefully, and try to use momentum by Nine more levels come with registration, bouncing ofl walls. Try not to brake unless but the nine shareware levels will keep absolutely necessary. you popping for some time. Now just to spice things up a bit, how As Bernoulli may have said, there's about some weapons? Collecting different more to this gas than meets the eye. When color gems (other than blue) enables offenyou move the balloon with the arrow keys sive measures against darts and other danTo locate these Ziff NET games on-line, tune in to the CGW headquarters on ZiffNet. These games can be downloaded from ZifiNet both on CompuServe and on PRODIGY. On CompuServe, go to Computer Gaming World's own forum (GO GAMEWORLD), Library 7, Shareware Sizzle. On PRODIGY, jump ZiffNet and Search by Title for the games listed here, or Search by Category to browse the entire Games Library. SPECTRUM HOURS: NEW! Artificial Intelligence game! DOBB96858669880 X-Wr. 23 Duay Darat HOURS: P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 6AM-1 1PM PST 93912-6295 7-DAYS 1-800-983-4321 ELECTRONICS CURRENT PRICES n amaan CALL FOR CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES B0 Radhe Ros $2ADD Dungeon Hax 33 Reed he knob in G 48 Sadowcy 46 ADD Rent 48 Rues d'Engrognert 2 10 Yar Colectory 48 Secowore Comet-CD 48 Nen Bread 19 SSV 21 Savo o 35 11t Har 43 Sm Cy 13 Agente Dirk 6 Sa Rica ADXDA da:Gries Ourse 43 Syains d'bre Anlag 52 Aonenter 2 37 Subwar 2060 ADSD Dirk Son 50 Sacele 5 Avon Ura $ Sp AOXO Droonitor Sar Trek 26 AT. 55 Aera Eca Sod's Te Fighter ADSD Eyedre Broderi 51 Stke Comanda W TO 56 Buced town Uer Vill: Paçon AXD Riverot 52 Sydcare Pus Sn & An Rev) 45 B Foge Uma Vut Pagin Sochik Aris Gardin d'F 54 The Horde 350 60 BON Scer Ds 16 Margre Core Set LTHS Morente Dex 13 Theme Park 25 Besa Koray Wariad! Arc Baron CDo 35 29 Uva IV 30 Badet When Two Wots Wa Bersama See Sy 39 Wema VI Compide 42 Cutes I 36 Wag contade Anda E z X 2 LAT VIR PanwSouch loc 47 Cash So 38 Wines Glory Bane 42 Utra Undriot1&1 30 Cordo7 29 XCom:Torin Drose Face Cates 2 49 Vroe aking Moon 55 Darxlogy Carache waarde Miss 56 Wing Commade Delte 2 XWrgi: Mera Pysst Conspiracy 41 Wro Commander 2 Delae 2 X-Wing 2B-Wing. Danon CD 35 2 Wing Cordel/Uma VI 29 Dunel Dark Logons 40 Wom F-14 Feet Delroy 00 System Daca hasta 27 Wand he Gods WTV u Fecs Gay Escape ton bra hero Dagon Loe. Capt1 EM JEWE CASE Figt Smut Toolt Hade  49 7h Guest a Font Page FAPTO 22 In Maiden Foto Feft Smukou Twist  s Carium 22 Foto:Bre2 lo:Fies of Scoilbines 45 Corporis hanc 2 Gorghiskon 1 37 Oudts World Gatlara Bades 2 cao p 33 Gana Damir.com Rund Rach B cvi, 52 Dune 23 Gardes Fort Stock Ve their 56 darabhas: Ang Gold Bates 1 4 Super Wing Commander breytun Point 4 land 26 Gar War 1914-1918 ATAR Layernd The 45 krgsO6 13 kga Ssan Lars Lore u Legend of Kyanda 23 Habte Throne 5 Non vs Aedzy Mach Warol 4 Loud te Rings bed'he Dud EM HARDWARE Micapace.co 36 Maria Mirsan 2 2 Krotoms d Germany COROM Oves Microcon 29 Rand Zok 27 Kynas Sard Base 16 Boc MyS-WN 9 Sad Wapo solutie 15 Meco doon S058 144 FAX Modem It Sar Was Cress 23 Mech Wario! 46 Sporer 142 FAX Modem Ex 165 Oupo: Mcarol Mace WN WE ALSO SALL: Pact Site Speech park 51 1942 Pack Awar 48 Norad 39 SEGA SNES, hega che, MAC Prvices 50 Aorso e Deco 42 Opos addatta Rbiran 4 ADXD. Cron:Genie's Orse 45 Paket Grora WSon 36 New Car SSI Wrgres 15 PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, DEFECTIVES REPLACED WITH SAME PRODUCT WE SELL ALL 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS COMPUTER &VIDEO PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS ENTERTAINMENT MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add 725% sales tax/HANDUNG $2 PER ORDER PRODUCTS SHIPPING: FREE GROUND SHIPPING WITH 5100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 PRIORITY MAIL ADD $4, 3-DAY UPS ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7 OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $4 Why limit yourself to multiple choice games when you could be telling Girlfriend Teri exactly what to do in your own words! Gore Wit 2 % BESES Girlfriend: The adventure with 10\" commands 2 Harpoon Norrad BH35 Actually, the number is too high to count! You see, Girlfriend uses artificial intelligence, so you can ask her any question and she will answer on your PC screen or audibly. Dream up things for her to do, and then watch in VGA color! Players tell us they never get bored because Girlfriend learns new words and ideas from every conversation. Every time is different, and there is no endgame! Watch for Girlfriend at mal Warch for Cilind your favorite store or order direct: Girlfriend Lisa PG-13 $59.95 Girlfriend Teri PG-13 $69.95. Add $4 S&H. Sound Blaster compatible voice add-on: $29.95. Specify disk format. Caution: mature subject matter! For FREE info on our software, including adult kits, circle the reader service number below! Dealer inquiries invited. AIVR Corp. (800) 324-AIVR 709 Lingco #106. Dept CG407 Richardson, TX 75081 USA Tel (214) 235-4999, Fax (214)233-4992 30 Circle Reader Service #115 138 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 Circle Reader Service #42 "


"CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS. INC. Multimedia Specialists Game Blaster CD 16 1-800-233-0010 New from Creative Labs! The Game Blaster CD 16 multimedia upgrade kit features a Sound Blaster 16. a double speed CD-ROM drive, speakers and joystick, and an incredible software bundle including Rebel Assault. Return to Zork, Iron Helix, SIM City 2000, Creative CD Blaster and more! Tech Support: (608) 233-8832 P.O. Box 55164 Madison, WI 53705-8964 Circle Reader Service #94 Visa & Master Card welcomed! Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Sat. 9am -1pm CST NEW! $379 CREATIVE NEC NCHINON CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive O PLEXTOR MultiSpin 3Xi CREATIVE LABS. INC. Digital Edge 3X New from Creative Labs! Along with a triple speed CD-ROM drive, the new Digital Edge 3X features the Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2. Groliers Multimedia Encyclopedia, Voice Assist, Text Assist, Digital Morph. Rebel Assault. Indy 500, The Simulation, and much more! Power users, this is your CD-ROM drive! Lightning fast internal triple speed drive with 195ms access time, 450KB/sec transfer rate, and a continuousflow 256KB cache. Exceeds MPC level 2 specifications, and is PhotoCD Multisession, and QuickTime compliant. Switchable SCSI-I/SCSI-2 interface. With an access time of 250ms, and a double speed data transfer rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB buffer, the CDS-535 is one of the fastest drives around! PC Magazine Editor's Choice! DM13028 Double Speed Plus CDROM drive This high performance SCS12 CD-ROM drive is intended for demanding multimedia applications such as animation. graphics, 3-D modelling and full motion video. It features a 240ms access time, a 64KB buffer and a 335KB/sec transfer rate. Triple Speed! $685 $439 $299 $257 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE 324 CD-ROM DRIVES  MM UPGRADE KITS ThunderMedia kit 239 NEC Multispin 4X Pro (NEW) 919 Gravis Ultrasound Sony Media Magic kit 169 Plextor DM3028 internal 257 Gravis Ultrasound MAX Game Blaster CD 16 379 Plextor DM3028 int, w/kit 319 MV Pro Audio Studio 16 Edutainment CD 16 Plextor DM5028 external 379 MV Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Digital Edge 3X (NEW!) Plextor DM5018 ext. w/kit 429 MV Pro Audio Spect 16 basic Creative Omni CD int. 199 Aztech CDA268-01A W/kit 149 Plextor QUAD Speed call MV Pro Audio Power Pak VIV Reno (NEW!) 275 Chinon CDS 535 Internal Toshiba 3401B internal 319 MV Pro 3-D Korg VV 2000 Family kit call Chinon CDS 535 int, w/kit 332 Toshiba 3401E external 448 MV Premium 3-D SCSI-2 VIV 3000 Super kit 424 call Chinon CDX 535 external Sony CDU-33A bare drive 167 MV Premium 3-D MultiCD MV 4000 Premium kit 449 call Chinon CDX 535 ext. W/kit Sony CDU 33A w/kit & 2 CDs 169 MV Deluxe MultiCD WV 5000 Pro kit call Creative Omni CD int. 199 Sony CDU-561-01 int. MV Pro Wavetable Upgd ReelMagic Upgd. kit 619 MicroSols. Backpack dbl spd 327 Sony CDU-7811-10 ext. Sound Blaster Deluxe Reveal DC230 Hm Ofc kit 249 Mitsumi FX001D dbl spd w/kit 169 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe Reveal DC240 Educ. kit 249 NEC Multispin 3Xi internal 439 SOUND CARDS Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed. Reveal DC250 Ent kit 249 NEC Multispin 3Xe external 539 Audio Magician Plus 239 Sound Blaster 16 Basic Reveal DC260 Edut, kit 259 NEC Multispin 3xp portable 418 Gravis Ultrasound 169 Sound Blaster 16 Value Ed. 126 Sound Blaster 16 184 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD 149 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD/ASP 119 Sound Blaster SCSI-2 95 Sound Blaster SCSI-2/ASP 59 ASP upgrade chip call Wave Blaster Option call G VIDEO CAPTURE/OUTPUT call ADS Game Zapper call Video Blaster SE 55 Video Spigot for Windows 79 Pro Movie Studio 79 Sigma Designs ReelMagic 104 Reel Magic Lite (NEW!) 109 Call for speakers, SCSI controllers, more! CD-ROM TITLES We only sell CD-ROM! ON: 942 The Pacific Air War call Day of the Tentacle/M.M. Il 37 Jet Pack 43 Neurodancer MPEG call Sporting News MPEG 'th Guest 43 Dinosaur Adventure CD 40 Jones in the Fast Lane 36 Newsweek Interactive #1 27 Sports Illus Almanac MPC th Guest 2:11th Hour 53 Dracula Unleashed 45 Journeyman Project 42 Newsweek Interactive #2 27 Sporting News Pro Football th Guest/Dune 47 Dragon's Lair 33 Jump Raven call New York MPEG call Star Trek 25th Anniv legis: Guardian of Fleet 48 Dragon's Lair MPEG 33 Just Grandima & Me 32 Oceans Below MPC 27 Star Trek Next Gen vir Warrior 39 Dragonsphere 47 Jutland 46 Oh No More Lmngs Dual Pk 35 Star Wars Chess MPC N-Qadim 41 Dune/7th Guest 49 King's Quest V 40 Outpost 44 Stellar 7 Mone in the Dark 44 Dungeon Hack 36 King's Quest VI 42 Patrician 36 Street Atlas 2.0 USA WIN Americana MPEG call Empire Dix Scenario Dsk 19 King's Quest VI Upgd 22 PC Globe Maps & Facts 32 Strike Commander/Tactical Animal Kingdom MPEG call Encarta Encyclopedia '94 89 King's Ransom 33 Pinball Arcade 35 Stronghold wrthur's Teacher Trouble 36 ESPN Baseball Tonite 43 Labyrinth of Time 45 Police Qst 4:Open Seas 46 Syndicate Plus mored Fist 41 ESPN Sun. Nite Football NFL 39 Lands of Lore 39 Police Quest 4 MPEG call System Shock 17 Flying Fort, w/SS2 32 European Racers 35 Laura Bow 2 36 Protostar, War Frontier 41 T2 Chesswars ackroad Racers 24 Eye of Beholder Trilogy 49 Lawnmower Man 37 Privateer 56 Team Yankee 2 attle Isle II 39 Eye of the Beholder 3 46 Legend of Kyrandia 33 Quantum Gate 44 Tetris Gold eneath a Steel Sky 39 F117&F15 Senario Disk 44 Lesuire Suit Larry 6 48 Quicken CDROM 64 TFX loforge call FA 18 Hornet 54 Lightning CD 39 Ravenloft 49 Tony LaRussa BB 2 lue Force: Next of Kin 37 F15 Strike Eagle 3 44 Loom 38 Rebel Assault 42 Total Baseball 1994 Edition uzz Aldrin's Race Space 55 Family Doctor 3rd Edition 45 Lord of the Rings 42 Return of the Phantom 37 Total Distortion ..I.T.Y. 2000 31 Fantasy Empires 37 Lord of the Rings MPEG call Return to Zork 42 U.S. Atlas 4.0 ampaign 32 Frontier Elite II 34 Lost in Time 37 Return to Zork MPEG call Ultima Under. 1 & 2 Capitol Hill MPC 26 Gabriel Knight 43 Lost Treasures of Infocom 31 Ringworld, Revenge Pat. 35 Ultima Vill w/Speech Pack astles II 46 Gateway 2 32 Lost Treasures Infocom II 35 Rodney CD-ROM 25 Under a Killing Moon D-ROMIX! Freex 14 Geekwad Games of the Galaxy 25 Lunicus 39 Romagain 16 Under a Killing Mn MPEG D-ROMIX! Hardcase 14 Gettysburg 39 Mad Dog McCree 28 Routerial v1.0 14 Video Cube D-ROMIX! Prime 14 Great Naval Battles 49 Man Enough 43 Sam & Max Hit the Road 37 Video Cube Space MPEG Challenge CD Pack 26 Great Naval Battles Il 41 Man Enough MPEG call Scrabble Deluxe 23 Video Cube:Sports haos Continuum, The 40 Gunship 2000 w/Scenario 35 Mantis Exp Fighter 42 Secret of Monkey Island II 39 Video Game Solution CD Chessmaster 4000 call Guy Spy 26 Mavis Teaches Typing 45 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 44 Who killed Sam Rupert ommanche w/Mis. 1&2 57 Harrier Assault SVGA 39 Matinee MPEG call Seven Days in August MPC 33 Who Shot Johnny Rock Companions of Xanth call Hell Cab v1.1 46 Mayo Clinic: Family Health 37 Sh. Holmes Con Det 3 49 Wing Commander I Deluxe Compton's Int Encyc, MPEG 114 High Command 48 Mayo Clinic: Total Heart 35 SimAnt Enhanced 45 Wing Commander Il/Ulf UW ong Robin Hood WIN 39 Horde, The 49 Mech Warrior il call Shadowcaster 43 Wing Commander II Complete 34 onspiracy 41 Horde, The MPEG 34 Mechamander 43 SimCity Enhanced 45 Wing Commander/Ultima VI 34 Critical Path 44 Humans. The 23 Mega Race 32 SimCity 2000 49 Wolf Pack Curse of Enchantia 21 Inca 37 Microcosm 48 Sound Track MPEG call World Atlas MPEG yberRace 36 Inca 2 34 Microsoft Golf for Windows 39 Space Ace MPEG 39 World of Xeen aemonsgate 29 Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis 37 Mosaic Magic 31 Space Quest 4 35 World Circuit Gran Prix Sarksun 47 Inherit the Earth 24 MPC Wizard 2.0 12 Space Shuttle MPC 26 World View MPEG Sark Legions 41 Interplay's 10 Year Anthology 45 MPC Wizard 2.0 MPEG 32 Spear of Destiny 39 Wrath of the Demon Dark Seed 37 Iron Helix 54 Myst MPC 47 Spirit of Excalibur 21 Wrath of the Gods lo surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $6 charge. Software shipping $5/order. Canada $8/order hardware shipping is 5%. Canada is 6%. Personal and company 8. WowSWANASAO USNADNOUS "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL The Wizard of Voxels To kick off his new column about the people and technologies behind the magic of computer games, Paul Schuytema talked to programmer Kyle Freeman about how he turned pictures of the brain into computer graphics that dazzle the mind. by Paul C. Schuytema FTER PROBING THE DARKEST SECRETS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN, AFTER CREATING THE HARDWARE and software that makes a three-dimensional CAT-scan come alive, what comes next? If you're Kyle Freeman, it's time to fly a helicopter Freeman, an electrical engineer by trade, is NovaLogic's whiz-kid of Voxel Space technology and, as a result, was the key programmer in the creation of COMANCHE: MAXIMUM OVERKILL. Prior to trying his hand at game design, he developed medical imaging technologies, using voxel graphics to represent the human brain right down to the electromagnetic contents of the cerebral cortex. Why, then, leave the brain for game design. The challenge was gone. And for Freeman, who started programming games in college, no other genre of computer applications seemed more challenging. Taking the knowledge he garnered from the medical technology field, he set out to make a visceral, movement-based game featuring realistic, rolling terrain. In an advanced CAT-scan, each view is preprogrammed and each frame may take up to 10 minutes to render on a micro computer. How, then, could Freeman take this technology and create a real-time voxel imaging system using only a 386? \"Simple,\" he says. \"It's all in the challenge.\" FREEMAN AS FLYER Kyle Freeman creates worlds that are so filled with realistic imagery, he can't resist the temptation to fly around in them himself. PUMP UP THE VOLUME PIXEL To understand how these two seemingly disparate fields are related, you need to know a little about voxel graphics. The term \"voxel\" is formed from the collision of two other words, \"volume\" and \"pixel.\" In the traditional two-dimensional world of PC bit-mapped graphics, a pixel is a finite graphical unit, occupying space and containing information such as color and luminosity. A voxel is a similar unit, but it exists in a three dimensional world and has the potential to contain much more information. In a CAT-scan, for instance, a voxel may contain color information, brain activity information, and radiation information. In a voxel taken out of COMANCHE, there is the density of the solid (water is less dense than rock), the color, the reflectivity, the angle towards the light source, and so on. In traditional flight simulators, the three dimensional world is modeled in polygons, with the world-data consisting of shape and position information. In a voxel world, the information stored is not all that different, but instead of discrete polygons, a voxel world is made up of thousands upon thousands of small voxel units. Freeman really didn't approach the COMANCHE project with the intention of redefining PC graphics. He simply tackled the task using the tools with which he was familiar. In his medical imaging work, all of the rotations and manipulation of voxel images were predetermined. Freeman wanted to break that barrier to display voxel graphics in real time. Basically, he began the project from the top and worked down. Using his 386 machine, he began working with true photorealistic images, and gradually manipulated and compromised the image quality until he had reached the real time mark he was shooting for. Listening to Freeman discuss the process, I couldn't help thinking that this was far too easy for him, like breathing, or perhaps the more complicated task of tying a shoe. As we talked further, I learned more about the nuts and bolts Freeman had to manipulate to make his vision become a reality. He programs exclusively in 32-bit native mode, meaning that he uses assembly lan140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! de SIR ACES LOVE EUROPE Crawl Inside the Mand of  l Klen A fun-filled adventure where men oyre DARYL E GATES OLICE QUEST OPEN SEASON SHADOWS OF DARKNESS GABRIEL KNIGHT SINS OF THE FATHERS S SIERRA LE SIERRA SIERRA 1-800-795-5979 Choose Any Two Sierra Games FREE When You Switch to Sprint!* directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.90** more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! After enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you may qualify for a second free Sierra game. *** Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber-optic\" clarity that makes both your long-distance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and virtually error free. Unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer. the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide an automatic 20 percent discount off all calls to Sprint's millions of dial 1 customers, anytime and anywhere. When the person you talk to the most in a given month is a Sprint Customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.**** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Sprint Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDS lets you continue to take advantage of long-distance calling and savings even when you're away from home. The FONCARD is free, with cards available for every member of your family. SIERRA The Most A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called The Most available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint Customers 20 percent off already low rates on calls each month to whomever you talk to The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers, Not valid for F ONCARD-only orders. One offer per household. Certain restrictions apply. Retail value of Sierra Games. Offer valid on any current Sierra product with a retail value of $79.95 or below To qualify for a second game, the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. THE MOST discounts apply to in-state/intraLATA calls only where authorized Circle Reader Service #164 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL crosion, a few seismic disasters, and the constant pummeling by the weather. Each voxel of terrain contains information about the density of each unit, for the rocks, the soil types, the water, etc. Directing his erosion algorithms to take into account the varying density of the material is one of the ways in which he was able to create such realistic landscapes. 0011 F12 programming 32-bit native mode hadn't yet been written. Writing in assembly language, Freeman was able to create graphic routines that operated from 100 to 1000 times faster than those 0241 created by the C proSPEED-24 gramming language. This low-level hacking gave Freeman the tools CHAFF: 23 he needed to create his FLARE:22 organic, voxel world. But how did he create the reHELLFIRE alistic rolling terrain and dramatic crevasses? He WINTER WONDERLAND Choppers in COMMANCHE operate in a variety of tried creating worlds in a conditions, just as their real-life counterparts. 3-D modeling package, but found that even with guage, even bypassing the computer's detail levels set at the 5-6 million polygon floating point unit («it just takes too long range, he still wasn't reaching the level of for the information to go to and return perfection he craved. So, using programs from a math coprocessor,\" he told me). of his own creation, Freeman sculpted the When he began the project, there was vir terrain, pushing the shapes around and tually nothing written for the 386 or 486 molding the landscape as if it were clay. that used the native mode. The standard After putting together a terrain map, he was 16-bit programming. Freeman had to still felt that it looked too sofi, too artificial. write his own DOS extender and his own The natural hacker then crafted a few prodevelopment environment, learning by trigram routines that would morph his voxel al and error since the documentation for worlds, simulating a few million years of VOXELS TAKE FLIGHT Oddly enough, it wasn't until the final weeks of the project that COMANCHE became a helicopter simulator. Before then, it was merely a real-time terrain modeling system. As Freeman worked to bring his terrain system together with the flightmodel of the RA-66 Comanche, he decided to make the program expandable. Partly because of time constraints, partly because of a desire to leave the game open-ended, he left hooks and ports of access into his tightly optimized code. With the release of the OVER THE EDGE expansion disk, Freeman has finally taken COMANCHE as far as he wanted it to go. Effects such as reflection and haze were not added to the earlier missions, because the information in the terrain voxels would have to be re-written. Freeman thinks that's just fine, though. He likes the SHAREWARE SPECTACULAR O The UNIVERSAL Game Cheater! TOP SHAREWARE GAMES ONLY $1.50 PER DISK Cheat death with.  Doom  Multi-Dimensional  Another Planet and  Tetris 3D  Duke Nukem 2 Theit Me with No Beer  Flight Simulators  Eternam  Gateworld  Roadwars 2000  Kiloblaster  Halloween Harry Simulations of Risk, Major Stryker Scrabble, Monopoly,  Executioners  Lemmings Uno  Mystery Monor  Stralsys  Kung Fu Louie  Spear of Destiny  Hockey  Hugo's Whodonit  Jill of the Jungle Megatron  Wofenstein 3D  Baseball  Redhook's Revenge  Blake Stone  Galactix PLUS Many,  3D Chess  Monster Bash  Bio Menace Many More FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES, EDUCATION, GRAPHICS infinity MACHINE The Infinity Machine works with virtually ANY game. Our easy to use interface allows you to edit or freeze almost any game feature such as lives, gold, or energy in real time. Our slow-motion mode lets you breeze through the tough spots like no tomorrow! What are you waiting for? Start living today! Now you Can Have Your Own GIRLFRIEND ... ... a sensuous woman living in your computer! GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to her, ask her questions and relate to her. Over 100 actual VGA pho tographs allow you to see your girlfriend as you ask her to wear different outfits, and guide her into different activities. As a true artificial intelligence program GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually grows the more you use it. She will remember your nome, your birthday, and your likes and dislikes. GIRLFRIEND requires 7-10 MB of free space. We offer the ADULT VERSION containing 2 different girls, LISA and SUZY at a special price of only $69. (reg. price $120.) Swimsuits and SOUNDS ... the swimsuit disk that TALKS! There are many disks full of swimsuit models. But none of them allow you to HEAR the models while you view the photographs. We have added the exciting dimension of TRUE SOUND technology to allow you to hear the models talk about themselves through your standard speaker or sound card. You will receive over 1.2 MB of sound and full screen, VGA graphics. You will also receive a FREE disks containing all the utilities you need to view, print, manipulate, catalog, edit and convert your pictures to Windows wallpaper. A great deal at only $19. Ako available: The Science Fiction Disk See incredible space shots and alien encounters while hearing other worldly descriptions and music, Only $19 or pair with Swimsuits and Sounds for $35. On CD-ROM: 3D DARLINGS... the first CD-ROM containing 3. Dimensional images. This revolutionary new Co. ROM offers hundreds of 3 Dimensional images of top glamour models of our time. Each model poses in bikini and lingerie atlire in various background settings. Induded is a user-friendly menu program that lets you choose a specific model, rood all about her statistics and alter nate between 2-D and 3D images. A special Zoom & Pan feature is included that lets you select any portion of the image for an extreme close-up. Includes models real names, statistics and contact information.Reg. price $79. Special intro price: $49. Our FREE CATALOG includes E ADULT games, movies and pictures on both DISKS and CD-ROM ADD 54 5/H.3.5\" Or FOREIGN ORDERS ADD $2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS, VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-243-1515 Ext. 600UB / 24 HRS / 7 DAYS FAX (215) 997-2571. Or CK/MO to:SeXXy Software, P.O. Box 220., Dept. 600UB, Hatfield, PA 19440 Circle Reader Service #160 FROM $34.95... VISA REM Mastercard U.S. 1359 FRANK DRIVE  MONROE, MICHIGAN 48161 TO ORDER, CALL 800-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #119 142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1994 Software "


"SOON TO COME JOYSTICKS FOR MACINTOSH & 3DO Fly higher. IRCH 2 100113 Higher. Faster. Farther. CH Products is defining new standards of design and performance for computer pilots. We'll empower you to effortlessly relay commands with a feel of absolute control... to swoop, loop and soar like never before. Get your hands on the top gun precision FLIGHTSTICK PRO\", the red-hot FLIGHTSTICK\", or the beginner's JETSTICK line of joysticks. Or our lightning-fast GAMECARD 3 AUTOMATIC\". And VIRTUAL PILOT, a yoke that will defy your Reach farther. concept of reality. And there's more on the horizon. From drawing board to your fingertips, ours is a relentless pursuit of new and better products. CH Products began with a dream 25 years ago, and we've never looked back. Today, we give you the wings to fly. Higher. Faster. Farther. Circle Reader Service #190 GAMECARD 3 = FLIGHTSTICK mm 3 FUGA STICK FLOW For all IBM and Compatible PC's 970 Park Center Drive Vista, CA 92083 Phone: 619.598.2518 Fax: 619.598.2524 PRODUCTS VIRTUAL PILU TM 1993 CH Products, a Joystick Technologies Inc. Co. MADE "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL ISTITI 0321  gle and relating that information to the angle the voxel has to the dominant light source, thereby arriving at the radiosity of a particular part of the image. When calculating reflections off the surface of lakes and rivers, the graphics engine takes into account the angle or strength of the light source, and how much of the surface image is projected over the water. Then through a creative use of colorizing algorithms, the program blends the color information of the rellected image with that of the water to achieve an appropriately muted mirror image. MEU FENE CHAFF000 FLARE:00 integrity of the early missions, and the fact that a pilot can land the chopper on the water doesn't phase him. Instead, he thinks of the water in the earlier missions as shallow, stagnant pools. Like any true programmer, he has turned a program limitation into a \"feature.\" As I was listening to Freeman discuss the sheer number of calculations involved in one frame of on-the-lly animation, calculating up to a million data points and displaying nearly 100,000 surface variations per screen, I wondered just how data-intensive the terrain information is in COMANCHE, but the exact voxel space scheme which makes this possible is part of the company's proprietary process which makes this voxel technology possible and, with a patent pending, the company is naturally reticent to release specific information. As each frame in COMANCHE is being rendered, the computer recreates the terrain from the building block voxels in the terrain database. In Voxel Space, the terrain is not merely surface data, but the voxels exist even below the surface, filling out the entire solid. As a frame is calculated, the opaque building blocks are assembled and basic calculations are performed, such as calculating the player's viewing an0042 ROCKETS ROCKETS TESTEESEEGI ET THERE VOXEL VISTAS Combining measurements of light sources with clever colorizing algorithims creates wisps of cloud cover and rippled reflections in the lake. BUY A VOXEL Freeman takes pride in his programming, paying careful, almost maniacal, attention to details. He is proud of his work on CoMANCHE, and he feels that it allows the players to explore truly realistic terrain. When asked why the graphics seem so different than the other simulators on the market, Freeman remarked, \"There's a lot more craft in it.\" So what future wizardry can we expect from Kyle Freeman? He sheepishly told me that that particular information was classified for the time being. He did give me a hint, though, saying that it would be completely photorealistic and in real time. \"On a PC?\", I asked. \"Sure, no problem,\" was the reply. Where Have You Seen This Before? SIDELINE SE ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Amazon Adventure Battle Isle 2 Floppy or CD ROM War Simulation Beneath a Steel Sky Adventure Canon Fodder Arcade Strategy Chaos Engine Action Arcade Diogers Floppy or CD ROM Arcade Strategy Genesia Strategy Game In Extremis Like \"Doom\" Maniac Sports Sports Simulator Micro Machines Racing Arcade Reunion Floppy or CD ROM Role Playing Game Rise of the Robots Fighting Game Star Lord (Microprose) Strategy UFO (Microprose) floppy or CD ROM Strategy Test Drive 3. Star Control, Hoverforce all THREE for only Corporation, F-14 Tomcat, Supremacy.all THREE for only PC MAGAZINES Get the best news on the best PG hitles from the US & Europe! These high ploss, full color magazines also feature demo.packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS OR CD ROMS with each issue! Titles include. PC Formal. PC Revlow, PC Zone, PC Plus, PC Power, and PC Gamer! Your choice! Only $10 each HP595 GZGOWCASE Hero Ouest 18.95 Hook 9.95 Ishar, Legend of the Fortress 18.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 9.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Niny 9.95 Killing Cloud 9.95 King of Chicago 9.95 King's Quest 6 21.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Links 386 (Access) 29.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 9.95 Mike Dirka Football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus (Psypnosis) 9.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Populous & Data Disk 24.95 Power Manger 19.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 9.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 RoboCop 3 9.95 Rocket Ranger 9.95 Sargon 5 9.95 Soal Team 24.95 Secret of Monkey Island 2 21.95 Seven Cities of Gold New Ed. 24.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim Life 18.95 Sleepwalker 18.95 Sleeping Gous Lie 9.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Spacewrecked 9.95 Spell Casting 1019.95 Spoils of War (RAW) 18.95 Star Legions 21.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Super Off Road Racing 9.95 Super Space Invaders 14.95 Super Tetris 14.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 14.95 TV Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 21.95 Trump Casino 2 14.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Ultima 6 21.95 Ultima Underworld 2 21.95 Utopia 18.95 V For Victory 21.95 WW.F 2 Wrestling 18.95 Warworks 14.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wing Commander Academy 24.95 Wizkod 18.95 Wolfpack 9.95 World Class Leaderboard 9.95 Wrath of the Demon 16.95 Zool 21.95 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment Mastercard & Visa $500.GOD. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges Oefective products exchanged with same item Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INOUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Circle Reader Service #166 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Civilization 21.95 4-0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Collossus Bridge 4 9.95 A-Train 26.95 Colorado 9.95 Action Stations 18.95 Command HO 18.95 Ancient Art of War in Skes 24.95 Conan the Cimarron 9.95 Artic Barons 21.95 Creepers (Psygnosis) 18.95 ATAC (Microprose) 24.95 Dave Ladbetter Goll (Greens) 26.95 B-17 Bomber Microprose) 24.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95  9.95 Dune 18.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 El-Fish 21.95 BAT 9.95 Elvira 2 14.95 BAT2 21.95 Epic 21.95 Bartlechess 18.95 F16 Falcon 9.95 Battle Isle 18.95 Fire Team 2200 9.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 First Samurai 9.95 Bloodwych 9.95 Floor 13 9.95 Carmen USA Deluxe 21.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Carrier Command 9.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 Carriers at War 21.95 Greg Norman Shark Attad Gol 9.95 Castles 16.95 Harpoon & Battle Set 2 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 Heart of Chiru 9.95 Circle Reader Service #107 Yes! On the flier that came with your Thrust Master controls Interface Dynamics now has an affordable system of brackets that provide a complete Cockpit Environment. Call, write, or fax for a free brochure. Interface Dynamics Corporation * 294 Forest Road Wolfeboro, NH 03894 Phone: 603-569-4638 Fax: 603-569-8038 "


"Give Your Joystick a Thrill. In the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You and your opponent wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money — action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned — with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold and Speed Master. This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. Fold free demo, call our 24hr. BBS af 310-539-7739. (8N1) NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13. All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. MEGA TECH Circle Reader Service #86 "


"UNDER THE HOOD Free Digital Lube & Tune At The Gigabyte Garage CGW's Technical Editor visits Chicago in Seattle and hangs out with several «scuzzy\" peripherals. HORNYAKIT by Mike Weksler Like Icarus, do you find your silicon wings melling as you fly too close to the multimedia sun? Here's the place for technically troubled heroes like yourself to find the aid you need. If there's an answer to your lechnical dilemma, you'll find it here. Can you have two SCSI chains running in the same computer? Jerry Lambright, West Covina, CA THE WILD WILD WORLD OF WINDOWS I just read about Windows 4.0 (Chicago) in PC Computing magazine. To be honest, I'm a little panicked! Running games in Windows? Am I wrong, or does Windows throw off timing in most games? And since 4.0 will be an operating system, we won't be able to exit to DOS to run our games, will we? Basically, what does Windows 4.0 hold for us game junkies? Mark Fossen, CompuServe user The full potential of Chicago won't be realized until there are 32-bit games that have been written to run under Chicago in native mode. To this end, WinG is the key. This 32-bit DLL will allow game developers to write graphics routines for Chicago and 3.1 (in 16-bit) that are comparable to DOS graphic performance. I was quite skeptical until I saw and played Doom in Windows on a 486DX2/66 at the Computer Game Developers Conference. The screen was even scalable: I could stretch the window to 640x480 and then render the game to fit the screen. The result is high res Doom. Too cool. (For more news about Chicago, see READ.ME next month). TWO WILD AND CRAZY SPACE MARINES Is there some bug in Doom version 1.2 that makes your character wildly run around and shoot? This annoying \"problem\" has no pattern. Is this a bug and, if it is, is there a fix to this? Dale Ghent, Middletown, MD OK. First, Windows 3.1 is run as an add-on for DOS. It's 16-bit, kludgy and slow. Chicago will be a complete operating system and will use Wing, a 32-bit graphics Dynamic Link Library (DLL) which approaches DOS speed in terms of game performance. Additionally, the operating system will have support for joysticks, networks and modems. You will not have DOS on your system (no more CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT), but you will be able to run DOS in a \"box\" within Chicago. Games can run right from the command line with 600K+ available. How will this affect next generation games? First, game developers can spend more time writing games and not drivers (hardware vendors will do the driver part), and conform to some kind of standard for installation. This is all very welcome in an industry that can't standardize a box label let alone software drivers. Developers at Microsoft have told me that you won't be able to \"dual boot\" between DOS and Chicago in the manner that you can with Windows NT. At first glance, I would recommend disabling the SCSI host on the sound card and slinging your new CD-ROM drive onto the Adaptec. You will most likely need a new ribbon cable designed for two peripherals to accomplish this. The disadvantage of doing this is that with your Adaptec SCSI host, you need two drivers in your CONFIG.SYS fileASPI2DOS.SYS and ASPICD.SYS. These are in addition to the MSCDEX.EXE file loaded into the AUTOEXEC.BAT. One nice thing about this setup, despite the added driver overhead, is the ability to have your sound card free to swap in and out with others without worrying about the CD-ROM drive. If you're not willing to do some major memory mambo to get a game running, I would run the SCSI hard drive off of the Adaptec (you can run up to two hard drives without any CONFIG.SYS drivers), and run the CDROM off of the Media Vision card which will only use one SYS driver for the CDROM. OK, so if you're still with me, you're probably asking \"why can't I just hook up my SCSI hard drive and my CDROM to my Media Vision SCSI sound card?\" Well, the answer is that you can, but since your SCSI sound cards don't have this thing called a \"boot ROM,\" your hard drive will run, but you won't be able to boot your system without a boot disk. The way I play Doom, I wouldn't really notice<g>. Seriously, the \"feature\" you mention is a bug identified by id Sollware and should be fixed in version 1.4. The patch will also include fixes for Gravis UltraSound problems. Look for it on a BBS in June. A TALE OF TWO SCSIS I recently purchased a Media Vision multimedia upgrade kit that came with a SCSI CD-ROM drive and a SCSI CD host on the sound card. I already have an Adaptec SCSI host running my Maxtor SCSI hard drive. Should I 1) disable the SCSI adapter on the sound card and run everything on my Adaptec SCSI host, 2) hook up my CD-ROM to my sound card and leave my hard drive on the other Adaptec SCSI host, or 3) should I run everything from my sound card and remove my Adaptec SCSI host from my machine? Why don't you share your technical adventures with your fellow CGW readers who may have the same problems? Send your questions to Under The Hood, clo Computer Gaming World, 130 Chaparral Cl. Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808, or Internet email at 76703.622@compuserve.com. 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"THE MARKETPLACE Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (714) 283-3000 x37 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. Games Too Expensive? Consider Pre-owned Software CARMACON  Save big $$$ over new Original disks and manuals IBM AMIGA-C64  Hard-to-find classics plus all the latest releases Call or write for free catalog (specify computer) Bare Bones Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 Reader Service #45 450 Oak Street, Palmerton, PA 18071 Presents: Herman's Second Adventure, a powerful and challenging logic-maze game, offering: . Colorful Screen Designs  24 Playing Levels  Sound Board Support  Records Best Times  Saves High Scores Uses 1 WindowsTM Windows is a rogistered trademark of Microsoft Corp Reader Service #189 PAPER MAYHEM Introducing the Cybership FREE Software! FREE Hardware! \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies, PBM game & company ratings and more fill each issue. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the Intest on PBM news So why delay and miss out on all the fun? PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG, 1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: Please inquire for rates. Encapsulated Computing Enviroment. An affordable virtual reality system for your home computer. Enhances the realism of games & simulators. Why do your computing at a desk when you can relax inside the comfortable cockpit of your own Cybership? Inexpensive. Easy to build. Fun to use. For detailed plans & instructions that include provisions for a built-in stereo system, and controllers send $26.95 to: Become a Beta Tester! It's easy! Companies can't afford to pay employees to play games all day in search of programming errors. They need you to test their newest games and hardware. You can keep what you test Free! For a complete information package on becoming a Beta Tester send $9.95 + $3.95 S/H to: CCB Enterprises PO Box 336 Saint Marys, GA 31558 Cybership Systems P.O. Box 166 Cottage Grove, MN 55016 (612) 768-0326 Reader Service #59 Reader Service #101 Reader Service #52 SWITTER The NEW CAPE COD CONNECTION ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Shopping is available. . Download our complete new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used software listing available today. Have us sell your used software on consignment. Robert Berry, Proprietor 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Reader Service #50 KKLW \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD.. Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind, $39.95. THREE GATES ... skryeing, awareness shifting, I Ching and runes, $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship, $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. MAGIC MOUNTAIN... weird adventure, male and female versions, not for children, $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 MWAKIKE MasterCard/Visa 1.800.545.6172 (after 5 p.m.) SUMUWILIAMUMULEN Reader Service #48 JULY 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 147 "


"AVCDTICCDGame and ADVERTISER Product Index INFO # 69 PRODUCT Mail Order Products COMPANY PAGE Gosselin Computer 104 Consultants Multimedia Specialists 139 Sideline Software 144 Gamer's Gold 155 S Software Megatech Psygnosis 50, 51 Microforum 90, 91 94 Mail Order Products 107 Mail Order Products 68 Mail Order Software 160 Mail Order Software 86 Metal & Lace 155 Microcosm 126 Microforum Family of Products 188 Multimedia Upgrade Kit 95 NVN 142 145 65 44 Operation Crusader 111 Outpost 63 Oxyd Magnum 101 PBM Magazine 168 PC Pedals 173 45 89 43 128 186 Pirates Gold MAC Pre-owned Software Pro League Baseball Raptor Reel Magic Lite Return to Ringworld 11 RFIL 37 29 INFO # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE 150 Across the Rhine MicroProse 109 183 Bill Cosby's Picture Pages Take 2 Interactive 81 115 Computer and Video Spectrum Electronics 138 Products 179 Contest Quantum Quality 126 Products 51 Corridor 7 Capstone Software 71 167 Cyber Mall InfoNow 67 Cyberstrike G.E. Information Systems 76 D-Day Impressions 27 Software, Inc. 47 DeltaV Bethesda Softworks 4,5 65 Disciples of Steel FormGen Corporation 127 Doom ID Software Cover 3 90 Dragonsphere MicroProse 2, 3 Electronic Shopping Cape Cod Connection 147 Mall BBS 152 Empire Deluxe Master New World Computing 106 137 Empire Soccer Empire Software 157 Epic Pinball Epic Mega Games 13 80 Falcon & MIG Commander Keyboard Commander 94 Corp. 141 Falcon MACH V Falcon Northwest Flight Simulator Microsoft 48, 49 190 Flight Stick Pro, Virtual CH Products Pilot, Flightstick, Jetstick 182 Flightmax Suncom Technologies 105 181 Front Page Sports: Sierra Dynamix 97-100 Baseball 39 Game Zapper Advanced Digital 137 Systems 131 Gameblaster Creative Labs 123 169 Games Master Keyboard & Terminal 86 Technology 81 Genghis Khan 11 Koei 131 42 Girlfriend Aidea Labs 48 Growth and Adventure Sw. Blue Valley 147 88 Harvester Merit Software 165 189 Herman's Second Carmacon 147 Adventure 177 Hex: Heresy of the Wizard Psygnosis 125 60 Hollywood Mogul DeVuono DeVuono Games 153 Indy Car Racing and Papyrus Expansion Packs 102 Jump Raven Paramount Interactive 47 192 Lord of Realm Impressions Software, Inc. 77 Lord of Realm Impressions 25 Software, Inc. 132 Lords of Midnight Domark Software 15 93 Mail Order Mission Control 152, 153 Mail Order Peripherals Direct Wave 104 52 Mail Order Products CCB Enterprise 147 54 Mail Order Products Chips & Bits 54 63 56 Mail Order Products Computer Express 72 77 59 Mail Order Products Cybership 147 Aztech Labs, Inc 43 National Videotex 135 Network Avalon Hill 129 Sierra On-Line 32, 33 Dongleware 121 Paper Mayhem 147 Interactive Digital 69 Devices MicroProse 45 Bare Bones Software 147 Micro Sports, Inc. 119 Apogee Software Sigma Designs, Inc. Time Warner Interactive Chips & Bits Strategic Simulations, 34 Inc. Ensonig Microsoft 30, 31 FormGen Cover 2 Corporation Sierra Direct 141 Take 2 Interactive 82, 83 LucasArts Entertainment Quantum Quality 116 Products Origin Systems Cover 4 Oceans of America 78 REM Software 142 Interface Dynamics 144 55 Robinson's Requiem Skyrealms of Jorune: Alien L 191 Soundscape Space Simulator 143 Spear of Destiny Mission Disks 164 Sprint 184 Star Crusader Star Wars Screen Entertainment 180 Strategy 67 70 138 99 97 119 166 System Shock TFX The Infinity Machine Thrustmaster Support Brackets ThunderSeat 185 103 132 23 Thunder Seat Technologies HPS Simulations Abracadata, Ltd. Titan Games SIIG Simulation Systems Tigers on the Prowl 159 Train Engineer 117 Try A Titan 112 TV Gamer Plus 113 Universal Cockpit & Joystick 187 Utah Beach Battlebook 172 World Circuit CD Rom 171 X-Com 151 Zephyr 44 117 159 96 61 Arsenal 108 MicroProse 95 MicroProse 115 New World Computing 93 Please see advertisement for contact information. 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 47% SAVINGS & FREE SOFTWARE! Top 10 Reasons To Subscribe To CGW O 1 year (12 issues) $27.94 SAVE 41%. 2 years (24 issues) $49.97 SAVE 47% Payment enclosed. Bill me later. 10 You won't miss an issue. Name 4SALS Subscribe now and save 47% off newsstands! Plus, get your FREE Pro Tips Gaming Secrets disk an unbeatable collection of hints and clues for winning your favorite and most challenging games, including X-WING and Return to Zork. Mail this card today! Company 9 Save almost $20 a year off the newsstand price. Address City State 8 Stay on top of the latest game releases. Basic one-yoar subscription price $28.00; on newsstands $47.40. Canada and foreign add $11.00 per year. U.S. funds only. Canadian GST included Please allow 30 days for shipment of first issue FREE software will be sent upon payment. 7 Receive something in the mail you actually want. 6 Get your copy up to two weeks before newsstand readers. Free Product Information 5 Save money by not buying any more lame games! NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 768 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY THE ADDRESSEE 4 Destroy and humiliate your opponents with stunning regularity with our strategy tips. 3 Be the games guru on your block. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD PO BOX 1851 RIVERTON NJ 08077-9451 2 Doing wrist curls with back issues will build your arms. III... ............... .... 1 A person of your stature should have things handdelivered. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FREE READER INQUIRY SERVICE Let us forward your request for futher information you'd like to receive on products or services mentioned in CGW. Name Address City, State, Zip Information must be furnished completely to be processed. Free Gaming Information I own...(please circle all that apply) ...... an IBM (or compatible) ...... an Amiga ...... a Macintosh ......another home computer ...... a dedicated game machine I have one or more children of the ages... ...... 3-5 years ...... 6-10 years ...... 11-16 years <MOW 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 Circle #203 for renewal (bill me $27.94) IOTI July 1994 Issue Do not mail after September 30. 1994 "


"NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 66 BOULDER, CO POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE Subscribe to Computer Gaming World =  EM GAMING WORLD P.O. Box 57166 Boulder, CO 80321-7166 lll.llllllullluuuuulllil COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FREE READER INQUIRY SERVICE Let us forward your request for further information you'd like to receive on products or services mentioned in CGW. Name Address City, State, Zip Information must be furnished completely to be processed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 I own...(please circle all that apply) 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 ...... an IBM (or compatible) 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 ...... an Amiga 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 ...... a Macintosh 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 .....another home computer 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 ...... a dedicated game machine 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 I have one or more children of the ages... 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 ...... 3-5 years 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 ...... 6-10 years 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 ..... 11-16 years 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 July 1994 Issue Do not mail after September 30, 1994 Circle #203 for renewal (bill me $27.94) Circle #204 for new subscription (bill me $27.94) IOT MOOD Free Gaming Information Free Product Information NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 768 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY THE ADDRESSEE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD PO BOX 1851 RIVERTON NJ 08077-9451 "


"MLDTICID Company and hone Index ADVERTISER Phone index 11 108 95 4,5 71 147 INFO. # COMPANY PHONE NUMBER PAGE 159 Abracadata, Ltd. (800) 451-4871 44 39 Advanced Digital (800) 888 5244 137 Systems 42 Aidea Labs (214) 235-4999 138 43 Apogee Software (800) gam-e123 187 Arsenal (800) 247-1877 44 Avalon Hill (800) 999-3222 129 188 Aztech Labs, Inc (800) 781-1188 43 45 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 147 47 Bethesda Softworks (800) 677-0700 48 Blue Valley (800) 545-6172 147 50 Cape Cod Connection (508) 548-2908 147 51 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 189 Carmacon 147 52 CCB Enterprise (508) 548-2908 147 190 CH Products (619) 598-2518 29 54 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 54-63 54 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 39 56 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 72-77 131 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 123 59 Cybership (612) 768-0326 60 DeVuono DeVuono Games (800) 350-5550 61 DirectWave (800) 882-8108 104 132 Domark Software (800) 695-play 15 63 Dongleware (617) 497-1130 121 137 Empire Software (800) 216-9706 157 191 Ensonia (800) 942-0096 67 Epic Mega Games (800) 972-7434 13 141 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 9 143 FormGen Corporation (800) 263-2390 Cover 2 65 FormGen Corporation (800) 263-2390 127 67 G.E. Information Systems (800) 638-8369 6 5 68 Gamer's Gold (800) 337-8578 155 Gosselin Computer (313) 229-2453 104 Consultants * HPS Simulations (408) 554-8381 132 71 ID Software (800) 661-7383 Cover 3 192 Impressions Software Inc (617) 225-0848 77 Impressions Software Inc. (617) 225-0848 76 Impressions Software Inc. (617) 225-0848 167 InfoNow (800) 914-GAME (4263) 168 Interactive Digital Devices (602) 940-0340 166 Interface Dynamics (603) 569-4638 144 169 Keyboard & Terminal (908) 297-5399 Technology 80 Keyboard Commander Corp. (800) 228-7449 9 4 81 Koei (415) 348-0500 131 INFO. # COMPANY PHONE NUMBER PAGE * LucasArts Entertainment (800)STA-RWARS 70 86 Megatech (310) 539-7739 145 88 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 165 89 Micro Sports, Inc. (800) 937-7737 119 126 Microforum (800) 465-2323 90,91 150 MicroProse (800) 879-play 109 171 MicroProse (800) 879-play 115 172 MicroProse (800) 879-play 90 MicroProse (800) 879-play 10) 879-play 2,3 2.3 173 MicroProse (800) 879-play 45 Microsoft (800) 426-9400 30,31 Microsoft (800) 426-9400 48,49 93 Mission Control (800) 999-7995 152,153 94 Multimedia Specialists (800) 233-0010 139 95 National Videotex Network (800) 336-9096 135 151 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 93 152 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 106 176 Oceans of America (408) 954-0201 78 99 Origin Systems (800) 756-8766 Cover 4 101 Paper Mayhem (815) 433-2047 147 153 Papyrus (617) 868-3103 87 102 Paramount Interactive (415) 813-8040 47 177 Psygnosis (617) 497-7794 125 155 Psygnosis (617)497-7794 50,51 179 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 126 180 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 116 119 REM Software (313) 457-1161 142 160 S Software (800) 243-1515 142 107 Sideline Software (800) 888-9273 144 164 Sierra Direct (800) 795-5979 141 181 Sierra Dynamix (800) 757-7707 97-100 111 Sierra On-Line (800) 757-7707 32,33 128 Sigma Designs, Inc. (800) 845-8086 41 112 SIIG (510) 657-8688 159 113 Simulation Systems (800) 647-7623 96 115 Spectrum Electronics (800) 983-4321 138 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 182 Suncom Technologies (708) 647-4040 105 183 Take 2 Interactive 81 184 Take 2 Interactive 82,83 185 ThunderSeat Technologies (800) 8-THUNDER 103 186 Time Warner Interactive (800) 482-3766 37 117 Titan Games (800) 249-5447 117 69 Gossem 34 Please see advertisement for contact information JULY 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 151 "


"FREE SHIPPING! ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. CONTROL (800) 999-7995 L The First Wonderof the CyberWorld. VIRTUAL VEGAS — AMERICAN DATA BANKERS PRESENTS: SOFTWARE VAULT PLATINUM Software *PLATINUM Platinum Collection is the sixth and latest CD ROM treasure. Includes: Games Windows Based Apps, Windows NT The Instant Based Apps, Multimedia, Graphics, Sounds, Desktop Publish-ing, Word Libran Processing, Pictures and GIF's, Fonts and Clip Art, Virus Protection, Educational, Business, . . and much more. $ 34 Also Available: Windows Collection, Games Collection Gold Collection $34. each or 3 for $89. on CD-ROM EEE COMING SOON ON CD-ROM PIXIS INTERACTIVE FEATURING THE \"TFUI\" INTERFACE NEURODANCER Roam the NeuroNET by hacking into NEURODANCER the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries. danger. Use your computer and VidFone to obtain enough credits to view the exotic Neurodancers who roam the computer networks in search of willing viewers. Featuring 3D animation, interactive game-play, and live motion video. Requires: 486, SVGA, 4 MB of Hard Disk, 8 MB RAM CD ROM $69. ride wbarea O ABOF NEW MACHINE PRESENTSI DREAM MACHINE The most innovative CD ever! Navigate through a 3D world where your ultimate fantasies come alive. The Dream Machine's beautiful hostess will lead you on an interactive journey through your imagination. The only CD that adapts to your choices. As seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and CNN. CD ROM $69. ORUTSUKIDOJI Is there any hope for humanity? Will the Legend of the Overfiend become reality? From the animation geniuses who created Space Cruiser Yamato, this is the astounding and controversial theatrical masterpiece which singlehandedly launched a whole new genre of Japanese animation. Definetely not for children. CD ROM $49. GIANT PYRAMIOSY MEDIAC CASTLE6? ROMAN COLISEUMS? HO HUM. WAIT UNTIL YOU SEE A PLAYGROUND FOR GROWNUPS THAT'S FREE FROM THE LAWS OF TIME, PHYSICS, OR THE MOB. VIRTUAL VEGAS\" IS THE PLACE. YOU'RE THE V.I.P. HERE'S YOUR TICKET UROISUKIDOJNI The OF THE OVERED CD ROM $49. S AMOLY MOTOR OLDER CATIUS AND USE YOUR MC VISAR DISCOVER_2:0099971995 "


"D O C A L GAMES 45 2888AS 44 69 79 B3 Dirty Debutantes Doors of Passion Dream GINI Dream Machine Hot Wire: High Society Mag Maddam's Family Massive Melons NeuroDancer Night Watch Nightwatch 2 Plxls Adult Sampler Scissors N Stones Virgins Virtual Vixens Winner Take All MOVIES 62 59 80 14 44 43 43 Sim City 50 Small Blue Planet Space Hulk Star Trek 25th 80 Street Atlas USA Strike Commander Syndicate TEX The Complete Ultima VII Bundle The Horde The Journeyman Project The Tortolse & The Hare Theme Park 52 Tony LaRussa 2 Ultima Underworld 1&2 Ultima Vill Pagan Under a Killing Moon Who Shot Johnny Rock? 42 Wing Command & Ultima 6 39 Wing Commander 2 Dix 34 Wing Commander Dlx WolfPack World Circult Grand Prix 45 World of Xeen Wrath of the Gods ADULT PHOTO CD To me pare & The Woor 50 39 29 Gabriel Knight Global Explorer Great Naval Battles 2 Great Naval Battles Grollers Encyclopedla 6 Hell Cab Inca 2 Inca Interplay's Collection Iron Helix Just Grandma and Me King's Quest 6 Labyrinth of Time Lands of Lore Lawnmower Man Learn Fly Fishing Lord of the Rings Lost In Time Man Enough Mayo Clinic Rom Mayo Clinic Total Heart Mechamander MM2 Day of Tentacle Myst Pacific Strike Privateer Putt Putt Goes to Moon Putt Putt Jolns Parade Putt Putt's Fun Pack Rebel Assault Return to Zork Sam & Max Scooter's Magic Castle Scrabble Deluxe Shadowcaster 7th Guest 2 The 11th Hour 89 7th Guest 45 Al Qadlm Genle's Curse 45 AD&D Dungeon Hack AD&D Fantasy Empires AD&D Ravenloft Aegls Guardian of the Fleet 53 Alr Warrior Alone In the Dark Armored Fist Arthur's Teacher Trouble Astrology Source Backroad Racer Battlechess Enhanced Betrayal at Krondor 29 Bible Ubrary 39 Blood Net Comanche Critical Path Daemonsgate Dark Legions Dark Sun Shattered Lands 54 Darkseed Dracula Unleashed Dragonsphere 54 Eye of Beholder 123 Fis Strike Eagle 3 Fatty Bear Birthd Surprisa 45 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack Angers for Windows 30 Alght Light Plus Flight Sim Toolkit 47 &&&&&888888888888888888888 58 Aslan Ladies Aslan Palate 29 Bodaclous Beauties Busty Babes 2 Double Play 1 Glris In Vivid Girls of J. Stephen Hicks Girls of Risque High Volume Nudes Hot Bodlos 39 Hot Hunks Hot Peppers Local Girls 3 in 1 Northern Delights Sizzle Southern Boautlos Super Smutware Vol. II Sweet Dreams Stills Taste of Erotica Sampler 2 14 Tropical Girls 3 In 1 Venus Model Search 93/94 44 Women on Wheels INTERACTIVE Adult Movie Almanac 101 Sexual Positions 101 Sexual Postions 2 Adult Movie Almanac Adult Sampler Adventures Seymore Butts 89 Adventures Seymore Butts 2 89 Buttman's Euro Vacation Condo Cutlas Digtal Dancing Insatiable Kama Sutra Legends of Porn 11 Mask Mystique of Orlant New Wave Hookers II Pinch of Pepper Princess of Persla Racquel Released RalnWomen Steamy Windows Super Models Go Wild The Barlow Affair Track I Love You Wicked Wicked Whispers Mystique of Orient New Wave Hookers 1 or II Night Trips Pinch of Pepper Princess of Porsla Racquel Released RalnWomen Secrets Super Models Go Wild The Barlow Affair Track I Love You Wicked Wicked Whispers New Machine Adult Sampler $14. 82 40 &&8 62 Amorous Aslan Girls Art Of Ploking Up Girls Baby's Got Butt Best of Inferno Best of Vivid Betrayal Bikini Beach Blonde Justice Busting Out Cafe Flesh College Girls Coven Erotica Gleis of Mardi Gras Hidden Obsessions House of Dreams House of Sleeping Beauties 29 5t 8888888888 30 3D Darings 3D DreamGirls Adult Palate Vol 1 Adult Reference Ubrary Amateur Models 2 American Girls 30 43 Spring Sale! JA.T.A.C. 24 Lemmings 2 AutoMap Windows 29 Rex Nebular BattleChess 1000) 24 CD ROM Buzz Allrin Race 29 Bible Library 39 Dragon's Lair 3 Mystique of Orient 29 F-15 Strike Eagle3 34 Wing Commander & Leather Goddess Ultima 6 Bundle 29 40 Timeoul Sports Baseball 27 Tower Ultima VIII Pagan Ultima VIII Speech Pack 22 Unlimited Adventures Unnecessary Roughness 37 V Victory 4: Gold Juno Victory at Sea Warlords 2 Washington Scenery WC 2 & Speech Pak Wing Commander Armada40 Wings of Glory WW II Battles Pacific X-Wing X-Wing 1 Imperial Pursuit 22 X-Wing MD 2 B Wing 19 34 BAS RenegaSNS 52 43 22 34 re Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 IBM DISK GAMES Fatty Bear B'Day Surp. Aces of the Deep Fields of Glory Aces Over Europe 43 Flashback 35 Across the Rhine Fleet Defender F-14 50 Al Qadim Genie's Curse Flight Light ! AD&D Fantasy Empire Flight Light Plus AD&D Ravenloft Flight Sim Toolkit Win ! Air Warrior Formula One Alone in the Dark 2 Frontier Elite 2 40 Arborea II Gabriel Knight Armored Fist Goblins 3 Beneath A Steel Sky Great Naval Battles 2 Betrayal at Krondor Hannibal BioForge 52 Harpoon 2 Buzz Aldrin's In Space Harpoon 2 #2 WESTPAC 30 Carriers at War 2 Harpoon 2 Editor Champions High Command 47 Cobra Mission Inca 2 22 Comanche Bundle 45 Incredible Toons Comanche Mission 2 35 IndyCar Racing Corridor 7 Isle of the Dead Cyber GO Kasparov's Gambit Daemonsgate King Maker Dark Legions King's Ransom I Dark Sun Kingdoms of Germany Delta V 43 Lands of Lore Detroit 42 Links 385 CD Castle Pines 22 Disciples of Steel Links 386 Pro Dragon Knight 3 Links Course Belfry 22 Dragon Knight 3 Upgrade 5 Links Course Innisbrook 22 Dragon's Lair 35.25 29 Links Pebble Beach 29 Elder Scrolls The Arena 43 Master of Orion Empire Deluxe Windows 37 Meadowlark Bridge Eye Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle52 Mech Warrior 2 Disk 1 F-18 Hornet MechWarrior 2 47 Falcon 3.0 50 Metal and Lace Get the facts via FaxBack... Call 201.783.3374 from your fax machine. Receive information on new releases, Adult CD rom, specials, and more. 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK 43 40 25 27 Metal and Lace Upgrade 6 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 49 MM 2 Day of Tentacle 40 New York Scenery Disk 34 NHL Hockey '94 43 Operation Crusader Pacific Strike 50 Pacific Strike Speech 22 Pacific Theatre Oper. Paris Scenery Disk PowerPoker Windows 40 Privateer Privateer Righteous Fire 25 Privateer Speech Pack Pult Putt Goes to Moon 35 Quarterpole 35 Rally 40 Return to Zork Romance 3 Kingdoms III 42 Sailing Simulator III VGA 49 San Francisco Scenery 32 Scenery Editor 27 Scrabble Dix. Windows 29 Serf City Life is Feudal Shadowcaster Siege Walls of Rome Sim City 2000 SimCity 2000 MD1 Simon the Sorcerer SSN-21 Seawolf Star Reach Star Trek Judgement Star Trek Next Gen. Stonekeep Strip Poker Professional 34 Stronghold Sub Wars 2050 Syndicate Syndicate Amer. Revolt System Shock T2 Arcade Game Terminator Rampage 43 TFX The Dig 43 The Merchant Prince Theme Park Third Reich Tie Fighter 37 H JOYSTICKS ACM Game Card Flight Control Pro Flight Control System Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro Formula T1 G Force Yoke Gamecard III Automatic 34 Parallel Game Port PC Gamepad Rudder Pedals Virtual Pilot Weapons Control Mark 2 95 40 42 CODEUNIQUE 52 Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our color catalogue filled with New items, CD Rom, Adult CD Rom, Discount Coupons, Complete Listings and more! FREE with your order, otherwise send $2.00. (Outside of US and Canada send $5.00) 35 SOUNDCARDS FX 16 Pro Audlo Spectrum 18 Real Maglc Board Sound Blaster 16 ASP Sound Blaster 16 SCSI Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 Sound Machine Sound Kit Ultrasound Volce Blaster Wave Blaster 40 Basdag: 54 Methods of Payment We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7 minimum); APO & FPO ( $7 minimum); Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL 7 Oak Place Dept. CGW0794 Montclair, NJ 07042 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! FREE SHIPPING On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground Simply send in coupon with your order! Offer expires 07/31/94 CONTROL Circle Reader Service #93 INTERNATIONAL 201-783-3600 FAY 20-783-3686 "


"NOW PLAYING These Just In \"Now Playing» features screenshots and brief descriptions of new products we received just before press time. We offer these descriptions to inform you that these games are on the shelves and to give you our first impressions of them. DESIGN MENU 1 KAKE PAGELOAD NEW JEREV NEXT DONE 14 CYL IN-LINE PERICHTE HAND BRAKE LEAF SPRING AIR COOLED BODY 18 1888 BRIDGE BARON FOR WINDOWS The most competitive computer bridge program just became Windows-compatible. Tom Throop's bridge programs have historically been among the most challenging, but the Alfred Sheinwold commentary and 24 separate bridge problems make this version particularly strong. Most popular bidding conventions are included, along with cumulative match statistics and a host of different match styles to play. As a special plus, OC RE air. Terrain does fly by rapidly in the game, billed as «The fastest racing game ever.\" Twelve tracks, ranging from Adelaide to the inevitable Monte Carlo are included, perhaps the most challenging being the woods-surrounded turns of Hockenheim, Germany. Four levels of play build in realism and difficulty, but this game has long been left behind by WORLD CIRCUIT and INDYCAR RACING, SO take a long pit stop before deciding on a spin. IBM, $49.95. Circle Reader Service #16. SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE, 2490 MARINER SQUARE LOOP, ALAMEDA, CA, (510) 522-1164 IMPRESSION CARS T500.000 1925 SHAKE FROTOTYPE CAR Bride Daran Single Han Dest1279526716 Dealer West Vet G ME 2NT by North Tricks Taken NECO WO Dale Dast spread their production tentacles across the globe, cut wages and benefits in the midst of prosperity, or sack striking workers \"just to show them,\" your managerial tendencies (be they maniacal or benevolent) will certainly emerge as you put the world on wheels. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #7. IMPRESSIONS SOFTWARE, INC., 222 THIRD STREET, SUITE 0234, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02142 (203) 676-9002 GUESSWORDS As multimedia inexorably reaches out, however haltingly, to the masses, parlor games from the collective unconscious emerge on the computer landscape. Billed as \"an age-friendly game,\" GUESSWORDS is COUNTRIES North Head Narth's Fay DATOS DESDE there is a Double Dummy defense for those bridge fanatics who feel that bidding flow charts simply aren't enough. IBM, $49.95. Circle Reader Service #5. GREAT GAME PRODUCTS, 8804 CHALON DRIVE BETHESDA, MD 20817, (800) 426-3748 FORMULA ONE Spectrum HoloByte and Domark are both known for innovations, but this isn't exactly FALCON TOOLKIT meets FORMULA ONE RACING. The 16-page manual gives an idea of the relative depth of the product, as does the box, which is 95% filled with WESS Cerarti . 14 HPH FORESTER BELLE Tu Es DETROIT Economic empire builders who play computer games to become a RAILROAD TYCOON or make Air Bucks, it's time to consider a drive-by looting and make your pile building cars in DETROIT. Spreadsheet warriors will not be phased by the minimal game animations-designing, marketing, building and researching new automotive technologies will be more than enough for them. Anyone who has ever wanted to another of those noble attempts to make the computer a family institution. The premise is sound-most people do like trivia games to a degree, and the categories are generic enough, that most everyone will be able to find questions within their ability to answer. The topic/subject screen is reminiscent of a daily planner, and the specific game screens 154 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"AV E 25 UVLIV ta!! HOT more! OVÉ 2,000 USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX. DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HALLS OF MONTEZUMA HAND OF FATE HARD NOVA HAADBALL 3  HARPOON DESIGNER SER HARPOON EDITOR HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINAVGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEAVY METAL HEIMDALL HEROES OF THE 357TH HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND HASA. HOOK HOVERFORCE HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 1 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 2 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 3 HUMANS HUNT RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA INCREDIBLE MACHINE VGA INDIANAPOLIS 500 INDY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES: LAST CAUS ISHIDO DOUBLE DRAGON 2 DRAGON FORCE ORAGON LORD DRAGON WARS DRAGONS OF FLAME DRAKOHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUSK OF THE GODS EARTHRISE EL FISH ELVIRA 1 ELVIRA 2 EPIC ERIC THE UNREADY ESCAPE FROM HELL ETERNAM EYE OF BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CD doo MAGIC JOHNSON MVP MANHOLE MANHUNTER SF MANTIS EXP FIGHTER-VGA MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISS MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEDIEVAL LORDS MEGAFORTRESS MEGAFORTRESS MISS DK MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOO MEGATRAVELLER 2 MERCHANT COLONY METAL & LACE MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM MIDWINTER MIG 29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 MIGHT & MAGIC 5 MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MINES OF TITAN MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE ML BASEBALL 4 USAT PSYCHIC WAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1-EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1-VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2-EGA QUEST FOR GLORY3-VGA RAILROAD TYCOON RAMPART REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED CRYSTAL RED LIGHTNING RED STORM RISING RETURN OF PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REVOLUTION 76 REX NEBULAR COS GEN RIDERS OF ROHAN RISE OF DRAGON-VGA ROAD & TRACK GRAN PR ROAD TO FINAL FOUR ROBOSPORTWIN ROCKFIEEE ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS 2 ROME: PATHWAY TO POW RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGMNT 2 SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECOND FRONT 24 16 STAR FLEET 2 STAA LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT STAR WARS CHESS STARFLIGHT 1 STARFLIGHT 2 STELLAR 7 STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STREET ROO2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COMMANDER SP STRONGHOLD STUNT DRIVER STUNT ISLAND STUNTS SUMMONING SWORD OF ARAGON SYNDICATE TANGLED TALES TANK TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEENAGE MNT ARCADE TEENAGE MNT MANH MIS TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2029 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEST DRIVE 3. ROAD&CAR THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEXDER 1 THUNDER HAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIMES OF LORE TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA BB TONY LARUSSAULT 88 TOP GUN DANGER ZONE TORNADO TRACON TRACON 2 TREASURES SAVAGE FR TRILOGY TRISTAN PINBALL TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 VGA TYPHOON OF STEEL ULTIMA 4 QUEST AVAT ULTIMA S WARRIORS DE ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRT ULTIMA 75 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7.S SILVER SE ULTIMA TRILOGY 1 ULTIMA TRILOGY 2 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTION E WE'RE BUYING! GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES IBM GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes 10 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the gamos you are selling. Coll, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S OOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an outhorization number for your shipment. Gomes will not be accepted without on authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S COLD. Save your authorization no. Wo can't answer questions about your shipment without your number! WE SELL USED GAMES 4D BOXING 683 ATTACK SUB 7TH GUEST.CD A-TRAIN ATAC A10 TANK KILLER 15 ABC BOXING ASC MONDAY NIGHT FB ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACTION SPORTS SOCCER ACTION STATIONS ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS VER 1.2 AIR FORCE COMMANDER ALL AMERICAN COLLG FB ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON AMBUSH ANCIENT ART WAR-SEA ANCIENT ART WAR SKY  FOOTBALL ARE WE THERE YET? ARMADA 2525 ARMOUR ALLEY BAT 817 FLYING FORTRESS BAD BLOOD BALANCE OF POWER 1990 BALANCE OF THE PLANE BARD'S TALE 1 BARD'S TALE 2 BARD'S TALE 3 BARD'S TALE CONST SET BATTLE CHESS BATTLE CHESS-CO BATTLE ISLE BATTLEMAWKS 1942 BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLITZKRIEG ARDENNES BLOODSTONE BLOODWYCH BLUE ANGELS BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BO JACKSON BASEBALL BRAIN BLASTER BREACH 2 BREACH 2 SCEN DISK BUCK ROGERS 1 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE INT CAESAR CAESARS PALACE CAMPAIGN CAR & DRIVER CARRIER COMMAND CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CASTLE DR BRAIN VGA CASTLES CASTLES 2 CASTLES-NRTHRN CMPN CENTERION DFNOR ROME CHALLENGE OF 5 REALM CHAMBER SCI MUT PRST CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN CHESSMASTER 3000 WIN CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL CLUE MASTER DETECTIV COASTER CODE NAME ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST COMMAND HO CONAN CONFLICT KOREA CONFLICT MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT CONQUESTS OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBO CONTINUIM CORPORATION COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CRACK DOWN CAIBBAGE GIN KING CAIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRUISE FOR A CORPSE CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CYBER EMPIRE CYBER RACE CYBERGENIC RANGER DAGGER OF AMMONRA DARK CENTURY DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN DARKLANDS DARKLANDS MASTERED DAAKSEED DARKSPYRE DAUGHTER OF SERPENTS DAVID WOLF SECRET AG DAY OF THE VIPER DEATH KNIGHT OF KRYN DEJA VU 2 LOST IN LV DICK TRACY DISCIPLES OF STEEL DONT GO ALONE All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games ore in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility AMER'S WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discover Money Orders/Cashiers Check Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air call for information on Canadian shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a 'wish list of tiles you are interested in. 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some 'wish lisr game credits may take slightly longer to fill. Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Gomes must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at ur x. Circle No. 68 on Reader Service Card 10 26 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 F1S STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER FALCON 30 FALCON 3.0 FIGHT TIGER FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRE FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FIRETEAM 2200 FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF INTRUDER FLIGHT SIMULATOR 40 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 50 FLOOR 13 FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS TRAZER FREDOY PHARKAS FATA FREE DC FRONT PAGE FB PRO FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GABRIEL KNIGHT GARY GRIGSBY PACIFIC GATEWAY GATEWAY 2 HOMEWALD GATEWAY SAVAGE FATA GENGHIS KHAN GHOSTS & GOBLINS GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBA: EFFECT GOBLINS VGA GOBLINS 2.VGA GODFATHER GOLD OF AZTECS GOLD OF THE AMERICAS GOLD RUSH GRAIL QUEST GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NB AMERICA ATL GREAT NB SUPER SHIPS GREENS GUNBOAT GUNSHIP 2000 SCENDSK GUNSHIP 10 ISLAND OF OR BRAIN VGA JACK NICKLAUS SE CRS JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATU JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JAMES BOND STEALTH JCK NICKLAUS GATST 18 JET FIGHTER 2 MISSION JET FIGHTER 20 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JONES IN THE FAST LANE JUMPJET KEYS TO MARAMON KGB KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4 . EGA KING'S QUEST 5. VGA KING'S QUEST 6 VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY L'EMPEREUR LAKERS VS CELTICS \"LAND,SEA AIR TRILOGY LANDS OF LORE LASER SQUAD LEATHER GOODESSES 2 LEGACY REALM OF TERR LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEMMINGS LEMMINGS 2 LEXICROSS CHI ATTACK CHOPPEA LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS 386 PRO LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL ENHANCED LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA LOST IN TIME LUNAR COMMAND MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLES UNCHARTED WATERS UNDER FIRE UNLIMITED ADVENTURES UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS UTOPIA V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBR VIKING CHILD VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WAR IN THE GULF WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WAXWORKS WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 1 WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 2 WC 2 SPEECH PACK WC SECRET MISSION 1 WC SECRET MISSION 2 WCULTIMA 6 CD WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WEAVER COMMISIONERS WEAVER MLBPA PLAST WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLOS WR WHERE IN WORLD CSD WHERE IN WRLD CSD-CD WING COMM ACADEMY WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WIZARDAY 5 WIZARDRY 6-COSMIC FOR WIZARDRY 7-CRUSADERS WIZARDY 4 WOLFENSTEIN 3D WOLFPACK WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLDS AT WAR X-WING X-WING B WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS YEAGER'S AFT YEAGERS AIR COMBAT ML BASEBALL GMOWNER ML BASEBALL MANAGERS ML FOOTBALL 2 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONKEY ISLAND VGA MOONBASE MURDER NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL 94 FOOTBALL NFL COACH'S CLUB NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 91 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '92 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '93 NFL VIDEO FOOTBALL NIGHTBREED NO GREATER GLORY NOVA 9 VGA OBITUS OIL'S WELL OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD OVERLORD PALADIN 2 PAPERBOY 2 PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PIRATES PLANET 'S EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 1 VGA POLICE QUESTI VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS MOVIES POWER HITS SCHE POWER HITS SPORTS POWERHITS BATTLETEC POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPHECY 1 PROPHECY OF SHADOW PROTOSTAR SECRET OF SILVER BLADE SECRET WEAPONS EXPAN SECRET WEAPONS LUFTW SENTINEL WORLDS SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE.WIN SHADOWLANDS SHERLOCK HOLMES-CD SHUTTLE SIEGE SIEGE EXP DOGS OF WAR SIERRA ADV BUHOLE SIERRA FAMILY FUN PK SILENT SERVICE 2 SILPHEED SIM ANT SIM CITY SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 1 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 2 SIM CITY TERRAIN EDIT SIM EARTH SIM LIFE SKATE OR DIE SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY SORCERIAN SPACE 1689 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 2. EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST 5. VGA SPACE QUEST BUNDLE SPACE ROGUE SPACEWARD HO SPACEWRECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCRAFT ASPECT SPELLJAMMER PIRATES SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 13 Prices & availabdity subject to change Cal Tor Free for current Does and those not isted-wele pot lots mora! Al lisad Games are complete & was free with original box documentation & disis System compatibility is not guaranteed. Al sales are final-defecere games replaced with same tide. Free shipping (Regular Ground in the continental USA on orders Over $150 wBuy& SELL 10 26 "


"NOW PLAYING look like outtakes from ASTEROIDS backgrounds. For all that, the game does succeed in its quest for a friendly feel, and the ultimate effect is something like ANACROSTICS IN SPACE. If you find the system to your liking, there are four expansion disks, doubtless with more on the way. IBM, $29.95. Circle Reader Service #4. GIC SOFTWARE, P.O. Box 1353, Los Gatos, CA 95031, (408) 356-7208 cent of the biblical account's trumpet (shofar) blowing substitute for power pills, and the collection of iron, brass and shekel takes the place of dot gobbling. As in its ancient predecessor, pattern memorization and fast reflexes are important, but Joshua requires some knowledge of the biblical account, as well. You must collect five questions per level before exiting the screen and answering said questions for extra points. The game includes 100 levels. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #21. WISDOM TREE, INC., 2700 IMPERIAL Hwy, BLDG, A, BREA, CA 92621, (714) 528-3456 JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATURE GOLF VOL. 2 Before you toss away that old putter, this is not a new game, but an add-on disk for JN SIGNATURE GOLF. Also, the game still utilizes 2-year old technology, giving rise to the inevitable comparisons with LINKS 386. Still, the focus of this title is less on graphics than gameplay and the subtleties of designing a golf course. The courses JOURNEY TO THE PLANETS A visual feast, this CD-ROM product is a tool for exploring the cosmos. Hundreds of digitized photos are enhanced and shaded to produce details that any amateur astronomer could love. Data files abound to whet the appetite of the more cally-shaped pieces onto more than 100 gray shapes before the conveyor belt becomes clogged with unused pieces. Once completed, the 113 varicolored puzzles look something like mosaics done in an origami style. Add some colorful animation and a maze to explore (as in the quests of SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY) and you get a picture of what may be an incredibly addicting game for TETRIS and SHANGHAI fanatics alike. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. OOP, INC., 1046 RIVER AVE., FLEMINGTON, NJ 08822, (908) 788-2799 SATURN Data MOOD PEA SHOOTIN' PETE Many cons past, in the dim beginnings of the Silicon Age, there was created The Plot For All Arcade Games. And the industry, young though it was, did look upon The Plot, and decided that while it was composed of only one note, that note did indeed sound good in their cash registers. Since that long-ago time, many technologies have been discovered, and some Great CANOPOLEVEN PRR STREEOPTIONS 20 You Planetary Tour Exploration here are built by the winners of an Accolade design contest, and offer an almost dizzying variety of challenges, 36 in all, which despite their fictional status, offer plenty of challenges for the aspiring golfer. IBM, $19.95. Circle Reader Service #2. ACCOLADE, 5300 STEVENS CREEK BLVD., SAN JOSE, CA 95129, (800) 245-7744 serious student, who may also check to see what Galileo or Percival had to say about the celestial wonders. The designers do make some concessions to fun, as all the views are three-dimensional \"flythroughs,\" much faster than Newtonian physics would allow—especially when you travel through solid objects! Topped off by a strong musical score and elegant interface, this seems like a product ready to blast off. IBM MPC/Mac $69.95, Circle Reader Service #9. MULTICOM PUBLISHING, INC., 1100 OLIVE WAY, SUITE 1250, SEATTLE, WA 98101, (800) 850-7272 12 Score: High: 25000 Pea Shootin' PETE JOSHUA: THE BATTLE OF JERICHO Hittites, Canaanites and Perizzites, beware! The son of Nun is crossing another Jordan River as this former Nintendo game enters the Land of PC Promise. Focused at younger gamers, JOSHUA is a PAC-MAN-style game where Hittites replace \"ghosts,\" musical notes reminisORIGAMO The Chinese call them TANGRAMS, puzzles made from cutting a paper into five different geometrical shapes and assembling them into different figures. The Japanese call it ORIGAMI, the art of folding paper into different geometrical shapes which, in turn, create figures of birds, animals and the like. In ORIGAMO, you have to apply some of the skill of both. Shapes slide along a conveyor belt in real-time and you have to place colorful geometriCompanies have sunk like Atlantis between the waves, but PEA SHOOTIN' PETE is proof that some things never change. In all fairness, the scrolling is good, as Pete shoots his peas against backdrops no Nintendo could emulate. Some of the animations will bring chuckles to even cynical magazine reviewers. Even so, check out the shareware equivalents before you glide across the screen. After all, you certainly know how this plotline will be resolved. IBM, $19.95, Circle Reader Service #19. VILLA CRESPO SOFTWARE, INC., 1725 MCGONERN ST., HIGHLAND PARK, IL 60035, (708) 433-0500 31810 1:3 7757 MO 0305 2 29 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"FIRVSCO IT'S FAST-TYS FURIOUS! IT'S EMPIRE SOCCER! The soccer game that captures all the excitement and fast paced action of the World Cup Competition. *Three gameplay-formats: Training, Exhibition & World Cup. * Managerial control to effect substitutions and formation changes. * Full ball control: diving headers, overhead kicks, sliding tackle, back heel etc. * Free kicks, corners, throw-ins and penalties. * 32 national teams each with different tactics and skill levels. FFVU *Special advanced player moves. * Up to 8 players in World Cup Tournament. Five skill settings ease you from beginner To World Champion. * Set up your own World Cup leagues, Available for IBM-PG-and-Compatibles Conputer Nou CG Novice  Empire Software. SOFTWARE ENTERTAINMENT INTERNATIONAL (USA) Inc. 4 Professional Drive, Suite 123, Gaithersburg, MD 20879. Voice: (301) 216 9706 FAX: (301) 216 0117 "


"NOW PLAYING riety in its 75 basic games, each of which has many variations (including number of cards turned over at a time, how many times the deck is gone through, etc.). There are even Yuton Plak 1700 PGA TOUR GOLF II Anyone doubting that the computer game industry and Hollywood have a lot in common, need only observe the number of sequels prevalent in each. This version brings undulating fairways and not-sosmooth putting surfaces to the Macintosh. While the graphics will never be mistaken for LINKS, they do significantly improve on the DOS version, with much smoother animation. For the golf fan who wants a i AT: A ASOL Dk system will score points with everyone. IBM for Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #11. RIVERBOAT CRIBBAGE This powerful Cribbage program features 2, 3 and 4-player variations with and without Crib auctions. There are several other variations (61 or 121 point games, individual or partnership, etc.) and an insome \"children's level\" solitaire games provided. To round out the package, bar and icon graphs show players' past histories versus \"Sol.\" IBM for Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #14. SOFTPRIME, 500 KIRTS, TROY, MI 48084, (800) 362-4400 Driver — 270 ydy m Brive 01 m3 Fuerto Cabbage P 10121 SIM CITY CD-ROM Sim Citizens of the world, rejoice! Will Wright's masterpiece of urban renewal comes to a CD-ROM theater near you. Your appointed city officials, portrayed by live actors, give full-motion video updates on the state of affairs. News reports feature natural disasters, their terrors enhanced ( change of pace, this product offers solid competition from computer opponents, as you tee up against the finest in golf, including U. S. Open winner Tom Kite and Player of the Year Fred Couples. In its attempt to be more of a simulation than its competitors, PGA TOUR II includes 10 different ball lies and gusty breezes which would make a meteorologist green with envy. The \"accurate ball physics\" model is even better. and the varied trajectories for special shots (chips, punches, etc.) have an authentic golf feel to them. Unlike many sequels, this actually adds to the genre-at least for the golfer who doesn't quite have everything. Macintosh, $59.95. Circle Reader Service #3. ELECTRONIC ARTS, P.O. Box 7578, SAN MATEO, CA 94403, (415) 571-7171 teresting (although, perhaps, out-of-place) 1800's Trivia Showdown. IBM for Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #12. RIVERBOAT POKER With 45 different poker games to select from, and plenty of definable house rules, this poker game can hold its cards up to the best of them. Note that it features a MODE OHN POFEROUSON us Each of these Riverboat Card Game Series products features an Old West theme and computer opponents who've walked right out the pages of folklore, pulled up their stakes and put their cards on the table. All are played under Windows (only) and feature ragtime background music. What sets them apart, though, is that they provide power tools for users. Each product contains many, many userdefinable game variations and instructional information to help build better playing skills. through special effects, SVGA graphics and thunderous stereo sounds. While the core of Maxis' award-winning game remains intact, the multimedia enhancements make for a more accessible and enjoyable product, especially for that handful of people in the world who haven't yet experienced the joys of running their own metropolis. IBM, $54.95. Circle Reader Service #8. INTERPLAY PRODUCTIONS, Inc., 17922 Frrch AVE., IRVINE, CA 92714, (714) 553-6655 full, 8-seat game and player styles that can really vary (getting Geronimo's money is one thing, but taking Jesse James' is another matter entirely), making the action constant and lively. IBM for Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #13. RIVERBOAT BLACKJACK This game boasts over 35,000 Blackjack variations (most, naturally, are slight variations and some, while interesting, are downright obscure). Programmable house rules and a skill-building card counting TIGERS ON THE PROWL Scott Hamilton bills his company as \"The Wargamer's Computer Company,\" and with this release, it's easy to see the wisdom of that nom de guerre. WWII small-unit combat is simulated with almost excruciating detail, r ight down to individual guns and rounds of RIVERBOAT SOLITAIRE This solitaire package offers plenty of va 158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1994 "


"I piscov    | DISCOVER THE BIG PICTURE GAMER US PLAY COMPUTER GAMES ON YOUR FREE BONUS GAME WITH PURCHASE SEE PACKAGE FOR DETAILSI YOU Just Plug It In AND THE ULTIMATE COMPUTER GAMING EXPERIENCE IS YOURSI GET READY FOR YOUR MOST AMAZING GAMING ADVENTURE EVER WITH TV GAMER PLUSTM. PLAY COMPUTER GAMES LIKE THEY WERE MEANT TO BE SEEN: BIGGER AND BETTER ON YOUR TV! EXPERI: ENCE COOLER COLORS, BIGGER BOSSES, MEGA MAPS AND SUPER-SIZE SWORDFIGHTS. GAR B B3 HB TV Gamer Plus Features 5 YEAR WARRANTY WINDOWS SUPPORT (IBM VERSION) IBM & MAC VERSIONS AVAILABLE EXTRA-LONG RCA CABLE TO TV ALL CABLES INCLUDED SIIG, Inc. 6078 Stewart Ave., Fremont, CA 94538 510/657-8688 1994 by SIIG, Inc. TV Gamer Plus is a trademark of SIIG, Inc. SIG Inc. TV Gamer Plus Is Available At The Following Locations Circle Reader Service #112 JRR COMPUTER Brands MartU.SA COMPUTER ELECTRONKS American Whole EARTH MICRO GNTER "


"NOW PLAYING File Nav Objects Paint Prefs Help IBM, $54.95. Circle Reader Service #1. ABRACADATA, P.O. Box 2440, EUGENE, OR 97402 (503) 683-1925 ammo. Combat results are based on physical models, including armor thickness and angle, dispersion of infantry units, fragmentation effects, and even the differences in projectile velocity caused by air drag! Boardgamers will love the computer's capaciFLOKKIE NO GETHER ULTIMATE DOMAIN Although released through the company that brought fame to CHESSMASTER, the first clue that this game is of a different breed is that it was designed by mysterious beings called Microids. Billed as a medieval adventure, it won't be mistaken for MERCHANT PRINCE. Visually, the game is Salvadore Dali painting the Renaissance in 3-D, by way of a POPULOUS interface. Skulls, knives, bombs and a variety of other moody accoutrements mix nicely with the heavy rain and snow effects, to make it casy to believe that the seasons are in fact changing. Aside from all the pyrotechnics, the game has plenty of strategy, with most of the decisions you make being linked to economics in some fashion. Adventure98284 848 11129328 metrical shapes to a complex polygonal aircraft. All else pales, however, when putting on the cool 3D viewing glasses, whose red-green lenses transform your creations into modern versions of '50s era horror flicks. Don't forget the popcorn. IBM, $49.95. Circle Reader Service #20. WAITE GROUP PRESS, 200 TAMAI. PLAZA, CORTE MADERA, CA 94925, (800) 368-9369 60 HERRIA ty for figuring line-of-sight for them, as well as the hidden movement of enemy units. The many options involve night lighting, tactical air strikes, laying minefields and tracing enemy units by the dust trails their vehicles leave. You may deploy such exotic weaponry as flamethrowers, but be careful—the program also checks for fires spreading from forest to nearby towns. Actually, there doesn't scem much that this comprehensive product doesn't simulate, as it rightfully models such «soft» factors as morale and training. While the graphic look cannot compare to games from larger companies, die-hard wargamers probably won't want to retreat. IBM $69.95. Circle Reader Service #6. HPS SIMULATIONS, P.O. Box 3245 SANTA CLARA, CA 95055, (408) 554-8381 WARLORDS II SCENARIO BUILDER Updates are always welcome, especially when they include 24 ready-made scenarios. The detailed fantasy wargame creation of Roger Keating and lan Trout now comes alive with new lands and battlegrounds made from the depths of your imagination (and the trusty editor enclosed). The more seriously inclined may create legions of mythical beasts with the ability to devour heroes—then again, I had fun arming Boy Scouts with scimitars. Gameplay adjustments, such as limiting the razing of cities, are at your discretion. Modifying terrain, dropping in cities and other features, and smoothing and editing the terrain are all explained effectively in the manual. The rough figures you create are transformed $50 Bancobo Commando Mago Rodeon Army Oby Shield TRAIN ENGINEER The point of view in TRAIN ENGINEER IS exactly what you would expect. Aimed at the model railroading enthusiast, this intriguing product allows you to design scenery-rich layouts and operate your train across that same custom trackage from the perspective of a railroad engineer. In gengame features are also added, as each player must search for the Lost Jewels of Neort. Evidently, building a society, engaging in trade, struggling against nature and fighting wars isn't enough to sustain interest. IBM, $59.95. Circle Reader Service #15. THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS, 60 LEVERONI Cr. NOVATO, CA 94949, (800) 234-3088 Edin Armies ISMES Here D00CD Slegs La Fortis MIDI 230 Tue REAL Tende my AN el EDE FA Trotur shini Mon Detail DO 32 VR BASIC More of a variation on a theme than an original product, VR BASIC puts an innovative twist on the 3D world-building genre of products such as DOMARK'S VIRTUAL REALITY TOOLKIT. Instead of an intimidating front end with buttons on-top of buttons, VR BASIC is an actual programming language. Code is cut and pasted from examples, or created from scratch using the provided text editor and subsequently run in the graphics viewer. Using an intrepeter instead of a compiler, the program does not yield self-running programs, yet still has nearly 60 powerful high-level functions for you to create virtual worlds of your dreams or nightmares, using NORTHCAD. Or, simply utilize the library of ready-torun objects, which range from simple geoON ESPREDELI eral, the graphics lack polish, but certain screens showing the overall layout of the track have an almost «Sim Train\" kind of feel that could be satisfying to all of us who have wanted to be able to \"enter\" the miniature realms of our model railroads. on the screen into real characters which take on a life of their own. The amazing thing is that this product succeeds even though it lets you look behind the curtain of one of the most engaging game systems on the market. IBM, $39.95. Circle Reader Service #17. STRATEGIC STUDIES GROUP INC., P.O. Box 261, DRUMMOYNE, NSW 2047, AUSTRALIA (904) 469-8880 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1994 "


"THE SCORE Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. . . . H  ;    HALL OF FAME ZIRK THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (Micro Prose, Inc., 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) WING COMMANDER (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) ZORK INFOCOM, 1984 Your greatest challenge MANY FORMATS lies ahead and downwards. Inspired by the famous \"Adventure» game by Crowther and Woods that had proliferated on mainframes everywhere, the M.I.T. graduates who founded Infocom uncovered The Great Underground Empire of Zork and first brought it to a home computer in 1981. With this fabulous InfoCOM adventure as its cornerstone, INFOCOM established a rich genre of text games where the \"graphics\" were painted in the mind, not the computer screen. The classic Infocom games became the benchmarks for puzzledriven adventure games, and the lavish touches of zany humor provided just enough comic relief whenever the gamer felt most frustrated. ZIL (Zork Interactive Language), the DEC-based development tools with which Infocom games were built, was remarkable for its cross-platform capability and, as a result, Infocom was able to publish their games on more unique platforms than any contemporary game company. Although the text interface was often clumsy, the prose was certainly not; in fact, we're still waiting for a game to match the writing quality and story-telling power of these games. La Tale THE BARD'S TALE ELECTRONIC ARTS, 1985 MANY FORMATS Baro's The Bard's Tale, designed by the fledgling group called Interplay, excelled within the role-playing standards of its day. Michael Cranford's original story was relatively simple, but it was enhanced with a host of innovations. It established the state-of-the-art for animated monsters, using three-point animation (three active, randomly moving points in each portrait window) and 3D mazes (all in color, with different bit-mapped textures to be added in later releases). The look and feel of the series became the pinnacle for subsequent games to reach. Later, The Bard's Tale III was one of the earliest games with automapping, another gaming innovation that became widely used. How did we ever play without it? JULY 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 161 "


"SCORE TOP 100 GAMES READER POLL #118 COMPANY SCORE 10.03 9.91 pas. TYPE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 g 10 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAME Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Gabriel Knight Sierra Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Sam & Max Hit The Road LucasArts Star Control II Accolade The Seventh Guest Virgin Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 9.79 9.64 9.56 9.55 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.20  Id Software MicroProse Access Origin RP SSG E SCORE 10.46 10.35 10.33 10.22 10.07 10.03 10.01 10.00 9.97 9.91 9.87 ST ana 9.82 LucasArts Maxis Origin QQP LucasArts Virgin Dynamix LucasArts Three-Sixty Pacific SSG QQP LucasArts Sierra Ultima Underworld 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES COMPANY SCORE Ullima Underworld Origin 10.22 Betrayal at Krondar Dynamix 9.63 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.44 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Ultima VII Origin 9.25 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 9.19 The Stugan SP AD WG WG WG 9.79 9.73 9.68 9.67 9.65 9.64 AD RP Dynamix 9.63 WG ST SI WG AD,RP SCORE AD AC 9.65 *1 Doom 2 Master of Orion *3 Links 386 Pro *4 Ultima Underworld 5 Warlords II *6 Day of the Tentacle 7 Sim City 2000 8 Wing Commander II 9 Solitaire's Journey 10 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge 11 Dune II 12 Front Page Sports Football Pro 13 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis 14 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki 15 Carriers at War Construction Kit 16 The Perfect General *17 X-Wing 18 Gabriel Knight 19 Betrayal at Krondar V for Victory: Utah Beach 21 Merchant Prince 22 Falcon 3.0 23 V for Victory: Market Garden 24 Quest for Glory III 25 Sherlock Holmes CDI Wolfenstein 3-D 27 Conquered Kingdoms 28 War in Russia 29 Hornet 30 NHLPA Hockey 31 Lands of Lore World Circuit 33 Ultima Underworld II 34 Might & Magic III 35 Aces of the Pacific 36 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen 37 Pacific War Sam & Max Hit The Road Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen Eye of the Beholder II 41 Star Control II Indy Car Racing 43 The Seventh Guest Chessmaster 3000 45 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Privateer Jack Nicklaus Signalure Golf Fleet Defender 49 Ultima VII 50 V for Victory: fald Juna Sword 9.63 9.62 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.53 9.49 9.47 9.59 12928269625*2858728252222222anenkant 222222nnlanas WG,ST Three-Sixty Pacific QQP Spectrum HoloByte Three-Sixty Pacific Sierra Viacom Id Software QQP SSI Spectrum Holobyte Electronic Arts Virgin MicroProse Origin New World Computing Dynamix New World Computing TOP SIMULATION GAMES GAMESIS COMPATY X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte Hornet Spectrum Holobyte 9.47 World Circuit MicroProse 9.44 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 9.38 Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus 9.33 Fleet Defender MicroProse 9.27 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 9.27 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 9.19 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 WG SI 9.45 9.44 9.44 9.42 L RP 9.41 9.38 9.37 SSI 9.34 SCORE RP WG AD RP RP AD.AC SI 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.33 AD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME TO COMPANY Master of Orion S MicroProse 10.35 Sim City 2000 Maxis 10.01 Solitaire's Journey QQP 9.97 Dune II Virgin 9.87 Merchant Prince QQP 9.62 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 9.32 Syndicate Electronic Arts 9.21 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 9.13 The Lost Admiral QQP 9.05 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8.92 JORION LucasArts New World Computing SSI Accolade Virgin/Papyrus Virgin Software Toolworks NovaLogic Origin Accolade MicroProse Origin Three-Sixty Pacific 9.32 9.32 9.27 9.27 9.27 9.27 9.25 9.24 MICSOPROPE "


"TOP WARGAMES GANE BOMPANY SCORE RP 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Warlords II SSG V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG The Perfect General QQP V for Victory: Utah Beach T hree-Sixty Pacific V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific Conquered Kingdoms QQP War in Russia SSI Pacific War V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 10.07 9.73 9.68 9.67 9.63 9.58 9.53 9.49 9.14 SSI 9.34 9.24 AD RP COMPANY SCORE ST AD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ACTION GAMES GAME Doom Id Software 10.46 Wing Commander II Origin 10.00 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 9.55 Privateer Origin 9.27 Lemmings Psygnosis 9.21 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 9.14 Oh, No! More Lemmings Psygnosis 8.92 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.85 Prince of Persia 2 Broderbund 8.60 Out of this World Interplay 8.57 Denemeneaselesemineesseen maailma 583333333333333332999223979932989398388888888 RP.AC 51 Lemmings Psygnosis AC,ST 9.21 Syndicate Electronic Arts STAC 9.21 53 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts AD 9.20 54 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 9.19 Secret Weapons of the Lultwaffe LucasArts 9.19 56 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 9.17 57 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 58 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte AC 59 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 9.13 60 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 9.11 61 Eye of the Beholder 9.10 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.10 63 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra 9.09 64 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 65 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 9.06 66 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 Quest for Glory I (VGA) Sierra AD.RP 9.05 The Lost Admiral QQP 9.05 69 Eric the Unready Legend 9.04 Empire Deluxe New World Computing WG 9.04 Conquests of the Longbow Sierra 9.04 72 Police Quest 3 Sierra AD 9.01 73 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 Battles of Destiny QQP WG,ST 9.00 75 Aces Over Europe Dynamix 8.99 76 Space Quest IV Sierra AD 8.98 Pagan Ultima VII Origin 8.98 Western Front SSI 8.98 79 Carriers Al War SSG WG 8.97 80 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Dynamix Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 82 Alone in the Dark l-Motion 8.95 Gunship 2000 MicroProse 8.95 84 Clash of Steel SSI WG 8.94 85 The Incredible Machine Dynamix ST 8.92 Carriers al War II SSG WG 8.92 F-117A MicroProse 8.92 Oh, No! More Lemmings Psygnosis AC,ST 8.92 89 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra 8.91 90 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts 8.87 91 The Horde Crystal Dynamics AC.ST 8.85 92 Star Trek: Judgment Rites Interplay AD 8.84 93 Indianapolis 500 Electronic Arts 8.83 94 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend 8.81 95 Rex Nebular MicroProse 8.80 96 Gateway to the Savage Frontier SSI 8.79 97 Tony La Russa Baseball II 8.78 Populous II Electronic Arts 8.78 Hayle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra 8.78 High Command Three-Sixty Pacific WG 8.78 Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. * = Top game of type. Dark Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy. WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports WG 8.96 AD SCORE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 TOP SPORTS GAMES COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access 10.33 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.82 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 9.45 Jack Nicklaus Signature Goll Accolade 9.27 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 8.78 NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports 8.54 The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade 8.50 4-D Boxing Electronic Arts 8.37 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III Bethesda 8.30 ST LINK 336 g 10 The Poll is based on reader survey cards from two issues prior to publication. Data is archived from more than 100 games, so the Top 100 is likely to contain titles which were not listed on the active reader survey card, and the Top 10 lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100. Also, every title listed on the survey card may not appear in the Top 100, either because they did not score high enough or because of an insufficient number of responses on a particular game (usually due to a title's distribution delays or low initial retail penetration). aan SSI The Computer Gaming World Poll A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMINGWORLD "


"THE SCORE PATCHES 3/29/94 AEGIS Patch: Eliminates the Electronic Book crash. 4/28/94. Air Warrior V1.13 Update: New execute files, fixes several problems. 3/1/94 Seawolf Patch: Allows 16-bit Sound Blaster sound effects and music. 3/30/94 Shanghai II V1.05 Update (Mac): Fixes tournament crash bug. 3/24/94 Arena V1.04 Update: Fixes several map, music, scrolling and magic problems. Provides new hot keys and allows you to sell magic items and delete spells. Particularly helpful for 386 machine users. 3/1/94 ZifTNET Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Patches for buggy programs have become the fastest fix. These patches can be downloaded from ZiffNet, both on CompuServe and on Prodigy, except where indicated. On CompuServe, go to Computer Gaming World's own Forum, GO GAMEWORLD, Library 2. The Patch File. To sign up, call (800) 848-8990. On Prodigy, jump \"ZiffNet\" and Search by Title for the patches listed here. Or, Search by Category to browse the entire games library. These patches can also be downloaded from other on-line services, from software publishers' BBSs, or directly from the publisher. We urge publishers to keep us informed of the latest patches for their games. Red indicates new files. Sierra SB Patch: 486 users may now use Sound Blaster with Police Quest 3, Space Quest 1 VGA, Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 and Hoyle's 3 games. 4/18/94 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Patch: Replacement file for players who get a divide overflow when starting the game. 3/28/94 SimCity2000 V1.1 Update (Mac): Latest version, it fixes the budget problem, among others. 3/1/94 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Update: Includes several hardware fixes, particularly for the Pentium and Diamond Stealth Pro. Not available on ZillNet. 1/27/94 IndyCar Racing Patch: Allows use of the Gravis Ultrasound Card. 3/20/94 Fixes problems with several CD drives and Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards. 2/09/94 Subwar 2050 V2.02 Update: Corrects cursor drift, time and date problem. 4/28/94 IndyCar Racing Modem Patch: Cleans up difficulties with modem play, and fixes scrolling menus for steering devices with no y-axis. 4/7/94 Master of Orion V1.3: Tougher opponents, better play balance, and numerous combat tweaks. 1/06/94 Terminator Rampage Patch: Allows Pentium users to play the game. 3/8/94 CyberRace CD-ROM V1.2 Update: Lowers base memory requirements, fixes save game problems and joystick difficulties. 1/20/94 Merchant Prince Update: Newest version of QOP'S strategy game. 3/11/94 TFX Patch UK V2.0 Upgrade: Fixes bugs; makes UK version equal to USA V 2.0, including several new features, but only works if you downloaded first patch as well. 2/24/94 Jutland V1.1 Upgrade: Allows non-penetrating shells, adds more graphics, runs smoother, and most significantly, includes time compression. 3/30/94. Diamond Dreams Upgrade: Fixes all known bugs, and features greatly improved Al for computer manager strategies. 3/29/94 MicroPrese Sound Drivers: New AdLib sound drivers for many older games which had problems running with 486 and Pentium machines. 4/7/94 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 Patch: Fixes stadium lockups. 5/3/94 Falcon 1.02 Mac Upgrade: Fixes sound problems on Mac AVs. 3/20/94 Jutland Patch: The game will now recognize different sound card addresses, rather than just the default 220 address. 5/3/94 Fleet Defender V1.2 Upgrade: Latest version of MicroProse flight sim. 5/6/94 Gobliins CD-ROM Patch: Fixes sound card and CD-ROM driver problems. 3/1/94 Lands Of Lore CD-ROM V1.22 Upgrade: Fixes lockup problems on fast machines, allows retrieval of Dawn's key and allows use of Waveblaster/Soundblaster 16 combo. 3/7/94 The Horde V1.1 Revision: Now supports Media Vision Pro Audio sound cards. Fixes lockups on some Sony drives, dead knights who don't disappear after snowball hits, and slows down the end credits. 4/28/94 Lands of Lore Flappy V1.23 Uagrade: Fixes \"Dawn's Key\" problem and Pentium lockups when choosing a character. 4/28/94 Mortal Kombat PC Update: ImUltima & Patch: Fixes AdLib proves sound card support, fixes problem with some macrash bugs, and requires less con chines. 4/15/94 ventional memory. 1/21/94. Unnecessary Roughness ReviNomad Patch: Gets rid of in sion: Changes graphics, ventory bug for trade. avoids lock-ups, and allows 3/1/94 use of Sound Blaster. Team stats are actually used, Police Quest 4 Patch: Fixes hand-offs work correctly, all known problems and and players do not vanish speeds up restoration of when tackling. CD-ROM saved games. Disk version now loads properly. 3/8/94 only. 4/5/94 Victory At Sea V1.01 UpQuest For Glory 4 Patch: Cor grade: Corrects numerous rects all known bugs. 2/17/94 problems with the initial release. 3/14/94 Rally V1.1 Upgrade: Fixes joystick calibration and War in Russia V1.1 other problems. 3/24/94 Upgrade: Adjusts game mechanics and fixes minor bugs. Ravenloft 1.1 Upgrade: Latest 2/08/94 version from SSI, floppy and CD-ROM. 4/29/94 WW2 Battles Of The South Pacific: The latest upgrade Red Baron Patch: Configura for OOP's naval wargame. tion fix for IBM only. 3/11/94. Hornet Patch: Fixes many bugs and adds new features to Spectrum HoloByte's flight sim. 2/07/94 Legends of Kyrandia V1.3 Upgrade: Solves lockups and corrects phrasing used by the characters. 2/04/94 IndyCar Racing V1.02: Fixes several sound problems, as well as more minor corrections. 3/16/94 Links 386 Pro Version 1.21: Corrects several major and minor bugs. 1/28/94 Lost in Time CD-Rom Patch: 164 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1994 "


"So shall you reap. HARVESTER TM coming this summer for PC CD-ROM 1-800-238-4274  Merit Software.  Future Visionary, Inc. Harvester is a registered trademark of Future Visionary, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #88 "


"The Rumor Bag Cub Reporters? AP/Wide World Photos by Ernie Ryne Santos My name is Ernie and...I'm a Cubs fan. other baghead for me. I grabbed the ordiGames in conjunction with MediaVision), There, I've said it. If we were behind by 12 nary program and ran through the crowd and, in his honor I quickly dismissed the idea runs in the bottom of the 9th, I'd still be sitlike I was in a life-or-death version of a live of copycat competition. ting in the bleachers praying for the wind to LODE RUNNER game. \"And Jeff Tunnell I reached the bleachers and, there she start blowing out. Like the late songwriter, I thinks his new LODE RUNNER: A LEGEND REwas, the source of sources the most beautiwant to be buried at Wrigley Field, between TURNS will be the ultimate challenge!\"I ful woman to ever don a Cubs hat. Unfortugames of a doubleheader. thought, \"Wait till his job is on the line and nately, she was surrounded by a half-dozen So, it's no wonder that, with the Cubbies in he has to scramble through a capacity bagheads. Worse, she was giving all of them their longest home losing streak in history, I crowd at Wrigley!\" I admitted to myself that the rumor about FAR SEAS, a computer verdecided to make that pilgrimage down Addiit would probably be an awesome experision of an original Strategy & Tactics game son Street to the House that Chicle Built, the ence on the computer, however. based on WWI naval warfare to be pubsacred breeding ground for \"Holy Cow!\" in Out of breath, I caught up with the other lished by Decision Games, a small order to provide enough fan support that baghead and got his attention. I oflered to boardgame company. I suddenly wished I our announcer would have to commit Harry pay him double the price of the original was in the middle of Argonaut's upcoming Carey or something of the sort. program if he would trade programs with CREATURE SHOCK, a new DOOM-like, firstI informed all my usual Chicago sources me. He did and I turned quickly to page person perspective science fiction shooter that I'd be at Wrigley Field in my usual attire: 13. Scribbled across a picture of Ryne Sandto be published in the U.S. by Virgin. That the bag for all seasons that I wear as The Ruberg in black felt pen was a note that said Al way, I could have lasered my way to her side mor Guy. I entered the main gate, part of Lowe of LEISURE SUIT LARRY fame is curwithout any opposition. the dynamic human wall flowing through the rently working on a new series called CAP As it was, I merely pointed toward anothturnstiles. It reminded me of the new TETRISTOL PUNISHMENT and that the first er spectator and innocently asked, \"Is that style game that Spectrum-HoloByte is about installment was supposed to be \"Bill and Bull Durham?\" As the bagheads rushed off to publish. The game was originally called Hillary's Whitewater Adventure.\" to get his autograph, I sat down beside her THE WALL in Japan, but it's going to be Suddenly, I noticed that there were even to watch the game and hear her whisper called BREAKTHROUGH in the U.S. The game more bagheads in the crowd. With hortor, I the latest secrets in my ear. She managed starts with a multi-colored \"Berlin Wall\" and feared that other computer game magazines to tell me about COMMAND HQ II (working requires you to systematically remove colored had reporters dressing up like me in order to title), being designed for MicroProse by blocks until the entire wall is broken down. I steal my rumors. That, I reasoned would be a Robert E. Lee. She said it would feature 4call it LITTLE BRICK OUT (in honor of the old trick as dirty as your characters may have to way and, possibly, network play. Naturally, Apple II game) requiring strategy instead of pull in Dog Eat Dog, the game of oflice polimany of the later improvements to the reflexes. tics to be published by Trilobyte. The game original game, including a map builder I bought a program and nodded to the began its design life at Disney with some and random map generator, will be includvendor in a knowing way. He always wrote a thing of a 50s romance comic look, but the ed in the new design. She also told me that hot game rumor on page 13 for me. Inlatest incarnation will have a much slicker Avalon Hill's BEYOND SQUAD LEADER has stead of smiling, he did a double take and look. I finally decided that my paranoia was now been bumped to January of '95. I looked at the crowd walking toward the like something I would expect in a Steve don't know what else she said because stands. I saw another baghead up in front Meretzky game. I remembered that Steve that's when the other bagheads discovered of me and immediately realized what had was hard at work on HODGE-IN-PODGE, the the other guy wasn't Leon Durham and happened. The vendor had mistaken the first release from new game company Boffo headed back to hit me out of the park. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $28.00 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add SI100 for postage. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167.Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. 166 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1994 "


"FROM THE CREATORS OF THE AWARD-WINNING WOLFENSTEIN 3-D \"\"The graphics are superb, with lighting effects and art that could only come from dark and demented minds.\" Computer Gaming World BE09 \"You want action? You want gunplay? You want gore? ...DOOM has it all.\" PC Entertainment \"...if you have saliva, prepare to drool now.\"\"...an absolute musthave for PC action fans.\" Electronic Games WANT TO BE A HERO? GO TO HELL! DOOM is a lightning-fast virtual reality adventure where you're the toughest space trooper ever to suck vacuum. Scientists stationed on a far-off moonbase have opened a gateway to Hell, releasing a monster-intested holocaust upon the universe. You're the last marine remaining on the base after the invasion. Your mission is to survive!  Four-player combat over network Two-player action over modem Incredibly detailed 3-D world Blood-curdling stereo sound effects Hair raising demonic denizens of Hell  Awesome foe-fraggin' weapons Call 1-800-IDGAMES Order the entire DOOM trilogy for $40.00 or get episode one, Knee-Deep in the Dead for the cost of shipping and handling. Or download episode one from Software CreationsTM BBS. (508) 368-4137 @ 2400-14.4K baud Canadian customers call 1-800-661-7383. INC SOFTWARE Requires a 386DX PC compatible or better; hard disk drive; VGA graphics; 4 Megabytes of memory. A 486 is recommended. Multiplayer options require a network which uses the IPX protocol, a modem, or serial link. Digitized sound effects require a 100% Sound Blaster compatible card, Gravis Ultra SoundTM, or Pro Audio Spectrum M-16. DOOM is a trademark of id Software, . Other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"REAL WORLD. REAL TIME, REAL TERROR. @ SYSTEM SHOCK A FIRST PERSON FIGHT TO THE DEATH IN THE DEPTHS OF SPACE. haos reigns aboard the space station Gifadel. Crew members are now horrible genetic mutations. Cyborg security robots roam the corridors bent on destruction. Ar the heart of it all is SHODAN, the ruthless super-computer that has seized control of all station operations. Will you be able to fight your way through and destroy SHODAN from within? A LOOKING GLASS TECHNOLOGIEST GAME Explore a totally immersive 3-D world with sophisticated physics. Jump, lean around corners, climb ledges, crawl through shaftseven fly with rocket boots all from a lightning-fast first-person perspective. Tailor the gameplay to your favorite style. Change difficulty levels for combat, cyberspace, puzzles or plot. \"Jack in\" to the computer itself to steal information, hack security systems and grapple with cybercreatures enslaved to the maniacal SHODAN. For a great game experience, use an Intel DX2TM, Intel DX4TM or Pentium processor-based system. For additional literature on Intel products, coll 1-800-756-8766. ORIGIN We create worlds * An Electronics Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Actual screens may vary. A Stand Alone Gome. Made in U.S.A. Software 1994. Looking Glass Technologies. 1994. ORIGIN Systems, Im. Spalem Shake ko trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Art is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Looking Gloss Technologies is a trademark of Looking Gloss Technologies. Circle Reader Service #99 "

