,

AUG -SEPT 87

NO. 39

FEATURES
8

We've Got A Hit
Game Development Overview / Don Daglow

12

Phantasie III
The SSI Trilogy Concludes / Scorpia

16

Euclid vs. Patton
Field Algorithms for Wargames / Chris Crawford

18

Dragon Side II
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Tips / Scorpia

22

Gold Rush
A Report From C.E.S. / Staff

28

PHM Pegasus
Electronic Arts Enters A New Pond / M. Evan Brooks

30

Goodbye 'G' Ratings
New Wave Adult Entertainment Software / John Williams

32

Theatre Europe
Datasoft Goes To War / Bill Harrington

34

B-24
A Fresh View From A Bombsight / Leroy W. Newby

36

Inside Defender of the Crown
Tips From the Designer / Kellyn Beeck

38

Titans of the Computer Gaming World
Ardai on Infocom / Charles Ardai

40

Uninvited
A Guided Tour of a Macabre Mansion / Roy Wagner

42

The Sentry
Firebird's Unique Strategy/Arcade Game / Roy Wagner

44

Zen and the Art of Game Design
(Annual White Space Article) / Greg Johnson

DEPARTMENTS
4
46
55
56

Taking A Peek
Letters
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

Accolade, Inc.
20813 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
SIGMA 7: The "Sigma" is a massive space station in the shape of a capital "Sigma," the number "7" stands for the number of difficulty
levels in the game itself. Avantage means it is a
lower end arcade product from Accolade, and
the feeling of deja vu is that the object of the
game is to destroy the ultimate alien battlestation before it becomes operational. C-64/128
($14.95). Circle Reader Service Card #1.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.
Jacob Way
Reading, MA 01867
THE HOBBIT and THE FELLOWSHIP OF

THE RING: From the books that spawned the
genre come two text adventures with interspersed graphics to challenge Tolkien buffs.
The graphics mattes have a watercolor appearance and the game objectives are faithful
to the books (which are included in the game
package). Apple II ($34.95). Circle Reader Service Card #2.
Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Hartford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
DARKHORN: For one to four players,
Darkhorn is an extremely versatile strategy/fantasy game. Players recruit armies from three
races; input orders by means of joystick,
keyboard or paddle; choose from eight set-up

options to handicap better players; and use a
dueling (arcade) option to decide combat.
Game comes on an Apple/Commodore "flippy"
disk with "nippy" documentation (helpful idea).
Apple, C-64/128 ($30.00). Circle Reader Service Card #3.
Broderbund, Inc.
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
CAULDRON: A castle with "Lava Chambers," "Hemlock Caverns," "The Crypt," and
"The [Killer] Pumpkin's Lair" is not the kind of
"Bed and Breakfast" place to be listed in the
Michelin guide. On the other hand, this ar-

Continued on page 6

cade/exploration game imported from England
(where it was a best seller) may be just the
kind of vacation from reality that some joystick
jockeys need. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #4.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
CHUCK YEAGER'S ADVANCED
FLIGHT SIMULATOR In this product, you
can fly eleven different airplanes ranging from
World War I vintage to the present or three different experimental aircraft where you complete "Test Pilot" evaluations using General
Yeager's own forms. You can race against your
friends. A sequel entitled "Chuck Yeager's
Combat Simulator" is in the works. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #5.
EOS - EARTH ORBIT STATIONS: Up to
four players attempt to build efficient and
profitable space stations in order to accomplish
one of seven missions. There are 39 different
modules to be chosen from in assembling your

station. Apple II, C-64/128 ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #6.
LEGACY OF THE ANCIENTS: Often
referred to by insiders as QUESTRON II because the designers wrote QUESTRON for
SSI, this CRPG makes a more lavish use of
color than the earlier product and contains 24
dungeon levels, 12 different towns, five action
games and "combat training centers" where you
can build up character points. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card #7.
Epyx
P. 0. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
STREET SPORTS BASEBALL: The
baseball diamond will remind you of something
out of the "Cosby Kids" cartoon series with its
garbage dump accoutrements, but it is a challenging arcade game with 16 amateur players
with distinctive personalities to choose from
and unique obstacles on the playing field.
Apple II, C-64/128, IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #9.

Eurosoft International
114 East Avenue
Norwalk, CI' 06851
JUMP JET: In this British import, the player
flies a simulator which emulates the carrierbased Sea Harrier VTOL. In addition to vertical take-offs and landings, pilots must learn to
hover and even, fly backwards. The display includes radar and range finder to facilitate
Sidewinder missile attacks and warning messages come via speech synthesizer. C-64/128
($24.95). Circle Reader Service Card #10.
VALHALLA: Based on Norse mythology,
this fantasy/adventure is not to be confused
with a Beowulf paced saga. If you want a
serious adventure based on Norse mythology,
this isn't it. Thirty-six animated caricatures of
the gods cavort through this adventure, sometimes whether you do anything or not! C64/128 ($24.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#11.
Infocom, Inc.
125 Cambridge Park Drive
Cambridge, MA 02140

THE LURKING HORROR Dave Lebling
meets Stephen King while searching out Chthulhu lore in the tunnels beneath M.I.T. That is
the feeling we got as we played this game. Of
course, the game isn't really autobiographical.
It is delightful horror at times, though. Many
machines ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#12.
STATIONFALL: Floyd the Droid is back
and you have been promoted to Lieutenant
First Class in this sequel to PLANETFALL.
Steve Meretzky's inimitable brand of humor is
lavishly integrated into the story. Many
machines ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#13.
Konami, Inc.
815 Mittel Dr.
Wood Dale, IL 60191
HYPERSPORTS/PING PONG: Swimming,
skeet-shooting, horse jumping, archery, triple
jumping, power lifting and pole vaulting make
up the first arcade game in this title. The
second game is a three dimensional table-top
view of the familiar patio/game room activity.
C-64/128 ($14.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#14.
MIKIE: How many arcade games are based
on characters from cereal commercials? This
one teaches Mikie more about real LIFE than
the cereal! Mikie literally tries to get "through

school" as he is chased by a mean janitor,
teachers and the cafeteria staff. C-64/128
($14.95). Circle Reader Service Card #15.
RUSH'N ATTACK/YIE AR KUNG-FU:
The first title is the official adaptation of the arcade game where you become a guerrilla behind enemy lines and strive to use your knife to
wipe out Soviets and rescue American P.O.W.s.
The second title is a conversion of another arcade game with a martial arts theme. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card #16.
TRACK AND FIELD: Just what it sounds
like, 100 Meter Dash, Long Jump, 110 Meter
Hurdles, Hammer Throw and High Jump make
up this typical arcade game's repertoire. Apple
II, C-64/128 ($14.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #17.
YIE AR KUNG FU 2: Will Lee Young's
"Oolong Tea Power" and "Chow Mein Noodle
Power" enable him to conquer the wicked
emperor and his seven warlords and restore
the cosmic balance? This arcade game picks up
where the first one (see above) stops. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card # 18.

CONVERSIONS RECEIVED

For the Amiga:
Roadwar 2000 (SSI)
For the IBM:
Arcticfox (EA)
Marble Madness (EA)
Music Construction Set (EA)
Superstar Ice Hockey
(Mindscape)

MichTron
576 S. Telegraph
Pontiac, MI 48053

TellStar (Spectrum Holobyte)

AIRBALL: Imagine a game with the style of
"Marble Madness" and a plot line developed

(SirTech)

Wizardry!: Proving Grounds

Continued on page 10

"I Think We've Got a Hit..."
The Twisted Path to Success in Entertainment Software
by Don L. Daglow
Don has a distinguished background in computer
game design and development. He has applied
his talents at such outstanding companies as Mattel, Electronic Arts, and Broderbund. His article
"The Dark Ages of Computer Game Design"
(CGW #28, May 1986) was one of the best articles we have ever
published. Don returns to
the pages of CGW with
this article on the ways
and means of computer
game production.

It was near the end. We
stared intently as the
brightly colored images
danced across the
monitor, electric spirits
summoned to a life of unerring rhythm, casual
beauty. Screen after
screen they persisted,
riveting in their intricate
perfection. The author
leaned toward me. "I'd like to make that part of
the demo go by faster. It drags."

I nodded. "Prob'ly right."
After another long pause, "I don't have time to
redo that graphic, but it still doesn't look right."
"It doesn't bother me. You know the one that
bothers me." I nudged him with a playful elbow.
He turned towards me with a wry smile on his
face, the uneven light making his inquisitive eyes
even more expressive. I noticed for the first time
that the sun had gone down and that the computer was lighting the room in festive colors like
a crackling fireplace on Christmas Eve. We continued to watch the carefully rehearsed routine
with which the game would proclaim itself to
prospective customers in software stores across
the country. After a few minutes, I turned to the

author and quietly uttered the phrase: "I think
we've got a hit."
Tired, proud, satisfied, worried, fulfilled...he
smiled.
Softened by time, that was a moment in the
development of Stuart
Smith's Adventure Construction Set in 1984. The
sun may not have gone
down that night just as
we were watching the
demo, but there were
plenty of times it did go
down as we talked over
the game's progress in
the glow of the monitor.
Stuart may not have been
worried about demo
pacing. I honestly don't
remember, but I do
remember the sense of
accomplishment, of
having been around for
the creation of something
worth creating. No one
else had ever been able to design an open
graphic adventure and role-playing game creation system (let alone on such a small machine
as a Commodore 64). Yet, Stuart Smith had
done it.
Now, three years later, my prophecy has been
proven correct. Adventure Construction Set was
a hit, won a bevy of awards and continues to sell
well. That's history, though. The purpose of this
article is to share what happens inside a
software publisher as we build the games we
hope will be hits in 1988 and beyond. We'll lead
you through a Producer's week here at Broderbund Software (in this case, an unusually good
and busy week) and share the highlights of
several projects, from those which are close to
completion to ideas just now crystallizing into
visibility on the screen.

Monday
What do we look for in a game
designer? We start with a sense of
game design, awareness of what
makes something fun. It is an instinct
bestowed by native talent and honed
by years of hard work. Creating user
interfaces that are easy and intuitive
is a learnable skill, but not as simple
as it sounds. Perhaps most important
of all is the ability to push yourself
week after week, month after month,
long after writing the game has
ceased to be fun and has aged into
drudgery, while still caring about
quality and "getting it right." A
publisher can help with the game play
and interface by giving feedback and
suggestions to help fine-tune the
game, but the ability to keep working
after sheer exhaustion sets in is a
talent for which no publisher can ever
compensate.
This Monday morning, I'm incredibly lucky. An established game designer, who fits the model I've just
described, calls with a new idea for a
game. It concerns an area I know he
studies and where he understands the
market as well as anyone in the industry. He summarizes his ideas briefly and it is clear that they are technically feasible and artistically original.
I know only three sentences about
what the game will be, yet we begin
tentatively to discuss the financial
structure of a contract. Eighteen
months from now (twelve to create
the product, six to get enough time to
see how it will sell), we'll know if our
decision was right. Mondays like this
happen only once or twice a year.
What a way to start the week!

Tuesday
This afternoon my hopes are up--albeit cautiously. Recently, I visited a
talented new author (whom I'll call
Jack) who had the beginning to an exciting-looking game. It starts out as a
strategy game, but has arcade elements as well. The strategy game portions look very promising, with nice
graphics and well-balanced game
play, and Jack is visiting Broderbund

today for my initial look at the first
version of the arcade-style screens.
We arrive in my office and immediately, boot the game. My heart
drops. It's too simple, too much like a
thousand other games. I really wanted
to be able to say "yes" to the project,
but there is just no way. I give Jack
some suggestions, remind him to hang
in there and keep working on it, and
tell him I'm still hopeful he can put
together a strong action sequence so
we can publish the game. Only time
will tell if he has the personal strength
(and money) to keep going until he
gets it right. A business programmer
who loves games but has never
published one, Jack quit his job to
work on the project without ever discussing it with a publisher. Now, he
has enough game to show, but his
money is running out. We see the pattern over and over again. The game is
good enough for us to be encouraging, but not yet good enough for us to
risk precious money funding its
development.
As Jack leaves, I find myself trying
to mentally plant thoughts in his
mind. "Keep trying. Use one of your
other ideas for the action game. Don't
give up." I hope all that stuff about
subconscious communication works.

Wednesday
Today is devoted to the almostdone, the project I can tell you about
because it will be close to coming to
market by the time you read this.
You'll get to watch with me to see if
we've got a hit.
Over a year ago, Mike Livesay contacted me and discussed starting a
monumental project, an Arcade
Game Construction Kit. The concept
had been tried before, but had always
required users to learn a programming language or master complicated
graphics tables. Mike wanted to
create a product that would let
people make games by selecting
pieces from parts boxes and choosing
items from lists to build "scripts" that
tell each moving object and background square what to do in given
situations. Lots of sample games and
pre-drawn graphics by a talented art-

ist would be included, so people
wouldn't necessarily have to use
Mike's powerful graphics editors in
order to create a game.
The project was complex, ambitious,
and dangerous for a publisher to undertake. Despite being simple to use,
the game had many powerful features
for advanced users, so the documentation would be expensive to write and
print. The author could run out of
memory in the machine before he got
the game driver running properly.
The editors could turn out to be too
limited to create fun games. The
whole project could be too complicated for anyone to understand or it
could let people build their own arcade games and be incredibly fun to
use. It could be a hit.
Mike had a five-year track record
writing both original action games like
The Heist and translations of such hits
as Miner 2049er and Bruce Lee. He
had programmed so many arcadestyle games he was a walking encyclopedia of design techniques. He
had a reputation for always finishing
what he started, paying attention to
quality and schedules, and being
pleasant to work with. We decided to
take the chance and publish Mike

Livesay's Arcade Game Construction
Kit.
This Wednesday is the moment
when what has been Mike's long, lonely struggle with one or two key supporters becomes an intricately
choreographed dance with members
of every department in Broderbund.
Mike is flying in to San Francisco
from Los Angeles with the latest version of the game for everyone to see.
I've already met with members of
the sales force and briefed them on
the project. They think it sounds like
something the retailers will want to
carry. Now, we start building a package that will communicate what the
software inside can do. We demo the
game to prospective package designers. In this and the following days
there will be meetings on: the front
cover art, the back cover screen shots
and text, the manual, the reference
card, the warranty card, and the
projected costs. I shudder as the total
expenses mount up, $10,000 and

(Continued on page 53)

around a haunted house. Then, turn the
marble into an inflated rubber ball which occasionally needs to be reinflated and you have
a feel for this design. ST ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #19.
GOLDRUNNER This generic space game
has detailed graphics and slight touches of
humor. Players must destroy the alien technology within the "Rings of Triton" in order to
pave the way for Earth's mass migration to
other worlds. ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #20.
SHUTTLE II: The next generation of space
shuttles is here in this game which looks and
feels like a flight simulator, but makes no
pretense to be one. Instead, shuttle pilots attempt to score points through successful missions and efficient launches and landings. ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #21.
Microprose Software
120 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
PIRATES: Sid Meier's game of adventure on
the Spanish Main is called an adventure/simula-

tion by Microprose. Alert gamers will notice
that its graphics and interface look a lot like
certain earlier games, but the game offers more
decision points and painstaking historical detail
beyond earlier games. C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #22.
Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, CANADA
B4V 2X6
ROMMEL AT GAZALA: Tobruk campaign
games have always been popular and this is
SimCan's contribution to the field. It is a
board/counter assisted game (or vice-versa)
with heavy dependence on "fog of war" to make
the game system work. Apple II, IBM ($60.00).
Circle Reader Service Card #23.
Spinnaker Software
One Kendall Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
SKY RUNNER: In this arcade game, the
player acts as a Super Narc, but with a twist. A
governmental dictatorship wants everyone on
dope, but the SKY RUNNER is a rebel seek-

ing to destroy the drug harvesting machines. C64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#24.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
PRESIDENT ELECT 1988 EDITION: This
is the same excellent game with more candidates and a few refinements. Apple II, C64/128, IBM ($24.95 or $10.00 plus old disk).
Circle Reader Service Card #25.
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
RUSSIA: Wargamers have eagerly awaited
this eastern front campaign game which features four command levels of military hierarchy, ability to play scenarios or a campaign
game, and a game design kit for customizing existing scenarios or creating new ones. Apple II,
C-64/128 ($40.00). Circle Reader Service Card
#26.

Computer Gaming World
Game of The Year
The following games are nominees for
CGW's Game of The Year Awards to be
presented at DragonCon '87 in October
and announced in the November issue of
Computer Gaming World.

Adventure Game of The Year
Bard's Tale II (Electronic Arts)
Leather Goddesses of Phobos (Infocom)
Might and Magic (New World Computing)
Starflight (Electronic Arts)
Trinity (Infocom)

Strategy Game of The Year
Balance of Power (Mindscape)
Battlecruiser (Strategic Simulations)
Battlefront (Strategic Studies Group)
Gettysburg:The Turning Point (Strategic
Simulations)
Under Fire! (Avalon Hill Game Company)

Action Game of The Year
Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts)
Gunship (Microprose)
Hardball (Accolade)
Marble Madness (Electronic Arts)
Sinbad and The Throne of The Falcon
(Master Designer/Mindscape)

One of the above games will be the Overall Game of The Year.
A CGW Special Award for Artistic
AchievmntaCopurGewilsb
presented.

SSI's fantasy trilogy is
brought to a close, and
Scorpia is there to
report the details!
t started in Gelnor,
I with the first con-

runs across the top of the screen, showing a stick figure for
each member of your party (head, torso, two arms, two
legs). When a character sustains a wound to one or more
body parts, the display shows you which one, and how
severe the wound is.
Injuries are relatively minor. Breaks, however, will certainly have an effect on the character's ability to fight or cast
spells. For example, you can't fight at all if your right arm is
broken or the limb in question has been cut (or possibly
chewed) off. The best you can do is parry. Fortunately, the
appropriate-strength healing spell will restore broken and
lost limbs...except for heads. A head (or torso) that is Gone
means the character is dead, and resurrection is necessary.
Monster displays now show the status of the monsters, too.
You can tell exactly which ones are OK, and which ones are
unconscious or sleeping (dead ones, naturally, are gone altogether). This is a great help in deciding where to aim attacks.
A new addition to the ranks of
combat weapons is the bow.
Anyone can use a bow, and they
are generally the best weapons in
the game. They are more likely to
hit the vulnerable head area of
an opponent, thereby putting him
(or it) out of action much more
quickly. A variety of bows are
available (mostly found in dungeons), and some are quite
powerful indeed.
The basic combat setup, with
your party strung out in one line
across the screen, has not
changed. However, you can now
move individual members forward, bringing them a little
closer to the enemy, thereby increasing their chances to hit
(and, of course, be hit). There is
no way, however, to form an actual group, with some members
behind others.

frontation with the
evil wizard
Nikademus. After his
initial defeat, the path
led to Ferronrah, a
once-beautiful island,
laboring under a terrible curse. Now, at last, the trail ends in a dark fortress
squatting in the depths of the Netherworld. The final battle
between good and evil is at
hand...
In some ways, Phantasie III is
an anti-climax. After all, you
were supposed to have killed
Nikademus way back in Phantasie I, after which your party
was transported to Olympus to
receive awards for this heroic
deed. How Nikademus managed
to avoid this destruction the first
time around is never explained,
which makes things a little unsatisfying. Nevertheless, here he
is again, although for the last
time; this really IS the final show
down with the evil wizard.
Much of the game will be
familiar to those who have
played the earlier ones, although
six new spells have been added
which are used in conjunction
with bow combat. A few spells
have also been dropped from the
list, including Vision, and all foul
Strength spells.
You can either bring over your
Another new feature is training.
characters from Phantasie II or
When a character goes up a
start again with new ones. If you
level, a menu of skills is
transfer the characters, they will
presented. These are all the skills
become level one again and lose
in the game, and you have free
by Scorpia
most of their gold and goodies,
choice of what you want the
but keep just enough experience
character to train in; a character
to go up a few levels at the
may train three times upon each
beginning.
level gain (either all in one skill,
However, there are a few new wrinkles. Veteran players
or in three different skills, or any combination). There is a
will be happy to learn that, in addition to the infamous Dismaximum level attainable for each skill, which varies by
tribution and Selling routine, there is now a command that
class.
allows trading and selling by individual characters. This
Finally, the concept of Social Class has been introduced
makes life a lot easier (and faster!).
into the game. Each character, whether newly-created or
The biggest changes have been made in combat. Gone is
brought over from a previous Phantasie, is assigned a social
the anonymous hit. Now, you know exactly where and how
class (Peasant, Laborer, Craftsman, or Noble). This has no
badly a character has been injured. A new display window
effect on fighting or spell-casting; it is there to give you

Phantasie III

money. Yes, free money (how about that!). A character's
starting cash is determined by social class. In addition, every
time a character gains a level, he receives a sum of money,
also based on social class.
The adventure begins in the town of Pendragon, in the
land of Scandor. Scandor is a 5x5 square, 25 locations, with
14 towns and eight dungeons. In most cases, dungeons are
located right outside town, so you
don't have to make long journeys
back and forth. There are also the
Planes of Light and Darkness, as wet
as the Netherworld; each has one
town and one dungeon in it.
The dungeons are much as before,
white areas that fill in as you move
through them. Due to the addition of
the wound display to the screen, the
area display (for indoors and outdoors) is somewhat smaller than in
previous games. This occasionally
makes it difficult to see those little white
spots that mark special areas on the map.
Several of the dungeons (the straw
hut, the Gnome caverns, and the
dragon caves) are not absolutely
necessary to visit in order to finish
the game, but you'll probably want to
explore them anyway. Some interesting things can be discovered in them,
including a couple of really neat
bows in the Gnome caves.
The first important dungeon to visit
is the Archives, conveniently situated
just outside of Pendragon. Here you
will meet again your old friend Filmon the Sage, who will be happy to
send you hither and yon on various
little quests. Mostly, these take the
form of telling you that "it's now time
to go to" somewhere or someone.
Among the somewheres you'll be
going to are the Hall of Giants, the
Dwarven Burial Grounds (quite inter
esting, in its own way!), and the
castle of Chronus the Time Lord.
Otherworldly travels will take you to
the Castles of Light and Darkness, and the fortress of
Nikademus in the Netherworld (last stop).
Naturally, there will be monsters aplenty to get in your
way. Some are old favorites from previous Phantasies. Some
are new. You can still try bribing or greeting them, but most
of the time, only fighting will do.
Combat follows the typical strategy of taking out the most
dangerous monsters first. Now that the displays show you
the monster status, you can tell just which monsters are nonfunctional and leave them for last. This is a great help in
making the most effective use of physical attacks and spells
(although, alas, spells still can't be directed to a specific target).

With the new body location rules, it is vital to keep an eye
on injuries to the party members. Healing spells can be cast
during combat, so make sure you take care of any Break or
Gone wounds as quickly as possible. Mages cannot cast
spells if their right arm is broken or removed. Any Break
(or worse) to arms or legs prevents use of a bow. Inattention
to wound locations can get your party wiped out pretty fast!
If you run out of healing spells or
potions, characters can be restored
by staying at an inn, either in town, or
in one the independent inns scattered
across the countryside. However, the
healing abilities of such places are
limited. While they can cure most Injuries and Breaks, only magic can
bring back a limb that is Gone.
As before, outdoor combat brings
little in the way of goodies; the best
items are found in dungeons. It's best
to avoid combat in the wilderness, unless you want some experience points,
but remember that you can run
across almost anything out there, at
any time. Monster levels are not as
graduated as they are in dungeons.
It's a good idea to make sure your
mages have decent combat skills,
especially with bows. This allows
them to use weapons when fighting
low-level (or sometimes even mediumlevel) monsters and reserve those allimportant spell points for the really
nasty critters. Why waste precious
points on orcs and kobolds if you
don't have to? In fact, mages can get
to be rather effective fighters with
enough training.
Say, remember that Wand of
Nikademus you've been lugging
around with you since the good old
days in Gelnor? I'll bet you've been
wondering why it's followed you from
place to place. This is where you find
out!
What's that? You say your party isn't from Gelnor?
They're all from Scandor, or emigres from Ferronrah? No
problem. You'll find a Wand in Scandor. Although, as you
can probably imagine, it is by no means easy to acquire.
Hint: don't go too far into the Archives until you're really
ready.
Graphics are much the same as before, although perhaps
(at least on the Apple), a bit more finely-drawn, particularly
in regard to the monsters. All areas are filled in, so there
are no dark spots to walk over to see what's there (which is
also why there is no Vision spell). Mapping is rarely neces(Continued on page 50)

Euclid vs. Patton

Field Algorithms for Wargames
by Chris Crawford
The first feature article in the first issue
of Computer Gaming World was entitled "The Future of Computer Wargaming" and was written by Chris Crawford (CGW 1 No. 1 November
1981). Chris has been an occasional
CGW contributor ever since then.
Anyone involved with computer
gaming knows about Chris. He has always been an eloquent and outspoken
guru of the art of computer game
design (see his book "The Art of Computer Game Design; Reflections of a
Master Game Designer" published by
Osborne/McGraw-Hill, 1984). For
some time Chris has wanted to form a
support group among professional computer game designers. A planned
monthly electronic conference between
Chris, the staff of CGW, and about a
half dozen other professional designers,
unfortunately never materialized. , The
dream, however, of a designer's network continued to inspire Chris. Now
he has taken concrete steps to make
that dream a reality by introducing a
new publication, "The Journal of Computer Game Design". The stated purpose of the new publication is "to foster
the development of the art of computer
game design. It is a forum for game
designers to talk to each other and the
world." JCGD will be published six
times per year with 12-16 pages per
issue. The cost is $30 per year (The
Journal of Computer Game Design,
5251 Sierra Rd., San Jose, CA 95132).
We at Golden Empire Publications are
so excited about the project that we

have reached an agreement with Chris
To abstract and excerpt from each issue
of JCGD. Each issue of our new publication, "Computer Game Quarterly", will
contain a two page overview/summary of
recent articles in JCGD.
The following article was submitted by
Chris earlier this year. We are pleased to
share it with you now in our Game
Design Issue.

E

computer wargame must
provide artificial intelligence to
drive the military units which oppose
the human player. The central
problem in such a wargame is the
planning of the move for each unit.
What kind of algorithm will serve to
maneuver units towards the enemy?
Any such algorithm must consider a
variety of factors. It must decide
whether to move offensively or defensively. Simply put, it must determine
whether the situation calls for aggressive action or conservative action.
This done, it must determine the best
direction in which to move. It must
move in such a way as to avoid traffic
jams with other friendly units. A
variety of solutions have been used
for this problem. Some rely on locating the nearest enemy unit and
moving toward or away from him.
My solution to this problem uses a
field algorithm. Fields are mathematical constructs often used in physics.
In my algorithm, every enemy unit
emits danger in direct proportion to
very

its strength. Every friendly unit emits
"negative danger" (i.e. safety) in direct
proportion to its strength.
Further, the danger emitted by a
unit falls off with increasing distance
from the unit. Thus, a nearby unit is
more significant than a distant one.
The choice of distance function is
critical. The most obvious choice,
from a physicist's point of view, is a
1/R**2 function; this is the standard
function used for conservative fields
arising from point sources in
Euclidian space. However, this function is computationally difficult to use
in an assembly language program. It
requires one multiplication and one
division, consuming about a millisecond of execution time on most
eight-bit microcomputers. It is also
possible to use linear arithmetic functions (constant-R) or even exponential functions (2**(-R)). These are
much faster, but have some tricky side
effects that the designer must carefully analyze.
Once a routine has been written to
calculate the danger exerted by a
single unit into a single position, it is
a simple matter to extend this with a
simple summation routine to calculate
the net danger exerted by all units in
the game into the square or hex in
question. The safety exerted by friendly units cancels out the danger exerted by enemy units. With such a
routine in hand, the designer can calculate the net danger at any point on
the map.
Note that danger, as used by this algorithm, is actually a vector field. At
each point, therefore, the danger has
both a magnitude and a direction.
This provides the artificial intelligence routine with a great deal of information about the situation.
However, I have found that in practice, it is easiest to treat the danger
field as a scalar quantity and simply
calculate the danger at each square or
hex adjacent to a unit in order to
determine its best move. This process
yields a local gradient that is normally
easier to use.
The algorithm to utilize this danger
function is quite straightforward.
First, evaluate the danger in the
square occupied by the unit. If the
danger is higher than some threshold,

then one should run for safety. If the
danger is lower than the threshold,
the one should move towards the
enemy. Examine each of the four adjacent squares. Move towards the one
with the best (highest if offensive,
lowest if defensive) danger value.
Naturally, this algorithm does have
problems. It tends to discourage, but
not eliminate traffic jams. Its worst
flaw arises in the following situation.
Imagine a line of fierce enemy units
facing a line of fierce friendly units.
Sandwiched between them is a line of
extremely weak friendly units. The
weak friendlies will feel the danger
and strive to run toward the rear. The
fierce friendlies will attempt to push
forward. The result, of course, is a
stalemate. Therefore, designers will
want to avoid this algorithm in
simulating actions with high unit densities.
Further, this algorithm has a
dangerous tendency toward oscilla-

tions. For example, a unit feels bold
and advances toward the danger. Unfortunately, the danger increases past
the threshold point when it moves forward. Now, the calculation tells the
unit to feel timid. Thus, it moves
back. This oscillation can continue indefinitely. Since hysteresis only
widens the oscillation, but detracts
from the intelligence of the decisionmaking, it is not profitable to minimize the changes in the danger
threshold. Perhaps the unit should
not recalculate the threshold until a
significant event (such as a battle
round or time-out period) has occurred.
Despite these problems, this is a
powerful algorithm that can be
modified to handle almost any combat situation. I have used variations of
it for Eastern Front (1941), Legionnaire, and Excalibur. The basic algorithm still has a lot of life in it.

DRAGON SIDE II
by Scorpia

Scorpia's
regular hint
column
visits the
newest
release from
Commonwealth
Software.
Ah, here we are, heading into
autumn again (my, the summer went
by quickly... especially when you consider it's still spring as I write this!).
Step in, cool off, and have a tall, frosty one. Fred, as usual at this time of
year, is away attending the annual
Grues Convention, but the Dwarf behind the bar is pretty good. Now that
you're settled in, we can talk about
doing a little dungeoneering.
The Twisted Speare is a follow-up of
sorts to Bronze Dragon [Ed. - See
CGW, #32, p. 49]. The original game
comes with one full-length scenario,
Seekers of the Storm, and twelve
make-em-yourself castle adventures where
you choose: how many rooms, levels,
and rooms per level it should have;
how difficult you want the dungeon to
be; and how powerful you want the
monsters to be (Note: Some castles
have a minimum monster level, no
matter how low you specify the starting monster level). The castle-making
utility then creates the dungeon with
rooms, treasures and monsters randomly placed. Thus, each castle is unique. In addition, there is a plot to
each one, usually retrieving some
magical or other special item without
having to kill some main evil wizard
type to get it. Most of the time you
need to do something (or several
somethings) before you can get your

hot little hands on it, though. Therefore, you ramble through the levels,
with an eye out for "plot objects,"
items that will help you achieve your
goal. At times, these plot objects may
not be easily discerned as such (perhaps a dirty cloth or plain-looking
stick). So, back in Dragon Village

(your base of operations), you check
in with the wizard, who tells you if
there is anything special about a particular item. Sometimes, you need an
object even though it does not have
special powers (a crowbar, for instance). There are also artifacts and
treasures that are not related to the
plot. This keeps you on your toes
(hehe).
In both games, monsters can be
good, neutral, or evil. Most are evil
and have a variety of abilities with
which to make your life difficult.
Some are unaffected by weapons;
others are immune to spells; a few
can drive your characters crazy; some
have their own nasty spells; others
launch kamikaze attacks (watch out
for those Banzai Bunnies!); and some

divide like amoebas, presenting you
with more monsters. The list is almost
endless.
When you complete a castle, a trip
to King Leopold (or Lord Usul, for
evil characters) is in order. Leopold
will ask for some of the special things
you've found. The more you give him,
the more generous he will be in
awarding experience points and raising the attributes of your characters.
He may scream "Open the Royal
treasure vaults!", but he won't give
you any money. There are enough
items in the castles for you to sell,
though, so that's not too much of a
problem.

The Twisted Speare has 10 new plots
on it (but no full-length scenarios).
You do need the original Bronze
Dragon (version 3.0 or higher, if yours
isn't, send the original disk and $5 to
Commonwealth Software for an update) because Speare is only able to
create castle dungeons.
While Speare has many new
monsters and a few other tricks, the
basic mechanics are pretty much the
same as in BD and Speare is 100%
compatible in terms of magic items
and equipment (everything that
worked or could be used in the
original BD will work here and King
Leopold will go into the same raptures over Speare plot items that he
did over BD items.
The Twisted Speare is the name of a
pub. Here, you pick up information
on the plots of each castle, so it's a
good idea to visit the establishment
before heading off for adventure. You
also should drop in after an expedition and show some items around.
Some of the patrons may recognize
them and tell you a few interesting
facts.
Interaction in the Speare is menudriven. When you arrive (having first
gathered together your stalwart
band), several people will be inside,
listed by number along the left-hand
side of the screen. On the right, also
numbered, are possible topics of conversation. Using the arrow keys, you
choose a patron (whose name is then
highlighted), then one of the numbered topics.
The person may have something to
say about the topic, know nothing

about it, or refer you to someone else
in the pub. As conversations progress,
new topics appear on the right, giving
you more to ask about. It is wise to
ask everyone about everything before
leaving.
Speaking of leaving, people come
and go as though it were a real pub.
A new patron might arrive while
you're chatting with someone or the
person you just decided to talk to may
walk out the door before you get to
him or her. However, if you wait
around long enough, anyone who left
will eventually return.
The castle maker for Speare is slightly different. In the original BD, you actually got the number of rooms
specified per dungeon level. In
Speare, the number of rooms will vary
so that if you ask for a dungeon of
five levels with 15 rooms per level,
some may have as many as 19 or as
few as 10. Yet, the total number of
rooms will add up to the original number (75, in this case).
To keep from going crazy looking
for missing rooms, watch the screen
as the dungeon is created and write
down how many rooms there are per
level. This way, you'll know how many
there should be on each one. This is
especially important since some
rooms are found only behind secret
doors. Mapping tends to be rather
easy, since you will usually be told a
room's exact dimensions as soon as
you enter, as well as the locations of
all visible doors.
The new plots have some interesting
features. Take "A Thief in The Night",
for instance. A member of Thieves
Guild 106 snuck into the headquarters of guild 147 and stole the
fabled Tome of Larceny. Naturally,
guild 147 wants the book back, but
guild 106 says "No!." What to do?
Guild 147, to avoid open warfare with
a brother guild, decides to hire someone non-guild to steal the book back.
Guess who?
Perhaps the most intriguing plot is
"Murder Royale". Prince John, heir to
the throne, is murdered while exploring the Castle of the Seasons. A
suspect is in custody, and all evidence
at hand seems to point to him. But
did Iago (yes, that's his name!) really
murder the Prince? Is there a connec-

tion between this and the death of
King Henry, whose recent death has
been ascribed to poison? What
deviltry lurks beneath the surface
here? Only an expedition to the
Castle of Seasons will reveal the truth.
With ten plots in all, there's plenty
to keep you busy here for quite some
time. Also, since you can control the

difficulty in Speare as you did in BD,
even high-level characters will find an
interesting challenge.
All is not a bed of roses, however.
The Speare castles and the pub itself
are VERY space-intensive and some
problems have cropped up because so
much has been packed in. A few have
lead to extremely frustrating moments. For instance, I was totally unable to create the dungeon for plot
#6, Castle of Dreams. Then, when my
party tried to enter the pub to pick up
information for "Murder Royale," the
program couldn't handle it (the end
of this plot requires you to accuse the
murderer in the pub with all the
suspects gathered, so you can see how
this would be a slight problem).
Fortunately, Commonwealth
Software is very good at finding and
fixing bugs. Two days after I called
them about the above problems, a
new disk, with the problems repaired,
was shipped out to me. They are also
getting in touch with as many Twisted
Speare owners as possible, so those
disks can also be replaced. By the
time you read this (remember, I'm

writing in early June), the problems
with TS should be history. However,
if you do happen to find something
amiss, call or write to Commonwealth. They are really interested in
providing quality software, and if
there is a problem, they want to fix it
as soon as possible.
Perhaps the biggest drawback to the
BD series is its linearity. You are
after Object X. To get X, you need
item A. To get A, you need B. To get
B, you need C, etc. This can only be
done in one order. Any break in the
chain, such as selling or destroying an
item, will prevent successful completion of the quest (in which case, the
only thing you can do is re-create the
castle and try again).
Not all dungeons are set up this way,
but many of them are. Plot items, of
course, are scattered throughout the
castle. Thus, it takes some time and
exploring to puzzle out the exact sequence and items necessary to
achieve the goal. You can explore
levels in any order you like, but obtaining the major object can be done
only in one way, with the proper items
used in the proper places.
Considering all the variables involved in creating the dungeons, particularly the difficulty factor, it is not
possible to give the usual sort of hints.
This is one time when you really have
to figure out everything on your own.
However, I have my own technique
for dealing with these castles, which I
call "Clean and Sweep".
Basically, I go through and map the
entire dungeon, killing off all the
monsters (or bribing non-evil ones to
go away). I leave all the treasures,
items, and such in place, but note
them on my map (I do pick up any
stray bronze pieces that may be lying
around, though, as well as search
dead monsters for interesting items to
use or sell). This is the "Clean" phase.
Once the monsters are gone, I can
go about picking up the plot items (or
anything that may be one), and see
what can be done with them, without
any hassles. After obtaining the major
object, and knowing that everything
else is safe, I ransack the dungeon for
all the goodies. This is the "Sweep"
phase. It works rather nicely (since

Scorpion's Tale

DRAGON SIDE II
the number of objects carried is
limited, it may take several expeditions to do a thorough job of looting).
Not all monsters are evil and you
can get into trouble for killing those
that aren't. Therefore, it's a good idea
to have at least one Elf in the party.
When you come across monsters you
aren't sure about, get the Elf up front.
Neither rearranging the party nor
using "Detect Evil" ability costs a
move, so once you know if the creature is evil or not, you can decide
what to do next (leave, fight, etc)
without losing a turn.
Overall, I enjoy the BD games.
While they do not have graphics (just
no room in 64K), they are cleverly
designed and quite challenging at
high levels of difficulty, even when

monsters are relatively low-level. The
plots in Speare are, I think, better
than in the original BD (but don't

overlook those, either), and divert a
bit from the linearity of the original.
They are an amazing value for the
money, considering how much is on
these disks. Add in a variety of plots
and customized dungeons, and you
have a very nice package indeed;

more than enough medium-length
games to keep you occupied for many
hours to come. Next time you're feeling adventurous, drop into The
Twisted Speare ...ya never know what
might happen.
Well, well, I see it's that time again
(you know what they say about having
fun). Before you leave, remember that
if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Visit the Games
RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach
the Games RT). By US Mail (if you
live in the United States, please
enclose a stamped, self- addressed envelope if you want a reply): Scorpia,
PO BOX 338, Gracie Station, New
York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

A C.E.S. Report
on the Computer
Entertainment
Software
Industry
Remember your intrepid editorial
staff's adventures in January? Our
trip to the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show in Las Vegas was
endangered by computer problems at
the reservations desk, a pilot trainee
in the air, a fuel spill at LAX, and the
public address system of our airline
malfunctioning. Well, your
courageous editors were treated to a
similar experience on the way to the
Summer Consumer Electronics Show
in Chicago. Our flight had already
been delayed for one-half hour when
a strange announcement came over
the public address system. "Ladies
and Gentlemen waiting to board Overbooked Airlines Flight Number 33
1/3, [Ed. Name and number changed
to protect the guilty.] we apologize for
any inconvenience caused by our
delay. The flight crew believes they
have fixed the problem, so after they
taxi the plane to make certain, we will
be boarding the plane for our
Chicago flight." To think they say
publishing is a gamble! Nevertheless,
software publishing is expected to be
less of a gamble in 1987-88 than in
years past.
The keynote address for C.E.S. was
given by Frank Myers, President of
Arvin Electronics and Industry Vice
President of the Electronic Industries
Association and contained a projection of $30 billion in consumer
electronics purchases, this year. Of
course, that figure includes
televisions, compact disc players,

videocassette recorders, radios, computers, televisions, and more. Even
so, the EIA estimates that sales of
home computer software will amount
to $1.6 billion in 1987 and $2 billion in
1988. Bob Ingersoll, new Vice-President of Marketing for Mindscape,
cited statistics stating that approximately 20 million computers are
already in homes and that figure is expected to be closer to 38 million by
the end of the decade. Speaking
during a panel discussion on Computer Entertainment Software, Ingersoll presented an optimistic view of
the future for entertainment software
in his comments: "I was a retailer in
the so-called depression. I don't think
it really occurred. I believe what happened was we had an expectation of a
growth curve which didn't occur. I
believe that in '87, we are where we
wanted to be, perhaps thought we
were, in '84." Other panelists agreed
with Ingersoll's assessment.
THIS LITTLE PROGRAM WENT

TO MARKET
rom the very beginning of the
show, we heard the key word
over and over again.
Firebird told us within the first two
minutes of our interview that they
were "here to win" in '87-'88. "We are
out to slay the giants!" quipped Marten G. Davies, President of the British
Telecom affiliate in the United States.
Michael Katz of Atari stated une-

F
marketing

quivocally that, "The big news for

Atari, this year, is marketing." He
elaborated on the subject by pointing
out that Atari has raised the ante on
their advertising budget to the $10-15
million range from their $2-3 million
range of last fiscal year. The new
president of Activision, Bruce Davis,
released a statement at C.E.S. which
read, "Our number one objective is to
attain a consistent level of profitability
by building on our existing strengths
in the marketplace." "Wild Bill"
Stealey, President of Microprose,
reflected that "We grew because of
product, but advertising and promotion is becoming more and more important." Microprose has underscored
their concerns in this area by initiating their VMR (Valued Microprose
Retailer) program of dealer support
and hiring Michael Harrison, a
former journalist, to serve as their
Communications Manager.
"This is fine," you arc probably
saying to yourself, "but what will this
mean to me, the consumer?" First of
all, the emphasis on marketing concerns will probably indicate that there
will be fewer titles released overall
each year. The companies are concerned that each new title reach a certain level of success and will be less interested in taking risks. At the same
time, the desire to reap more profits
out of successful and marginally successful titles should speed-up the rate
and number of conversions. Astute
CGW readers will note that we

predicted this horizontal consolidation of the market in issue #35 (p. 7).
Second, the marketing emphasis
means that software publishers will
continue to support three different
price levels: 1) High-range
(generally $40 plus); 2) Midrange (generally $20-40); and 3)
Low-end or budgetware
(generally under $20). Third,
the close monitoring of sales
performance should make the
publishers more responsive to
the consumer's desires and
demands. At Activision, this will
include frequent retail store
checks, better communication
with user groups, and "more
traditional market research."
Consumers can rightly expect
the publishers to pay more attention. Fourth, product quality itself should increase with more
"man-years" and corporate dollars invested in each title. Bing
Gordon, Vice President of
Marketing for Electronic Arts,
added emphasis to this final
point by noting that Proctor and
Gamble is one of the largest
producers of consumer-oriented
products in the U.S., yet they
will not bring any product to
market which has not been
rated significantly better in their consumer testing research than existing
products. Gordon insists that "A
product should be 50% better than its
closest competitor." He summarized
the discussion on marketing by
noting, "Marketing can add overspin,
but it can't make a product."

"RACE" PREJUDICE
of new releases must
Anytouchdiscussion
on the proliferation of
racing simulations. One of EA's hottest new releases, Ferrari Formula I,
should be out by the end of the third
quarter. The second of the Sports
Legends series, this racing game will
feature seven actual Formula I Grand
Prix courses with site-specific scenery;
seven different artificial intelligence
profiles on actual Grand Prix drivers
(Andretti, Lauda, Fittipaldi, Proust,
et. al) which players can race against;
impressive mechanical-engineering

strategies which include a wind-tunnel
for setting the wings and numerous
decision points for tires, suspension,
etc.; and the superb Amiga graphics
and sound that has given EA such

ing skill to outwit terrain, elements,
and police while driving on a mountainous road. In addition to these first
line products, Firebird will be releasing a mid-price racing game entitled,
Revs Plus and ShareData, a
giant in budget-priced software,
will release a multi-game arcade
pak around the racing theme.

THIS SPACE ASSAILABLE

Games of space exploration

renown with the Amiga. Activision
plans to release Top Fuel Eliminator,
a C-64 product based on drag racing,
in June of this year. Interestingly
enough, the player must make
numerous strategic decisions involving: ignition timing, fuel mixture,
clutch adjustment, supercharger
speed, wing adjustments, and tire
pressure. Detailed information on surface temperature, air temperature,
humidity, elevation, and traction is entirely relevant to setting up the car to
race in the nine most important races
of the drag racing season. Accolade
has also entered the racing fray with
Test Drive for the Amiga (slated for
September release). This program
with its exceptional graphics enables
the player to drive a Lamborghini
Countach, Lotus Turbo, Ferrari Testarosa, Corvette, or Porsche on a
mountain road. Players must use the
characteristics of each car, the "Fuzzbuster" type radar detector, and driv-

and conquest have been
popular since the early days of
StarTrek in its mainframe
manifestation. This year will be
no exception. On the serious
(Sirius?) front, Accolade will
launch their NASA-assisted
design Apollo 18: Mission To
The Moon in June. Ottawa-based
Artech Digital Entertainments
did the design work on this C-64
simulation and has continued to
enhance Accolade's reputation
for maximizing the C-64's
graphics. Players will compete in
eight different phases of the
moon mission: launch, flight,
orbit, EVA (extra vehicular activity or spacewalk), lunar landing, moonwalk, and lunar blastoff. Final Frontier Software,
familiar to most CGW readers as the
publishers of Space M + A + X, announced that Lunar M + A +X, an
even more detailed simulation than
the previous product, should be available around Christmas and an Atari
ST version of Space M +A +X is currently being developed. Microprose
revealed that they are working on a
space combat game with the working
title, "Starship Empire," which they
would like to have ready for the C64/128 by Christmas. The game would
presumably use a first person view
with a scrolling cockpit and the player
would captain a cruiser while defending the Terran Confederacy from
deadly aliens. Activision hopes to
score with the Apple II conversion of
Aliens and Firebird has translated
their Starglider game to the Amiga format. EA has already released EOS
(Earth Orbit Stations), a multi-player
game of space station construction
and Interstel has begun to advertise

Star Fleet II, which will be released in
August of 1987 on the IBM, followed
by C-64, ST and Amiga ports by
December. In SFII the player returns
to the Academy to learn Krellan
strategy from the their viewpoint by
participating in a Krellan simulator.
There are lots of bells and whistles on
this product, including more graphics,
supply rules, negotiations, boarding
graphics, obliterator pods, selfdestruct mechanisms, and fractal
graphics for planetary surfaces which
provide an arena for a simple, surface
combat system. This one should be
worth waiting for.
THE DELIGHT OF THE AVIATOR
Aviation aficionados may have to
make some difficult choices in
1987. Microprose leads the way with
Project Stealth Fighter, but EA's Chuck
Yeager's Flight Simulator and
Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s B-24
with its mission-oriented approach to
a combat flight simulator can't be far
behind (if at all). Spinnaker
Software's Air Combat
Emulator II and ShareData's
Flight Simulator Pak fill out the
budget ranges. Meanwhile,
Atari is attempting to cross-pollinate its XE game machine and
XE line by offering Flight
Simulator II along with Missile
Command and Blast 'Em as
part of their XE Game System.
Project Stealth Fighter should
be available for the C-64 by Fall
'87 (Apple and IBM by early
'88). The simulator itself goes
beyond F-15 Strike Eagle by offering opportunities to pitch
and roll, but the real advantage
of the new product is to allow
the player/pilot to control the
entire electromagnetic profile of
the Stealth aircraft. There are
numerous decision points in the game
which will control detectability, thrust,
and angle pitch. The game uses a
speculative model of a 40,000 pound
aircraft with twin GE engines. Missions will probably be based on
geographical regions which include:
the Arctic, Caucasus, Mediterranean,
North Africa, and Persian Gulf. The
latter arena for combat was primarily

a marketing consideration, since it
doesn't make sense to use technology
designed to deceive a major power
when one is facing a minor power. B24 is SSI's real-time flight simulator.
Although it doesn't give the familiar
cockpit view of most flight simulators,
it is a detailed and challenging simulation where one must pay attention to
altitude, vertical speed, heading, air
speed, degree of bank/turn and degree of pitch. The player performs all
the tasks of the pilot, co-pilot,
navigator, engineer and bombardier
in a B-24 Liberator bomber and must
successfully rendezvous with the rest
of the formation and fighter escorts,
while determining the flight path,
speed, altitude, and targets for the entire bomber formation. Chuck
Yeager's Flight Simulator is an IBM
product from EA which allows one to
fly fourteen different planes, race
against a competitor's plane (the
program records your scores so that a
friend can race against you), or act as
a test pilot by flying planes and filling
out Yeager's own forms.

OUBLIETTES AND ORANGUTANS

O

f course, the fantasy genre will be
well-represented during the
releases for late '87. Intellicreations
will release Alternate Reality: The Dungeon, the long-awaited sequel to The
City. Character generation is essentially the same, but characteristics are
more nuanced as to their effect upon

the game. The support locales (shop,
tavern, inn and smithy) are not as
easy to find, since there is only one of
each in The Dungeon. Those who
liked the idea of The City, but hated
the problems will be delighted to
know that the company used Betatesters from outside the company with
avid gaming backgrounds and the
designers paid a great deal of attention to The City players' complaints.
The new game has the ability to join
guilds and has moved beyond "hack
and slash" to a point where encounters may be beneficial or irrelevant, in addition to dangerous.
[Note to City players: You no longer
have to reboot after saving the game.]
Activision will soon release The Last
Ninja for the C-64. This is not simply
another martial arts game. This is a
"thinking man's" arcade/adventure
with puzzles, weapon choices, magic,
and monsters. The artwork is so finely
detailed that you will literally think
you are looking at a 68000 machine.
Lucasfilm is releasing Maniac Mansion through Activision, a mystery
game with joystick-driven,
menu-assisted parser and, at
least, five different successful
endings. Players can form parties of seven characters and
maneuver three of those
seven separately throughout
the adventure. There are 55
rooms and more than 450
touchable objects in the adventure.
The concept behind Rainbow Road (from Electronic
Arts) is familiar to fantasy
buffs. Characters move from
location to location by either
physical movement or teleportals (the graphics are reminiscent of the climactic interdimensional scene towards
the end of the movie 2001)
More importantly, however, is that
the game can be played solitaire or
with up to three human players. It has
menu-driven character action, movement and combat a la Archon (also by
Free Fall, and also published by EA),
and hundreds of pieces of information to collect in order to solve the
quest. Each character's attitude and
manner is important with regard to

the success of each encounter and the
quest in general. SSI will release
"Wizard's Crown II,"
The Eternal Dagger
for Apple, C-64/128,
and Atari 8 bit
during July, August
and September
respectively.
Mindscape has just
released the third
Macventure. Entitled Shadowgate,
playersxo
Castle Shadowgate
via a smooth, mouse
interface, in order to
locate and destroy
the sinister Warlock
Lord. Avalon Hill
has just started shipping Darkhorn, Tom
Cleaver's longawaited multi-player
strategy game based
on a fantasy world.
Firebird is expecting to steal a lion's
share of the market with Guild of
Thieves, the sequel to The Pawn,
which has a "suspicion of a release
date" in the third quarter and should
be available slightly later on the
Amiga. Knightorc (also to be released
on the ST and followed on the
Amiga) is a fantasy game with the trilogy built into the product itself. As
the player moves from entry level to
expert, the story continues progressively with continuity of characters
and abilities. Black Lamp is an ST
product which Firebird fully expects
to rival Cinemaware. The company
will also enter the mid-range, textonly adventure market with Silicon
Dreams and Jewel of Darkness.
universe will expand with
e
"three
"thre new products for the fall.
Plundered Hearts sounds like a cross
between a Harlequin Romance novel
and a pirate movie. Nord And Bert
Couldn't Make Head Or Tail Of It is a
collection of short stories built on
wordplay, cliches, spoonerisms and
puns. Readers of Xanth novels may
send this one to the top of the charts.
Finally, Beyond Zork is Brian Moriarty's attempt to stretch the envelope of
Infocom-type games. It is expected to

be a blend of the traditional interactive fiction and role-playing games.

FULL SILICON JACKET

M

ilitary simulations are also
present in 1987. Besides B-24,
SSI is working on The Battle of Shiloh
(built off their very successful Antietam/Gettysburg system), a
Napoleonics game, a simulation built
around modern Afghanistan, and a
tactical, squad level World War II
game. By the time you read this
Broderbund will release Ancient Art
of War At Sea in August (and at a
later date for the Mac and Apple
IIgs). AAWS will cover naval warfare
from the age of fighting sail up to
WWII. Scenarios included on the
game are: The Spanish Armada, The
Nile, Quiberon Bay, Trafalgar, and
the search for the Bismarck. You can
also design your own scenarios.
Spectrum Holobyte will release PT109 in late June or July for the Mac,
with the C-64, ST and IBM ports due
in August or September. This exciting
simulation of the `Elco' (Electric Boat
Company) Patrol Torpedo Boats is
designed by Digital Illusions, designers of Gato and Sub Battle
Simulator, and looks like a detailed
product. Avalon Hill is rapidly converting Under Fire to IBM formats.
The product will support 320 c 200
color, 640 c 200 black and white or

the 700 c 350 Hercules card, plus
they've added some significant aids to
play. The mapmaker now shows
X, Y coordinates,
indirect fire range
has been increased, more
detail on the units
makes it easier to
differentiate between weapon
types, teams may
include up to 20
units per side (as
opposed to 16 in
the Apple version) and the
game may offer
up to twelve different weapon
types (six types
per team) as opposed to the earlier total of six.
The game also leaves a trail of crosses
to help the player keep track of his
move.
icroprose has an entire string of
conversions and new products
planned for late '87 and early '88.
Gunship, for the IBM, should be available in the fall and boasts smoother
animation due to the machine's configuration. Silent Service, for the
Apple IIGS, is due in September of
1987. The bad news is that the much
heralded Red Storm Rising project
won't appear until early first quarter
of 1988. The good news is that it will
probably be a series of two or three
games. Airborne Ranger involves individual combat. The player
parachutes into enemy territory,
armed with a submachine gun and
hand grenades, and attempts to perform several different commando missions. The game is potentially a
sophisticated Castle Wolfenstein.
Speaking of the old classic,
Mindscape has recently released Into
the Eagle's Nest. The player seeks to
rescue three allied saboteurs from
that Nazi fortress, "The Eagle's Nest,"
and attempt to destroy the fortress
while saving European art treasures.
There are four floors to the castle and
four separate missions for aspiring
Clint Eastwoods.

M

One of the most significant military
simulations heralded at the show was
the Universal Military Simulator from
Firebird. As noted in January, UMS
is a remarkable piece of craftsmanship which looks as though it will be
the military construction set the consumers have been looking for. Stay
tuned for detailed coverage in October.

"HART'BREAK RIDGE AND
OTHER SIMULATED REALITIES

AA s promised, SSI introduced their
A
version of the 1988 Edition of
President Elect at the show by hosting
a tournament on Saturday night. We
regret to inform our readers that the
CGW editorial staff merely finished
second in their respective parties.
Bob Lindstrom (of A + Magazine), as
George Bush's campaign manager,
and Steve Panak, as Senator Gore's
campaign manager, advanced to the
finals with 471 and 351 electoral votes
respectively (against computer opponents). Lindstrom (Bush) handily
defeated Panak (Gore) 499-39 after
Gore's disastrous foreign trip in the
finals. Of more significance than the
tournament, perhaps, was the fact
that Joel Billings, the publisher of the
game, defeated Nelson Hernandez,
the designer of the game, in a friendly
non-tournament game at the party.
Billings (Gore) defeated Hernandez
(Kemp) by a mere 950,000 vote margin (50%-49% in popular vote, 317221 in electoral vote). It was 3:46
A.M. Eastern time when Gore was
declared the winner. California was
not yet decided. The excellent news
about the 1988 Edition of President
Elect is that owners of the original version can receive the new edition by
sending in the old disk plus $10.00
(and $2.00 for shipping and handling).
Other simulations to be released in
1987 include: Avalon Hill's NBA, the
only professional basketball simulation to include graphic representations of all 10 players. The statistics based game, designed by Quest,
Inc., will feature twenty teams (from
the 1959-60 Boston Celtics to the final
four of the 1985-86 season), include a
stat-keeper program which not only
keeps cumulative season stats, but up-

dates individual player's performances during and after the game, and
offer three modes of play (human vs.
human, solitaire, and computer vs.
computer). XOR, makers of NFL
Challenge, recognizes that the $99.95
price tag on their major product is a
bit stiff for many gamers. The new
management plans to market a
trimmed down version of NFL Challenge which would reflect 3/4 of the
product at 1/2 the price, a Chevrolet
to their current Cadillac. This may be
accomplished by putting out a pure
strategy version with no NFL names
(working title "Shirts and Skins") or
perhaps, simply the statistics for the
"NFL Championship" game. Nevertheless, the company plans to be as
responsive to customers as possible
and hopes to add player's names,
tabulate individual stats, and provide
a utility for designing your own plays
in future releases of the game. Epyx
used a "California" theme at their
booth to trumpet their new California
Games and soon-to-be-released line
of "Street Sports" games, while
Mindscape touted their Superstar Ice
Hockey (which has just been converted to IBM formats).

THE RETURN OF THE
ARCADIANS

Ar

cade games are making a come
back in 1987. Mindscape was so
pleased with their Bop'N Wrestle
game that they have introduced
Bop'N Rumble, a humorous, arcade
romp through the inner city in which
your brawny wrestler attempts to
defend "Granny' from hoodlums and
freaks. ST owners may like MidiMaze, the Maze Wars type game from
Hybrid Arts which lets you link
together up to 16 ST's for a multiplayer "Happy Face" smashing spree.
Players can even design their own
mazes by using almost any ST word
processor. Accolade will market a
delightful miniature golf game with
zany animation and typical Accolade
humor. Mini-Putt should debut in the
fall of this year. Firebird will offer Hyperball in their mid-price range to
sate the appetites of "Rollerball"
aficionados. Microdeal will attempt to
woo Marble Madness fans with Air-

ball, a 300 room maze which must be
traversed with an easily deflated Airball. Spinnaker Software is continuing
to market the UXB line and has
added Bazooka Bill, Ardok the Barbarian, and Sky Runner to their list of
arcade titles. Activision has served
notice that they are returning to the
game machine market with their new
Kung Fu Master cartridge.
A FLIGHT OF ANGELS
Our return trip to Southern California was delayed by more than an
hour, due to the fact that "Overbooked Airlines" had, indeed, overbooked the flight. In fact, your
editorial staff couldn't even sit
together and compare notes from the
show on the way back. Instead, we
each had to suffer the presence of a
beautiful woman as our companion
for the flight home. Smart marketing
move, overbooking! Which reminds
me, if you want to know what direction the software industry is going
during the rest of this year and next
year, as well, just ask yourself "What
would the best marketing decision
be?"

Title:
Players:
System:
Designer:
Publisher:

PHM Pegasus
1
Apple, C-64
Noah Falsteim
Electronic Arts
Lucasfilm Games

M. Evan Brooks goes to an expert to
add depth to his review of Electronic
Arts' latest wargame simulation.

P

HM Pegasus (PHM) is EA/Lucasfilm's entry into the world of realtime combat simulators.
With the profusion of flight,
submarine, naval and
helicopter simulators, it
seemed only a matter of time
before innovative concepts
would be exhausted. But
EA/Lucasfilm has come up
with a simulator approach to
a weapons system that no
one has ever considered
before in terms of home computing.
PHM refers to the official
US Navy designation: Patrol
Hydrofoil Missile (craft).
Most people have no real
conception of the
capabilities of the hydrofoil;
the most familiar hydrofoil in
the world plies the shipping
lanes of Hong Kong and
Macao -- a tourist "must
see". Insofar as the naval wartime capabilities of the
hydrofoil are concerned, a
large void exists in the public
consciousness.
The United States Navy
has a total of six hydrofoils
in the Fleet -- hardly enough
to form a task force.
However, for certain escort
and surveillance missions,
the hydrofoil is a good
choice. PHM familiarizes the user
with the capabilities of the hydrofoil
in its most likely environments and
mission objectives.
This reviewer has to confess to
general ignorance of the subject matter, having considered the main use of
hydrofoils to be as a swamp boat for
grade-B Everglades television shows;
in reality, hydrofoils and airboats are
separate and distinct vessels. Therefore, in reviewing this product, aside
from the entertainment aspect, this
reviewer consulted with an expert in

the field. The source utilized for this
review is an acknowledged expert in
hydrofoil systems; his published works
in this area are voluminous, and he
has spent the last fifteen years in the
field. While this article was initially
going to be co-authored, given the current mind state of the military/intelligence community (e.g. the Morrison/Pollard/Marine guard affairs),

coastal patrol boats in the 200-300 ton
class (non-hydrofoils).
The United States Navy is a "Big
Ship" Navy. Gary Hart developed terminal unpopularity with Naval Forces
by calling for mini-carriers. More is
Better; Big is Best! In fact, the
hydrofoils were canceled by the Navy
and only Boeing and Congressional
overrides compelled the Navy to accept the craft.
Somewhat akin to the
World War II PT boats
("They Were Expendable"
has more truth than a mere
movie title), the hydrofoils
are prestigious commands.
However, the command is at
the lieutenant or lieutenant
commander level; the entire
squadron is commanded by
a captain. Plans to develop
frigate-sized hydrofoils (2000
tons) have existed, but again,
cost of construction has
proved fatal.
If necessary, the hydrofoil
squadron could be moved to
the Mediterranean by a
mother ship. But overall, the
hydrofoil has evolved into a
commercial success rather
than a military one.

Overview
HM is a quality product.
The glossiness of the
package coupled with the
voluminous documentation
presents a pleasing offering.
The documentation is very
complete, and its extensive
historical background and
technical data make for interesting reading. A total of eight missions make up the simulation.
Mission accomplishment will result
in a ranking from "Deck Mopper" to
"Admiral". The first two scenarios
(training) are harder than necessary.
In Battle Training, ten enemy vessels
will attack. The problem with the
scenario is that the enemy ships will
suddenly appear within a 5-mile
radius. Since the radar screen offers
up to 40-mile ranges, such "pop-ups"
negate the effect of relying on radar,

P

"My Other Boat Is A High Speed
Combat Patrol Hydrofoil"
by M. Evan Brooks
this source wishes to retain his
anonymity (along with his job).

Hydrofoils In The Navy

H

istorically, the hydrofoils are the
step-child of the Navy. Currently
employed as a Coast Guard supplement, the hydrofoil has simply become too expensive for naval employment. The Navy was going to purchase an additional 5 ships, but current plans call for a foreign design of

and in fact teach non-reliance on an
important system. The second
scenario (Graduation Exercise) involves ten enemy boats attacking simultaneously. Unless masochism is the
desired result, this reviewer recommends beginning with the third and
following scenarios. They are
more interesting and realistic.
By simple keyboard input,
one may choose between the
bridge and the operations
map. Similar inputs allow for
movement rate increases (to
128 times normal!), speed,
radar scans (from 2.5 to 40
miles), targeting, maneuvering and utilizing convoys and
helicopters -- Easy to Learn,
Easy to Use.
he largest flaw in PHM is
that the simulation favors
the player in terms of
damage control. Depending
on the type of hydrofoil
(American, Israeli or
Italian), the player can absorb damage in up to four
separate compartments,
while missile hits upon
OPFOR (Opposing Forces)
boats are generally sufficient
for complete destruction. Allied missiles (Harpoon,
Gabriel or Exocet) are
smaller than their Soviet
counterparts; they are torpedo-sized equivalents, while
Soviet Styx missiles are miniature (half-sized) airplanes -and with 5 times the explosive warhead of NATO
weaponry.
Generally, a single missile
hit would be sufficient to
destroy the player ship; on
the other hand, the converse
is not true. While the player
can utilize chaff in an effective ECM role, the enemy
vessels have no such advantage. Historically, most naval vessels do have
chaff capability, if not ECM. Based
upon size and destructive abilities of
the missile systems, it would take one
hit to destroy a Komar or OSA;
however, Nanuchka and Assad boats
could require 2-3 missile hits in order
to render them combat ineffective. In

1986, a Libyan Nanuchka was hit by
an A-6 delivered Harpoon; the boat
required four hours to sink. An interesting aside is that a tug was sent out
on a rescue mission; not knowing the
identity or capability of the tug, US
airpower quickly sank it.

T

terms of velocity, the simulation
'appears relatively accurate, except
'appears
for the turn rate being slightly too
high for the player vessel. In terms of
game employment, missiles are the
weapons of choice, albeit their
availability is insufficient for all missions. Therefore, guns must be
employed against lesser threats with
the missiles reserved for the "Big

Boys". Gunfire is adjusted by an adjuster light and is an excellent corrective factor. Through this mode, "leading" the enemy vessel becomes a
method of skill rather than luck.
While the documentation offers ship
silhouette recognition, actual identification of enemy vessels on
the high seas remains a
problem. Only continued
familiarity by playing will permit the player the luxury of
early recognition; thereby
permitting one to choose the
optimum weapon for the
situation at hand.
In later scenarios, auxiliary
units are available (both
helicopters and convoys).
PHM will not allow one to
shoot at a friendly vessel.
While this will prevent
numerous serious errors, this
reviewer does not think that
IFF (identification -- friend
or foe) would be available to
commercial convoys. Thus,
EA has lessened the responsibility of the player -- a plus
for playability, but a minus
for historical accuracy. Lest
the reader dispute such
point, it is only necessary to
point to the Gulf of Tonkin
(1964), wherein a US
destroyer came very close to
firing on its sister ship in the
heat of "combat" (turner joy
and maddox).
The helicopters are invulnerable. This reviewer
wondered why no weapons
system was capable of removing such a threat. The expert
was not bothered by this;
given the scenarios, the
helicopters would have sufficient time and distance to
avoid contact with enemy
weapons system.

Strategies
In terms of employment, particularly
in a surveillance scenario, a "Rolling V" should be utilized. The
(Continued on page 54)

With the planned release of more and
more software titles which deal with
mature themes and our sensitivity to
"censorship" issues, CGW decided to
ask John Williams of Sierra to address
the subject of adult-oriented software.
This overview is the first of three parts.
Mr. Williams will not only sketch out
current conditions in software publishing but address the significant
areas of public reaction and selfregulation in the industry. To
those readers who will ask if this
series is necessary, we must
answer with a resounding "Yes." If
the computer entertainment industry is to avoid the religious controversy which has surrounded fantasy role playing and censorship
battles continually fought by the
record industry, guidelines will
need to be drawn soon.

James Bond, Rambo, and even a
Steven King story (The Mist). The motion picture counterparts of these
games all rated a PG-13 or R rating.
James Bond movies are usually rated
PG (sexual content and violence);
Rambo movies are generally granted
R ratings (violence, language and
poor taste); and Steven King's stories

GOODBYE 'G'
RATINGS

T

he makers of computer
software have finally figured
it out. Not all computer garners
are under the age of 16. Software
publishers are finally making an
effort to provide software that
adults can enjoy on their own
level. Adult situations, mature
subject matter and even a little se-x has been included in recent
programs. As the trend continues, we will see more of the
adult subject matter which, up until
now, has been found in R and X
movies.
The concept of "Adults Only" entertainment software is not new. There is
and has been a handful of "Adults
Only" software titles which could be
purchased through mail order houses
and the public domain. As early as
1982, On-Line Systems (now Sierra)
produced a hit software package
called Softporn which featured some
really dirty stuff. Unfortunately, although Softporn was followed by an
avalanche of adult-oriented software
titles, the vast majority were poorly
produced and of questionable taste.
Until very recently, adult-oriented
software has not appeared on the
roles of the industry best seller and
critics' choice lists.
The recent trend toward adult
themes was started when Mindscape
released adventure games based on

The New Wave of Adult
Entertainment Software
By John Williams
are normally tagged with an R rating
(violence, nudity and macabre themes
too intense for young children). While
it is obvious that the computerized
equivalents of these movies are less
potent than the real things, they still
retain some of the same flavor that
earned them the PG and R ratings as
movies. In most cases, the sex and
foul language have been removed,
while the violence has been toned
down to an almost tolerable level
(Rambo, of course, is an exception.).
Recently, two adventure games,
which are establishing the beachhead
for adult-oriented software, made the
charts. They are Leather Goddesses of
Phobos and Defender of the Crown.
Leather Goddesses met the problems
of adult themes and sexual subjects,
as expressed in computer games,
head on. Players are given the option
of toning down or turning off sexual
content in the adventure game by

selecting one of three different levels:
Tame, Suggestive, and Lewd. In Tame
level, players are subjected to all the
sex appeal of a Gidget rerun (though
the game is still fun to play). At the
Suggestive level, the player encounters descriptions that are funny,
but bashful. The Lewd level treats
players to creative and well-written
descriptions involving naked
people, surgical tubing, and yaks
(?). The entire episode is played
for laughs and the sexual content
is not graphic, but it is still not a
game that you would want to
play with your mother.
Defender of the Crown is an adventure game in the more traditional (and trite) sense of the
word. The object of the game is
to do battle with the bad guys,
try to save the princess, and so
on. The difference comes when
you rescue the princess. She
"rewards your heroics with her
favors" in a bedroom scene that
you could not find in a Disney
movie. The scene is romantic,
erotic and just plain classy. This
product will go down in history
as the first to make effective use
of lingerie in software. The
artwork for Defender of the
Crown is some of the most realistic seen in any computer game.
So, when the princess steps in
front of that roaring fire, you see
everything that is going on underneath her nightgown.
While both of these products would
easily have earned PG's had they
been movies, the represent a large
step forward for adult software
programming. The next step in
software will be the first
honest-to-goodness "Adults Only" game. This
next step will contain subject matter
that would earn it an R rating in the
cinema. Unless Infocom gets on the
ball and creates a "Crude" level for
Leather Goddesses, the dubious honor
of taking this step will go to an
animated adventure game from Sierra.
Sierra has two (count 'em) game titles waiting in the wings which deserve
an R rating. The first is Leisure Suit

Larry in the Land of the Lounge
Lizards, an adventure game parody on
singles life in the 80's. The main

character in the game, Larry, is a 40
year old man thrown into the dating
game after years in a steady home
life. In the game, the player will be
thrown without mercy into singles
bars, discos, casinos, and even, a
house of ill repute. There will be
gambling, prostitution, alcohol
abuse and other subject matter
which has traditionally earned
the R rating for a motion picture. On the more socially conscious side, a company spokesman said the game will advocate
"safe sex."
The second R rated product
will probably be Police Quest:
Search for the Death Angel.
Police Quest will be a more
serious adventure game with a
"feel" that could be compared to
the novels of Joseph Wambaugh
or an animated Hill Street Blues.
While it could be argued that
this software is a qualifier for a
PG rating, the characters involved in the game make the R
rating a necessity. Police Quest is
based on the life of a street cop
that goes undercover.
This means that the prostitutes, drug addicts and
other undesirables of the
street scene make for a
tale that is just a little
too strong for early
teens.
In talking with other industry spokespersons,
mention has been made
of other adult-oriented
software titles in the
works. Computer game
versions of Harlequin
Style romance novels
and some especially
steamy works based on
Playboy's "Ribald Classics" are on the way.
Nevertheless, just as the
major Hollywood
studios avoid the X rating, major
software publishers will avoid the
production of "X-rated Software."
Small production houses are the ones
cleaning up on their releases of
ADULTS ONLY! software offerings.
Milkyway Productions (P.O. Box 432,
Old Chelsea Station, New York, NY,

10011) has recently re-released three
of the most offensive and pornographic software products of the
Atari VCS days. Custer's Revenge and
Bachelor Party (even the title of the

third product is
too rude to mention) are available by
mail order, but only to people over 18
years of age. If these titles see any
kind of sales at all, we can expect to
see them on the more sophisticated
computer systems like MS-DOS.
A more innovative "X-rated

Software" product is CVC Online's
SEXTEX Bulletin Board Service
(CVC On-Line, 801 Second Ave. NY,
NY 10017). Done in conjunction with
High Society (the elite "smut"
magazine), SEXTEX promises to
be the on-line equivalent of
phone sex. Of course, independent swingers' bulletin board
systems already exist in major
cities across the country.
Finally, even dirty old Softporn
is due for a comeback. It is currently enjoying a new lease on life
as a graphic adventure for the
NEC 8801 in Japan. It has also
been rumored that it will be
released this fall for Apple, Atari
and Commodore 64 by Impulse
(what else?) Software (P.O. Box
1103, Oakhurst, CA, 93644) with
a suggested retail price of $7.95.
As more adults begin using the
computer as an entertainment
center, more adult software will
emerge. Each publisher in this article is quick to point out that
publishers are not trying to sell
these items into the traditional
entertainment software
market (i.e. teenage
boys). Adult software is
sold to adults only. In
fact, Infocom, Sierra,
and other software
publishers have been
very conscientious about
clearly marking software
with warnings on the
content of the software.
Master Designer
Software (distributed by
Mindscape) would seem
to be the exception in
this regard. It is clear to
the Software Publishers
Association that some
sort of self-regulation is
the best policy and plans
for a rating system will
probably be made in a
future SPA meeting. In the mean
time, most of the software publishers
and a lot of adventure gaming adults
are glad that Tipper Gore doesn't
own a home computer.
NEXT MONTH: Public Reaction to
Adult Software

TITLE:
THEATRE EUROPE
SYSTEMS: Apple, Atari, C-64/128
DESIGNER: Ian Steels
PUBLISHER: Datasoft (Intellicreations)
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311

INTELLIGENCE REPORT:
Since the Cold War in
the late 1940's, the
armed forces of NATO
have faced the threat
posed by the Soviet
Union and her Warsaw
Pact allies. As the
decades have passed,
each super power has
perfected an arsenal of
conventional, chemical
and nuclear weapons unlike any ever unleashed
before in battle. While a
Third World War might
begin anywhere and
would surely be a global
struggle, ultimate victory
or defeat might well
hinge on the success or
failure of a massive
Soviet invasion of
Western Europe. For
nearly four decades the
politicians and generals
of three continents have
sought answers to the unthinkable. Could the outnumbered western alliance withstand
the Soviet onslaught using only conventional weapons? Would one side
or the other feel forced to resort to
advanced chemical weapons? Would
a nuclear option involve only a
"limited" tactical exchange or would
such implementation lead inevitably
to full-scale strategic nuclear war?
Theater Europe (TE) is a hybrid
product which functions as an introductory level strategy game covering
the battle for Europe in the "next" war
and as an arcade game integrated into
the strategy game. TE comes with a
12 page game manual, a copy of the
front page of the Die Zeitung (a fictitious West German newspaper outlining the present "Crisis") and a map
of Europe, including both NATO and
WARSAW PACT reinforcement
schedules. The documentation ushers

gamers quickly through the initial
game set-up, options and game play.

DEPLOYMENT:
All game commands in TE are issued via joystick from a series of onscreen menus. Commands are both

Datasoft
Goes
To
War
by Bill Harrington

simple to learn and use. Players may
elect to play the game at any one of
three difficulty levels. Unfortunately,
TE allows only solitaire play with no
provision for two player gaming. In
addition, only one game at a time may
be saved to disk.
TE provides for two types of game
play. Gamers may elect to play a traditional strategy game or choose "Action Screens," arcade style game
screens which, if selected, occur
during combat. These are definitely
NOT simulators, such as Gunship, F15 Strike Eagle, etc. The ability to
drop down from a strategic game to a
tactical simulator would be an interesting option. However, a challenging
arcade "shoot'em up" sounds like it
could be entertaining in its own right,
if not strictly relevant. This is where
TE begins to fall down. The action
screens (infantry, tanks, jets and air

raids) are, in fact, only a single arcade
game that even the truly uncoordinated should be able to master in
one sitting. CHOPLIFTER it isn't.
Their entertainment value drops
faster then a banana republic's currency. To make matter's worse, the
"results" of these arcade games go on
to influence the results
of the larger strategy
game! Serious gamers
may want to give this
particular game option a
miss.
In spite of these drawbacks, TE is a somewhat
more substantial as a
strategy game. Units are
CORP level and include
NATO, Warsaw Pact,
and Neutral (Swiss,
Austrian and Yugoslavian) forces. Each unit
is rated in turn for Combat Strength, Air Support and Supply level.
Note that corp and army
organizations in TE are
not strictly "historical."
The game proceeds in
turns representing two
days each. Each turn includes a movement
phase allowing gamers
to deploy NATO or
Warsaw Pact units.
Units generally move one position at
a time, via the joystick, except in
mountain areas where units take two
game turns or four days to enter a
new position. The principal exception
is the Warsaw Pact 1st Airborne
Army which may be deployed deep
behind NATO lines in its initial move.
Oddly enough, perhaps because of
game scale, the game does not allow
NATO airborne units ( e.g. the 82nd
Airborne) similar deployment.
Next, players enter an attack phase
and select enemy units as targets,
again with the joystick. After selecting
targets, the player may choose to use
tactical "chemical" weapons for this
turn and the balance of the game, enhancing enemy losses, but raising the
spectre of an enemy response. After
leaving the attack phase, the screen
display "flickers," indicating units
engaged in combat. Destroyed units

disappear while defeated units are
retreated one position to the rear.
After combat, the player enters a
rebuild phase for allocating supplies,
airpower and reinforcements to
depleted units.
Finally, TE players allocate available
air power to air superiority missions,
counter air, interdiction, reconnaissance and three special tactical missions ("assaultbreaker" to disrupt an
enemy attack, "deep strike" to attack
enemy command and control centers
and "iron snake" designed to cut
enemy rail road lines). Strategic and
Tactical Air Support in TE is
abstracted, with no air combat plotted
or displayed during game play. Last,
but not least, players may choose
strategic chemical or nuclear attacks
on single enemy cities or launch a
massive nuclear retaliation by
inputting a nuclear authorization code.

DISPOSITION:
Game play in TE proceeds quickly.
A single game takes approximately an
hour to play. When the computer
commands the Warsaw Pact, it acts
aggressively, but fails to coordinate attacks or fully deploy all the available
units. The Soviet 1st Airborne conveniently waits behind enemy lines to
be surrounded and eliminated (even
at level 3!) When the NATO player
stays on the defensive and plugs any
gaps in the central front with reserve
units, the Soviet computer player is
easily frustrated. Commanding
NATO, however, the computer player
is NEVER aggressive (even when I ordered the Warsaw Pact armies to
retreat toward Moscow on day one!).
When I didn't order a retreat, the
computer player allowed me to turn
the Northern flank and surround the

remaining NATO forces in central
Germany. Alas, the NATO solitaire
player was a poor loser and launched
a full scale nuclear strike. That is the
real problem in TE. You can't win for
losing. That may be the point of the
game, but as entertainment, it is of
questionable value.

FINAL SOLUTION:
TE tries to be two very different
games. As an arcade game, the "action screens" simply don't measure
up. As a strategy game, TE uses all
the right jargon, but a simplistic
design and lack of a two player option
make for a game that is barely introductory level. TE does a credible job
of demonstrating the perils of escalation and dramatizing how slippery the
slope to nuclear war might be, but is
basically a game in search of a market.

After 43 years, the name "Ploesti"
still turns a head, jogs a memory
and tugs at a stomach if it is uttered
within earshot of one of some few
thousand men in their sixties who
knew the flak-filled skies of "Ploesti."
"Ploesti," known as the graveyard of
bombers, was the site where more
bombers (339) were shot down than
at any other target in World War II.

maintaining a certain air speed so as
to stay in formation and not become a
"straggler" waiting to be shot down,
"joining up" with your group formation 2,000 feet over Spinazzola, Italy,
and rendezvousing with your 15th AF
Fighter Group to be escorted to and

John Gray did more than turn my
head when he phoned me and said he
was designing a computer game based
on my airplane, Hangar Queen, and
my Bomb Group, the 460th (stationed
at Spinazzola, Italy), with a mission
directed toward "Ploesti," Rumania.
He had just finished reading my book,
TARGET PLOESTI: View from a
Bombsight.
John brought me out to California
and sat me down at his computer.
There, I played his first game, 50 Mission Crush. That was my first experience with a computer game and I
was sent back in time as I flew combat missions into Germany from a
U.S. air base in England. On my
seventh mission (in the game), as my
plane was being torn up by enemy
fighters and the bail-out alarm
sounded, my palms oozed sweat and
my heart beat faster as I relived that
horrible moment when, on my actual
fiftieth mission, the wing of my B-24
blew off and I bailed out. John Gray
had captured combat realism in a
computer game!

A Fresh View from a
Bombsight
by Leroy W. Newby
from the target.

While there, he walked me through
his new game, B-24. B-24 is a flight
simulator type game. He showed me
how his product took a different approach than other flight simulators.
Most simulators focus on the exacting
demands of doing all the things required to take off in a plane, loop it,
or land it. In B-24, you as the Commanding Officer of the 460th Bomb
Group are presumed to know the
mechanics of flying an airplane. In
playing B-24, your skill input involves
decisions such as choosing one of 12
oil refineries encircling the city of
Ploesti, changing course so as to
avoid a mountain at your altitude, conserving gasoline for the trip home,

Taking off requires attaining a certain air speed to get off of the ground.
You have some say in this as you
choose the bomb and gas load, with
consideration of the head wind at
take off, all of which affect runway
and lift off speed. You also control
the degree of flaps and engine power
settings to gain optimum fuel usage
and not overheat the engines. If you
fail to reach a certain speed by a
designated point on the runway, you
may "abort" if you act quickly enough.
This may cost you some efficiency
points, but will certainly be less of a
penalty than crashing on take off.
You are in control! All of this came

from John Gray's experience as a B29 Flight Engineer in Korea, as well
as flight test engineer and pilot for
Boeing.

OIL'S FARE IN HITLER'S
WAR
John "picked my brains" for several
J hours and I supplied him with
many authentic combat documents
(some of which are reproduced in the
game packet). We discussed all of the
facets of a Ploesti bombing mission,
from finding the Initial Point (start of
the bomb run) to procedures in leaving the target area. We also covered
the specific targets and their relative
importance. Since oil was one of the
single most important ingredients of
Hitler's war machine and the end of
the war in Europe hinged on the
destruction of his oil production,
one's success in the game revolves
around the daily production rates for
each refinery. How accurately you
bomb your objective is reflected in
the drop in production rates after you
leave the area. Your efficiency rating
includes getting a high percentage of
planes back to base, degree of target
destruction and other factors. When
you complete the 19 missions flown
by the 15 Air Force against Ploesti,
your total destruction of production
at the twelve refineries is measured
against the historical destruction by
the 15th Air Force in 1944. If your
total destructive impact is greater
than that of the 15th Air Force, you
will be given an estimate as to how
much you would have shortened the
war and how many additional lives
would have been saved. Conversely, if
your total destructive impact is less,
you will be given an estimate as to
how much you would have prolonged
the war and how many additional
lives would have been lost.
On my second trip to California, I
was amazed at how John had captured the many nuances of decisions
having to be made in split seconds
and affecting the success of a mission.
His grasp of details, known only to
men who were there on those missions, is impressive in their integra-

tion into the game. Game is not the
right word. Experience is what you do
when you grab that joystick and work
your way to Ploesti and back. Satisfaction is what you get when you make
that landing back at Spinazzola.

ways looked easy when I was a bombardier!
We began our slow climb to 2,000
feet and headed for the coordinates
indicating Spinazzola, our rendezvous
point for group assembly. I was al-

THE CHAUFFEUR
SYNDROME
fter watching John fly a
Acouple
of missions (with
my kibitzing mounting to the
point where he had to tell me
to wait my turn), he finally
said, "Now, Mr. Bombardier,
let's see what kind of a pilot
you are!" We bombardiers always said that WE were the
reason it was all happening..."You pilots are just
around to drive us bombardiers to the target so we can
strut our stuff. Same for you
navigators!"
I, of course, picked Astra
Romana, the largest refinery in
Europe, as my target so I could gain
extra credit for destruction of my old
nemesis with its high production rate.
I filled the gas tanks to full because it
was a long haul and I wanted to go in
high at 24,000 feet to cut down on
flak accuracy. I hedged a little on
bomb load, taking only eight 500#
bombs in order to conserve fuel, even
though it would cut down on my
bombing effectiveness.
I had never taken off a Piper Cub,
let alone a four engine bomber, but
there I was poised at the start of the
runway, engines on full power. I
started down the runway as my
airspeed increased tantalizingly slowly. I barely attained the required
speed at the point-of-no-return check
point, so I decided to go for it. As I
reached the end of the runway, I
seemed to have take-off speed and
had no choice but to lift-off. As my copilot, John, shouted, "More flaps!" I
responded with ten more degrees.
"Nose down to gain airspeed."
"Roger," I responded as I obeyed.
"Level out!" Whew! This taking off al-

could not get it feathered and face
the blades thin side forward in order
to reduce drag. Two other engines
had the superchargers shot out, so we
had only one complete engine.
John Gray didn't have to coach me
on what to do now. I dropped
my bombs, closed the bomb
bay doors and noted my
airspeed was not dropping so
fast--but my altitude was dropping! By the time I got things
under control, we were at
11,000 feet. I had to study the
map to plot my course home.
There were several 8,000 foot
mountains in my path, but a
few places to slip over some
hills with only a 2,000 foot
elevation. Unfortunately, the
low hills took us over some
cities known to have flak batteries. Of course, there were always "bogeys," German
fighters, to worry about, as well.

ready perspiring. The trick in assembling the group of 40 planes is to
maintain assembly speed while circling Spinazzola. I somehow did this,
but when I set out across the Adriatic
Sea, I failed to pick up my fighter escort and our group was forced to fly
all the way to Ploesti sans fighter escort...and that is not a good idea. We
lost a plane to enemy fighters before
we got to Ploesti.

We did engage some fighters,
but our gunners drove them off. As
we approached the Adriatic coast,
our fuel supply became a concern. A
calculation revealed we could not
make it across the sea to our base, or
to the alternate base at Foggia, a few
miles closer.

As we started down the bomb run,
we lost an engine to flak and our oil
pressure dropped before we could
feather the propellor. A super
charger went out on another engine
and our total available power
dropped drastically.

was living back in 1944, as I sweat
over the map and the stats shown
on the screen. We had thrown out
everything not nailed down, including
the famous Norden Bombsight that I
had taken a solemn oath to defend
with my life. We had to wend our way
through the Dinaric Alps to the sea
and then, locate the Island of Vis for
an emergency landing.

My mind raced back 43 years to
when I was in exactly the same situation. At that time, I was the bombardier so I salvoed my bombs as we
began falling below and behind our
group formation. Our pilot then
maneuvered the plane into a dive in
order to gain air speed and get us out
of the flak zone quickly. We leveled
off about 13,000 feet and headed
home alone. Our Number Three engine was "windmilling" because we

"We're going to Vis," I hollered to
John, who was sitting right next to
me. The Power setting on my #3 engine (why does it always have to be
#3?) was zero and there was only 6
on #1. The others were at full power-9. Now, I was going to land a bomber
for the first time and it was going to
(Continued on page 49)

No "Game Design Issue" would be
complete without an article on strategy.
Kelly Beeck, designer of Defender
of the Crown, shares the inside information on how to defeat those
Norman dogs. Most of the information in the article applies to the
C-64 version of the game, but
Amiga owners can gain from these
tips, as well.
by Kellyn Beeck

the chart on the next page for the
Norman ratings

Inside
Defender
of the
Crown

Movies often succeed or fail on
the strength of their characters.
Without interesting and believable
characters, even the most promising
storyline can fail miserably and disintegrate into a series of disconnected
events. Defender of the Crown (DOC)
is like a movie in this respect, because
characters are vitally important. They
determine the outcome of every game
by directing the course of events as
medieval armies march and collide
across the landscape of 12th Century
England.
In fact, the best way to tell you how
DOC is to explain the role of characters in the game. Based in part on the
Robin Hood story, DOC involves a
"minor" disagreement between Saxons
and Normans: a civil war. Civil wars
were almost commonplace in
medieval England and the middle of
the 12th Century is convenient because the Saxons were still smarting
from the Norman Conquest. Therefore, the game takes place at the end
of the Second Crusade (1147-1149).
The story begins with a royal assassination, igniting a civil war in which
you play a Saxon knight fighting
against the Normans.
PREPARE THE RATING PARTY
Each game is played with a different
set of medieval lords: three Saxons
and three Normans chosen from an
"all star cast" of nine characters. To
make the character ratings work to
your advantage, you will need to know
the characters' strengths and weaknesses as you are playing the game. A
table of the ratings is included with
this article. Use it to try out some of
the ideas that I am going to suggest,
but remember: leadership ratings can
change during the course of a game,
so be sure to check your opponents'
ratings frequently. The Saxons' ratings
may be found in the game itself. See

Joust A Bout To Topple
Thee
Be sure to consider jousting ratings
when you are choosing opponents in
the tournament. Your rating determines the size of the invisible "target"
you must hit on your opponent's
shield in order to knock him from his
horse. If you have a "Strong" rating,
the size of the target is larger and
easier to hit. Conversely, if your jousting rating is "Weak," you must strike
the shield very close to the center to
win. Your opponent's rating determines how frequently he will miss.
Weak opponents miss often and give
you another chance if your lance was
off target. Remember, your opponent's

rating only matters if you miss. That
means hitting the center of the cross on
the enemy's shield will always be successful, regardless of the ratings. Therefore, veteran jousters need not worry
about opponents' ratings as much as
beginners should. (Note for Amiga
owners: the opponent's rating determines the size of the target in the
Amiga version, your rating determines
the degree that your lance bounces, and
you always lose if you miss the shield
target.)

Fuel For The Duels
In swordfighting, ratings determine
the strength of each opponent and
are displayed as colored bars at the
bottom of the screen. Most of the
time, you should try to raid the castles
of lords with lower swordplay ratings
than yours. There are exceptions,
however. For example, imagine that
there are two lords left in the game,

Roger Falconbridge and yourself. Falconbridge owns most of the territories
and his army is stronger than
yours. You can strengthen yourself at his expense by raiding his
castle two or three turns in a
row. If you are successful, the
balance of power should be
shifted in your favor.
When swordfighting, remember
the guards are vulnerable only
when holding their swords up at
a 45-degree angle, so you need to
wait for that moment to strike. Try
parrying and retreating at the same
time. The guard will follow you,
thrusting and parrying as he tries to
penetrate your defense. Sooner or
later, you'll catch his sword in the vulnerable position--and that is the moment to thrust. As soon as the guard
reacts by thrusting or parrying,
though, return to parrying yourself
and wait for the next opportunity to
strike. Also, remember not to move
too far to the left (unless you want to
escape). If you find yourself running
out of room, just advance while parrying and force your opponent to the
right side of the screen.

The Causality of Casualties
When sturdy soldiers and gallant
knights face each other on the
"Defender" battlefield, the stronger
army usually wins. Sometimes,
however, leadership can carry a badly
outnumbered army to victory. Further, in cases where the two armies
are roughly equal in size, victory in
battle will always go to the side with
the strongest leadership rating.
Leadership increases the number of
casualties your army inflicts on the
enemy. During each round of battle, a
base number of casualties is calculated according to the tactic you have
selected. For example, knights have a
greater chance of inflicting losses if
you select "Ferocious Attack." After
the base number of casualties has
been determined, leadership increases the number by a certain percentage. A strong leader increases his
opponent's losses by 43%; an average
leader increases casualties by less
than 18%; and a weak leader has no

effect. The percentage is doubled if
you select "Outflank" as your tactic, so
a strong leader can increase his
opponent's losses by 86%.
Therefore, you should start each
battle by checking your opponent's leadership rating on
the chart above (better yet,
memorize them). If his rating is
lower than yours, you may want
to use the "Outflank" tactic.
In any case, choose the tactic
that capitalizes on whatever advantage you have. If you have
more catapults than your opponent, choose "Bombard."
Remember, catapults are expensive, but they inflict more
"casualties per dollar" than soldiers and knights. If you have
more soldiers, go with "Stand
and Fight."
Speaking of catapults, keep two objectives in mind for the catapult bombardments that take p lace during

castle sieges: knocking down the
castle wall and reducing the size of
the defending army (the soldiers and

knights are added together and displayed on the ammo selection screen
as the "garrison."). Your first shot
should always be a boulder. You can't
launch a disease bomb or Greek fire

into the castle until you have knocked
a hole in the wall.
If your first boulder is on target, use your second shot to
launch the disease bomb
through the hole and into the
castle. When it is used on the
second day of the siege, disease
causes 50% casualties among
the defenders. The number goes
down to 40% if disease is used
on the third day, followed by
30% and so on. Greek fire always causes 10% casualties,
regardless of when it is used.
Consider the strength of the
castle, the garrison, and your
own army before choosing your
ammunition for each shot. The
castle itself can be as important
as the garrison inside the walls.
In the battle which invariably follows
the siege, any remaining castle
strength decreases the defenders'

(Continued on page 48)

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World
Chapter One
With a tip of the hat to those who have gone
before, the author plunges determinedly into a
study of Infocom, the source for text adventures.
Surprise!
You thought you knew Infocom like the back
of your hand. Whether that hand held a glowing sword of Elvish antiquity, a Stellar Patrol
scrub brush, or no tea, you knew what to expect: the best text adventures on the market,
each written in a unique prose style which you
either love or loathe; a consistency of subject
matter and tone; and a degree of craftsmanship
and pride in developing quality material which
has won virtually all the
most highly coveted awards
in the industry for Infocom.
Recently, however, things
have begun to change. The
change is not in quality because, except for Seastalker, Infocom has never
released a notably disappointing game (and that was years ago). Stylistic changes have abounded, though, and if they
have not all been positive, they are, at least,
well-intentioned. From programming to packaging, Infocom has been "pushing back the envelope" of the interactive fiction field. More
"pushing" is on its way.
There is no way to tell if Infocom's new ventures will be successful and, despite their mileslong track record, one is tempted to point to
the lukewarm receptions received by experiments such as A Mind Forever Voyaging,
Fooblitzky, and their database, Cornerstone. Successful or not, however, one thing is certain -

the nature of Infocom's software can no longer
be taken for granted.
Some suggest that most of the alterations one
sees in Infocom's characteristic style and
development philosophy are the direct result of
ownership by Activision. Though the two companies remain largely autonomous, it would be
difficult to deny that Activision has an influence
on the directions that Infocom pursues. Furthermore, the changes reflect decisions which seem
typical of Activision (e.g. adding sound effects
to certain versions of The Lurking Horror or
releasing nine new products this year as compared to as few as three in previous years.
Still, one should not rob credit for the company's new directions from the decision makers
at Infocom. The Infocom philosophy is, and has
always been, a curious blend of risk-taking and
reliance on past success. Thus, one has the increased interactivity of Ballyhoo at the same
time as Spellbreaker, a.k.a. Enchanter III (a.k.a.
Zork VI), or one is confronted with the expanded memory requirements of A Mind
Forever Voyaging and Trinity, while one may
also relax comfortably in the highly traditional
puzzle solving of Hollywood Hijinx or Stationfall.
While this strategy could be potentially overcautious, it has always been successful for Infocom. Since it has been so successful, gamers
have become less and less wary when Infocom
announces new developments. In this past, they
have almost all been improvements. Why
should that change now?
Indeed, the situation shows no sign of changing. Though Infocom currently plans a more
thorough overhaul of their systems than has previously taken place, their timing is ideal. The
market seems just about ready for Infocom
games which feature sound, graphics and new
formats of play. If this is not so, however, and
profits are not doubled as a result of players

hearing Floyd's [Ed. - the inimitable Floyd the
Droid!] joints creak, Infocom is prepared, as
usual. Another Zork spinoff is in the works, as
is one or more absolutely traditional adventure games.
Several years ago, I was chatting with someone at Infocom and he revealed to me that a
voice-controlled Zork had been developed,
but was not going to be released until the
market was ready to support it. Since then,
many games have been released, each one
heralding some new feature: the first of the
now standardized packages (Cutthroats), the
first licensed title (Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy), and others. Yet, somewhere in the offices of this real-world equivalent of the Great
Underground Empire lies a version of Zork
which responds to voice commands. Somewhere near that gem, no doubt, is a game with
unfathomable graphic capabilities undergoing
development. A few doors down, Infocom's
prophets must be looking even further into
the future and gleaning ideas for ever newer
ways to "expand the methods," as Infocom representative Cindy Weiss says, "of exploiting
the multimedia aspects of interactive storytelling." With material, talent, and ambition like
this on tap, a brighter-than-ever future for Infocom is virtually assured.

Chapter Two
The author recounts his own experiences with
an uncontrollable passion for Infocom's
peculiar brand of interactive fiction.
I have some friends who simply cannot understand why I and so many others adore text
adventures. Most of them admit that if I have
to adore them, Infocom's are the ones to
adore, but they still cannot comprehend the allure of a screen filled solely with text or of a
simulation of life so terribly restricted. One,
the manager of the neighborhood "Software
City" that has appeared in prior installments
of this series, gave up on Infocom after encountering the first signpost in Enchanter.
Another, a noted gaming columnist and budding novelist, admitted recently that he hates
text adventures. Further, the terrible thing is,
I can't even answer their objections.
Ever since I played my first Infocom game
as I recall, - I was hooked, tolerat--Planetf,
ing even the abominably slow Commodore
1541 disk drive in my zeal for the genre. To
those who just shake their heads in pity, I
offer no defense. The puzzles are frequently
silly, the situations arc contrived, and the

choices to be made are limited, but I play
every single game Infocom makes, and I enjoy
them. Some I enjoy more, some less, but I always enjoy them on some fundamental level.
There is a certain satisfaction to be gained
from solving even the silliest of Infocom's puzzles, a feeling whose existence is common
knowledge to the crossword puzzle enthusiast
or the mystery-story reader. If the situations
happen to be of limited scope,
how much more so are the situations depicted in a film or novel?
Of course, there is not a single
Infocom game which can compare, on any level, to a great
novel. There are, needless to say,
different emotional and intellectual responses upon finishing A
Passage to India and completing

Leather Goddesses of Phobos.
When you do finish Leather Goddesses, though, there is a pleasant
ly euphoric sense of triumph to be
had. This must be, I suppose, partially a joy at triumphing over the
machine and partially a satisfaction at having beaten the game's
author in a battle of wits. Is an adventure game really more than a
highly elaborate version of "Twenty Questions?" Interactive fiction
has less in common with modern
fiction than it does with the ageold pastime of riddling - and perhaps, it is this basic connection
that accounts for the success of so
many fantasy games played out
against medieval backdrops.
Therefore, it is fair to say that Infocom's games are, most of the
time, just entertaining puzzles, albeit very entertaining ones. Sometimes, however, and not terribly in
frequently, either, Infocom's
writers create a portion of a game
which transcends its medium and
bridges the gap between interactivity and fiction, between activity
and art. When a game can make a character
come alive, establish a conflict whose resolution can be separated from the resolution of
an individual puzzle or riddle, or when a passage of prose or a sequence of events elicits a
response from the player which exists outside
the strict confines of the game, an adventure
game has become a transcendent work. This
is the case with parts of Planetfall,

(Continued on page 46)

NAME:
SYSTEM:

Uninvited

Amiga, Macintosh
(Amiga version reviewed)
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
ICOM Simulations, Inc.
PUBLISHER: Mindscape
Northbrook, IL

Uninvited.

THE ENTRYWAY
(Warning! Uninvited visitors who do
not desire hints should move to "The
Study" portion of the tour!)
ou sit behind a steering wheel.
The windshield is cracked and the
text displayed in a separate window
tells of your brother's startled cry,
your swerve to avoid someone/something on the road, and your missing
brother. Another rectangular window
indicates all possible exits from the
current scene with a small square
wherever an exit is located.
Well, here we sit in a wrecked car
with the smell of gasoline pervading
our senses and lightning and thunder
invading from outside. The first task
is getting out of the car. Once outside, you find that you are standing in
front of a very large house with a mailbox. What do we do with a mailbox?
Of course, we follow the unwritten
rule of adventure game playing. That
is, disregarding any legal or ethical
considerations, one always opens
every mailbox and even, letters to
others in order to examine their contents. [Ed. Note: This is now a written
rule.] Then, you add what is found
(and what is important) to your inventory. Now, the task is getting into the
house. The door is easy to open (So is
going inside!), but from the way it
shuts behind you, getting out of this
house is not going to be so easy. This
is a good time to SAVE the game.
You will encounter several other
creatures, but the only other living
human in this house is your brother
and you won't find him until the end
of the game.

A GUIDED TOUR
OF A MACABRE
MANSION

Y

In the early stages of your exploration you have a few rooms that are
safe to explore, but several rooms are
guarded by a beautiful apparition
which ends up turning quite nasty.
Upstairs there arc lots of rooms to explore with many objects to consider.
A great number of clues are also
found upstairs that will prove useful

by Roy Wagner

as the game progresses. The attic is
certain to provide a dead end.
Having taken care of the downstairs
ghost (just let the upstairs one be),
you are able to explore several more
rooms and then go outside. You will
find several useful items in these
rooms, so don't rush outside too
quickly. Though not obvious, the light
in the servant's quarters should be
turned on. Then, you will face something else that must be turned off (use
a certain inanimate object).
Don't leave the house until you have
started a fire and solved the puzzle of
the hingeless box. A demon with a
key wanders through the house. He
will challenge your patience, but isn't
important until much later in the
game, when you explore the outside
areas you will find something that he
will enjoy having.
Outside you will find three new
buildings to explore; a greenhouse, a
chapel, and a magesterium. The
greenhouse will be the easiest, even
though it may not seem productive at
first. You will not be able to enter the
magesterium until you have completed your exploration of the chapel
and the maze beyond it. Getting into
the chapel will not be easy either because of two vicious dogs. These dogs
are good listeners so you might try
SPEAKing to them, but make sure
your words are spelled correctly.
Once inside the chapel, you will find
another that will listen to your words.
Before leaving the chapel, explore
the area below the altar. It won't be
easy getting down there, but if you

have SAVEd the game, it will be fun.
The exit from the chapel leads to a
very challenging maze. It can be
mapped by paying close attention to
the display in the EXITS window.
The maze contains several
tombstones, all missing something
often found on graves (do you have
it?). Yet, only one grave site is the
right one and it is deep within the
maze. Several problem situations will
have to be dealt with in the maze
before you get what you need.
Now, off to the magesterium with its
three mysterious doors guarded by yet
another demon. This one probably
liked to visit the greenhouse when he
could. The laboratory will certainly
have you combining elements to get
something that another hungry demon
might like and the mysterious caverns
will lead you to the end of this game,
but it won't be as simple as it seems.
The key to finishing requires floating
to an otherwise unreachable height,
finding your brother, and destroying
the demon that is now more interested in possessing you. Once you
have finished, you will be rewarded
with a printed certificate. (With the
Amiga version, be sure to copy your
printer driver to the game disk, unless
you start the game from your standard WorkBench.)

THE STUDY: AN
OVERVIEW OF
THE GAME SYSTEM
(Uninvited visitors are encouraged

to scrutinize the writer's descriptions
of this adventure's mechanics.)

Uninvited uses the structure, screen
display and play system of
Icom/Mindscape's earlier adventure
game, Deja Vu, although the stories
are not related. ICOM originally
designed these games for the Macintosh, but they are now available for
the Amiga. The user interface and appearance for the Amiga versions are
very similar to that for the Mac, except for the addition of color. The
graphics are reasonably detailed,
audio is digitally supplied for a
pleasant sound, and the manual and
quick reference card for the Amiga
version do a good job of explaining
the details of game play.

THE KITCHEN
(Uninvited visitors are reminded
that temperatures sometimes become
uncomfortable in this room.)
were a few minor annoyances
T here
with the Amiga version. It failed
to take full advantage of some V1.2
features, probably because most of
the development was most done using
V1.1. The frequent loads from disk
for the demon with the key and for
sound effects became tiresome. I frequently wished that the game had an
option so that sounds could be toggled off and on. The sounds were, in
general, effective, but sometimes not
as clear as they could be.
There was some confusion in the
game in LOADing SAVEd games
when you intended to resume play
using a previously SAVEd from file.
If you have enough extra RAM, I
highly recommend saving your game
to RAM: while you play and then
copying the files you want to keep to
disk after you QUIT the game.

THE ART GALLERY: A
PERSONAL PERSPECTIVE
ON GRAPHICS

like a good text adventure game,
especially Infocom text adventures.
There is an intellectual challenge in a
good text adventure that is hard to
match in a graphic game. I also like to
read and that is probably another
reason that I like a well-written text
adventure. There are a lot of good
movies, but the book is usually better.
Occasionally, I find myself confronted with graphic adventures
beyond the fantasy "hack and slash"
type, story games that use graphics to
augment the text. There are good
ones, but the graphics displays really
slow things down and are often of
mediocre quality. Too often, more
time is spent preparing the graphics
rather than a decent story line. After
seeing and waiting for the graphics to
display a few times, I usually hope
that the game has the option to turn
off their display.
Then, Mindscape released their
Macventures, Deja Vu and Uninvited

[Ed. Now, there is also Shadowgate.].
These are true graphic games where
some of the graphics are vividly (or
perhaps I should say, horrifically)
animated in order to add tremendous
depth and texture to the story line.
Aside from the SPEAK command,
the entire story is told as you move
various graphic images or act upon
them by using a small list of action
words (EXAMINE, OPEN, CLOSE,
OPERATE, GO, HIT, CONSUME,
and SPEAK). Of these, EXAMINE
and GO are not even necessary because you can use a mouse to perform their respective actions.
In Uninvited, the SPEAK command
is only needed twice. In each case,
you must type in the text you wish to
SPEAK. There is one other bit of information that you must also type.
Aside from those three times, the rest
of the game is played with mouse
power. The "literary" text story still
remains because the mouse actions
you take result in the display of text in
a special text box (through which you
can also scroll back to view a limited
amount of previous text).
Using graphic images only may limit
your actions in a given situation, but it
also eliminates, fortunately, the constant frustrations of trying to
manipulteorydfgaphicmes

using text input. The EXAMINE command will tell you what the object is
and provide some idea of how it can
be used. In Uninvited, there are plenty
of images to carry, many more to
move only, and others to EXAMINE
only. All are done with easy mouse
input.
Only about half the objects are actually needed and you must decide
which objects these are. The useful
objects are generally used for only
one ultimate purpose. Even though
you are dealing primarily with objects,
however, the game is ultimately completed by correctly interpreting the
text story as it unfolds.
As with any text adventure, what you
are not told or are very indirectly
told, can create frustrations with
game play. This game is not without a
few of those situations. One example,
encountered early in the game is a
statement intended as a clue. It read,
"Gold, silver and mercury, together
they form a key."
This phrasing is such that once you
know what it is trying to tell you, you
can understand how the author (or
playtesters) thought it was a good
clue. In its present wording, though, it
is very difficult for that clue to be of
much help. Perhaps, other phrasings
of the same information were thought
to be too obvious. My alternate phrasing might help you. "The combination
of gold, silver, and mercury will unlock the door."

THE DINING ROOM
(Uninvited visitors are allowed to
savor the gustatory recommendations
of the writer.)

I

found this game to be very enjoyable. The game concept is innovative and fun. It is much easier to work
with than pure text or text and
graphic adventure games. Eight
sheets of clues/hints can be obtained
from Mindscape for a very reasonable
price in order to make it easier. I
recommend this one for anyone interested in trying something new and I
also recommend sending for those
clues/hints right away.

ABOARD THE TEN THOUSAND
SENTRIES LIMITED
A Unique
Strategy/Arcade
Excursion
Via
"The Sentry"
by Roy Wagner

Name:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

The Sentry
C-64/128
$39.95
Geoff Crammond
Firebird
Ramsey. NJ

Aaround,
s you stand quietly and look
you find you are trapped
in a lonely mountainous region with a
few randomly scattered trees. The flat
lands are a checkerboard of colors.
As you continue your observations,
you refrain from making any sounds.
Any noise will activate the Sentry that
is assigned to the area in which you
are currently located. The area is
large, but as soon as you make a
noise, the Sentry will be reactivated to
scan the area. If you are spotted and
don't move quickly enough from its
sight, you will be destroyed. The
Sentry must maintain the equal distribution of energy and your presence
will upset that balance.
The Sentry may also have
Landgazers which assist it in surveying areas where the Sentry cannot
see. Your challenge is to destroy the
Sentry before it destroys you. You
need have no fears or emotions since
you are a robot just like those that oppose you. They will seek out any energy objects with a value greater than
one and you have a value of three.
Your only defense is to move without

being seen and
seek higher ground
in order to see
where the enemy is
located and absorb
its energy.
You possess a
certain amount of
energy and can use
it to create other
objects. A tree has
a value of one, a
boulder rates a
value of two, and
another robot
(similar to yourself) has an energy
value of three. This is possible to accomplish on any visible, unoccupied
square of flatland. In a similar way,
you can also absorb objects to increase your available energy.
Once, however, you take any overt
action, aside from horizontally or vertically scanning your surrounding
area, the Sentry and Landgazers will
seek to absorb your energy. Your advantage is that you can move. Their
advantage is that they scan the
landscape from above you because
the Sentry is located on top of the
highest peak of the area.
By skillful, strategic climbing, you
can avoid being seen and move to
higher and higher areas until you are
able to stand above where they stand.
From that height, you are able to absorb them. The region that you start
from, though, is only one of tenthousand. There are many more challenging regions that await you, each a
match for your current energy level.

Th

e Sentry is an outstanding and addictive game. It does not pamper
you with easy levels. The game begins
with your entry of a four digit number
and an eight digit password that designates the landscape. For your first
game you enter 0000 for the

landscape number and no password.
Even the first and only known
landscape is tough, but it teaches you
the necessary skills that you will need
for other landscapes.
From these numbers a three color,
"fractal" landscape is generated which
includes flat lands, hills, and mountains. You initially see an aerial view
of the entire landscape which looks
somewhat like a three-dimensional
topological map. It shows the relative
positions of the Sentry and any
Landgazers that may be present.
Your position is not shown, but is always at the lowest visible level.
Once you feel that you are familiar
with the region you can press any key
and be transported to the surface of
the landscape. You will now view the
landscape directly from where you
stand upon it. You now have a safe
period of time to look around the
Landscape using the panning keys.
You can pan left and right through
360 degrees or pan up and down
through about 80 degrees. This gives
you a chance to spot the Sentry or
any Landgazer which is not yet activated. You also are able to select
other squares to which you can move.
Panning is the only operation that you
can do which does not make any
noise.
he Sentry, also a robot, stands
Tupon
the highest point of the terrain. Once a noise is made, the Sentry
and the Landgazers become active.
They scan the landscape looking for
squares that contain any alien energy
levels above one and ignore any
square that contains a tree (one energy unit) or is empty.
If they find any object(s) with a
value greater than one, a unit is taken
from the square and tree is created
on a random empty square. This
process of unit subtraction and tree
creation is repeated until all energy
on that square is reduced to one unit,
a tree. As you create boulders and
other robots, the Sentry and
Landgazers will seek to reduce them
to a level of one.
You are able to move about the
landscape, avoiding the Sentry and
Landgazers, by positioning your sights
on an empty square and creating
another robot there.

If you are spotted by the Sentry or a
Landgazer, a Scan Warning indicator
will fill with specks and you will hear
a low buzzing sound. This is called a
full scan and you have about five
seconds to move before your energy
reserve is drained one unit at a time.
When all your energy has been been
drained, you will be absorbed and the
game is over. Up until you have lost
all your energy, you can move from
the square or may hyperspace to
another random location leaving your
old robot behind.
If you have been spotted, but the
Sentry or Landgazer cannot see the
square on which you are standing, the
Scan Warning will be half filled with
specks and you will hear a low buzzing. They cannot absorb your energy,
but they will attempt to force you out
into the open by looking for a tree in
your vicinity and transforming it into
a Meanie.
The Meanie will rotate quickly,

making a low clicking sound, until it
faces the robot you occupy and force
you to hyperspace at a cost of three
units. It will then be transformed back
into a tree. Your best response to a
Meanie or a full scan is to move to
another square as quickly as possible.
Once activated, the Sentry and
Landgazers rotate through threehundred sixty degrees in thirty degree
increments. By observing the direction The Sentry and each Landgazer
rotate, you can more easily avoid their
absorbing stare. Therefore, the game
is reduced to three very simple actions: scanning, moving, and absorbing energy. Nevertheless, these three
prove to be very intensive and the
quest for successfully completing a
landscape becomes a strong obsession.
There are several possible strategies
that can be used to seek out and
destroy the Sentry: creating trees to

block your position from view; creating boulders on squares to test if the
Sentry or Landgazer can see that
square; or stacking one or more
boulders on a square to elevate your
position in order to reach greater
heights. Do not spend too much time
scanning or absorbing energy without
being within close range of your next
move, since when you are spotted, the
five seconds that you have in which to
move goes by very quickly.
game has been very successful
Tin
in the United Kingdom, where it

originated. This is due in part to its
simplicity. There are no complicated
actions that need to be performed to
win, just some very well planned actions. This game offers the thrill of
laser tag as you play the role of a
simple soldier on a three dimensional
chess board. I highly recommend it
for many absorbing hours with your
computer.

ZEN AND THE ART OF GAME DESIGN
by Greg Johnson

In this, our Game Design Issue, we felt it
would be appropriate to at least touch
upon the relationship of games and
game design to life itself We asked Greg
Johnson (lead designer of Electronic
Arts' "Starflight") to enlighten us concerning such weighty
matters. Here is
the, more or less,
English version of
his article. We're
still working on
the translation of
the article into the
Swahili version of
CGW.

Instead

of occurring
in space, a game
should be space. It
should explore the
"now essence" and
allow the player to become a totality of experience. In doing
this, the game and the player, in effect, become
one. In designing software, people all too often
overlook the fact that all that was, is, and all
that is, shall be. Most game designers adhere to
the old philosophy of "immaculata concepta nongrata" and, in a blind attempt to create creation
itself, they undermine the very foundation of
determinism. These concepts may appear to be
subcilliary, but they are at the very heart and
guts of game design.
One's first step in designing a computer game
should be to find an idea that communicates itself. If an idea is not strong enough to communicate itself or infuse one's being (if you will), it
can hardly be expected to maintain its integrity

within the realm of social circumcision. This
may seem like an obvious point, but it lies at the
center, as well as the periphery, of design.
The second step of a designer should be to reexamine the motivations. It may be necessary to
first examine the motivations, if this has not already been done. Without the proper motivations, a game can hardly
play itself. Further,
without these motivations, the game inevitably becomes motivationless, and in some cases,
even lackadaisical.
The final step in game
design should be to express the inner mind as
seen through the inner
eye of the total self. This
may seem complex at
first, but if it is kept in
mind that a game is only
an extension of a real
falsehood into a false
reality, it becomes extremely simple. If these
principles are clearly understood, the game system rather than the
mechanic will become manifest.
In summation, it can be seen that the process
of design is essentially a non-design process. It
can also be seen that it is the quintessential
design process. While this may seem like a contradiction, it both is and is not. Certainly it can
be said that in order to design a game, one must
open one's mind and free oneself to the
pleasures of the body. In fact, this is only one of
many things that can be said.
In summation of the summation, we have
learned that much can be said, but how much,
after all, can we hear. Perhaps only what is said
and then again, perhaps only what is not said.

Titans of the
Computer Gaming World
(Continued from page 39)
Spellbreaker, and A Mind Forever Voyaging, to
name a few appropriate examples.
Even if none of these are A Passage to India,
or even Lake Woebegon Days, they are unquestionably light years ahead of the text adventures
made by other companies. Synapse came close
with Mindwheel, but that game collapsed under
the weight of its poor operating system combined with that of virtual cartloads of artistic
pretensions.
Infocom doesn't pretend to be anything other
than what it is. What makes Infocom games special is not just their entertainment value as interactive fiction, but also as interactive fiction.
Thus, it is this precarious balance which makes
Infocom games so good.

Chapter Three
In which the author not only highlights Infocom's two newest games, but also previews
their next three, the latter being a matter of utmost secrecy at press time.

Interestingly, rather than pursue new directions in fiction, Infocom is returning to many
traditional aspects of adventure gaming. Even
their newest ventures are more experiments
with new types of gameplay than they are experiments in plot or characterization. Nevertheless, don't be surprised if, as you play these
games, you see a greater finesse to the writing
or discover some strikingly memorable text. It
is, after all, what we have come to expect from
Infocom.
The first two games mentioned are already
available. The latter three are due to be
released this fall. Information concerning the
yet-to-be-released games comes directly from
Cindy Weiss or other Infocommies. So, if something changes in the meantime, they are the
ones to yell at.
The Lurking Horror (Dave Lebling): This
seems to be Lebling's paen to his M.I.T. days,
with a bit of horror thrown in so that the title
makes sense. You are on a snowbound Massachusetts college campus with a twenty page
essay to write and a word processor which
cheerfully transports you into a demon-ridden
pit at the drop of a Find-And-Replace.
Homages to the horror canon, from
Ghostbusters to The Twilight Zone, fill the story

ads for defunct games. However, (
trumpets blare) our companion
magazine/newsletter, "Computer Game
Quarterly", has a "Boot Hill" column
where $15.00 allows you to place 25
words in an ad section to be read by
10,000 dedicated garners.

THEIR 8-BITS WORTH!
More Atari 8-bit software! Take advantage of the extra memory in the
XL/XE line.
Steven Galeott
Bloomingdale, NJ

PEARLS BEFORE MINDS!
I really enjoyed Kilobyte's reviews, but
it was frustrating to read about games
like "After Pearl" which I have been

trying in vain to get for a long time. Is
there a market out there for used
games? How do you tap into it? Does
CGW accept classified ads for defunct
games? Help!
Greg Wilmoth
Tucson, AZ
Ed. "CGW' does not accept classified

To software manufacturers: More 8bit Atari!
R. A. Smith
Reedsport, OR

Ed. There seem to be two problems in
the 8-bit Atari's future. First, Atari
seems to be treating the 8-bit as an orphan. Where the Apple IIGS runs
Apple 8-bit software in emulation
mode, the ST doesn't emulate 8-bit
Continued on page 49 49

(as do several moments of true terror).
Stephen King couldn't have done it better.
Stationfall (Steve Meretzky): I've been begging Infocom for a sequel to Planetfall for
years. They finally came through. Floyd is
back, as is the cutting satire of the original,
and the story is every bit as fascinating as the
plague on Resida was. A trip to a space station goes awry because of an alien artifact
that was brought on board. Some parts of the
story are disturbing, but on the whole, Stationfall is a worthy successor. Now, how about

Planetfall III?
Plundered Hearts (Amy Briggs): As the title
suggests, this will be Infocom's first romance,
a bodice-ripper set on the high seas of the
17th Century. The genre is a bit unusual, but
if anyone can pull it off [Ed. - the bodice?], it's

Amy Briggs. Of course, if it weren't unusual, it
wouldn't be Infocom.
Nord and Bert Couldn't Make Heads or Tail
of It (Jeff O'Neill): Yes, that's "tail," singular.
Cindy promises that the package art will
make it all clear. More importantly, this game
contains eight separate short stories - Infocom's first short fiction - and a "new style of
wordplay." O'Neill also wrote Ballyhoo and if
the wordplay is along the lines of the

mousetrap puzzle, players are in for a great
time.
And now for the biggie...
Beyond Zork (Brian Moriarty): This continuation of the Zork series is set in the Zork
universe and contains elements of role-playing
games. That is, you will be able to make your
own character with distinct attributes and possessions and send him through an all-new
Zork adventure. No doubt this will
call upon Wishbringer-like multiple
solutions to puzzles, extended to a
nearly inconceivable degree. Frankly, I can't wait to see it.

Chapter Four
An exceedingly short chapter in
which is presented the author's advice to Infocom.
1. Don't fall into the Activision trap of
decreasing quality in the wake of increased
productivity.
2. Don't make the openings in the new packages so small that it is nearly impossible to
slide the manuals in.
3. Don't panic.

Inside "Defender
of the Crown)
(Continued from page 37)
casualties by a certain percentage. If
you achieved the maximum
five hits, the castle will only
reduce the defenders' losses by
25%. If you failed to hit the
castle at all, however, the
defenders' army will have its
losses reduced by 88%. (Note
Castle Strength Chart.).

Corollary To Coronation
Victory in Defender of the Crown
results from a mixture of good
strategy and sound tactics. Above all,
however, it is important to know your
opponents. Study the Normans, their
character ratings and their behavior.

You will discover that nothing about
their actions in the game is random.
Their movements in each turn are
based on a mixture of logic and "emotion." In the same way people make
decisions, the Normans (and even
your Saxon allies) look at the map to

find the most valuable territories
within reach. Then, the spoil this
eminently logical approach to
decision-making by including emotions in the formerly careful deliberations. In the final analysis, attacks
often are directed against the one the
attacker hates most. Therefore, the
more you attack the same character,
the more he will attack you in return.

All of which brings us to my final
piece of advice. Do not attack your
fellow Saxons. Use their lands for safe
passage to attack the more valuable
territories held by the Normans. This
should allow you to build an army
large enough to match the Normans
strength for strength. To
bolster your advantage, joust
for fame to increase your
leadership rating. Exercise
care, though, because those
who joust for fame and lose,
experience a drop in their
leadership ratings. Further, attempt to weaken stronger opponents by raiding (especially when
they are away from home on campaign). You can be certain of this by
watching their movements on the
map. Since they won't have had time
to have spent the gold piling up in
their castle treasury, you can make a
big haul of gold to invest in a CD.
What is a CD in this time period?
Catapult Development, of course!

B-24
(Continued from page 35)
be on the tiny runway (only 3,500
feet) at Vis.
As we approached the landing field,
the tower told us to secure a
parachute pack to each waist gun
mount and hold the chute out and
pull the ripcord when we touched
down. We would need these extra
brakes because the short runway had
a cliff at the other end. In the final approach, our windmilling prop spun off-which was a blessing since it gave us
more airspeed with less drag. As if
this weren't enough trouble, a pilot in
a biplane began taxiing down the runway in front of us. We couldn't go
around as our gas was about all gone.
Our pilot, Charlie Hammett, greased
our plane over the top of the errant
biplane and dropped it right in front
of the, no doubt, surprised pilot. With
about 1,500 feet to try and stop a B24 that needs 3,500 feet, our two

Letters (from page 46)
EVASIVE ACTION!
As one of the primary designers of
Sub Battle Simulator, after reading
your June 1987 review of the program,
I felt obligated to respond to some of
your reviewers' criticism and comments. Specifically missing from this
review were mention of the use of
"Reality Levels" within the program to
modify gameplay. Several of the items
and occurrences mentioned are possible only at the easy play levels,
which do diverge from historical
reality to allow the average player
some chance of initial success. If you
play the game at level 4, all the usage,
timing, damage, and hitting percentages are set as near to historical
reality as our research indicated. Also
missing from the review was the fact
the program is not copy protected to
allow for easy back-up and hard disk
installation.

pilots needed more than their four
feet on the brakes and the two
parachutes flung out the waist windows. The Man Upstairs gave us
some help that day. The bomber
eased to a quiet halt at the very edge
of the cliff. The nose section
protruded out over the edge a couple
of feet. Rocks and ocean loomed 500
feet below.
As I maneuvered my B-24 for the
landing, I found my altitude dropping
faster than I realized. I could even see
the biplane on the landing strip.
Watch me do this, Charlie! (Charlie,
by the way, is Up There with the
Man.) "Don't get below 500 feet,"
shouted my co-pilot, John. "Get up!
Get up! Pull ba---"...CRASH! And
now, I was with Charlie again. I had
forgotten the Vis runway was 500 feet
above sea level and altitude is
measured above sea level.
Then, John explained why the game
has two learning missions (Mostar,
Yugoslavia and Bucharest, Rumania).
Many of the decisions are removed.
One can hone one's "flying skills" and

To the reviewer's credit he did discover two minor bugs which were not
found and corrected during the extensive pre-release testing. A second
release of the program (version 1.1) is
presently being shipped which addresses these two bugs and adds the following features: relative or absolute
radar/sonar displays, feet or yard distance readings, target "lock-on"
capability, release of debris (to confuse enemy ships) option, circular torpedo runs (on 42-43 Mk14 American
Torpedoes), entrance and exit messages for patrol areas, 10-30% faster
execution in all display modes, more
realistic land views, and more.
Current owners can upgrade their diskette by sending their old version plus
$5.00 to Epyx.
Gordon Walton
Bryan, TX

Ed. Thanks for the information on the
upgrade; we look forward to your upcoming release "PT-109."

get the hang of flying a bomber quickly before tackling combat problems. I
flew both training missions and my
next mission to Ploesti was easier. I
even hit my target and arrived home
with no missing aircraft in my group.
All of the elements of a real combat
mission to Ploesti are yours for the
playing. A tight formation discourages
fighter attacks. If you, as the Group
Leader, do not maintain a steady
prescribed air speed, your formation
will open up and the "bogeys" will get
you. You must rendezvous with three
different fighter escort groups.
Failure to join up with them will invite fighter attacks.
It is all there. The heartaches and
satisfactions of combat flying. Germany's WWI air ace Baron Manfred
von Richtofen's words apply here:

"The reward is the ecstasy of combat."
As you complete more and more missions to Ploesti, it is satisfying to see
the production rates decreasing and
know that you are having a hand in
bringing the war to a close.

Coming In CGW
October 87
Wargaming/
Educational Games
November 87
Christmas Buying Guide
December 87
Football Issue
January / February 88
Grand Age of Warfare
March 88
Science Fiction
April 88
Spring Sports
May 88
Mist, Magic, Mystery
June / July 88
Krieg!

(Continued from page 13)
sary, except to note the locations of the various towns and
dungeons.
One odd thing about this game is the feeling of smallness I
had while playing it. Somehow, it did not seem quite as
large as the previous two Phantasies. This may be due in
part to the fact that some of the dungeons are not true dungeons at all. The Straw Hut, the Dwarven Burial Grounds,
and the Battleground come to mind here. None of them
allow you to go very far.
I also finished the game faster, and with my characters at
lower levels than in either of the earlier games. It certainly
came as a surprise (shock, even) when I was told my group
was ready to take on Nikademus! Of course, the party does
get some help from Lord Wood at the end. Perhaps that
had something to do with it. Still, the game turned out to be
a faster play than expected.
Rather
This is a
surprisingbit of a
ly, the
nuisance
game supat the
ports only
start, since
one drive.
you must
make copies of the Player and Dungeon disks (utility
provided on the boot disk) in order to play the game. A
number of disk swaps are required to make each disk.
There should have been a facility for two-drive systems. Fortunately, once play begins, swaps are minimal and occur
only when leaving or entering dungeons.
As before, the Dungeon disk can hold only one dungeon
save on it. If you are exploring more than one dungeon at
the same time, you'll want to have a separate disk for each
dungeon. Otherwise, old saves will be overwritten by new
ones, and progress through the old dungeon lost.
The manual is the usual fine job, telling you just about
everything you need to know to play the game. Of course,
much of the material is straight from the previous manual,
but there is an appendix in the back detailing the differences between this Phantasie and the others. Experienced
players can skip most of the manual, bone up on the changes, and start off right away.
Overall, in spite of the additions, Phantasie III is pretty
much from the same mold as its predecessors. The game
mechanics are basically unchanged and those who have
played the previous games will know what to expect. There
are no special items to pick up (rings, runes, amulets, etc),
but the ever-present scrolls wait to be found, most with only
background information, a few that are truly important.
Thus, the game follows the well-trodden path of fighting
monsters to gain experience, exploring dungeons to pick up
information and goodies, and working out simple puzzles,
all culminating in a final, knock-down, drag-out battle with
the evil wizard.
For all that, Phantasie III closes out the trilogy in good
style, with a grand ending (for the victorious), and a welldeserved rest for your weary and battle-scarred band (especially if they've been at it since Gelnor; they're probably getting on in years by now).

Bottom line: The final chapter; a must for Phantasie fans.
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

"I Think We've
Got A Hit. . ."
(Continued from page 9)
$20,000 at a time. Somewhere in
today's hectic schedule, Mike and I
review the remaining programming
work in detail. Most of our planning
concerns what will be included in the
"parts boxes" people will use to build
their own games. At the end of the
day, I drop Mike off at the airport
and can sense his excitement as so
many talented people join his solitary
quest. "It won't be long now..." we tell
each other, not speaking the last half
of the sentence, "...until we'll know if
it's a hit."

Thursday
Thursday morning. The Acquisitions
Meeting. Eight key Broderbund staffers, led by founders Doug and Gary
Carlston, sit on folding chairs in a
room filled with different computers

to review and discuss current submissions.
An adventure game, discussed positively before, gets covered again. The
authors have made additional improvements and the consensus is to
publish it. Several other titles (from
games to business software and displaying no special qualities) are
reviewed and quickly rejected. Two
others that show promise are routed
to individuals willing to put some time
into working with their authors. This
week's meeting was productive.
In the afternoon, it's celebration
time. One of my authors has reached
a key milestone with his game and we
celebrate with champagne. Doug
Carlston, Broderbund President,
comes by, followed closely by Chairman Gary Carlston and Ed Auer, the
company's Chief Operating Officer.
They each discuss the game's key
points with the author and congratulate him on his work. It is a satisfying
moment for the designer and welldeserved after weeks of grueling effort (that night, during dinner, he ad-

mits staying up until 3:00 A.M. just to
get the software finished on time!).

Friday
Two of the best designers I know
are just wrapping up their current
projects. That means each is starting
to kick around what project they'd
like to do next, "blue skying" their way
through a mountain of interesting
"maybe's" in search of the next concept that can motivate them to work
eighty-hour weeks and inspire us to
pay for the year-long development
process.
Over the next few weeks, I'll listen
to as many as twenty different game
themes from each author, and reply
with our own suggestions, ideas, and
twists in return. We'll consult with the
Sales staff to find out what the gameplaying public is currently buying and
ask the Marketing team what patterns
they see developing in the industry. In
the end, though, there is only one key
indicator that really counts, the moment when the author's eyes light up
and you can see his or her excitement
about a project. Until that moment,
there is no game. After that moment,
at least with the great game designers,
it's only a matter of time and the
game will come.

Saturday
I've stopped by the office for a
couple of hours to clear my desk and
get ready for next week. It's been an
exciting few days. All of us in the
game publishing business know what
we really want. We want hits, great
awe-inspiring gazillion-sellers that will
make the author's bank account and
our balance sheet look like a script
for Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous,
sure-fire games that will instantly be
recognized for the cultural milestones
they represent, becoming classics that
will sell for decades at premium
prices to a grateful world.
We won't know it for a year or
more, but maybe this week we started
a real, honest-to-goodness hit. Of
course, Monday the phone could ring,
and...

(Continued from page 29)

hydrofoil should be at the base of the
"V" with the two helicopters at either
end. In this way, a complete coverage
of the search area can be made.
Utilization of the air assets in opposite directions can yield too much
information which would be obsolete
by the time the hydrofoil was ready to
make contact. Therefore, consistent
search patterns in the "V" yield maximum results.
For survivability, enemy missiles

pose the
largest threat.
However,
these can
generally be
avoided. By
speeding up
the simulation,
one can wait
until the missiles reach a
distance of c.
10 miles. At that point, one should
turn away at a 90 degree vector.
When the missiles are c. 1 mile away,
chaff employment will generally cause
these missiles to miss.
Tip from the Expert: this reviewer
would never have considered it, but
gunfire can knock down an enemy
missile. During the 1973 Yom Kippur
War, an Israeli cook aboard a Saarboat, firing a 50-calibre machine gun,
knocked down an Egyptian missile.

However, this is a last-ditch effort,
and should be reserved for instances
where chaff launchers are either expended or destroyed.

Summary

P

HM is an interesting simulation.
The expert noted the absence of a
"Realism" mode; he felt that actual
damage levels and better enemy forces options would have made the
product more successful. This
reviewer is not so sure; it can be quite
difficult to avoid damage in certain
scenarios. Overall, pegasus does succeed in simulating the hydrofoil in
operation; but at the same time, the
game has a certain sameness and/or
lack of elan which differentiates the
truly outstanding product from the
merely good one.

RID #40 (Use card at p. 5)
On this page, a number of games and articles
are listed for evaluation, as well as some
general interest questions. When evaluating a
game, consider such matters as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging and
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability and level of interest); and LIFE
(does the game wear well?).
For each game which you have played or each
article which you have read, place a 1 (terrible)
through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate title. For each multiple choice question, place the appropriate letter next to the appropriate question; for each yes or no question,
place a 1 (yes) or a 2 (no) next to the question;
and for open ended questions, write your
answers in the "Comments" space.

Game Ratings
Following the daring advance of Gettysburg to a phenomenal 8.08, SSI
deployed a total of four titles in the top ten (nine in the top twenty) on the
strategy side. Microprose maneuvered two titles into the top five as Gunship provided air support for Decision in the Desert. On the adventure

side, Bard's Tale II's effectiveness range diminished to 7.99, yet held the
lead over the formidable Ultima IV. Might and Magic and Wizard's Crown
moved up in the standings as other titles weakened. EA and SSI conjured
three titles each into top ten positions.

