February 1989

Number 56

Features
Ready or Not, Here They Come

8

Special Report: Winter Consumer Electronics Show

The Colony

14

Mindscape's 3-D Space Adventure / Alan Roberts

Game Designers' Conference

16
18

42

F-19 Designer Notes

46

Mars Saga

50

Tales of a Martian Manhunter / Joe Sherfy

21

Hints on "Wasteland," "King's Quest IV," and more / Scorpia

Battlechess

Revenge of the Death Angel

The Reality Behind the Game / Meier and Hendrick

Rainbird's Game of Greed and Deception / Frank S. Eva

Scorpion's Mail

38

Sierra's "Police Quest 2" / Michael Chaut

I Can't Believe Grown-ups Do This For A Living

On the Eve of "Corruption"

Insights Into Game Design
Abstracts from the Journal of Computer Game Design

Build Your Own Adventure Game

52

A Survey of Construction Kits / Scorpia

27

Low Blows and Other Winning Moves / Ken St. Andre

TV Sports Football

30

Cinemaware Captures the Gridiron / Lee and Lambright

Modem Wars: A Game By Any Other Name

32

A Wargame for Modem Play / Daniel Hockman

Descent Into the Maelstrom
The Latest in the Wizardry Series / Dennis Owens

36

Departments
Taking a Peek
Letters
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
7
60
62
62
64

Taking A Peek

Absolute Entertainment
251 Rock Road
Glen Rock, NJ 07452
F-18 HORNET: Players engage in ten
combat missions around the globe in
this naval air combat game. This is the
C-64 version of an Atari 7800 game.
Each player is a graduate of the "Top
Gun" Flight School, so takeoffs and landings on aircraft carriers are a piece of
cake. Right? Smooth scrolling graphics
and 3-D solid-fill terrain all enhance the
feeling of actual flight. Missions cover air
combat, supply drops, and bombing
and strafing runs. I could tell you more,
but then I'd have to kill you. C-64 pictured ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

Activision
3885 Bohannon Dr.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
CHOP 'N DROP: The last man standing takes all in this full contact karate
game. One or two novice Chuck Norrises compete with the computer in a
joystick driven free for all. Players can
use up to 16 different karate moves
while trying to land the most blows in
timed rounds. C-64 (29.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.

PREDATOR: Players fight their way
through enemy soldiers, the jungle and
an alien manhunter in this computer version of "Arnold vs. the Alien." Rescuing
US diplomatic hostages becomes secondary to staying alive in this fast moving
action game. Machine guns, hand
grenades and flamethrowers prove to be
man's best friend in this one. C-64
($14.95). Circle Reader Service #3.

Antic Software
544 Second Street
San Francisco, CA 94107
CRASH GARRETT: Picture Rocket
Ranger in an Infocomic style game,
without the story branching, and you've
got Crash Garrett. The level of graphics
and sound you've come to expect from
the Amiga frame this imported French
adventure game. Crash must prevent
sinister Nazis from kidnapping long
stemmed, American beauties and using
them for breeding stock to create an

Aryan race of superhumans. Well, you
get the picture. Amiga pictured on p.
59, Atari ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

Arcadia
711 West 17th St. Unit G9
Costa Mesa, CA
DOUBLE DRAGON: The coin-op
Kung Fu game comes to the home computer as one or two players control twin
brothers in a battle to clean up the
streets and recover their girlfriend from
the Shadow Boss. Players choose from a
variety of Kung Fu moves and street
weapons in this joystick driven action
game. To fight is to win, eh Grasshopper? C-64 pictured on p. 59, IBM
($34.99). Circle Reader Service #5.
(Continued on page 59)

Letters

Sense of Omission
I wish you would give the listings
of all computer systems for a
game. For example, Manhunter is
not just for the IBM, but also for
Apple IIGS and C-64/128. I have
the feeling I've missed out on
more games through your
magazine, simply because you
didn't list all computer types available.
Julie Freeman
Cupertino, CA
I counted three games in
"Taking A Peek" that are in IIGS
format, but were not listed. Is your
magazine entitled MS-DOS World
or Computer Gaming World?
Bob Campbell
Downers Grove, IL
Ed: "Taking A Peek" is based on
actual product received. Many
times, we receive one version of
a game prior to press time and
publish the "peek" from a look at
that version. Then, it may take
anywhere from a week to several
months before we get the other
versions of that game. For this
reason, we started a "Conversions Received' column to keep
readers updated on products for
their favorite computer systems.
Remember, CGW works on a minimum of two months lead time. A
program that arrives in December
usually will not show up in
"Taking A Peek" until February.
We are constantly working on
three issues at once and it is possible that a version can arrive
after we have printed the "Game
Ratings" or "Taking A Peek." It is
not our intent to slight any computer system. However, we do
not want to mislead our readers
by printing that conversions are
on the shelf before they actually
are, either.

Final Exposition
As the author of First Expedition, I am writing in response to
the review of same appearing in
your November issue. I can not

read that
review without
a strong sense
of disappointment and a
feeling that the
reviewer was
surely mismatched to
review this adventure. His
"Bad Tidings"
section begins
with "Part
simulator and
part quest
game, First Expedition is not a
role-playing game" as if he were
striking at a claim that it was the
ultimate in role-playing games.
Then, he proceeds to demonstrate
that it fails as a role-playing game
and, in fact, is trivial. It reminds
me of a recent encounter on
television that was highly
publicized. I can see the reviewer
stating, with no small degree of
contempt, "First Expedition, you're
no Role-Playing Game." I guess
my first and most immediate point
is that it was never intended to be
one in the first place. So, I am confused at the vigor with which he attacks some imaginary premise
that it is one. He feels that it is
trivial, yet has a too difficult and
cumbersome means of navigating
about the world. I would like the
opportunity to address this review,
as I feel it was unjust in its treatment of First Expedition. The biggest sin I feel committed in this
review was one of omission. I
hope to throw some light on what
First Expedition is for those who
might find it enjoyable.
First Expedition is a first-person
color graphics adventure that
places you on a fictional ocean
world and gives you the task of
finding three missing Sun Spheres
before a certain number of days
have elapsed. A full day is four
minutes of daylight followed by a
four minute night. At night, there
are stars. These are used for
navigation and can be used in two
ways: a compass is provided to
permit triangulation for those who
wish to become involved with
manually charting their position
and, there is an option that can be
set at any time which activates the
Autoplot feature for those who do
not want to deal with the task of
plotting their position. With
Autoplot, you merely have to identify two stars currently in the sky
from the star chart and you are
given your coordinates on the
planet.
And so, you rove from island to
island. During this roving, you
meet ships coming over the
horizon who may be friendly or
hostile (you are advised how to tell
the difference), sea beasts that

can be shot for food, storms, fog
that hides the islands on the
horizon during day and hide the
stars at night, and of course, islands which rise out of the sea as
you approach. As you search for
uncharted islands, you can use
survey rockets to scan the area
about you. There is always an island within a full day's cruise from
another (unless you head out
across the Great Sea, an area of
open ocean lacking islands which
is marked on the island chart).
That means you may have as
much as eight minutes during
which you may run into sea
beasts, other ships, storms, plot
your position during the evening,
and be beset with fog. Not all
these events happen every day
and so, there will be times where
your main concern is staying on
course by use of the rudder, work
ing against the currents which
vary in strength and direction in
different parts of the world.
Granted, this can result in several
minutes of relatively idle time in
your quest for the next island, but
just when you forget to look behind you, you may get boarded
and lose food and fuel.
As the author, I agree that First
Expedition is not a difficult puzzle
type of game, nor is it a complex
role-playing enterprise. If it was, I
would have failed in my efforts. It
is a user-friendly ongoing adventure presenting a world that many
have had fun exploring. Users I
have talked with have called it
"captivating" and "quite addictive."
Of course, these may be the very
folk who find some of the more
complex and involved software
entertainment packages too difficult to figure out or, like me,
merely do not want to spend that
much effort in figuring out how to
solve the problem presented. First
Expedition is not for hard core
problem solvers. I wrote it because
there seems to be a gap in entertainment software for the many
who want something they can
return to and continue "playing"
without the burden of long learning curves and the complexity of
many of the quest and role packages.
Ironically, First Expedition was
originally conceived to be a navigation-oriented sea-going adventure.
The navigational aspect of First Expedition was what first caught the
interest of Interstel. It, in my
opinion, is one of the most interesting points of the adventure
despite the displeasure the
reviewer had with that aspect of
the package. The Autoplot feature
was added toward the end of
development of the adventure for
those who did not want to go
through the exercise of plotting
their position. As for it being easy

to solve, the reviewer is the first I
have heard of who never had to
start over. I congratulate him on
that accomplishment. The
gentleman did advise me on the
phone that he played it through to
its solution and that "there's a lot
to it." I was sorry he didn't find the
room to include those feelings in
his review.
Steve Englestad
San Diego, CA

Ed: The advertisement for "First
Expedition" which ran in the October issue of CGW mentioned,
"renegade pirates, storms, sea
beasts, hostile natives, armed
robots, and a deadly comet . . ."
as well as set the stage by
proclaiming," ... you are
plunged into a dangerous unexplored world, guided only by
pieces of old maps, a compass, a
star chart, and the advice of your
first mate . . . ." We also thought
the idea of a "real-time, first-person graphics adventure" implied
a continuity with the role-playing
genre. Part of the function of a
review is to help our readers
decide for themselves whether a
product is what they are looking
for or not. We hope the publication of this letter will further establish what kind of product First
Expedition is.
(Continued on page 44)

Winter C.E.S.

Soaring Into 1989
In order to publish this
fast-breaking report on the
Winter Consumer
Electronics Show, our
review/strategy for
Neuromancer has been
postponed until CGW #57.

and ST versions of
Arkanoid, A.L.C.O.N.,
Bubble Bobble, and
others. Also, according to
Alan Fetzer (Taito's President), the programmers
working on their conversions work right alongside
mini-workstations using the
coin-op hardware with the
goal of matching the bigger machines normally
faster frame rate.

O

ur fabled editorial
jaunts to cover the
fast-breaking world
of computer entertainment
software, often start with
disconcerting experiences
with the airlines. Our trip to
the Winter Consumer Electronics
Show in Las Vegas was no exception. Our flight was delayed for two
hours because the plane originally assigned had mechanical problems. We
boarded the new plane in glum spirits
and the pilot almost immediately
broadcast what we expected to be the
obligatory welcome speech. Instead,
we heard,
Good evening, ladies and
gentlemen, welcome to Flight 2222.
They tell me we're running a little
late. I wouldn't know. I had a
nighttime assignation with a lady in
San Jose until getting the call. But,
don't you worry about her, she'll
probably just make the loop around
the airport a few times until she runs into
another pilot . . . or an ex-marine. Ah, well,
probably saved me from a fate worse than
death. Anyway, since I saved all that money /
was gonna' spend on her, you folks can have
anything you want to drink on me. Don't forget to thank these ladies doing the serving. I'd
like to thank each and every one of them personally, but I'm told they're being sent somewhere else after this flight. Oh, well!
We all applauded as the clever pilot turned a
potentially negative moment into a crowd
pleaser. That's what the entertainment software
industry hopes to do in 1989. In spite of
investors' lack of confidence in the economy in
general (because of the uncertain dollar and
the federal deficit), Frank Myers (vice-president
of the sponsoring trade association) opened
the show with the counter-assertion that consumer confidence is high and "Intention-to-buy
statistics are encouraging."

A Call to Action
Since the cartridge game market dominated
by Nintendo (though Jeff Weitzer, Sega
Product Manager, projects an 11% penetration
of the video game market by their company at
the end of the year) has flexed so much financial muscle, the disk-based software industry
has responded with a fervor. By far the majority
of software titles exhibited at the show were action titles. Since the games-systems market is
estimated at greater than two billion dollars per
year and disk-based entertainment software at
less than 300 million dollars per year, this is
not surprising.

Action
Speaks Louder . . .
Epyx has developed a game with a
3-D cutaway view of a mansion's interior as seen from an oblique overhead
perspective. In Devon Air in the Hidden Diamond Caper, players manipulate their cat burglar characters
through a dynamic environment
where almost everything but the bathtub can be manipulated or moved.
Players try to find the hidden
diamonds in the mansion while avoiding cute "pig mice" and "giant
canaries." The game is a first quarter
release for Amiga, C-64, IBM, and ST.

Fortunately, many of these titles, for both
game system conversions and coin-op translations, are pushing their respective hardware
platforms to new heights. In coin-op conversions, in particular, there was an emphasis on
side-by-side comparisons. At Data East, the
conversions of Bad Dudes (a street fighting
game where players fight killer dogs and thugs
to "rescue the president") and Robocop (the arcade game based on the movie) were being
demonstrated on personal computers stationed
adjacent to their "older cousins." Arcadia and
Melbourne House had coin-ops in their booth
to demonstrate how well their arcade games
stack up against their "big box" games. The
company announced Magic Johnson's Fast
Break Basketball (an action game for 1-2
players which compares in style with their John
Elway's Quarterback football game) for
Amiga/IBM (due around April 1) and Artura (a
"Barbarian"-style game where the hero throws
axes and casts spells to rescue the maiden) for
Amiga, ST, and C-64 to be released this
month. Taito is now using the actual graphics
files from their coin-op hits on Amiga and ST
versions of Operation Wolf and Renegade.
They plan to utilize the graphics files from the
arcades whenever possible in their 16-bit versions. Broderbund raised the curtain on their
Amiga version of Star Wars, based on the
Atari Games coin-op version. The program
utilizes wire-frame graphics enhanced by color
and digitized music.
Graphics resolution and faster frame rate
seem to be the order of the day. Taito has an
impressive line of MS-DOS conversions which
are getting substantially closer to the Amiga

Another interesting approach can be
found in Paragon's Spiderman and
Captain American in Doctor Doom's
Revenge. The story is told on-screen in comic
book style layouts (and an actual Marvel comic
forms part of the documentation). Full-screen
action sequences where heroes utilize both
fighting skills and projectile weapons (Spidey's
web and Cap's shield) resolve portions of the
story (second quarter release).
Konami, publisher of both Konami and
Ultra cartridges for the Nintendo Entertainment System, is stepping up its emphasis on
personal computer software of its NES hits.
Lynn Hejtmanek explained, "Because of the success of our NES products, the personal computer software was moved to a back burner."
Now, the company plans to tighten the conversion process and release MS-DOS, and C-64
versions of Boot Camp, Jackal, Metal Gear,
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, and Double
Dribble before the end of the year and Amiga
versions of Rush'n Attack and Contra before
June (with Ajax and Metal Gear close behind).
Rainbird's IBM versions of Carrier Command and Starglider ll look like the 68000
machine versions and offer more (the new Carrier Command offers a feature with four realtime windows to keep track of those Manta
fighters). The company also plans a first
quarter release of Savage, a three-level arcade
adventure in which the character utilizes the
viewpoints of a barbarian, an escape sled, and
finally, an eagle. The graphics look better than
those on dedicated game systems and the
sound is the typical upbeat Rainbird "rocker."
Sierra's Silpheed offers extremely fast scrolling
and frame rate in a Japanese hyper-version of
a "Centipede"! "Defender" hybrid, complete with

Special Report

an American version of the Japanese
soundtrack that really "cooks."
Box Office plans a February release of their
licensed Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey
Circus game. Players compete in tight rope
walking, trick horse riding, trapeze, and lion
taming through nine levels of difficulty (Amiga,
Apple, C-64, IBM, and ST—February
release).

Adventures on Land and Sea
There is a renewed emphasis on introductory
style adventure games. Icon-driven games like
Origin's Tangled Tales: The Misadventures of
a Wizard's Apprentice, a tongue-in-cheek approach to fantasy adventure and Interplay's
Amiga version of Neuromancer, as well as

Cosmi plans to introduce new
splash to the Pac-Man genre. Their
Chomp! game enables players to jump
from fish bowl to larger and larger
aquariums, devouring other fish and attempting to avoid being eaten oneself
while growing from goldfish to "Jaws"
size. The aquariums are not mazes,
but play mechanics are similar to other
"eat and run" games.
Hewson Consultants Ltd. (designers of Uridium), is part of Medalist
International, a new affiliated label
program at the Microprose. Exolon
(science fiction action with graphics
reminiscent of Terrorpods), Netherworld (a tougher looking Uridium-style
game), and Eliminator (which looks
like a space race with teeth) should be
the first titles on the shelf.

Data East should release Heavy Barrel (C64 and IBM) and Super Hang On (a Mac II,
IBM, ST, and Amiga title based on a Sega
license) in the second quarter. Besides the
familiar motorcycle race from the coin-ops, the
latter is a mouse-driven version which includes
an icon-based course builder with different
shapes and varying terrain. Courses can be
saved to disk and the player can establish
checkpoints for fractional times.
Microillusion's Dr. Plummet's House of
Flux is an arcade game in which one pilots a
ship through 28 levels of varying gravity while
facing tight spots and alien creatures.
In addition to Aussie Games (see Rumor
Bag, CGW #55, p.14), Mindscape introduced
Sgt. Slaughter's Mat Wars (a wrestling game
which allows players to both manage their
fighters and perform the fighting); International
Team Sports (volleyball, water polo, soccer,
swimming, and track); and Combat Course (an
obstacle course competition with its own construction kit). The company also unveiled After
Burner, Action Fighter, and Shinobi as the
three newest versions in the Sega line.

Action style adventure will also be prevalent in
1989. Kyodai, a consortium between Broderbund and 11 Japanese companies, will release
its first three products by summer of 1989. Ancient Land of Ys is an action/adventure quest
for the six lost Books of Ys (IIGS and
IBM). Hydlide (IBM) takes the player
from medieval villages to outer space.
The game uses a fascinating combination of overhead view and 3-D terrain
with excellent resolution. The story line
begins with as little information as possible. There is a crack in the earth with
monsters coming through. The
player's job is to find out why. Terrain
includes forestland, tunnels, cloud city,
a medieval castle, futuristic castle,
parallel dimension, and 200 screens of
outer space. Psychic War (IBM) is
another sci-fi fantasy game from
Kyodai in which strategy and puzzlesolving are as important as arcade action.
Other action-adventure titles include:
Epyx's Trials of Honor (a French
"Defender of the Crown"-style game);
Microprose's Sword of the Samurai
(a working title for a game built on the
Pirates technology and offering more
emphasis on diplomacy); Activision's
I a g Ninja 2 (set in New York and
much friendlier as it is easier to pick
up objects and there is no ninja
magic); Electronic Arts' Project Firestart (a sci-fi/horror game for the C-64);
and SSI's Hillsfar (a role-playing
game in the AD&D"' line with an arcade style combat arena - IBM and C64—March release).

Titus Software introduced a game
within a game idea with Titan, a fictitious game in another continuum
where players must guide a power
sphere through eighty synthetic worlds
(i.e. levels) in order to succeed (Amiga,
C-64, IBM and ST) and Knight Force,
a twelve-level action-adventure using
the company's familiar 3-D graphics
driver (Amiga, ST, and IBM).
Epyx demonstrated Axe of Rage and
Curse Buster (first quarter—Amiga, C-64, IBM
and ST), two medieval action games. The
former has four maze-like levels that must be
cleared out by the axe-wielding hero and the latter uses voice synthesis and 3-D graphics to
enchant players through 100 smaller mazes.

tional maps/charts, and 47 ports of call. The
game uses digitized photos from the expedition.

menu-driven games like Microillusion's
Scooby Doo (due later this year on IBM) with
its refined Zak McKracken look and Epyx's
Omnicron Conspiracy were announced. The
Scooby Doo adventure will contain four adventures in one (Mystery of the Aztec Sea God, Ski
Village, Haunted Mansion, and Western Town).
The Omnicron Conspiracy is a space detective
adventure with 250 rooms. It is not combat intensive, has an estimated 20-40 hour solution
time, and offers what the company calls
"tongue and cheap" humor. For example, what
do you say to a pusher who offers you a drug
called "Dex-Boost?" "Just Say No!"
Undersea adventure will be a recurring theme
in 1989. The Infogrames (French company
purchased by Epyx in November of 1988)
division has prepared Undersea Commando, a
"James Bond" superspy adventure where
players try to foil the "Yellow Shadow." It is essentially an action game with a strategy wrap.
Cosmi is offering a challenging action adventure called Navy SEAL.. Players "qualify" for
active service in four different disciplines and
then, participate in realistic commando style
missions. Sierra's Jim Walls, designer of
Police Quest, has now collaborated with a
former U.S. intelligence officer to create Code
Name: Ice Man, a 3-D adventure game based
on S.E.A.L. service.
In addition to these military/intelligence
themes, Intracorp will release the IBM version
of Search for the Titanic in February. The program offers 75 wrecks to explore, 100 naviga-

Within the action-adventure approach,
Mindscape allows players to command a six
person S.W.A.T. team during a Hostage: Rescue Mission (Amiga, C-64, IBM, and ST - first
quarter release scheduled). The product offers
new perspectives to street scenes, strategic options in placement of snipers, and ability to
operate multiple characters.
Lucasfilm Games announced that the company would be producing the Indiana Jones
and the last Crusade game, but could not
reveal details on the game without compromising the film plot. The company does expect to
complete the game as soon as possible after
the May release of the film and has promised
information for CGW readers at important junctures prior to the game's release.
Sequels will also abound in 1989. Might and
Magic ll has just arrived from New World
Computing. This one has better graphics than
their first, automapping, and new character
classes and spells. Mindscape just unwrapped
the Macintosh version of Deja Vu II: Lost in
Las Vegas with the ST version due in a few
weeks. Players take on the role of Ace Harding,
second-rate detective, in this adventure using
the familiar ICOM interface from Deja Vu,
Uninvited, and Shadowgate. Space Quest III,
using Sierra's Sierra Creative Interpreter
(which just gets better and better), should provide a chance to rescue those crazy guys from
Andromeda before the quarter is out. Cosmi is
building on The President Is Missing approach
for an intriguing new mystery game entitled,

Presumed Guilty. The pacing is supposed to
be faster than the original game.
In a different direction, Roberta Williams has
returned to her love of Agatha Christie
mysteries, added a distinctive Sierra-"Mel
Brooks" touch of humor, and developed a murder mystery set in New Orleans in the 1920s.
Another Sierra 3-D adventure to watch
for is King Arthur (a quest for the holy
grail presented by two professional
animators of television cartoons). Long
term projects to be expected from the
company are a female version of "Leisure
Suit Larry' (working title is Polyester
Patty), a 3-D horror game from Mark
Crowe, and a space game not related to
Space Quest from Scott Murphy.

comeback with Taito's revival of QIX. It is a territorial conquest game that was a big hit in college and university towns a few years ago. In
addition, Leisure Genius is offering computer
versions of Risk and Clue: Master Detective,
based on the expanded version of the popular
board game. Card games will also make their
appearance in 1989 with Trump Castle from

Electronic Arts has 688 Attack Sub in
their Quality Assurance process, so
release is imminent. The product supports the Ad Lib sound board and features IBM graphics that really push the
hardware.
Finally, a non-military vehicle simulator
is under development at Spectrum
Holobyte. A series of big city driving
simulations using 3-D filled graphics,
map mode, helicopter mode, and authentic skylines is projected. The IBM
demonstration looked great and the
game is expected to support human vs.
human competition by utilizing null
modem hook-ups.

The Magic Candle, available from
Miles Computing offers more than 200
hours of play. Players select their parties
from pre-designed characters by means
of an interview and resume process.
There is an ability to split the party and
assign different tasks to each, day and
night vary according to season, and there
are no experience points in the game. Instead, the party grows by using and learning skills through experience and "reading" books.
Other adventure products include: First
Row's The Honeymooners game (an
animated adventure built around three
basic puzzles); Twilight Zone for the
Amiga from the same company, Faery
Tale Adventure for the Macintosh II from
Microillusions; the same company's
Dondra for the IBM; Microprose's Covert
Action (a menu and window driven spy
adventure where you use your gun last); and
Koei's as yet untitled ancient chinese adventure game.

Strategic Mission
Wargames are few and far between. Koei expects to release Nobunaga's Ambition 2 with
use of generals and other subtle improvements. SSI just released Battles of Napoleon
and First Over Germany (sequel to 50 Mission
Crush and B-24) is due this quarter. Interstel
is releasing a C-64 version of Empire and SSG
has just released Halls of Montezuma on IBM.
Otherwise, the strategy games are basically
non-standard. Cinemaware's Lords of the
Rising Sun (Amiga - first quarter) utilizes an interface for its tactical battles that is so elegant
it may well become a standard. Unlike other
Cinemaware titles, this one can be played
with or without the arcade sequences. The
game involves a classic struggle between two
brothers during 12th Century Japan. Both the
maps and the strategy are dynamic and realtime. Microprose's Sword of the Samurai for
the C-64 uses some similar approaches in its
battle sequences.
Melbourne House will offer War in Middle
Earth during the first quarter. The game features arcade quality graphics and a Risk style
level of difficulty. Players control the party from
the "Ring" trilogy, as well as any allies which
the party can convert through offering important artifacts. The map from Tolkien's world
and the characters seem carefully treated in
this strategy game of fantasy conquest.
Abstract strategy games may be making a

another hit under development. In yet another
approach, Spectrum Holobyte revealed that
they are working on the Electronic Battlefield
series, to be marketed in conjunction with
several of the information networks. The company has not officially confirmed that the series
will include "tanks," but there are to be three different products reflecting air, land, and sea. It
seems like a safe bet, though.

The Sporting News

Intracorp and Hoyle's Book of Cards from
Sierra.

Stimulating Simulations
One area of strategy gaming that is not suffering is the simulation. Velocity Software has
released Jetfighter, an IBM flight simulation of
the F-14, F-16, and F-18. Designed by Robert
Dinnerman and Moses Ma, who designed F/A
18 Interceptor for EA, it is everything the
Amiga product was and also has an external
view from any angle, and a full detailed terrain
map of California as added features. Chuck
Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer 2.0 from
Electronic Arts will teach advanced skills
necessary to perform aerial stunts such as the
Blue Angels or Thunderbirds would use. EA
also plans to market a Chuck Yeager audiotape where the veteran pilot offers specific advice on situations included in the simulation.
Activision is pushing the graphic capability of
the C-64 with their F-14 Tomcat, a game
which emphasizes dogfighting. There are 80 different missions which can be accessed
separately or played as a campaign game over
an entire "career." In addition, Lucasfilm
Games is expected to publish a third quarter
follow-up to Battlehawks 1942, building on the
technology introduced in that game.
Tank simulations, as we noted in our December review of Steel Thunder, will be a major factor in 1989. EA's Abrams Battle Tank is an
IBM product with slick graphics. Bing Gordon,
EA vice-president, told us to "Think of it as a
tank simulation for one commander rather
than a squadron leader." Microprose's Tank
(working title) will take modern battle doctrine
seriously. Our sneak look at the product was
impressive. It looks like Microprose has

Beyond Epyx's introduction of the IBM
conversion of The Sporting News
Baseball, there are a number of new
baseball games in the near future. EA
plans to release Earl Weaver Baseball
2.0 which features more emphasis on the
pitcher/batter confrontation; Data East
plans to develop a unique approach to
baseball with Scott Orr, founder of
Gamestar, (Orr says it will be "somewhat" statbased and enriching); and Cinemaware plans
a TV Sports: Baseball game (other games expected to be published in the series include: tennis, basketball, and possibly, ice hockey).
For different sporting events, Gamestar has
developed Motocross for the IBM, EA is expected to release Kings of the Beach, a professional beach volleyball game for first quarter
release; and the long awaited John Madden
Football will ship "For sure, by April 1st."

Technical Advances
Those who are looking toward CD-I (Compact Disc - Interactive) might be looking for
that system in first quarter of 1990 rather than
Christmas of 1989. However, one keynote address at WCES noted that the current CD-ROM
extended architecture is providing a bridge between CD-ROM and CD-I. Cinemaware recognizes this and is releasing Defender of the
Crown CD-ROM for the IBM. It is the familiar
game with a tremendously enhanced
soundtrack.
Others are not confident about the system.
Alan Fetzer of Taito pointed out to CGW that
the coin-op laser-disk based games had
tremendous maintenance problems and expressed his reticence in believing that the
hardware can hold up.

Here, We Go Again
All in all, the show demonstrated that there
will be a great number of titles in 1989 and
hopefully, something improved and exciting for
everyone. So, as our clever pilot commented
upon our landing, "There you have it folks.
Another victory for technology and skill over
fear and ignorance."

Review

takes a bit of getting used to; putting the cursor slightly
above the center of the viewscreen moves one slowly forward, below the center moves one slowly backwards, and left
and right spins the character in place. The further from the
center, the faster one moves.
Combat is straight-forward: put the enemy in the marshal's
crosshairs and click the mouse. Damage received is taken
from the character's energy levels (shown in the gauges in
the upper left).

by Alan Roberts

I

serious here.
Board up your windows, yank the phone
out of the wall, and
tell everybody you
know that you're
moving to Tibet.
Finishing this game
will take some time
and dedication.
In The Colony,
players take on the
role of Regional Marshal for a given sector. As the marshal,
you find yourself
responding to a
mayday signal from a
scientific research
colony. You have a
near-miss with a black
hole and crash-land
on the planet. Therefore, the game begins
when you regain consciousness. You have to: 1)
Title:
The Colony
System:
Amiga, Macintosh (512K required,
rescue survivors, if any; 2)
1 MB and hard drive recommended),
repair your damaged ship;
and IBM
3) use whatever force is reVersion Reviewed:Macintosh
Price:
$49.95
quired (it'll take quite a bit)
David Smith
Designer:
to destroy an unknown
Publisher:
Mindscape
Northbrook, IL
alien race on the verge of
invasion. As Marshals from
a more primitive era might say "It's all in a day's work,
Ma'am".

Interfacing With the Future
Imagine a cross between the arcade game "Battlezone" and
the movie "Aliens." Then, combine that with the same style
of malicious puzzles that kept people awake late at night
with "Shadowgate" and "Uninvited." Now, you have a mental
image of The Colony.
Using a mouse, players maneuver their characters through
the marshal's crippled ship, the planet's surface and an eightlevel colony. Players can choose to view either see-through
"wire frame" graphics (like the original "Battlezone") or slowermoving hidden-surface animation. Steering the characters

When a character gets close enough to an object that can
be manipulated (a desk, a door, a chest) the animation is
replaced with a bit-mapped illustration. Clicking on an article
allows it to be examined. To return to the real-time animation, either click on the "Exit" dialogue box or press return (I
recommend the second option; moving the mouse to the
bottom of the screen hurls your character backwards across
the room).
It'simeog

Coming under Alien Fire (My Gripes)
The game is not copy-protected, and works well on a hard
drive. Mindscape uses a decoder scheme where you have to
key in a secret combination periodically (to start a saved
game, to exit the ship, etc). Although this is normally fairly
unobtrusive, at one point the marshal must find a code and
travel to the very depths of enemy-held turf to key it in. One
cannot save the game at this point, because saving the
game will changes the code. This is sadistic.
Death comes by running out of energy. This is portrayed
by showing the energy levels plummet on screen before you
are turned into a pile of scrap. Still, there are a few times
when marshals can be killed instantly and players have to
guess what got them. Being given some sort of post-mortem
would only be fair.
There are a few tough mazes in the colony. Using the
standard ploy of dropping different objects doesn't work in
this game, because the only objects one can pick up and
take are virtually indistinguishable from each other. If one
returns to a room he has just ransacked, everything has
been tidied up. More than once I wasted time double-checking rooms that had already been searched.
Although the sounds are an enhancement, there were
times when they slowed the game to a crawl. It would be
tempting to remove the sound files.
Finally, even after some practice, maneuvering can be a
problem. Desks and chests can pop you out of the animated
game play at annoying times (holding down the "option"
key will disable this problem).

Marshalling Your Forces (Conclusion)
Although many games claim to be "the first of a new
generation", this one can do so honestly. Most games give
players a detached overhead (or side) view of what's going
on. It's easier to take on the character's point of view (figuratively speaking) if you literally see things from his perspective.
Along with lots of action, there are several mysteries to
solve: the fate of the scientists, the nature of their research,
and the origin of the aliens. More practical problems include
operating machinery and mapping a complicated complex
that seems to exist on more than three dimensions. Although there are some poignant spots in the game (finding
a child's abandoned toy, for example) there is only a limited
(Continued on page 56)

Game Developers' Conference

I Can't Believe
Grown-ups Do This
For A Living
Notes
on the
Conference
on
Computer
Game
Design

magine (Chris Crawford (Balance of
Power) wielding a bullwhip as an
analog to creativity, Dan Bunten
(M.U.L.E.) challenging game designers
(with tongue in cheek) to admit that they
are nerds/geeks, and the creators of computer role-playing games debating over
what storytelling really is. Those events
were but three of the many fascinating

I

discussions held at the recent Conference on Computer Game Design last
September. The brainchild of Chris Crawford, this foundational conference was
held by and for subscribers to Chris' Journal of Computer Game Design (see
abstracts in this issue). Over 150 designers, developers, programmers, and
producers from all over the entertainment

software industry converged on the
Miltpitas Holiday Inn in order to continue
building a sense of an independent
artist's community and improving the
games we play.

Chris Crawford Creativity and Game Design
Chris Crawford is always stimulating. He
began his lecture with the assertion that
creativity is "magic" and defies rational
definition. Then, he proceeded to examine the creative process rationally. He
suggested that there are two basic
methodologies toward creativity. One
method is to approach something old
from a new perspective and the other is
to develop something completely new
and different.

The former is incremental creativity, to
take an existing idea and do it one better.
The latter is grand leap creativity, which
makes a clean break with the past and attempts to do something totally new and
different. Crawford admits that grand leap
creativity doesn't really occur on a pure
scale, but it is what he personally strives
for.
The incremental method involves finetuning a few systems rather than every
system. "A game," espouses Crawford, "is
a system with a huge system of interacting sub-systems." Crawford stated that
99% of games are incrementally created,
but said, "Don't take my word for it. Take
CGW's." He, then, read "Taking A Peek!"
from various issues of CGW which illustrated his point: " . . . an attractive

'Arkanoids'-type game . . .;" "Think of Pacman in hyper space!" " ... a Zaxxon type
game . . .•" "...another arcade
spaceship shoot-'em-up . . .;" and so
forth.
Chris noted that typically one game in
50 (2%) is a hit. Using his own criterion,
he states that 20% of his games have
been hits. Since, therefore, he has a better than average "hit" rate and he puts his
energy into "grand leap" designs as opposed to "incremental advance" designs,
he stated that he felt qualified to offer
suggestions to the designers at the conference on grand leap design.
Don't be seduced by technology, because that is getting the cart before the
horse. Instead, the optimal approach is to
(Continued on page 28)

Review

I

magine this: Your name is

Derek Rogers, an ambitious
yuppie on your way up the
London business ladder. Your
ability at stock market
maneuvering catches the eye of
David Rogers (apparently not related), who makes you a full
partner in his firm, gives you
your own office, a big money
salary, and your own BMW.
Now, just as soon as you begin
to celebrate your achievement,
things start going terribly
wrong. You have become the
chief suspect in an insider trading scandal, and no one is rushing to your defense!

On The Eve of
"Corruption"

ten function keys for frequently
used phrases. This should save
typing time, but since there
seems to be no way to save
those definitions, this feature is
only of value when one intends
to play for an extended length
of time.
The parser is limited, but
should suffice. The main thrust
of the game is away from object manipulation and toward
character interaction. There are
fifteen personalities that the
player must learn to communicate with.
Each action adds one minute
to the game clock. This means
that certain developments are
going to happen at specific
times. You will have to be in
the right place at the right time
in order to catch the action. It
also means that the player has
a limited time before he will be
hauled off to jail. Once there,
the game is over. Maintaining
your freedom is essential in
order to untangle yourself from
the long arms of the law.

In the past, Magnetic Scrolls
has produced The Pawn, Guild
of Thieves, and Jinxter. With
no mythical lands, sorcerers, or
elves here, Corruption is a "trueto-life" adventure.
The Amiga and ST versions
feature 80 column text and
have excellent illustrations in a
style akin to artistic paintings.
These can be pulled down over
the text, but pure text adventurers can play without the use
of the illustrations, since they
do not figure heavily in the
resolution of the actual adventure. For example, in an early
scene, you can plainly see a
cleaning lady, but try as you
may, the program keeps saying
she is not there. Obviously, at
this point in the game, her part
in the adventure is only atmospheric.
Pull down menus also provide
for some other nice features,
such as the ability to instantly
reveal all of the exits for the current location. Other menu
items allow for easily saving
by Frank Eva
and reloading game positions
that have been stored on a
TITLE:
Corruption
SYSTEM:
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM,
separate data disk, turning
V# PLAYERS:
1
graphics and printer on or off,
PRICE:
Amiga & ST $44.95
IBM $39.95
and also toggling the speech
DESIGNER:
Magnetic Scrolls/Rainbird
mode. The speech mode,
PUBLISHER:
Mediagenic
which initially seemed a positive
Menlo Park, CA
addition to the Amiga version,
becomes nothing more than a
novelty once you realize that phonemes are not used. Thus, a
rather unattractive. This cultural
word such as 'office°, is pronounced '0 (long) Tice (as in ice)'.
inconvenient, however.

Rainbird's Contemporary
Adventure Game

The documentation includes a 'quick start card' providing loading instructions, an 'adventure guide' or quick reference card
detailing special functions, a °gameplay manual' that explains
methods of communicating with the game, as well as providing
encrypted hints, and an audio cassette which contains the basic
story (It also contains the program's original musical score for
those who, due to system limitations, can not access the music).
Another nice feature is that the player is allowed to define the

Although Rainbird recommends Corruption for "Adult
minds only," this does not
mean that the language or illustrations are 'R' rated. This
reviewer saw very little to give
the game the air of "adults
only." However, Corruption is
not a game that children could
readily comprehend or even
enjoy. The themes are adult
and the game play moderate to
difficult.
One minor drawback, relative
to software coming in to this
country from overseas, is the
cultural barrier. Certain expressions may leave the player
somewhat puzzled. For example, in one scene you are
told that the secretary has
made her office 'homely' by the
addition of family pictures on
the wall and brightly colored
flowers on her desk. Over here,
something that is homely looks
barrier is more interesting than

By all means, make a map of the game, and explore all locations. There seem to be no really illogical procedures required to
be successful at Corruption. Just remember that you are thrown
into the world of cutthroat business with its power plays, greed,
deception, and double dealing. You must become ruthless in
order to survive.
Adventure gamers who have had their fill of slaying dragons,
etc., will surely find Corruption an intriguing change of pace! CGW

Game Hints

From time to time, Scorpia leaves the
common room at that famous tavern of
the mind, "Scorpion's Tale," and
answers the mail delivered to the back
room.

Warning: There are specific hints
about popular adventure games located in this vicinity.
It's time to trek into the cozy back room
and rummage through the mail bag.
Sorry to say, tho, that mail service has
been pretty bad lately. Through most of
November and December, letters have
been taking almost a week, if not more,
to reach me. That, mind you, is domestic
mail. Usually service improves as the post
office gears up for the December rush of
Christmas mail, but not this year. CGW
sent me a card. It took 9 days to get
here! My apologies to all for slow responses to your queries. There isn't, alas,
much I can do about it.

Scorpion's Mail

Manhunter
There is both a Harry and a Harvey
(easy to confuse). You have to figure out
the last names of both of them to
proceed with the game. Harry is day two,
and Harvey is day three. Some people,
on the other hand, haven't managed to
get past day one. This is probably because they didn't do the right thing at the
video game in the bar. Remember: less is
more.

King's Quest IV
The bridle remains an elusive prize for
many (and this comes as no real
surprise, being one of the nastier puzzles
in the game). You won't find it until after
you're out of the whale. be sure to look
everywhere. Also, if you are having
trouble finding the whale in the first
place, it doesn't show up until after
you've been to Lolotte's and gotten her
first quest. Save the game after that so
you won't have any problems (well, not
too many . . . grin!). The gold ball, which
a few are having trouble locating, is actually in plain sight, although not obviously so. Look carefully at screens near
water. Keep in mind that Rosella's position on the screen is often crucial to finding or obtaining items.

Bard's Tale III
Several people have been unable to obtain a rainbow rose in Lucencia. Have
you seen anything else that was rainbowcolored? There is a connection between
the two of them. Also, for those who are

having problems handing out flowers, the
bard's song at the hall is helpful.

Leisure Larry H
A number of folks are having a hard
time getting started. Remember it doesn't
pay to be too honest here. For those
who have gotten a little further along, the
spinach dip is just for points, and isn't
otherwise useful. The trick is figuring out
the right way of getting rid of it (There
are, by the way, a number of actions you
can do in this game that will bring points,
but do not advance the plot, so you
could finish the game without a perfect
score. So unless you're a perfectionist,
don't worry about it too much).

Future Magic
Several have written to me, asking if
there is more to the game than shooting
down raider ships. There certainly is, but
it will take awhile before the "real" action
starts. Just keep after the ships, and
watch for a new beacon on Caldorre.
Also, there really is no place where you
can purchase prohibited weapons. All of
them must be found in various places
throughout the game. One more thing:
(Continued on page 24)

(Continued from page 21)

Scorpion's Mail
some of those who have gotten far along
have complained that their energy levels
are too low to perform certain important
tasks. Be kind to animals, even hostile
ones. Look at them sometimes; they can
use a little help.

Wasteland
I have been advised by a couple of
readers that it is possible to kill the Night
Terror, if you keep at it long enough,
especially with a Proton Axe (which requires no ammunition). There isn't any
reason to do this, but if you're feeling
especially hostile, go ahead (grin). The
helicopter is only good for one ride, and
you need a high agility to train for it.
Since you can walk to anyplace the
helicopter can take you, you may want to
skip it entirely. Finally, you will not be
able to get into Darwin Base until after
you have been in Sleeper Base (which in
turn means having successfully gone
through the sewers).

Ultima V
Food is a problem for many, especially
now that almost everyone knows it's bad
to steal crops from the fields (including
lobo's). Unfortunately, there isn't any
secret method for making money quickly.
The best thing to do is keep your party
small at the start (no more than four), sell
everything you don't really need, pray for
trolls under bridges (heh), roam around a
lot at night (when chances of encounters
are better), and always have the most intelligent person in the party do your
buying and selling, to get the best prices.
On another matter, a number of people,
especially those who have not played IV,
are having a hard time finding dungeons
(which are not marked on the maps).
They're all in the mountains; look for a little pile of boulders, which marks the
entrance (the words to open them, however, you'll have to learn on your own).

Wizardry V
There are several locked doors on the
first level. All but two (the silver door and
the bronze door) can be opened eventually by either lockpicking or the Desto spell.
If these aren't working for you, wait

awhile and try again when your party has
gone up a level or two. Unless a door
has some special description to it (aside
from being locked), you can usually get it
open without needing a special item.

Demon's Winter
I have heard from Craig Roth, author of
the game, that the problem with the
orb/crystal has been fixed. It is now impos
sible to get the orb before you have the
crystal (which will save the lives of many a
party). Also, he tells me that, although
this is not mentioned in the manual (left
out by accident?), you can erase characters you don't want during their creation
by simply hitting return at the name
prompt (wish I'd know about this one a
lot sooner!). This will help you avoid
having to save and then delete unwanted
characters. Thanks for the info, Craig.
Hmm . . . seems we've reached the bottom of the bag In the meantime, if you
need help with an adventure game (I'm
not too helpful with arcade games, as I
don't play many of them), you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: send SMail to ST1030. By US
Mail (include a self-addressed stamped envelope if you live in the United States and
expect an answer): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Review

Question: What
metamorphoses
from a lifeless
lump of stone
into a grinning
hulk of a
monster,
thunders across
the battlefield,
grabs the fairest
of the fair, and
gobbles her up
like a stick of
gum?

Low Blows
and
Other Winning Moves

Answer: A rook
taking a queen in
Interplay's new
Amiga version of
Battlechess. You
have to see it to
believe it.
Battlechess
reminds me of Archon. The pieces
act out the combats, but they follow Chess rules-the taker never
becomes the take.
I haven't
matched Battlechess against
Sargon 4 or any
of the celebrated
near master level
programs, but it's good enough to beat me on an intermediate
level, and if one set it on any of the higher levels (level 7 or
higher), I think it would give any player or other program a real
good run for the money. Interplay has a level control in the program that allows you to set the thinking time anywhere from 1 to
10,000 minutes. The latter may be a bit excessive, and it would
be nice to have fractions of minutes allowed, for those times in
the end game when even 30 seconds is an eternity.
Still, the fact that Battlechess can play a mean game of chess is
not the point of this game, nor is it what makes it enough fun to
drag me away from Pool of Radiance or another CRPG. Watching the carefully storyboarded and choreographed battles when
the pieces take each other is the true kick. If you ever want to
see your Amiga at its full power, then you must play this game.
Battlechess is an artist's program and, while Mike Quarles deserves full marks for packing the program into one 800K disk, the
real star is Tod Camasta, and whoever helped him with the art.
By my calculations, there are 35 possible combats, and one
variation to cover pawns taking each other en passant. Five of
those combinations are very, very rare, and are only seen when
checkmate occurs. Technically, a game ends with checkmate,
and kings are never taken, but Interplay has included story-battles for the final coup-de-grace. Each battle, from pawn takes
pawn to king takes queen has something distinctive and amusing about it. I wish I had a large screen TV to display this game,
since some of the hilarious detail gets lost on a 12-inch monitor.
Interplay tried hard to include those features most wanted by
chess players. The program allows you to set up your own chess
problems, or rearrange the board to achieve any desired configuration. Once you have placed your pieces on the board, the

Interplay's
"Battlechess"
by Ken St. Andre

program then
switches back to
regular game
mode, and you
take it from there.
You may also
play chess in the
regular twodimensional top
down mode if the
3-D perspective
makes it hard for
you to concentrate or visualize the board. 2D
chess doesn't include the great
visual and sound
effects, but it is
easier to understand who's
doing what to
whom.

Battlechess contains several
standard chess
program options;
for example, one
can play human
Battlechess
TITLE:
vs. human,
SYSTEM:
Amiga
# PLAYERS:
1-2
human vs. comPRICE:
$49.95
puter, or comDESIGNERS:
Interplay Productions
puter against itPUBLISHER:
Interplay Productions
Costa Mesa, CA
self. One can
also link to
another Amiga
via modem and play an opponent in another location. This requires the other player to use Battlechess and an Amiga--no intermachine compatibility exists. Other features include the option to
take back moves in sequence, thus allowing one to undo a disastrous move, and the option of having the program suggest
your next move at any given time.
However, the guys at Interplay missed some opportunities to
make Battlechess an even better program than it now is. One
thing they should have included was a printed listing of the
moves in each game, with an option of dumping it to the printer.
They could have easily included chess clocks to give one the
same feeling of time pressure that tournaments create.
Redefinable color values for the chess sets would given the game
a personal ambiance. I may be perverted, but I really would have
liked to see that slinky queen in widow's black or virginal white
(The basic colors used in the game are lavender and blue.). For
something called Battlechess, it would have been nice to have a
"Fairy" chess version where the battle results were not predetermined and where the defender could win.
Lastly, while the individual combats are exquisite, there really
should have been more variety. If each piece had four possible
combat sequences versus every other piece, the game would
retain its capacity to surprise the players much longer than it
does now. Sure, it would take a lot more memory, but memory is
cheap now. If Interplay ever does a port to another machine, I'd
suggest that they call in a chess playing game designer and really
pull out all the stops.
Quibbles aside, every chess player will want a copy of this program, and every Amiga owner owes it to him/herself to see Battlechess in action. Highly recommended.

Game Developers' Conference (Cont.)

decide what you want to do, then, decide
HOW!
Don't internalize marketing thinking. Do
not allow the marketing department to intrude on creativity. Marketing is based on
yesterday. It is similarity thinking and this
is fundamentally opposed to creativity.

stories in other media succeed because
they offer more than simple entertainment."
Next, Moriarty asked where the author
of interactive stories had advantages over
other modes of entertainment. He suggested the advantage rested in replay
value and involvement. "It is one thing,"
he contended, "to watch a movie and see
someone else pull the trigger. It is quite
another thing to pull the trigger yourself."
He went on to argue that interactive
stories offer a tremendous tool for persuasion.

Live in the world of IDEAS. All new
ideas come from relationships with other
ideas. The best designers have enormous
intellectual curiosity. Talk to different
people and read lots of books on different subjects.
Develop respect for the psychology of
the creative process. Here is where
Crawford used the whip analogy. He
noted the physics of how a whip
works. A whip works on the wave principle where the larger mass is translated to smaller and smaller portions
until it moves faster and faster and
goes beyond the speed of sound and
pops. In the human psyche, the tip of
the whip represents the concrete, rational portion of the mind. Farther up
the whip is the subconscious and the
huge mass at the handle is the universal memory and unconscious archetypes. In keeping with the Jungian
analogy, Crawford quoted Jung, "One
of the basic aspects of man is the invention of good games."

Moriarty noted that the point of
Trinity was inevitability. The point was
that survival depends on doing unpleasant things. The designers noted
that people resent being manipulated
and if you manipulate them too much,
they will lose them rather than persuade them. Moriarty suggested that
this was what play balance is for. Cliff
Johnson (The Fool's Errand) suggested that Trinity is not interactive. If
you do the wrong thing, you come to
an end. Moriarty insisted that it is interactive. It is possible to make wrong
choices, but they are choices that the
author wants the person to make.
Moriarty observed that, in life, there is
ultimate interactivity. People always
have choices and are continually
forced to make them.

Crawford's Creative Approach:
1. Identify the problem (How to
portray the subject to be simulated in
the program).
2. Communicate the problem through
your entire mind:
a) Say the words out loud
b) See the problem
c) Attempt to feel the problem tactilely
d) Use the "killer step," Creative Agony
to feel the problem emotionally.
Then, rest - "sleep in the arms of
the dragon."
Remember: "You cannot control this
process. You are a puppet on a string."
The answer will come some day. It does
not work on a deadline, but publishers
do. Therefore, schedule projects in such
a way as to accomplish the creative work
early on - the easy stuff at the end (i.e.
Work on creative issues of project B
while doing programming of project A).
Creativity is draining. It is not fun. It is
hard work. Why? The pay-off (after the
wounds have healed) is to say, "I have
created a thing of beauty and truth. It's
worth it. It really is."
As is typical of Chris' industry-famous
speeches, this one was complex, hot, and
deep.

He then presented the following

Interactive Stories
Three different sessions touched on issues regarding interactive stories. Brian
Moriarty's (Trinity) session was entitled
"Interactive Stories," Brian Fargo (The
Bard's Tale) and Dave Albert (producer
at Electronic Arts) emphasized fantasy
role-playing in their session, and other
panels focused on interactivity and artificial personality.
Moriarty began his session by asking
the question, "How are stories used?"
They are used, he suggested, to entertain, inform, persuade, and/or express
feelings. CGW's associate editor, Johnny
Wilson, and David Feldman (Shadowgate) suggested that information and persuasion could also be combined to accomplish acculturation and value building.
Moriarty then emphasized that, "Entertainment is the sine qua non ("without
which there is nothing") of stories." If
designers don't entertain, they cannot
hope to achieve any other purpose.
"Most stories and games never aspire to
be anything more than just entertainment."
He went on to present his Thesis
Point: "The finest and most enduring

"Richter Scale of Interactivity'
(from highest to lowest)
• FTF RPGs with human moderator
• Infocom adventures
• Menu-driven adventures (e.g.
Maniac Mansion)
• Infocomics, Portal (fixed content with
variable sequence and
perspective)
• "What Next?" books
• Radio programs (require some
imagination)
• Movies (least interactive - nothing to
the imagination)
Moriarity went on to remark that in
order for the reader/player to care, "The
participant must be persuaded to make
an emotional investment in the story." In
order to accomplish this, the story needs
plot, characterization, and unity of purpose.
The latter part of the discussion
revolved around "Selling the Story to the
Publisher." In order to do that, the designer must: 1) prove it is entertaining and
2) emphasize the familiar (usually with
one sentence or easily expressible concept).
The conclusion of the discussion was a

plea to get away from the feature list and
figure out what the point of the story is.
Brian Fargo (Interplay) and Dave Albert (Electronic Arts) presented a different focus concerning games which tell
stories. Fargo promised, "No more 'kill
the evil wizard at the end of the game'
products." They suggested three new matters of focus: new themes, use of nonplayer characters, and storytelling art.
New themes include western, science fiction, Japanese, and horror settings. With
regard to NPCs, future games should
learn about supporting characters from
the movies. Both agreed that this doesn't
have to be complicated. Finally, designers should learn from cinematic use of
plot points, confrontation, and resolution
(climax).
The audience responded to the discussion with suggested alternatives to combat in CRPGs, such as: mining,
economics, and skill development. The
designers also challenged each other to
emphasize personality quirks in NPCs
and to spend more time modelling
human behavior.
Brenda Laurel (of Apple's multi-media
group) began a panel discussion on artificial personality with the assertion that,
"We have not yet created interactive characters. We need to begin by studying
dramatic characters. Drama is a short cut
for understanding people because it embodies enough heuristics to help us understand ourselves." Good drama is
based on rules about cause-effect and
enables us to see clear good, evil,
heroism, and emotion.
Laurel, known throughout the industry
as a student of Aristotle, referenced the
ancient philosopher/dramatist as to why
drama works. It is entertaining, the ancient wise man theorized, because it
visualizes relationship between cause and
effect. In short, it is "universalized." Therefore, a play is not about people, it is
about actions. Characters must have
traits that presuppose how they will act.
Laurel believes that the technology is already here for interactive characterization.
Nevertheless, she argued that today's interactive fictions depend more on appearance or description to indicate character than on characterization itself. Appearance is not what is most important in
characterization. For example,
Hamlet wears black, but so does Johnny
Cash and Hamlet looks sad, but so does
Pat Paulsen. That doesn't tell much
about a character.
What constitutes decision-making in a
given character? For some, it is a moral
imperative—man and god (higher law).
For others, it is an ethical imperative—
man and man (social relations, politics,

law and civilization) or expedient imperative—man and himself (simple means to
the ends). With this in mind, she
presented "Laurel's Laws for Creating
Characters in Interactive Fiction." These
are:
Traits must be actionable (lead to action)
Traits must be relational (have objects)
Traits must be dynamic (change on the
basis of new knowledge and information). If these are utilized, the challenge is
to create an action calculus:
1. generate event,
2. cause character to interpret the event
and update his/her "awareness,"
3. enable character to plan his/her next
actions, and
4. give character enough data to evaluate
said actions.
In order to accomplish this, one can
use mini-scenarios, a simple Al approach,
or anything that enables characters to
make their own choices. Once implemented, the day of the hard-wired plot is
over!
David Graves (of Hewlett-Packard)
stated that the main problem with the
standard approach to artificial personality
is that we currently treat actors as objects. "One cannot presently talk to characters," he protested, "because there is so
little to talk about. We need a representation for emotions, knowledge and
beliefs, as well as a rich media for communication."
Chris Crawford (Trust & Betrayal: The
Legacy of Siboot) asserted that bringing
characterization to games will be the
major issue in the mid-1990s.He sees
three problems to be overcome. The first
is development of artificial personality
(using algorithms). This can be readily
solved. The second is that these characters must be able to talk to each other
and that means designers will need bigger vocabulary (5,000 words or more), a
system for syntax, and a capacity for context. The third problem is that audiences
can't accept too rapid a rate of change.
Crawford posited that context is the

major problem. However, since social
situations create expectations, those situations can be used as delimiting walls to
reduce the context to a manageable
amount of data." To illustrate the latter
point, Chris told about being in Germany
and picking up enough German to use a
few words. He got into a cab, answered
the driver in German, and received a torrent in reply. Chris sheepishly asked for
the driver to speak in English. He has
suggested that the standard text parser is
in the same boat. To avoid this, he has
suggested that programmers use a
"Creole language" (second generation language spoken by immigrants). For example, an Arthurian game might use a
fake Old English.

Simulations
During a provocative panel on simulations, Gordon Walton of Digital Illusions (PT-109) observed that simulations are fun because they move quicker
than real life, eliminate that which is not
fun, and provide a visceral feel. Gilman
Louie of Sphere, Inc. said that real pilots
hate simulators. They "would rather be
flying," as it were. Therefore, he believes
that the challenge for simulation designers in the entertainment market is not
only to create realistic simulations, but
simulators that are fun. The challenge is
to understand the feel, the excitement,
and the thrill. It is to identify the five
minutes of fun in hours of reality and emphasize those five minutes.
Many designers of simulations are concerned with the problem of their warmongering image. Walton asserted, "We
don't develop our products to glorify war,
but to help the general public understand the problems warriors face. We
deliver war! We teach reality. You can
win at the simple level, but at higher
levels, you're going to die. We believe in
being responsible."
Gilman Louie responded, "I got upset
because I got a letter from a customer
who said Falcon was too tough. He was
angry because he kept getting killed and
wasn't getting points. If anything, we
glorify war by making games too easy.
War is not pretty. We shoot our own men
by mistake. Men fly knowing that only
some are going to return. Part of the job
with Falcon is to scare the hell out of
people and let people know that people
die!"
Noah Falstein (Battlehawks 1942) was
more concerned about moral responsibility. He asked, "If we're doing our job
right and we make the game fun
enough, what happens when people like
the game and decide to opt for the reality
(Continued on page 54)

Review

T

he theme song's running
bass line suggests the tension of the upcoming clash
between two football titans. The
camera pans across the field of a
packed stadium. A camera moves
in for a close-up of the blazerbedecked reporter behind the
desk. The Cinemaware Football
League is on the air!

Red Dogs
and
Hot Dogs

From the opening shots
described above through the
detail of the coin toss, the spoof
commercials (e.g. "In and Out
Brake Centers: We hardly slow
you down!"), the halftime show,
and the animation of the teams
themselves, 7V Sports: Football
offers an exceptional amount of atmosphere. True to the company's tradition of
building showpiece games which capture
a style from a particular genre of entertainment and developing a game around
it, the first of a projected series of sports
games blends sound, action, and color
into a unique approach to football.

Cinemaware Captures
The Gridiron
by Wyatt Lee and J. D. Lambright

Pre-game Report
The realistic animation offers some of
the flavor of watching football on
television. Human players have the option of competing solo against the computer opponent, head-to-head against
each other, or teaming up against the
computer opponent. Sound effects are
comparable to the impressive Head
Coach and are enhanced by the lively
musical score. The graphics and animation are exceptional. In addition, the
"camera angle" with the player's oblique
(from behind) top-down view offers a
chance to see plays developing and exploit the opposition's weaknesses. It is a
familiar enough view to make the player
instantly comfortable and is less unsettling than the "inside-the-helmet" perspective with its lack of peripheral vision in
GFL Championship Football. Also, the
flow of play is more forgiving than either
GFL or 4th & Inches with their demands
for precise patterns.
Play selection is less sophisticated than
NFL Challenge, Head Coach, Pro Football Simulator, or MSFL Pro Football.
Unless one is statistics-oriented, however,
this may not be as limiting as it originally
seems for two reasons. First, it is possible
to extemporize plays by not handing off
to the intended ball carrier, keeping the
ball oneself, or passing unexpectedly.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

TV Sports: Football
Amiga, IBM
1-2
$49.95
Larry Garner
Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA

Second, it is possible to call a mirror
image of the plays. After selecting the formation, one simply holds down the fire
button when choosing a particular play
and the pattern will be reversed.
League play is facilitated by a built-in
statistics package that automatically updates the league after each game. The
clipboard even keeps track of individual
statistics for most positions. Unlike some
earlier sports games where only one
human player could play against a
league of computer operated franchises,

TV Sports: Football offers several
human "owners" the chance of
playing against each other and
the computer operated teams in
the league. This even adds additional color to the "telecast" of the
game in that the scores of computer owned teams versus computer owned teams can be "broadcast" during games that involve
human owned teams. That is the
good news about league play.
The bad news is that the teams
are rated according to an arbitrary
points system rather than actual
NFL statistics. This approach will
more than likely make "Draft Day"
a rather controversial event in
most multi-player leagues, since one cannot simply type in a verifiable statistic but
must come to agreement on a subjective
rating with regard to the player's Speed,
Strength, Hands, and specific Ability for
each position. These ratings, in turn, are
added together to create a talent point
total. Unfortunately, one cannot perform
a complete edit on a team because each
player's total talent points are already
locked in. If a team's quarterback starts
with 24 points (indicating he is the team's
best player), one cannot change him to
23 points and make the halfback into the
24 point player. This also minimizes the
importance of trading since one cannot
edit substantially different players at a
given position. One cannot give up an excellent linebacker to trade up from a
mediocre to an excellent quarterback, for
instance.

Scouting Report
Game play is entirely joystick-driven.
This helps the pacing so that one does
not have to keep looking up plays in a
complex playbook. Players choose from
four basic offense and four basic defensive formations, followed by four basic
patterns. Active players (those controlled
by the human player) are marked by a
flashing cursor, but the other players on
the team play "intelligently," as well. If the
human player decides to go with a
designed running play, he simply presses
the fire button and the computer will execute the play as selected. If the human
player wants to control the flow of play
himself or definitely wants to throw a
pass, he simply pulls back on the joystick
(Continued on page 49)

Review

Modem Wars
"A Game By Any Other Name"
The best way to
understand what Modem Wars is,
is to realize that its original title
was "Sport of War". In many ways,
this is a better title than Modem
Wars. Why? Because Dan
Bunten's new game distills many
of the basic elements that make
up war as well as sport. Competition, ability to develop strategy
and tactics in real time, tension,
and lack of information as to the
opponent's intentions are all basic
elements in both war and in sport
(as well as in Modem Wars).

There are two back lines,
one in each player's territory.
Crossing the center line adds
points to your score, as does
crossing the opponent's back
line. You play the game as a
wargame, but you accumulate
points as if it were a sports
game.

By Daniel Hockman

The basic units of "play" are
similar as well.
In warfare you
have infantry,
cavalry, artillery, leadership. In football, the sport
that may come
closest to
emulating war,
you have
linemen,
backs, quarterback, and
coaches. In Modem Wars you
have grunts, riders, boomers, a
command center and spies.
So, why did EA decide to call the
game Modem Wars? Simple, the
title tells you a basic fact about
this game: it is a wargame
designed to be played by humans
via modem. Most computer war
games are historical simulations
of famous battles or combat environments. They are most often played versus a computer opponent. Modem Wars
has the option of a computer opponent,
but as you will see below, the computer
opponent is not what this game is about.
This is a game for humans to compete
with humans and the best way to do that
is to have each player seated at his own
terminal. Modem Wars was designed with
this in mind.

Calling the Play
(Game Elements)
In Modem Wars you are the quarterback or general of an army of

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Modem Wars
C.64, IBM
2
$34.95
Dan Bunten
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

mechanized warrior robots. From inside
your Command Center (comcen) you
control the actions of your units which
are organized into battle groups. Terrain
varies with each battle. Plains, streams,
forests, slopes, and plateaus all play a
role in your planning. Although the terrain varies from battle to battle, the basic
playfield remains constant. Forces set up
on opposite sides of the center line.

You win by either knocking
out the opponent's comcen or
by outscoring your opponent.
In addition to getting
points for crossing the
center and back lines,
you gain points by
damaging the enemy
comcen. After you
master the basic elements of game play
you, and your friends,
will move on to
develop personalized
strategies to maximize scores.
Modem Wars is more like
Chess or Stratego or any of
the computer sports games
than it is a wargame (which
often have a low level of
repeat play interest). You will
play a lot of games, and will
begin to keep
records of scores.
Perhaps you will
even set up a
league. Modem
War interest
groups are already in operation on Quantum
Link and getting
started on other
systems such as
Compuserve.
Note: There is an
error in the
documentation in regards to the scoring
system. According to the rulebook, the
points you receive when you win "by terrain points" equals "the number of terrain
points earned divided by two and added
to 300". In reality, the number of points
you receive in a win "by points" is "the difference between the scores (as they appear on the screen) at the end of the battle divided by two and added to 300, but
not higher than 450".

Special Teams (Features)
Beyond land combat, there is an air
game. In most scenarios, the comcen is
armed with missiles and drones. The
drones are primarily used as offensive
firepower against the enemy comcen (although they can be used to bomb
enemy troop concentrations). Missiles are
primarily used as defensive weapons
against drone attacks and, to a lessor degree, against land units within missile
range of the comcen.

with drones and missiles. "Face-Off' features 14 speedy riders per side (a lightning warfare scenario). "Sluggers" is a
heavy artillery (boomers) slugfest. The
two big scenarios are "Full War" and
"Defender". "Full War" is just what it says.
All unit types and game features are available to you in fighting an equally wellarmed opponent. "Defender" is similar to
"Full War" except that the attacker has
more drones and a movable comcen and
the defender has more missiles and an
immovable comcen.

There are seven scenarios. "Scrimmage"
is a learning scenario. "QB Sneak" features a small mobile offense versus a
larger but slower defensive force. "The
Bomb" is a training ground for air combat where each side has only a comcen

In "Full War" and "Defender," you have
available a list of advanced commands
such as cloaking, digging in, blitzing,
changing formations, and setting individual targets for your artillery (normally
units select their own targets).

Training Camp
(The Solo Trainer)
The solo trainer is just that: a trainer,
not an opponent. Do not buy this game
if you only plan to play against the computer. Playing against the solo trainer is a
frustrating experience. The solo trainer is
predictable, but deadly. In "Full War," the
trainer opponent will mass most of his
units into one huge force which will
march relentlessly towards your back line.
This can be countered by well-placed
dug-in groups just on your side of the
river. However, the solo trainer is deadly
with his drones and missiles. You will rarely get a drone hit on his comcen (at least
I couldn't), but he will rarely miss yours.
He rarely misses with his missiles, you will
rarely hit his drone with your missiles.

Modemless Wars
by Tom Cleaver
Dan Bunten's Modem Wars allows
you to humiliate an opponent across
the miles. The miracle of the modem
makes this possible, but suppose you
want to destroy an opponent across
the table? Is there any way you can
play Modem Wars in person? You bet
there is! In fact, there are two ways.
Two Commodore-64s can be wired
together if each of them has a
modem. Instead of connecting your
modem to a phone, just connect it to
the other modem. This is commonly
known as a "null modem." If the two
modems are not identical, they may
be incompatible and this technique
may fail.
If you do not have a modem, you
can still play Modem Wars by connecting two C-64s together via the User

Ports in the back. This is done with a
"null modem cable" which simply connects User Port to User Port. So far as
I know, a C-64 null modem cable is
not available commercially, but it's
easy to make.
Simply go to an electronic parts
store and ask for 12 feet of telephone
cable and two 24-pin card edge connectors (12 pins on each side). The
telephone cable is the standard kind
with four conductors—black, yellow,
green, and red. The card edge connectors have 12 "pins" on the top
labeled "1" through "12" and 12 on
the bottom labeled "A" through "N"
with letters "I" and "G" omitted. The
cost should be about $10.
Now, wire the two connectors
together using the phone cable as
shown below. This will require a soldering iron.

Since it is possible to plug the connectors in upside down, mark "Top"
on the appropriate side of each one.
When you initialize your "Play Disks"
for Modem Wars, use these
parameters:
Type of modem:Hayes & RS232
Carrier:Force On
DTR Logic:Normal.
Give your phone a rest, get wired,
and enjoy!

Those drone hits on the comcen are
deadly. When stunned your comcen
loses its vision for a time. That's when
the solo trainer gets in his most devastating blows.
When playing a human opponent
things are much more evenly matched,
and if not, you can handicap the better
player.

The Editor Versus
The Designer
A Battle For Bragging Rights

A League of Warriors
One of the nicest features of Modem
Wars is the game film utility. After a battle
you can replay the "game film" which
plays back the battle in high speed. You
can save those game films for study, sharing, etc. By the time you read this review
Dan will have uploaded to Quantumlink
and Compuserve a utility called the
"Modem War Game Film Utility" which will
allow you to upload your game films to
BBSs. The program will also allow you to
calculate your "batting average", and contains documentation on how to write special utilities to analyze battles. Look in the
EA area of QuantumLink. At press time it
was not determined where the program
would be located on Compuserve. You
might drop into the Gamer's Forum and
look there.

Can You Cut It?
Dan would like us to believe that
Modem Wars is "a wargame for the rest
of us". That is, Modem Wars is a fast
moving game that does not get bogged
down in the minutia of detail so often associated with wargames. Dan feels that
Modem Wars is for those gamers who
want to "play war" but are turned off by
the detailed rules of the typical wargame.
Has he succeeded? Well, yes, sort of.
There is no question that Modem Wars
distills the essence of warfare into basic
elements that can be quickly learned.
There is no question that Modem Wars
plays fast and is exciting. The problem is
that its strength (real time play) might
also be a marketing weakness. A sizable
number of gamers are not used to combining complex strategic thinking with
real time situations. They can spend
hours ordering tens of thousands of men
into mortal combat, but they wimp out
when they have to think under fire. They
want to play chess instead of speed
chess. They want to analyze instead of
act. As the enemy drones zero in on their
comcen, they throw up their hands in
frustration when knocked out before they
can extract themselves from the
maelstrom of fire that has engulfed them.
Hey! War is Hell! You will learn this when
you play Modem Wars. Some of you will
not like it, but for "real" gamers, those of
us that don't eat quiche, Modem Wars is
swell!

In September 1988, Electronic Arts
brought together two of computer
gaming's "heavyweights": CGW Editor
Russell Sipe and Award Winning
Designer Dan Bunten. The occasion
was a pre-release Modem Wars
match. On the one side, there was
Sipe who, over the course of eight
years, has probably seen more computer games than anyone in the
hobby. His advisors were Dave
Maynard (product manager for
Modem Wars) and CGW Associate
Editor Johnny Wilson. On the other
side, there was Bunten who designed
Modem Wars.
The first battle was a toss-up until
the 3/4 way point when a group of
Bunten's riders found Sipe's dronestricken comcen crossing the river.
With zealous glee, Bunten pummeled Sipe into oblivion. Using the
communication feature of Modem

Wars, Dan took multiple opportunities to gloat on his way to victory:
"I'll teach you now! Here's for that
bad review you gave me a couple
years ago!" In the second battle, Sipe
was secretly given additional drones
as a handicap. Bunten screamed
bloody murder when the additional
drones were unleashed. As the
drones did their dirty work, Sipe typed
a message "You think that review two
years ago was rough, wait 'til you see
what happens if I lose this battle!"
Now, we are sure that Dan knew we
were kidding, but it was shortly after
this that two of Sipe's groups found
Dan's comcen skulking through a
forest. What happened next wasn't a
pretty sight. Score: Dan-1 Russ-1.
Electronic Arts media relations director Dave Dempsey then suggested
that the match be ended in a 1-1 tie.
Good move Dave!

Review

Descent Into
The Maelstrom
Sir-Tech's "Wizardry V:
Heart of the Maelstrom"
by Dennis Owens
esigned in the tradition of the classic first three scenarios
of Wizardry, Wizardry V: Heart of the Maelstrom offers a
D mystifying, satisfying romp through the temple of La-La,
the caverns beneath it, and, finally, into the abyss itself in search
of the aged
Gatekeeper who
guards our plane of
existence from the forces that swirl amid
chaos.
A return to the format of six adventurers
questing through the
darkest, dampest
reaches of a cavern in
search of world-salvation and monsters to
whomp, Heart of the
Maelstrom is, at once,
both more simple
than Return of
Werdna and improved
over the first three
scenarios.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

Wizardry V: Heart of
the Maelstrom
Apple II, IBM
1
$49.95
D. W. Bradley and
Andrew Greenberg
Sir-Tech
Ogdensburg, NY

The game boasts a
stronger storyline than
most of its predecessors (Wizardry IV:
Return of Werdna
being the exception),
larger game maps,
and enough other changes to its
set of magic spells and method of
play to offset its still basic (after all
these years) graphics display.

There are, now, characters to
talk to in the dungeons, pools to
PUBLISHER:
swim in, door locks to pick,
monsters to summon, and
enough treasure and magical artifacts to stock a well-supplied
retirement castle for many decades to come.
The NPCs (non-player characters) are unmistakable. They "approach" rather than simply appear and "wait" prior to attacking or
being attacked. You can talk with them, fight them, barter with
them (either to buy or to sell some item), give them items or
gold, "Katu" them (to make them like you), steal from them, or
simply leave them, but fighting or killing one of these NPCs (or
stealing from them) could seriously affect your characters' alignments and hamper your progress through the game. This writer
wound up having to have warriors and mages leave the party on
several occasions as a result of such activities.
Most of the NPCs can be brought back to life at the Temple of

Cant, but they do not take kindly either to being killed or to catching you trying to steal from them. It is only through these NPCs
that you can glean enough information to figure out how to rescue the Gatekeeper from the "unnatural, magical vortex" that has
formed beneath the temple. So, either be nimble or honest.
Many smaller quests must be resolved before you get to the biggie, though, but none of the quests are extremely puzzling. They
all involve finding one item and using it somewhere else or finding out information and asking some NPC about it. Any item
which seems, at least, relatively odd or almost any item which
Boltac's won't buy should be held onto.
Wizardry V: Heart of the Maelstrom comes on five double-sided
disks (of which, only nine sides are used) and contains eight
levels of dungeon. The maps no longer fit neatly inside 20x20
grids. Instead, the dungeons twist and turn, much more like
natural caverns. Also, there are no longer wrap-around dungeons
in the Wizardry universe. When characters start to walk west in
this game, they really walk west. The only way back is to walk to
the east.
Such a significant change in Wizardry's mapping design is especially curious at a time when many maze games are trying to deemphasize paper and pencil mapping. The game is difficult to
map (at least without erasing, cursing, and using lots of graph
paper) because, upon entering a new level, there is no way to tell
which way the dungeon will stretch out and whether it may
branch away in a number of directions or not. You must also pay
attention to whether you are north, south, east, or west of the
exit up to the castle. Otherwise, a "Dumapic" spell will only confuse you.
Also, there are pools in the caverns and your characters have
swim ratings which can only be improved by swimming. Some
waters in the pools help, some hurt, and some hide neat things
that you can get if you reach bottom. You have to be careful,
though, not to swim much deeper than your character can handle. Should you dive more than one level beneath your ability, for
example, you might not be able to make it back to the surface.

It Must Be Magic
The spell system has been slightly revamped. You still learn
spells only by advancing and returning to the Inn, but there are
now 63 to learn rather than the earlier 50. Gone are old standbys like "Matu" and those spells that were never really useful or
were semi-redundant (like "Manifo," "Lorto," or "Badialma"). Now,
some spells have been enhanced and used to replace older
spells, but some seem to have only had their names changed.
Others, like "Litofeit" (which allows the entire party to levitate a
few inches above the ground, avoiding those hard-to-spot pits)
are new and nifty.
Especially helpful new spells are those which allow both mages
and priests to summon and banish creatures to and from the
elemental planes. While those summoned will only stick around
long enough to take the brunt of whatever groups of nasties are
attacking you, they can still save a seriously weakened party just
when you need it most. The overall sense is that, despite the increase in the number of spells, the magic system has been
tightened and improved.

Unrefined Observations
Not all refinements in the game play have made the game
smoother. Hidden doors are now only visible if you specifically
search and/or cast a "Calific" (reveal door) spell. The old system,
where "Lomilwa" revealed secret doors, was much more efficient
and did not slow down game play nearly as much.
Another problem is that the game sometimes is slow because
the game requires so much disk access. An emerging problem in
the Wizardry series (first evidenced in Return of Werdna is that

the increase in the number of disk sides and game size seems to
have overwhelmed the 8 bit machine's ability to access the information needed for game play.

so a party behind a magical door or somewhere inside the jigsaw
bank may have to wait a while before you can equip and prepare
a rescue party to go and recover them.

In spite of the requirement that the entire game must be loaded
before you can play it and the fact that such a lengthy boot-up is
supposed to enhance game play, the game continues to access
the disk for every message, battle, discovery of treasure, special
item, etc. Very little can happen in this game without disk access.
It slows the game down tremendously and there does not really
seem to be a reason for it. After all, the dungeon graphics are
still the old, familiar, functional style. Even though the package
states that only one disk drive is required, the game accesses the
disk so much that it is even a slow process with two disk drives.

It is no longer necessary to keep going back to the castle, unless you just want to learn new spells or sell off all your loot.
Pools of water located here and there will keep characters stocked up on magic and health points.
In addition, experience points build up fairly quickly and characters can transfer into the game, but only from earlier Wizardry
scenarios.

A lot of the refinements, though, are welcome. The "Litofeit"
(levitate) spell, the ability (as in Werdna) to save in the dungeon,
and the introduction of ranged weapons, all make the game
easier, decrease distractions, and make it more user-friendly. The
quit/quick-save option, for instance, enables you to save your
location just before doing something you think you might regret.
You can now leave a party in the dungeon, return to the castle,
and start a new party if you desire. Several parties can be left in
the maze at the same time, so you can even launch rescue missions and only pick up the characters you want from the old party.

Note that in the first versions of the game released to the
public, certain sets of monsters (located on level four) will freeze
the game when a battle is initiated. They are easily recognizable,
because they either have nothing listed where their descriptions
should be or they fill the description box with colorful computerese gobbledygook. Whenever you contact one of those sets
of monsters, simply run away. My party always succeeded at running at those times. If you do not run, you will have to reboot as
soon as one of those monsters either attacks or is attacked. If
you have not saved the game recently, you will find yourself very
sorry, indeed. [Ed.: According to Andrew Greenberg, the program only does this when a disk swap has occurred which the
program did not initiate. The problems are easily repaired, however, by making another back-up disk straight from the master
disk and transferring the characters in the party to the new
disk. Apple users with two disk drives and extended memory
should make certain that they load the game from only one
disk drive.]

Be sure, though, not to quit and leave the game while your
party is in a hard-to-reach place. The quit option resets the level,

This game is a must for any adventure gamer's computer-game
library.

Personally, the sections in the manual beginning with questions
asking how you are doing, whether you are still there or not, and
if you understand the discussion, struck this writer as condescending. One wonders if they are really necessary. [Ed.: These
summary sections only add up to a total of one and a half
pages out of 86.]

Design Notes

Chris Crawford is one of
many "cutting edge" designers who is excited about
the dawn of a growing artistic community among
game developers. As editor
of The Journal of Computer Game Design and
member of the organizing
committee for the Computer Game Developers'
Conference, he has contributed significantly to an
increasingly insightful colloquium concerning the
present state of and future
directions for computer
game design. JCGD is published six times per year and costs $30
per year (The Journal of Computer
Game Design, 5251 Sierra Rd., San
Jose, CA 95132). Back issues are available at $5.00 each. In this issue of Computer Gaming World, we will be abstract
ing from issues 1.6, 1.7, 2.1, and 2.2.

Real Life In A Box
by Gordon Walton, John Polasek,
and Karen Hunter (GATO and PT-109)
In the first two installments of a three
part series, the crew from Digital Illusions discussed both design goals and
the steps their development group takes
in implementing a vehicle simulator. The
group divides design goals into experiential goals (the "look and feel" which they
want to impart to the player) and interface goals (primarily the game controls).
Using a World War II submarine
simulator as an example, the experiential
goal is to ...create an effect which is
reminiscent of the terror of being depth
charged, the thrill of a great torpedo
shot, or the cleverness of a night attack,
. ." Their operative principle is that " .. .
the player's perception is more important
to the design than actual reality. True
verisimilitude is desirable but secondary
to perceived verisimilitude." The team's
primary interface goal is to insure the
most intuitive control mechanism possible for a given computer system and a
consistent use of keys/commands
throughout the program.
The steps used by Digital Illusions in implementing these goals for a particular
vehicle simulator are:
1) Choose the Topic and Context; 2)
Define the Geography; 3) Implement the
Map view(s); 4) Create a Simulation for all
Vehicle Movement; 5) Implement the 3Dimensional View; 6) Create all Mission
Scenarios; 7) Create all Enemy Intel-

two-dimensional map. In
JCGD 2.2, the second article in the series provided
specific examples of code
to demonstrate how to
move the vehicle about the
two-dimensional map just
described.

ligence; 8) Playtest; and 9) Finish &
Ship It.
As an example, the group chose a Los
Angeles class nuclear attack submarine
for a topic and North Atlantic operations
in 1989 as the context. They defined the
geography by asking two questions:
"What is the maximum area we can represent?" (i.e. how far the vehicle can travel
based on constraints of fuel, time, and
natural barriers) and "What is the minimum area we can represent?" (i.e. keeping the model to a manageable size). In
the sample design, the group reduced
the size of the "playing field" to the North
Atlantic from 75° N to 30° N and 82° W
to 13° E (circa 10,500 kilometers wide by
9,000 kilometers wide). In the game setup, the player will be ordered to patrol
the mapped area. If the player tries to
leave, he will be "relieved" of his command.
Then, the group determined the basic
unit of measure for implementing the
map view(s). The minimum unit of
measure is related to the minimum time
rate and minimum speed of travel. So, if
the minimum time rate is two seconds,
each game cycle must represent, at least,
two seconds. Then, assuming a minimum speed of two knots, the basic units
will be approximately 5.87 feet in size so
that all movement can be recorded, as
calculated by 6017.2 ft/3600 seconds x 2
seconds x 2 knots = 6.69 feet).
Next, the team determined the given
square area to be determined by each
pixel or byte. For example, each pixel or
byte might be 16,384 times the minimum unit so that (6.69 * 16,384 =
109,608.96 feet (or 33,725.83 meters)).
Next, the team established that it needed
312 pixels (10,500 kilometers/33.72583
kilometers = 311.33) to depict the width
of the map and 267 pixels (9,000
km./33.72583 km. = 266.85) to depict
the height of the map. This made the bitmap 83,304 pixels. Since each byte of
memory can contain 8 pixels, it took
about 11 K of memory simply to record a

Computer
Game
Design The Write Stuff
by David Mullich
(The Prisoner and Wilderness)
David opened his article by quoting a
motion picture studio executive who had
recently stated, "Computer game designers are a much brighter bunch than
screenplay writers. Unfortunately, most of
you computer people don't know the first
thing about composing a story." David
used this remark to challenge his readers
to consider " . . . how the principles of
writing can be applied to computer game
design, making it as valid a medium for
storytelling as is film, theater, or even
literature."
He stated that the focal point of any
creative work is the concept. He defined
story concepts as composed of three
parts: character, action and conflict.
Without a main character that makes
decisions based upon his dramatic need
(or motivation) and a capacity for that
character to grow, the story is unlikely to
be either interesting or rewarding.
Without action, those activities whether
physical or mental, that enable the main
character to achieve his goal, the story is
lifeless. "Story is action" he emphasized.
Finally, Mullich reminded his readers that
"Conflict is the basis for all drama in all
mediums. In high school English, you've
probably heard conflict categorized as
Man vs. Man, Man vs. Society, Man vs.
Nature, Man vs. God, Man vs. Himself,
etc." Without conflict, there is no satisfying resolution to either story or game.
Mullich's final point was that too many
games are poorly constructed from a
dramatic standpoint and degenerate into
an empty series of confrontations. He
challenged designers to utilize a plot with
a beginning, a middle, and an end. "The
beginning presents the story's premise, introduces the main character and initiates
(Continued on page 41)

(Continued from page 38)

Abstracts from
the Journal
of Computer
Game Design
the action." It is the story's "set-up." In
the course of the article, he suggested
that too many games leave the set-up to
the documentation or, worse yet, one
screen at the beginning of the game.
Next, he spoke about the middle story
segment—the confrontation. He stated
that game designers seem to be doing a
great job in terms of providing confrontation.
The final portion of a game/story is the
end—resolution. "Few games," he noted,
"have made any progress toward expanding the game's ending, the Resolution,
beyond a single screen display announcing the results of the final conflict. This
may be due to the binary thinking of
game designers, for most games have
only two possible outcomes. Either the
player accomplishes his goal (destroyed
Werdna, found the Holy Grail, beat the
High Score) or he dies." He went on to
suggest that designers should create nonbinary outcomes. "Perhaps the player has
lost the battle but not the war. Perhaps
there is an even greater evil behind Morgoth. Perhaps the South will rise again."
He concluded his article by voicing the
desire that designers could come up with
some "novel" approaches to game design
by looking through the eyes of a writer.

Bringing
Characters to Life

tions help stimulate the generation of
plot."
Recognizing the difficulty in developing
expert systems to accomplish this, Graves
noted that he and partner, Tim Brengle,
have been experimenting with code fragments called "affectors." These fragments
are attached to various locations, objects,
or actors to influence an actor's behavior
by giving him additional goals or modifying his emotional state. Using this approach, he observed, each character's
emotional state or current goals could
drive behavior from a larger set of possible behaviors. Hence, one could get
closer to character driven plots and actions without having to solve some of the
most difficult A.I. problems.
Another major benefit of this approach,
he noted, was that the interaction with
these characters would be richer because
they would now have something to talk
about (as opposed to most characters in
current games). "In worlds containing
only objects, the only topic of discourse
is the 'object economy' (physical objects
that may be manipulated). In order to
produce interaction on more human
terms, a system must have (1) a rich representation for emotions, knowledge, and
beliefs (an 'emotion economy' and an 'information economy' . . .); (2) a rich set of
behaviors that are driven by these new
economies; and (3) a rich grammar for
communication of knowledge, events,
beliefs, and emotions." To accomplish
this, a new type of knowledge database
will have to be constructed which will " . .
. contain both static initial data (the state
of the world's knowledge before the start
of the game), and dynamic data on
events or information flow as the game
proceeds. Each character should have
pointers into this database to reflect the
state of his own knowledge and beliefs."
Graves even noted that the database
could be somewhat inconsistent, since it
is realistic to presume that some characters in a given world would hold beliefs
that contradict the knowledge and/or
beliefs of other characters in that world.

by David Graves
(Hewlett-Packard engineer)
In JCGD 2.2, David Graves followed up
on his comments in the second issue of
JCGD (and abstracted in Computer
Game Forum—Winter 1987, p. 23). In
that first article, he talked about making
characters more realistic by resolving
lower level logistic problems. In the most
recent article, he emphasized the need
for characters to have motivation. He observed that, "No organism's behavior is
ever unmotivated. Thus, in order for characters to display behaviors that appear
reasonable and believable, they must
have their own motivations. These motiva-

Interface
Sophistication,
not Process
Intensity
by Greg Costikyan
(a pen and paper game designer
who goes way back)
In JCGD 1.6, Greg submitted a short

rebuttal to Chris Crawford's "Process Intensity" article (abstracted in CGW #47,
p. 51). In responding to Chris' contention
that an intense number of mathematical
calculations (high crunch per bit) was important to a successful game, Costikyan
argued that the calculations are not important if the player does not realize what
is going on. He offered an insightful example:
"Suppose that we have a computer wargame, in which weather is an important
variable, but the interface never makes
this fact clear. On turn one, units can
move from Brussels to Le Havre. On turn
ten, they can't—because it's raining. The
player doesn't know it's raining and is disgusted and puzzled when he can't make
the same move he made before." He
went on to point out that in a pen and
paper game, where the players drive the
system, this problem cannot occur because the players have to read the rules
and apply the movement modifiers. However, any number of systems can be impenetrable to players if the interface does
not communicate successfully. "In other
words," he concluded, "the game should
only process information to which the
player has access."

What is a
Computer?
by Chris Crawford
Chris began his discourse with a conventional engineering definition of "computer" that did not really accomplish anything. Then, he indicated that the reason
that the engineering definition fails is because, "
. the computer is first and
foremost a tool, not an object. . . .
defined not by what it is but by what it
does."

From there, Crawford offered examples
of successful personal computer
products and pointed out the primary element in the success for each one: interactivity. He noted that spreadsheet users
play with the numbers, word processor
users play with the words, and BASIC
users play with the programs. "Play," he
contended, "and interaction are closely
couple concepts. Rich, deep interaction
is indistinguishable from play." He concluded that play comes closer to the essence of personal computing than any
other experience. Because the total flow
of information—volume times speed—
remains higher for games than for other
applications, Crawford suggests that
games offer more interaction than any
other software product.

Review

Curse of the
Fallen Angel
Sierra's "Police Quest II:
The Vengeance"
by Michael Chaut

O

ne year has passed since Officer Sonny Bonds
brought Jessie Bains (the Death Angel) to justice for
his crimes. The world of drugs and violence has
been silenced and the city of Lytton is once again peaceful
and serene. In Police
Quest II, the latest edition to Sierra's
"Quest" series and sequel to Police Quest,
the story begins with
Officer Bonds
promoted to the position of Homicide
Detective. All is calm
until Bonds learns of
the upcoming retrial
and ultimate escape
of the Death Angel.
(Bains apparently appealed on a technicality and was
granted another trial.)

What's New
On The Beat?
Once the credits
start, the viewer realizes that the graphics are getTITLE:
Police Quest II:
ting better all the time.
The Vengeance
Through use of their new SCI
SYSTEMS:
IBM
(Amiga, Apple IIGS,
(Sierra Creative Interpreter),
Apple lle/c, ST, and
Sierra has doubled the graphic
Macintosh versions projected)
# PLAYERS:
1
resolution capabilities of their
PRICE:
$49.95
previous release. They are now
DESIGNER:
Jim Walls
able to add cinematographic
PUBLISHER:
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA
touches such as zoom shots,
split screens and film wipes.
The characters are no longer virtual stick figures, but have
realistic form and shape. The opening sequence provides
the player with an animated montage which includes both a
police diver and a chase scene. Combining the graphics,
animation and the unbelievable music sound track (provided
by the MIDI Processing Unit and Roland MT-32), this
reviewer felt as though he was watching the TV Movie of the
Week.
The game starts with Sonny arriving to work in the Lytton
Police Station. After parking, one should give the car a "onceover." As in all Sierra games, it is important to take, look,
and/or read everything that can be seen (in some cases,
things that are not immediately visible). Once inside the station, it is time for a little exploration. The area should be can-

vassed to find out where things are; Sonny should check-in
at the homicide office; and locate his desk, check messages,
and gain computer access. Before leaving the station,
players will need to make sure Sonny has his keys, picks up
his gear, visits the firing range, and most importantly, finds
and takes his field kit. By this time, it should have become
apparent that Sonny's mission is to recapture Bains before
the murderer can fulfil his death threat made at the conclusion of Police Quest I.
In order to win the game, players will experience the daily
ordeals of a homicide detective (i.e. fingerprinting crime
scenes, questioning witnesses, booking evidence, etc.). One
must not only capture Bains, but must do it "by the book,"
building your case as you go. When he is caught this time,
he needs to be put away for good!
The game forces players to vicariously face life-threatening
situations where split second timing and decisions make a
difference between life or death. Players learn about working
hand-in-hand with other branches of police work such as the
underwater investigation squad, coroners's office, and
S.W.A.T. Team. Above and beyond all else, one must always follow proper police procedures in order to succeed in
this game. When in doubt about procedure, it is helpful to
refer to the Homicide Officer's Guide which is included with
the documentation.
Sierra has made some major strides in technology across
their product line. First, this game supports a mouse and
three (3) different music cards (the Roland MT-32, the AdLib
& the IBM). This reviewer used the Roland Multi Timbre
Sound Module (MT-32), a 32-voice synthesizer for the IBM
which is comprised of eight individual synthesizers and a percussion sound module. Included with the MT-32 is the MIDI
Processing Unit that provides the interface between the MT32 and the computer. Mark Seibert's first venture utilizing
this new technology offers a musical score that is simply
spectacular. It actually changes rhythms and themes as one
moves from one scene to another. So, when Sonny is in a
scary and dangerous scene, one hears foreboding music
and when Sonny is reunited with his girlfriend, one hears
happy music. Although it is expensive, the Roland MT-32
seems well worth the expense. Having used the MT-32, it is
hard to go back to games without music card support.
Second, the command interface has also been changed.
The player no longer sees a command line and cursor at the
bottom of the screen. Now, to interact with the game, one
simply begins typing and a Message Input Window appears.
In addition, the "F3" (for the MS-Dos version) "retype" or
"echo" key only works for the current command sequence,
speeding up the game. Those who enjoyed the earlier game
will be pleased to note that Sierra has kept the handy "action
keys." Also, the difficult and tricky manual driving sequences
have been eliminated. Once Sonny is in the car, one simply
types in the location where he needs to go and the game
does the rest.

Avoiding Internal Affairs
Warning: This section of the review contains specific
hints. Players should make certain they read the Lytton
Police Department Homicide Officer's Guide included in the
documentation. It is a major source for clues. One must
know and utilize proper radio codes, vehicle codes, and
penal code citations, as well as correct police operating procedures for running an investigation, in order to win.
Further, the player should save the game regularly as
Sonny moves from situation to situation. Since Sierra now

conveniently provides the player with the ability to save twenty (20) different game positions within a directory, this
provides the player with an easy method to backtrack.
It is important to visit the shooting range and adjust
Sonny's gun sights. This assures that when his gun is fired,
it will find its mark. When you are at a crime scene make
sure everything is dusted for fingerprints. Everything in your
field kit should be used. It is there for a reason.
If someone offers an item to Officer Bonds or he finds
something that appears meaningless, have him hold onto it.
In actual police investigative work, one never knows when
something that seems to be insignificant will turn out to be
the key to solving a crime. When arresting felony suspects,
make sure Sonny calls for a back-up, has his weapon drawn,
identifies himself as a police officer, etc. He should be certain
to question all witnesses. When reluctant witnesses are encountered, they should be questioned again.
Don't allow Sonny to overlook using other branches within
the force, the computer, and the telephone to help with the
investigation. It is even possible to dial "411" for directory assistance during the course of the game. Make sure that
Sonny pays close attention to the instructions given by fellow officers and superiors. It may even help to write down
their instructions. Remember always how important it is to
stay in touch with your partner, he is your lifeline.

Players should look for clues on the screen. If an object on
the screen cannot be identified, it is time to investigate. In
order to win this game with all possible points, players will
have to really do some old fashioned police work. One can
win without getting the maximum number of points, though.

Press Conference
It is obvious that in this game as in its predecessor, Jim
Walls' "on the job" experiences add to the element of realism
and danger that are evident throughout the game. In fact,
Walls confirmed in an interview with this reviewer that all of
the situations in this game actually did happen to him or a
friend. For example, the sequence with the diver actually occurred and the real Jessie Bains (his name was changed) did
escape (and is still on the loose).
Police Quest II is basically linear in nature. In order to win,
players have to accomplish one task after another. However,
the designer has given us many more puzzles and pitfalls
than in his earlier outing. In any case, this reviewer is convinced that Police Quest II: The Vengeance is going to be
hard to beat! The advanced graphics, intriguing story, and
flowing animation make this story come alive. The whole
package leads us toward a new apex in interactive game fiction!.
Once again: Remember to "Be careful out there!"

Letters

(Continued from page 7)

the record-keeping, but in the nature of the war.

Inflated
Deutsche Marks
In the November, 1988 issue of
your magazine, you review the air
combat simulator, Battlehawks
1942. You preface your remarks
with a few notes about air combat
board games and air combat in
general and you are indeed correct
in asserting that in air combat
(real or simulated), "Altitude is
life." But you err when you state
that the credit policy for German
air-to-air kills was more lenient
than that of the Allies, which implies either that German victory totals are inflated or that Allied victory rosters are more creditable or
both.
Most air war historians consider
that Germans (and the Finns) kept
the most accurate records of airto-air kills and had the most stringent requirements for being
credited with an air-to-air victory.
German policy was not to accept
a claim without documentation in
the form of eyewitnesses, actual
wreckage, killed/captured aircrew,
or gun camera footage. Also,
there were no shared kills. If any
doubt existed about the victory,
credit was assigned to the unit involved, not to any individual pilot
or crewman.
In contrast, there was no definitive American policy, each Air
Force determining its own criteria.
The 8th Air Force, probably the
best known of the U.S. Army Air
Forces, enabled aircrews to claim
strafing results (ground kills) in a
pilot's totals. They also caused
confusion by counting shared kills
into victory totals—one pilot ended
the war with 21.84 kills (whatever
that represents)! It is generally accepted that American airmen wildly overclaimed early in the war,
but later, when most aircraft were
fitted with film cameras, victory
claims became much more accurate.
The British had no official policy
concerning air-to-air victory claims
and it is thought that most British
airmen overassessed their performance. If anything, the Russians
were worse than the British.
The real reason why German
pilots were able to run up such astounding victory totals lay not in

The Germans initiated war in
September of 1939 and were involved until 1945. Poland, France,
Britain, The Eastern Front, the
Defense of Germany—German
pilots were involved from day one
and remained in action until the
war was over or they were dead!
There was little opportunity for
rest and recreation—small wonder
the German pilots scored such
high totals—they were at war
every day for five and one half
years.
Contrast this with the Allied experience. Britain did not get involved in the war in earnest until
the spring of 1940; Russia entered
the war in June, 1941; and, of
course, the Americans only
entered the war after Pearl Harbor.
Russian pilots, like their German
counterparts, were in the fighting
for nearly all of the war. The
British and the Americans, however, had a policy of rotating
aircrew out of combat once they
had completed a certain tour of
duty.
This misunderstanding concerning German victory credits is an
old one, stemming in part from
confusion with the almost lenient
criteria for awards and decorations in the German Air Force, but
mostly from an unwillingness on
the part of the Allies to accept the
German figures.
Roger Horky
San Antonio, TX
Ed: All right, 111 erase the
84/100ths of an airplane silhouette from my fuselage, but l
want Lucasfilm to install the German awards criteria immediately. Thank you for your enlightened opinion on a longstanding debate. You might note that,
in contrast to one of your points,
The Simon and Schuster Encyclopedia of World War II states,
" . . . while the Luftwaffe gave
one credit per plane on shared
kills, the participating pilots had
to decide among themselves
which one got the credit, since no
shared credits were allowed;
generally the junior pilots were
given the shared credits to build
up morale and scores." (p. 3).

And Now,
For Something
Completely Different
Your mag is rad!
Jeff Kaplan
Black Mountain, NC
Ed: Cool, man, cool!

Designers' Notes
by Arnold Hendrick & Sid Meier

The Reality
Behind The Game
hen
Microprose
finished Project:
Stealth Fighter for the C64 in October of 1987, it
was clear than an IBM
version was next. Inexpensive PC clones were
flooding the market,
making 16-bit computing affordable within the
American home.
The marketing debate
revolved around whether
"me too" flight simulator
releases had glutted the
field to the degree that
our time would be more
profitably spent elsewhere. Sid Meier was unconvinced by this
viewpoint. His philosophy was and is "If
you do a really neat game, people will
buy it, regardless." Bill Stealey, marketing
maestro, was more direct: "I don't care
what the other guys are doing, give me a
hot IBM product and I can sell it, guaranteed."
Normally the original creators have a
big say in conversion design, but in this
case the original designers (Jim Synoski
and Arnold Hendrick) were burnt out by
that effort. Fortunately Sid Meier had a
barrel of new ideas for improvements.
These included cockpit situational displays with more data, new algorithms for
greater mission and radar variation, expanded enemy Al (artificial intelligence).
At the same time Andy Hollis had just
finished the IBM Gunship conversion.
With that experience (his second major
3D graphics package), he was full of new
ideas for further improvements in our 3D
graphics technology.
It was clear that Sid and Andy weren't
talking about a C-64 conversion any
more, but an entirely new design. The
only thing borrowed from the C-64 would
be the game scenario concepts, military
equipment research data, and perhaps
some flight dynamics algorithms.
The original schedule called for an optimistic 106 man-weeks of work spread
over six calendar months and six or
seven people. In reality, it took about
double that effort over nine to ten calendar months.

them. Bug lists run
many pages, with bug ID
numbers in the
hundreds, for weeks on
end.

Building the Product
Developers at Microprose have specialties: design, data, programming, art,
sound, testing, documentation, etc. Fourteen different people worked on the IBM
F-19 Stealth Fighter, half of them jumping in when their talents were needed,
then moving elsewhere when the job was
done.
The biggest single task in a computer
simulation is the programming. F-19
Stealth Fighter was planned for three or
four programmers, working together,
who spent over two work-years writing
code. In team programming, it's vital that
somebody write the "glue", the "master
loop", the main program that calls the
other components as needed. The
responsibility of the "master loop" fell to
Sid Meier. His former life as a Systems
Analyst prepared him well for this task.
Other areas of responsibility fell to Andy
Hollis (3D graphics system), Bruce Shelley (3D world databases), Max Remington
(3D objects), Jim Synoski (the "everything
else" man), Arnold Hendrick (documentation), and Ken Lagace (music and sound).

Testing The Product
The final hurdle for F-19 Stealth Fighter
was testing. The entire Quality Control
group got into the act, working late
nights and through the weekends. Before
the dust cleared over 600 man-hours had
been spent hunting bugs, not to mention the programming time spent fixing

The complexity of testing long ago forced
MicroProse to abandon
outside testers. A fulltime professional Quality
Control (QC) man (or
woman) can find more
bugs, and more important bugs, in one day
than an "evening
amateur" can find in a
week. Complicated
products like F-19
Stealth Fighter require
special testing tricks, including special
game data files that "force" uncommon
situations, and special testing hardware
systems that let a programmer "break
into" the game to see what's going
wrong. Even "silly" bugs require a
knowledgeable tester. For example, if
playtester Al Roireau didn't know that the
F-19's maximum speed was Mach 1.1, he
might have never realized level flight reading 1500 knots on the HUD was a bug!

Success out of Failure
The original schedule planned for F-19
Stealth Fighter's completion in August
and shipment in September. Shipment
before September 30th is deemed vital in
marketing and sales because many large
distributors and stores "close off' purchasing for the year on that date.
Unfortunately, development stretched to
the end of October. Worse, the printing
company selected to produce the manual
took five weeks to do a two-week job.
Shipments didn't begin until mid November. Traditional marketing and sales wisdom says that a release that late in the
season will greatly injure the sales volume.
However the MicroProse's sales force is
used to feeling like the Light Brigade at
Balaclava. Against all odds they succeeded in getting, at least, distributors
and stores to carry the product. The
result: F-19 Stealth Fighter is the most
successful release in MicroProse history.
The initial production run will sell out
sometime in January 1989, just two

months after the release,
surprising everybody (including the MicroProse
product management
people!). The investment
of 4.2 man-years, including over 2 man-years of
programming time paid
off.

The F-19
versus the
F-117A
On November 10th
1988, the US Air Force
publicly released a photo
and some brief information about the Stealth
Fighter they've been
flying since 1983. How
does the "real thing"
stack up to the stealth
fighter created by MicroProse?
Size: The F-117A is
dramatically smaller than
the F-19. In fact, it appears smaller than most
known combat aircraft.
Pundits have called it "a
kite with a cockpit". Although both stealth
fighter designs have one pilot and two engines, the F-117A almost certainly has
much smaller power plants than the two
monstrous F404's MicroProse put into
their F-19. Smaller size does mean that
more airframe can be built from composites, making the plane lighter and less
reflective to electro-magnetic radiation. In
short, the tiny F-117A is probably more
"stealthy" than the F-19.
Performance: Compared to dogfighters
like the F-16 and MiG-29, all stealth
fighters are presumed inferior. For example, the F-19 has good instantaneous
turn rates, but sustained turning is poor,
causing it to "stall out" in lengthy turning
duels. The F-19 also lacks afterburners,
since it uses slats to mask the exhaust
signature. Even with huge F404 engines
the Mach 1.1 speed is possible only after
some fuel weight is burned up. The
F-117A's size would give tighter turning,

but the large cockpit hump probably
causes significant handling problems. On
the other hand, the F-117A may borrow
the exhaust suppression technology of
the B-2, which might permit afterburners.
With these lighted, F-117A maximum
speed should be higher than the F-19.
Armament: Stealth aircraft must carry
all their ordnance internally. Here the
large size and big engines of the F-19
give it enormous advantages. It has four
internal stations, each holding two or
three missiles or bombs (for a total of
eight to twelve items, plus a 20mm cannon. The F-117A has perhaps one or
two stations, each holding one or two
missiles or bombs for a total of 1 to 4
items, one or two being most likely. The
shrimpy F-117A almost certainly lacks a
gun, since the 20mm Vulcan with ammo
is too large and heavy, while no smaller
gun is useful in air-air jet combat.

Avionics: Given sufficient miniaturization technology, size does not
limit avionics. However,
avionics are never
cheap. An F-16 with minimal but modern
avionics costs $10 million per plane, while the
otherwise similar F-18
with full-range modern
avionics costs over $20
million each. The USAF
bought over 50 F-117As
without knocking a huge
hole in the defense
budget. This means the
F-117A almost certainly
lacks all those useful
devices on the F-19:
zoom tracking cameras,
FUR imaging for night
flying, laser designators,
signal processing for
cockpit "situation"
screens, and state-of-theart infrared and radar
jammers. In comparison,
flying the F-117A could
be a "seat of the pants"
experience where the
most advanced device is
the pilot's eyeballs.
Summary: Overall the
F-19 probably has superior avionics and weaponry, while the F117A could be faster and is almost certainly more "stealthy." As a spy plane the
F-117A does well. It would sneak in and
out better than the F-19. However, airground attacks are probably more effective with the F-19. Note that the military
advised President Reagan against using
the F-117A to bomb Libya Q probably because the F-117A couldn't guarantee sufficient accuracy! In air-air combat the F19 also appears superior. It has a cannon
the other lacks, can absorb more
damage, and has a unique zoom camera
system that gives a pilot constant closeups of his opponent's maneuvering. The
F-117A is probably appreciated more by
the CIA than the USAF; it's a stealth
plane for peacetime. The F-19 is a fighter
pilot's dream: big, powerful, and rewarding to the smart warrior. It's a combat
plane, with plenty of punch to back up
its stealth.

(Continued from page 30)

receiver well
enough to line up
the throw. This
makes a short
passing game
much more viable
than a long game
for all the wrong
reasons.

and he becomes the field general. The
system of play is simple, elegant, and fast.
Passing plays require good, but not perfect timing. When the quarterback
releases the ball, a green "x" appears on
the field. This signifies the center of the
"catchable range." Naturally, the closer a
receiver is to the "x," the better his
chance of catching it. However, the
player's "Hands" rating, defensive player's
"Hands" rating, and possibility of making
a diving catch enter into the calculations.
Running plays primarily depend on
speed and the offensive player's "Ability"
rating. Success at these plays will require
quick cuts to the right or left of the
defending player at the last possible
second. It can be frustrating until the
timing becomes natural. After one gets
the timing down, though, it is exhilarating
to beat the defender in such a way as to
feel like you yourself have actually executed a great open field move against
the opponent.
Nevertheless, there are weaknesses to
the system. First, the active player flashes
in the same color as the opposing team.
It is extremely distracting to attempt to
run from tacklers in your own colored jersey or even to find your player visually in
an opposing backfield as you attempt to
sack the quarterback. It would have been
better if the player had flashed in a
neutral white. Second, one's view of the
playing field is limited by the camera
angle. Therefore, one can only see
around 20 yards downfield from the line
of scrimmage. It is difficult to complete a
long pass when one cannot see the

Third, the
documentation
could have been
more helpful. It
seems extremely
uneven to print a
booklet in excess of 40 pages to describe
the basics of football (so basic as to explain what a halfback is) and spend less
than eight pages discussing the control
system and features of the computer
game itself. Further, the smaller booklet
has a much more cluttered layout, uses
different terminology ("Agility" rather than
"Ability"), and is more difficult to read,
even though it is extremely important
that players master its contents.
Fourth, the offensive and defensive
lines are treated as a lump sum entity (as
in Computer Quarterback) rather than as
individuals as in NFL Challenge, Pro Football Simulator, MSFL Pro Football, and
the soon-to-be released John Madden
Football. This takes away some of the
strategy of getting the right match-ups. In
Head Coach, one can exploit the computer opponent by using fresh substitutes to open up important holes on a
given play. In Pro Football Simulator, it
makes a difference whether the blocker is
a good pass or run blocker. John Madden believes that individual match-ups
are the key to the game. TV Sports simply "levels the playing field" on this matter.

Game Plan
TV Sports: Football is an ideal product
for the casual fan who wants to compete
against his buddies in an exciting league.
The statistics compiler keeps league
statistics so there is no hassle for the
"commissioner" (although there is, as yet,
no built-in utility for printing those stats).
In addition, the commissioner has the option of using the "AUTO-play" mode

enables the computer to resolve games
when human "owners" fail to show up.
Fans who want the detail, sophistication,
and player identification of the National
Football League will be disappointed with
the current product (but might be interested should Cinemaware decide to
publish an NFL team disk). The rosters
can be edited so that actual professional
athlete's names could appear and the
ratings can be edited to generally reflect
an actual player's abilities, but as mentioned earlier, this is not entirely satisfactory. Action game fans who want a difficult game may not like this game as
well as a strict arcade game like John
Elway's Quarterback, but players who
want to capture the atmosphere, flow of
play, and fast-moving competition of
professional football should love it.

Review

Tales of a
Martian
Manhunter
Electronic Arts' "Mars Saga"
by Joe Sherfy

T

he good news is that the governments of Earth have

finally figured out what to do about the overcrowding
of prisons. They sent all of the convicts to Mars to work
in the mines. The bad news is that you're stuck on Mars.
You were taking
a leisurely trip
when your ship
developed engine
trouble and this
is where you've
ended up. Well,
at least, the Controllers of Mars
have offered you
a job. They want
you to find out
what happened
to the outpost
called "Proscenium." Should
you be successful, they will do
whatever it takes
to help you get
off planet.
Such is the
situation characters find themselves in when they
play Mars Saga,
a computer roleplaying game set in the far future.
TITLE:
Mars Saga
The game begins from the perspecSYSTEMS:
C-64/128
# PLAYERS:
1
tive of Tom Jetland, the character
PRICE:
$34.95
described in the fictional introduction.
DESIGNERS:
Westwood Associates
Next, players recruit additional team
PUBLISHER:
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
members to create the typical adventuring party. Each character is rated
in several critical areas (might, agility, stamina, health, wisdom, education, and charisma) and has a particular background (e.g. police) to justify the acquisition of his individual
skills (administration, battlearmor, language, etc.).
Should the characters need more development, players
have the option of enrolling members of the party in the
University. There, characters can improve their skills for a
small fee. Improving a character's computer skills, for example, will enable the party to break into computer terminals
all over the Martian settlement of Primus. There is also a Per-

sonal Development Center where characters can improve
their attributes for a nominal charge.
Of course, it is possible to build up a character without tuition payments. Since, combat skills are improved by means
of actual combat, one simply helps the badly understaffed
police department in disposing of some of those nasty fellows running about the streets of Primus.

Warlords of Mars
The game's combat system is fast-moving and exciting.
The screen brings the battle to life and shows the dispositions of each force. Then, players are given the option of
taking control of all, some, or none of the characters. The
computer can be assigned to handle any team members not
under direct player control. Combat is played in turns with orders being given to each character in sequence. These orders are joystick-driven and characters with more agility are
allowed to perform more functions in a turn. After all orders
have been input, combat begins. Battles are resolved very efficiently. Then, it is "spoils" time for the victors and on to the
hospital to treat any wounds received in the skirmish.
On the "Mars" of the game as on the earth of our reality,
money is important. Within the game, money is necessary to
better equip the team or improve the characters' abilities.
Characters can check the computer system for want ads to
respond to or visit the police station to find out about bounties to be collected. A lot of the money can be earned by
gambling, but it is also easy to circumvent the system and
earn money by enlisting team members, fighting a battle or
two, and then, taking their credits. After that, one simply
drops them from the team, enlists new troops (making sure
they have a decent amount of funds on hand), and repeats
the procedure. Of course, the sale of captured weapons is
also a good source of income as in any standard adventure
game.
The game has much to recommend it. First, it is very accessible. One can read the instructions and begin play in just a
few short minutes. In addition, the game utilizes near-industry standards such as auto-mapping and joystick-driven
interface to keep the game moving at an enjoyable pace.
Newcomers to CRPGs should enjoy the combat system because they can allow the computer to handle the team until
they are more comfortable with the game. Further, those
who are more interested in the storyline than in combat can
also have the computer resolve the combat without having
to view it. Finally, it offers a user-friendly option in the ability
to save games without having to switch disks.

Warts of the 'World"
Yet, there are some drawbacks to the game. First, one of
the methods of earning more money is gambling. However,
building up large amounts of cash in this way is a very timeconsuming process and encourages one to short-circuit the
rules. Second, the documentation could have given the
player a little more information on the various opponents to
be encountered in the course of the game. It would have
been nice if the documentation would have included a rundown of the characteristics of one's opponents. This could
even have been incorporated into the game as information
to be obtained from the computer bank on Mars.

Survey

S

ooner or later, just
about every adventure game player
gets the urge to write a
game of his or her own.
For most, however, the
urge ends up being nothing more than a dream, unless the person has some
programming skill to go
along with the idea.

Writing Your
Own
Three Software Adventure Kits
Compared

Enter various adventure
game construction
programs. These commercial programs are written
primarily to allow the nonprogrammer to design and
run adventure games without having to
learn to code in a particular language.
This article examines three such
programs.

by Scorpia

If{
Player is_linked_to Metal
Vest
Metal Vest is_locked
}Then{
msg_to_desc Weather
inc_msg
Msg_to_exam Metal Vest

Keep in mind, however, that these
programs are all copyrighted. You can
create games with them to give to
friends, but you cannot sell them without
permission of the copyright holder. The
game idea may belong to you, but the
underlying code that makes it work
belongs to someone else.

The above code checks to see if the
player is in possession of (is_linked_to)
the Metal Vest, and if the Metal Vest is
locked, it can't be removed (is_locked). If
both these conditions are true, the program will display a message about the
weather, as well as one about the metal
vest (which, by the way, is cursed).

If your inclinations are toward text adventures, you may want to consider
Figment or Adventure Game Toolkit.

Figment:
The
Imagination
Processor
Figment is a complete package that
provides various templates for creating adventures, as well as the means to jump
between the game and the editor to
make changes "on the fly". This is a
handy feature, as you don't have to stop
the game to fix problems and then recompile and re-run the program. Also, Figment is heavily oriented towards CRPG
aspects, so a character's attributes and
fighting/spell casting ability are important.
Creation begins at the "Stuff' menu
template. "Stuff' is everything except the
rooms: the player, objects, creatures and
people, etc. All of these have a variety of
attributes and descriptions to be filled in
by scrolling through the menu.
After that, come the "Scenes" (rooms)
where you get to unleash your creative
writing abilities, followed by the Map
which is used to define the connections
between the rooms. Another menu al-

A room can have as many
as 14 tests of each type, so
you can work up some pretty sophisticated routines,
keyed to current or future
events. However, even the
simplest ones must be carefully worked out and tested
because of the way they are
set up using the programming language. Here is an
example from the demo
tutorial game that comes
with Figment:

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Figment: The
Imagination Processor
IBM
$95.00
Patch Panel Software
Patch Panel Software
11590 Seminole Blvd. Suite A-9
Seminole, FL 34648

lows for creating synonyms for commands.
This is easy, but things tend to become
a little complicated after this. In order to
actually make things happen in the
game, any special circumstances meant
to occur have to be defined, room by
room, by means of the Pre and Post
Command Testing menus. This is done
in a sort of quasi-programming style that
is not always easy to follow, particularly if
the sequence of events is complex.
The Pre-Command Tests check for certain conditions before the command is
evaluated by the program, while PostCommand tests are checked after the
player issues a command. This is necessary for every room except those where
nothing is ever going to happen. There,
the Pre and Post tests will just be blanks.

On the template page, the If and Then
are separated by blank lines where the
designer can fill in the test conditions
and results. This is done simply by
positioning the cursor on a blank line
and using up and down arrow keys to
scroll through possible choices. All items
previously defined (objects, people,
scenes) are available through the scrolling. So are the various conditions
(is_locked, is_linked_to, etc), which are
preset and cannot be changed (except to
negate, so that is_locked could be
is_not_locked). No typing is required.
You just plug in variables from a common pool by scrolling until what you
want shows up.
Working out the exact sequence of
what you want, however, is the tricky
part. Each test (pre or post) is standalone. It simply checks the current condition every time the player is in that particular room and "fires" or not depending
on the results. Some really odd things
can happen, especially with multiple
tests, if you don't carefully think out the
exact sequence in advance.
You should also be careful when jumping between the game and the editor. Invisible pointers are being updated while
you fiddle around in the editor and you
may return to the game to find yourself
in the wrong room or with the wrong
message being displayed.

defined verbs, and testing for complicated conditions (in much the
same fashion as the
tests in Figment). It isn't
necessary to use the
meta-commands to build
a game, but they are
available.

Adventure
Game
Toolkit
The Adventure Game
Toolkit (AGT) is the
most Spartan of the
packages and is, essentially, a sophisticated
compiler. You create a
data file containing all
the necessary information by using your word
processor (no templates
here!). Then, you compile it into a playable
game.
AGT's parser reminds
me of Infocom's. It can
understand and operate
on such commands as
"Put on the cloak, then
examine it; read its
label;" "Place the green
rock and the small pebble behind the tree;" and
"Scotty, beam down a
tricorder and the QWERTY module."
That's powerful.
Constructing games with AGT is not difficult, although a fair amount of typing is
necessary. You simply create a data file
and start entering data. No programming, as such, is needed. The program
doesn't much care about the order (since
it will create the actual run time files
during the compile process), but for
debugging, keeping similar things
together is essential.
Thus, you should create all the rooms
first, then objects, then people (if you intend to have special characters wandering around the place). Everything has a
number associated with it, in particular
ranges, so the program knows by number if an item is a room, object, or person. For instance, a room could be
described as follows:
ROOM 2 Reception Room North 5
Southeast 6 END_ROOM
This creates room 2, the reception
room. Going north from here would
bring you to room 5 (whatever it is) and
southeast to room 6 (whatever that one
is). A separate ROOM_DESCR is also
necessary for each room, in which its full
description is given.
Objects are created in much the same
way, although they have characteristics instead of directions and these determine
what can be done with them (taken,
dropped, played, pushed, opened, closed,
etc). If an item is something such as a

The program is textonly, but does allow for
changes to background
color, text color, and
player input color. These
can be set in the game's
title file or changed
dynamically in the adventure itself.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The main problem with
AGT is that with no ingame editor, debugging,
especially a complex
game, can become exceedingly time-consuming . After playing your
game and finding the
bugs, you have to exit,
get into your word
processor, make the
changes, and then,
recompile and replay the adventure.
Adventure Came Toolkit
IBM, Macintosh
$35.00
David Malmberg
and Mark J. Welch
Softworks
43064 Via Moraga
Mission San Jose, CA 94539

locked door or box, the KEY to the item
also must be specified. Special events,
such as opening a locked door, are easily
set up using a few commands. Again, no
programming is necessary.
Creature set-up is also similar, although
care needs to be taken if the creature is
hostile. Characters cannot leave a room
with a hostile being in it (rather a drawback, as there ought to be a provision for
running away). Thus, a weapon must be
placed somewhere in the game that can
be used to remove the hostile being.
Creatures can also be "group members"
who follow the player character wherever
he or she goes.
You can also create synonyms for any
verb or noun (including creatures) in the
game, such that "take" can also be expressed as "get, snarf, grab", or "coins"
can be called "money, gold, cash", etc.
Those who are unsatisfied with this
basic way of creating a game with AGT
can utilize the program's slightly more
complex meta-language. This allows for
some truly professional results. These
commands include counters and flags to
allow for a variety of events, custom-

Also, I found that keeping my word
processor active in the background kept
AGT from compiling.
With AGT, unlike Figment and ACS,
you can create and give games to friends
who don't have the system. You simply
copy the necessary files to another disk
and your friends can play them. They
don't need to have AGT itself.
The manuals for Figment and AGT are
fairly comprehensive, with numerous examples and explanations of their features
(although Figment's documentation is a
little hard to follow in the areas of Pre
and Post command testing). ACS'
manual contains everything you need to
know to create a game, but without an
index or table of contents, you must do a
lot of page-flipping to find what you want
One thing any of these packages will
teach you is the value of sitting down
and working your game out thoroughly
before you touch a key. Precise notes
and maps are a necessity to the successful creation of any adventure game.
Trying to do it on the fly only makes for
frustrating problems. It is also important
to read the documentation carefully,
more than once, to get an understanding
of how the underlying code functions.
Otherwise, you will end up with a mess
that is a nightmare to debug.

(Continued on page 56)

Game Developers' Conference (Cont.)

and end up getting
killed? What is our
responsibility?"

ces in Battlehawks
1942, people have asked
if they can shoot down
the pilots that bail out.
The decision of Larry
Holland and Falstein was
that they could, but they
put a counter into the
game where the enemy
fighter pilots come after
the player if they themselves are ever shot down.
Louie mentioned that in
Vietnam, there were
rules of engagement. If
a person bombed a
church, for instance,
they lost social status
and the chance at a
medal.

Dave Mencone (professional software tester) offered another perspective by asking, "What
about those who don't
enter the military because they got what they
needed from a game?"
Next, the discussion
turned to predictions
about the future of
simulations. Ned Lerner
(Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer)
commented that there is
a new target audience35 year olds. We're all
going to try to reach the
Tom Clancy market." He
also alluded to the fact
that there are all sorts of
rumors about custom
hardware add-ons to enhance play.

The session closed with
questions and answers.
A question about mixing
FRPs with simulations
evoked the answer, "It's
a natural." The reason it
hasn't yet happened is
because of lack of
machine power,
memory, and publisher
interest. Asked about
naval simulations, Walton answered that ships
are harder to simulate
than jets and helicopters.
There is more to model.
These will probably be
command simulations as
opposed to cockpit
simulations. Asked about
land simulations? Louie
commented that there
are apparently going to
be about 20 of them in
the next year, particularly
tank simulations.

Louie remarked that
the simulations market is
such that, like movies,
the person who owns
one, owns ten. Further,
with the new hardware
coming on the market,
authors no longer are
forced to write to the
lowest common
denominator. Rather,
products will now be written to take advantage of
the particular hardware
available. "Falcon A.T.
will look like cardboard
by next year. We can't
stop pushing. There will
always be a market.
There will be, at least,
ten new flight simulators
next year. I guarantee it."
Walton stressed that
people want the ability to
change parameters,
select more and varied
scenarios, and utilize
more modem and network features. He
believes that there will be
a continuing increase in
sophistication. One thing recent products
have taught us is that ". . an extremely
difficult game can do well commercially."
Louie reminded the designers that ". . .
nearly every major publisher turned down
Falcon when we were simply developers,
because they perceived it as too difficult
for the mass market."

For final thoughts, Rich
Hillemann (executive
producer of simulations
for Electronic Arts) observed that the simulations business is to computer entertainment
what the special effects
teams are to the movie
business and Louie concurred, "We are the
'model builders' for the
future."
In the discussion period, Bob Lindstrom
(editor of A+ magazine) stressed, We are
doing a good job of simulating the
mechanics of warfare and strategy, but
we haven't captured the human experience. . . . until we manage to simulate a buddy being blown out of the cockpit and we care." In relation to this, Noah
Falstein noted that in the bail-out sequen-

Multi-Player Games
The problem with multi-player computer
games is getting the computer into the
right room (computers are usually in a
study, home office, or back bedroom
rather than the family room) or going out

the back door (via modem to a network
or point to point). Dan Bunten revealed
that only 30,000 units of M.U.L.E. were
sold. Everybody has played it, but not
everybody has purchased it. Even though
multi-player games have not, heretofore,
been great commercial successes, the
theory is that networking and point to
point gaming changes the economics of
socialization—anyone can be equal. Multiplayer games may be a cultural issue.
"Trying to sell your product by first changing society is a tough proposition."
Real interaction is not between player
and the screen, but between players. We
really liked the term, electronic campfire,
which came to be used to reflect the community and family building aspect of
multi-player games.
Several designers were excited about
the use of BBSs for "play-by-electronicmail" games. CGW editor-in-chief Russell
Sipe was very involved in the early days
of PEBM when he founded "The
Armchair Diplomat," an electronic
newsletter which reported on PBEM
Diplomacy" games on Compuserve
and the Source.

Several designers were excited about
what fiber optics in the home will do for
the future and what LANs may do for of
fice gaming.
In the question period, Bunten
responded to one major problem. "What
happens when one computer is faster
than another?" To keep from diverging,
there are various states where the computers are put into lock-step. Bunten
uses a "send a delta" approach.

Award Winning
Performances
One highlight of the conference was
the awards banquet in which the designers gave awards to the publishers. The
winners were:
Best Technical Support:
Electronic Arts
(Runner-up:
Epyx)
Best Quality Assurance Operation:
Microprose

(Runners-up:
Broderbund, Epyx, and Infocom)
Most Innovative Publisher:
Cinemaware
(Runners-up:
Electronic Arts, Microillusions,
and Mindscape)
Best Producer:
Matt Householder (Epyx)
(Runners-up:
Dave Albert (EA), Christopher Erhart
(Infocom), Rich Hillemann (EA),
and Terry Ishida (Activision))
Best Publisher:
Origin Systems
(Runners-up:
Broderbund, Electronic Arts, and Epyx)
An honorary award was presented to
Chris Crawford as Zee Greatest Game
Designer in Zee Universe.
The game designers plan to hold such
conferences twice per year and the
results seem certain to improve the
quality of various games.

(Continued from page 14)

(Continued from page 53)

Writing Your Own
Adventure
Construction
Set

amount of interaction with the objects around you, and none to
speak of with non-player characters.
If you're a purist and like your action games brainless and your
adventure games run from the keyboard, this may not be your
game. If, however, you are looking for a challenging game that
successfully combines the two genres, this is it.

Having a Blast (Cheaters' Corner)
Warning: This section contains specific
information about the game.
One way to play this game and keep your sanity is to rely on
teamwork: have one person mapping and the second "steering."
Some people can't seem to get out of the ship without getting
killed. This is hardly surprising, considering the pressure they're
under.
Once on the planet's surface, find the colony as soon as possible. In some games, your enemy is polite enough to come at
you one at a time; this is not the case in this one. If you need
extra help finding the colony, subtract one from each letter (make
"b" into an "a" etc.): lffq uif nppo po uif mfgu tjef pgzpvs tdsffo.
You will find extra fuel for your suit and ship in the colony, but
getting it into your ship after you've removed the old core might
be a problem.
There is one spot where the author pays tribute to the movie
2001. If you end up here, you're finished. Good luck.

Finally, one might consider
an old-timer, the Adventure
Construction Set (ACS), which
lets you design graphic adventures in any of three settings:
Fantasy, Modern, and Science
Fiction. ACS is menu-driven in
the creation phase, which
makes it relatively easy to use.
You can move around and edit
different parts of the game
quite easily, going from the
world map to particular areas
to specific rooms to changing
creature attributes with no
trouble at all.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Adventure Construction Set
Apple II, IBM,
$14.95
Stuart Smith
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Virtually every feature of the game, including terrain, treasures,
monsters, friends, traps, magic, weapons, armor, etc. can be altered to suit your tastes (or deviousness), thus giving you practically unlimited control over the final product. In addition, characters (monsters, animals, friends, enemies, etc.) can be set to follow a wide range of behavior patterns such as: peaceful, aggressive, brave, or cautious.
Even the graphic depictions of everything in a game can also
be changed by using the graphic editor. This lets you modify the
shapes and/or colors of any item or add new ones should you
feel so inclined (Special note to IBM owners: while the label on
the package says CGA, the program supports the full range of
EGA colors, as well). Care needs to be taken when fooling
around with changing colors, however, since cycling through the
palettes automatically changes the colors of all items (not simply
the one you may be working on at the moment) and can leave
you with purple water or gray trees.
Music is also part of ACS and allows you to add tunes to the
game. There are different ones for each of the three main types
(fantasy, modern, and science fiction). This is optional, and you
can turn the sound off entirely if you prefer.
The major drawback to ACS is that, even for a simple project, it
can become a very time-consuming process to create a game.
The world map has to be made, followed by the regions (which
contain the rooms), the rooms themselves (complete with resident beings, goodies, and so on). Then, to edit existing items or
create new ones adds even more time to the effort.
To somewhat get around this, you can partially construct a
game and have ACS finish it. Thus, while you may know some of
the game, the rest will come as a surprise. It is also possible to
have ACS construct a completely new game from scratch by
specifying the type of game and difficulty desired and letting ACS
do all the work.
Each of these packages has its strengths. ACS offers graphic
screens, Figment offers a game/editor gateway that allows easy
fixing of bugs and a template system that removes most of the
typing drudgery; and AGT acts as a compiler which allows for
creating (especially with meta-commands) remarkably complex
and sophisticated games in a fairly simple way.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

A Primer On Mars
As far as strategy is concerned, it is important to recognize
that the team will be fighting a number of battles against a
host of different opponents and it is a good idea to "practice"
and improve the characters' combat skills prior to leaving
Primus. As soon as the characters' skills have been somewhat developed and enough money earned, it is time to
move on to Progeny (where it is somewhat safer).
Once the team of adventurers arrives in Progeny, it is most
important to break into the computer system. It is advisable
to recruit someone who already has some basic computer
skills and spend whatever it costs to improve them. Once
one cracks the computer system, this opens up numerous
opportunities.
Further, the mines can be a real treasure to the bold adventurer. If the team confines its activity to the city, it is possible
to miss some of the delightful aspects of "Mars." More importantly, one can find items in the mines which will help in
other situations. The outlying inhabitants are pretty nasty,
though.
Finally, don't be a tightwad. Use the team's credits to improve their skills and equipment. Characters must continually improve in order to have a chance to win. Weapons,
programming, battle armor, and medicine skills pay the most
dividends. Who knows, that extra suit of Golum armor just

might be the difference between winning and being someone else's lunch.

Martian
Kudos
All in all, this
reviewer found the
trip to "Mars" to be an
enjoyable excursion.
The game does not
follow the recent
trend toward more
complexity, so it can
be highly recommended as a good introduction to those
who want to try a
CRPG for the first
time. It is also recommended to those who
want a user-friendly
and fast-moving
game with a challenging stable of different
opponents.

Taking A Peek

tive! IBM pictured on pg. 4, Apple IIGS
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #8.

P.O. Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
SCAVENGERS OF THE MUTANT
WORLD: Players scrounge and
scavenge their way across up to four million worlds in this post-holocaust,
strategy adventure game. Parties of four
explore, map, plunder, and fight through
civilization's rubble while trying to stay
alive and avoid radioactive contamination. Top-view graphics enhance the
combat screens and individual, tactical
combat provides the player with
options-o-plenty. IBM pictured on p. xx,
($54.95). Circle Reader Service #9.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
ALIEN SYNDROME: As Mindscape's
series of Sega conversions continues,
players race against time (in fact, a time
bomb) to purge sector after sector of an
alien infestation and rescue captured
colonists. This joystick-driven action
game is Barbarian meets Gauntlet in
Outer Space! C-64 pictured ($29.95),
Atari ST and Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #10.

PSS (from Intellicreations)
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
DOWNHILL CHALLENGE: One to
six players compete in four different
skiing events in this fast moving, 3-D
race game. Downhill, slalom, giant
slalom and jumping are available for
competition on beginner, intermediate
or advanced runs. Be prepared for plenty of nose plants! C-64 pictured on pg.
4 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

Discovery Software
163 Conduit Street
Annapolis, MD 21401
SWORD OF SODAN: Players seek
the evil necromancer, Zoras and attempt
to avenge the death of their father in

this joystick driven role playing/action
game. Great graphics (reminiscent of
Dungeon Master) and digitized sound enhance the action as players work
through 11 levels of the dreaded
graveyard spirits, giant scorpions, and
castle guards. Amiga pictured on pg. 4
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
ZANY GOLF: Jack Nicklaus meets
Marble Madness in this incredibly imaginative version of miniature golf. Each
of the nine holes are mini-games in
themselves, except players have to work
their way up to the final hole. One to
four "battle" their way past flashing
lights, bouncing burgers, laser beams,
particle rays, fireworks and the classic
windmill. This game is tough and addic-

ANNALS OF ROME: One player has
the thankless task of trying to expand
the Roman Empire while fighting off hordes of barbarians and dissatisfied rebel
legions in this intriguing strategy game.
It's all here: tax the citizens; bribe the
legions; promote and demote senators,
tribunes and legates; conquer barbarian
homelands; and recruit auxiliaries. The
only thing missing are those great tailgate parties after the chariot races! IBM
pictured, Atari ST and Amiga ($34.95);
C-64 ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
#11.
FIREZONE: Outstanding graphics
highlight this one or two player
strategy/wargame set in the 22nd century. Players maneuver gray tanks, infantry and a variety of other futuristic
weapon systems over a wide variety of
realistic terrain in an attempt to wipe out
the enemy. Hidden movement, nine different campaigns, scenario generation,
and map creation modules add depth to
this game. Atari ST pictured, Amiga and
IBM ($34.95); C-64 ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #12.

Taking A Peek

SORCERER LORD: Another in the
Wargamers Series," this time the player
must fight off an invasion from the evil
Shadowlord's Wolf Riders while gaining
control of the enchanted Rune Rings.
Elements of role playing combine with
the strategies of wargaming in a graphically gorgeous fantasy world. Sorcery,
fatigue and leadership ratings all factor
into combat. This could be an updated
version of the Lord of the Rings. Atari
ST pictured, Amiga and IBM ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.

Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
OVERLORD: One player oversees the
Allied invasion of Normandy from D-Day
to the final destruction of the
Wehrmacht in France. Colorful graphics
enhance this strategic wargame which in
cludes hidden movement, airborne
operations, morale, supply and multiple
difficulty levels. This is similar to Sim
Can's Operation Overlord, but with
colorful graphics. Atari St ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #14.
SPACE SCHOOL SIMULATOR:
The player takes part in 20 training missions in an attempt to graduate from
this futuristic "Top Gun" flight school.
Lasers, shields, scanners, missiles, flares,
infra-red and delay bombs are all available along with an option to design your
own ship. Shades of Tom Corbett,
Space Cadet! Amiga pictured, Atari ST
and IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
#15.
VULCAN: One or two players fight out
the Tunisian Campaign from WWII. The
game features hidden movement, air attacks and multi-scenarios. This is a companion game to CCS's Desert Rats.
Make sure you take a good sun block
with you on those long desert treks! IBM
(39.95). Circle Reader Service #16.

Spectre Software
P.O. Box 6614
Lakeland, FL 33807
FRIDAY NIGHT POKER CLUB:
Players compete against four of the
twelve members of the Friday Night
Poker Club in this poker simulator.
Dealer calls the game, and each computer player plays according to his own
style. The player can watch, practice or
blow his dough in this easy to follow

game. All you need to add are the chips
and dip. IBM pictured ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #17.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
BATTLES OF NAPOLEON: Miniatures come to the computer in this multiscenario, wargame/construction kit.
Refight Waterloo, Quatre Bras,
Auerstaedt and Borodino, or let the computer design a random battle. Better yet,
players can design their own with this
powerful game system. The game includes skirmishers, infantry squares and
cavalry charges. Oh those Greys! Apple
II pictured, and IIGS ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #18.

Conversions Received
For the Amiga
Captain Blood (Mindscape)
Rebel Charge at Chickamauga (SSI)
Reel Fish'n (Interstel)
Tetris (Spectrum Holobyte)
Twilight's Ransom (Paragon)

For the C-64
Crazy Cars (Titus)
Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 (Accolade)
Jordan vs. Bird (EA)
Rampage (Activision)

For the IBM
Bard's Tale II (FA)
Battle Chess (Interplay)
Fast Break (Accolade)
Halls of Montezuma (SSG)
Indoor Sports (Mindscape)
Platoon (Data East)
Sidewinder (Arcadia)
Skate or Die (EA)

Hall of Fame /

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been well
spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they have been
enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all

Game Ratings Chart

The game ratings have been frozen for three months
while the new Reader Input Device database is under
construction. The ratings printed here are those compiled with the last figures received prior to adopting an A
through F grade scale. Be sure to tune in two issues

from now when we unveil the results. In the meantime,
the response has been fabulous. If you haven't mailed in
your responses for the new database, turn to the R.I.D.
and let us know how you feel.

