February 1990

Number 68

Features
Electronic Arts' "Swords of Twilight"

8

Adventure Toward A Rainbow Ragnarok / Douglas Seacat

Three-Sixty's "Harpoon"

12
14
17

22
26

Sierra's "The Colonel's Bequest" / Johnny L. Wilson

Scorpion's Mail

30

Game Hints for Weary "Warriors" / Scorpia

What's New In Computer Games?

34

Special Report on the Winter Consumer Electronics Show

Terror On The Track
"DeathTrack" from Dynamix / Chris Lombardi

56

Origin's/CGW's "Omega" Tournament

58

18

More Platoon Level Combat with M-1s / M. Evan Brooks

"Danse" In A Manse Macabre

"Action Stations"

CGW Knows The Score!

Scorpion's Tale Gives Hints On Leisure Suit Larry Ill

Spectrum-Holobyte's "Tank"

54

Naval Combat from a Command Perspective / H. E. Dille

SimCan Charges Over New Terrain / William Bulley

New Conquests for Leisure Suit Larry

All Bloody On The Eastern Front
Command Simulations' "White Death" / Wyatt Lee

Broderbund's "Joan of Arc" / Chris Lombardi

"Main Battle Tank: Central Germany"

50

SSG's Gold of the Americas" / Chuck Moss

Modern Naval Command Simulation / M. Evan Brooks

The Witch of Orleans

Planning for Gold

44

Departments
Taking A Peek
Editorial
Contest Results
Rumor Bag
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device

6
7
7
10
36
65
72

Taking

A

Peek

Access Software
545 West 500 South
Bountiful, UT 84010
FAMOUS COURSES VOL 1,11,111: These
add-on segments for the World Class
Leader Board system each provide four
new courses with improved graphics and
"Real Sound", the company's digitized
sound system that doesn't require a
sound board. Tee off at Pebble Beach,
Banff Springs, and Dorado Beach with
the swap of a disk. IBM ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.

Arcadia
18001 Cowan, Stes A & B
Irvine, CA 92714
ARTURA: Very loosely based on the Arthurian legend, this action game puts
players in the realm of Morgause, Artura's
evil sister. Players must battle the minions
of Morgause while searching for the magical runes that will help them in their
quest to free the beautiful Nimue. What a
concept! C64 (pictured) ($29.99), IBM &
ST ($39.00). Circle Reader Service #2.

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
IF IT MOVES SHOOT IT!: The title
says it all. This European design is pure
shoot'em up. The graphics are outstanding and the joystick action extremely challenging. Joystick wimps need not apply.
IBM (pictured) & Amiga ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #3

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd
Westlake Village, CA 91362
IT CAME FROM THE DESERT: You
might worry about a company whose 'A'
product line is based on 'B' movies, but
you needn't be concerned about this
cross between the sci-fi 'B' classics, "It"

and "Them". Some of Cinemaware's best
graphics yet, and a coherent plot line will
keep you glued to the screen and away
from the snack bar. Amiga ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #4

Data East
1850 Little Orchard St.
San Jose, CA 95125
MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL: Data
East attempts to capture the excitement
of Monday Night Football in this first of
several planned sports releases. There
are plenty of pretty pictures; cheerleaders,
the Goodyear blimp, Frank Gifford, and
digitized player sound, but not a whole
lot of game. It has limited play creation
and player alteration capabilities, a somewhat awkward interface, and does not
keep track of stats. IBM (pictured)
Continued on page 69

Editorial

Contest

Why We Do What We Do
Judging from our readers' feedback in
letters to the editor and comments on
R.I.D. cards, there are a number of
readers who want to know why we have
certain styles/policies. For example, some
readers dislike the use of fiction in
reviews or sneak previews. When CGW
uses fiction in an article, it is intended to
illustrate something about a game. Sometimes the fiction simply helps establish
the game's fiction, but sometimes it often
illustrates actual game play. The recent
MechWarrior sneak preview (CGW #66)
used fiction to illustrate targeting procedures and overheating problems found in
the Battletech universe, but not in the
game.
Others want to know why the basic information box which we include with our

reviews is not usually found in our sneak
previews. This is because sneak previews
are written based on pre-production
copies of the game and we do not mention details like hardware requirements,
copy protection, documentation and
price because those factors may change
(and have changed in the past) before
they hit the market. Usually, a game
which is "sneak previewed" will be featured in a follow-up article after it has
reached the market. Some want to know
why we even "bother" with sneak
previews. In essence, CGW publishes
sneak previews so that readers will have
some idea of hot new products at about
the same time they hit the market. Otherwise, the lead time (up to three or four
months, depending on when the production copies arrive at our offices) could

cause the coverage to be less valuable. It
is one device we use to stay current.
Some readers want to know how some
games appear on the ratings chart
without having appeared on the latest list
of questions. The ratings list is a cumulative database. If a game has "ever" been
rated in CGW, we have its numbers
figured into the ratings. Other readers are
under the impression that the number of
respondents given in the ratings chart is
the TOTAL number of respondents. This
is the AVERAGE number of respondents
received EACH time the game has been
rated. How recently the game was
released, the availability of the game and
the machine formats for the game are all
factors which have some bearing on the
number of readers who respond.
We hope this "behind the pages" look
at why we do some of the things readers
often ask about will help all of our
readers enjoy perusing the pages of
CGW even more than they already do. If
not, we always read your letters!

Win A Free Trip To Britain!
In search of the best air combat simulation
player among CGW readers, Lucasfilm
Games and Computer Gaming World announce Their Finest Hour: The Battle of
Britain Competition.
Grand prize is an all-expense paid trip to
England with game designer Lawrence Holland and computer Gaming World
Editor-in-Chief Russell Sipe concurrent with the 50th
Anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Departing
September 1990, the highlight of the twoweek tour is Battle of Britain Day, September 15, 1990 and the 50th Anniversary
ceremony in London. Led by Valor Tours'
Bob Reynolds, Secretary of the Royal Air
Force Association, the trip includes the
Farnborough Air Show, numerous visits to
U.S. WW II air bases in East Anglia, extensive
museum and airfield tours, and even a
Cambridge pub notorious for its RAF patrons;
all to recreate this monumental event 50
years later.
The competition is three-tiered with players
first submitting a qualifying pilot record by
March 15, 1990. If chosen to compete at
Level Two, players submit required campaign
play records and original missions they have
created using the "Mission Builder" feature,
due by May 15, 1990. The five finalists
chosen for Level Three then play each others
original missions on or before June 15, 1990.
Top scorer is then off to England in time for
the 50th Anniversary!

COMPETITION RULES
LEVEL ONE
1. Submit a pilot record saved to disk with
the required qualifying score--a minimum of
1000 points.
• First create a pilot from the roster screen
during flight briefing. Any pilot type is acceptable. Consult page 81 of Their Finest Hour
manual for more information. All types of
pilots are eligible.
• After your qualifying pilot has reached the
minimum requirements of 1000 points, copy
your pilot file onto a 5 1/4" or 3 1/2" floppy
disk.

Note: As a pilot is named, the program
creates a DOS file name using one of the following extensions, based on type of pilot.
This file name should be used in copying.
PLANE

EXTENSION NAME

Spitfire/Hurricane

.RAF

BF 109

.109

BF 110

.110

Stuka

.J87

Ju88/He 111/Do 17 .BMB

Example: For a Spitfire pilot named Joe
the file name is JOE.RAF.
2. 100 disks will be chose randomly from
those received and reviewed for qualifying requirements.
3. The qualifying pilot disk must have name,

address, and phone clearly labeled on the outside and must contain only one pilot record
file. Disks with more than one file or whose
identifying label is illegible will be disqualified.
Only one entry per person.
4. Send disk to address below. Entry must
be postmarked by March 15, 1990. All disks
received during all three competition levels become property of Lucasfilm Games and cannot be returned.
Battle of Britain COMPETITION
LUCASFILM GAMES
P.O. Box 10307
San Rafael, CA 94912
5. The 100 qualifiers chosen will be notified
by mail and will receive full instructions and requirements for Level Two play at that time.
Employees, contractors, or freelancers of
Lucasfilm Ltd., Electronic Arts, or Golden Empire Publications, are not eligible to enter.
Void where prohibited.

Review

B

grabbed instinctively
ritomart
for her
blade as the pale
translucent forms of
wraiths formed before
them, moving closer
with haunting grace.
Bercilak grabbed
Britomart's arm,
whispering furiously
in the half-darkness,
"Be still, friend. We
won't get to
Shadowlord Maron's
dwelling by fighting
his every guard."

The wraiths halted at
a distance, "A strange
place to find the
living." They seemed
suspicious, but not
hostile, yet.

A Sword
and An Ogre
to Steer Her By
Electronic Arts' "Swords of Twilight"
by Douglas Seacat

"Well met. We come
in peace," the
enchanter, Benedic,
greeted with warm
tones.
"Yes," continued the
warrior, "my name is
Bercilak, Albion's
green champion. We
would seek aid in this
fine place."
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
The wraiths seemed
# PLAYERS:
to take council in this
PRICE:
and then, replied with
DESIGNERS:
almost warmth. "PerPUBLISHER:
haps, you are hungry;
would you care to
share a meal with us?"
Bercilak winked at the still scowling Britomart and agreed
to the meal, which wasn't at all bad considering it was served by four of the
darkest undead. He fingered the jeweled
hilt at his waist as they departed, feeling
the frost of the legendary Sword of Cold,
Fireproof. Soon Maron would live no
more, with a Sword of Twilight buried
in his skull, and shadow would be
forced to retreat further from glorious Albion, the land of Good.

Swords of Twilight (Swords), the new
role-playing adventure from Electronic
Arts, is the first CRPG which allows true
multi-player role-playing such that each
player can perform simultaneous action,
dialogue and travel. In addition, the plot
is executed in the fine Starflight tradition
where information is worth more than
gold and the plot takes many days to unravel.
The game takes place in a universe of
eight worlds, all connected in a con-

Swords of Twilight
Amiga
1-3
$49.95
Jon Freeman
Anne Westfall
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

tinuous loop by the Rainbow Road.
These eight worlds are parallel universes,
where landscapes are very similar, but cultures and people vary widely. At opposite
poles of the Rainbow Road are Albion
and Archeron. They are antitheses of
each other in that the former is a land of
good and abundance, while the latter is
home to evil and violence. Between these
two poles lie six worlds which have recently been captured by Shadowlords (minions of evil who hope to enslave Albion).
To accomplish this, the Shadowlords
have scattered the seven protective
Swords of Twilight throughout the worlds
they control. Each Shadowlord guards (or
has placed under guard) a Sword that
might harm one of his fellow
Shadowlords. Thus protected, these evil
beings plan the conquest of Albion.
Fortunately, there are several factors
standing in evil's way. First, the gates to
the Rainbow Road are guarded by powerful dragons, who are quite particular
about who they let travel the Road.

Second, the good
people in every world
are willing to ally with
anyone who desires to
destroy the
Shadowlords. Third,
Gloriana (Queen of Albion) has gathered
together the greatest
and most hopeful of
the good heroes in
order to send them
forth in small campaigns to actively steal
the Swords of Twilight
and kill the
Shadowlords. This is
where the human
player(s) come(s) in:
controlling selected
heroes in the fight to
save Albion.
The game itself uses
a three person interface, with two players
controlling joysticks
and the third (usually a
magic user) using the
keyboard. Either or
both of the joystick
characters can be controlled by the computer at any time (very
fortuitous should a
human player not be
able to participate in a
given session).

The screen is divided
into four exterior windows and a central
graphic map. These
four outer windows
allow conversation, interaction and trading to occur, while
movement and combat are shown on the
larger graphic map. The Archon-style
icons that represent the players and occupants are nicely rendered, if not overly
varied. Indicators of both attitude and
health can be easily seen for every character in the four outer windows. For example, if a person is wounded, his name
will change color reflecting the degree of
the injury. Also, attitude is reflected
through adjectives such as "Polite" and
"Friendly" displayed on the screen.
Character generation is handled in a
very interesting manner. Instead of creating a random character with straightforward (and often meaningless) statistics,
the player must choose three adventurers
from a list of 30 possible characters.
There are three basic classes in which the
characters fall: Knight, Champion and
Mage. A Knight is a fighter ranked
anywhere from 1st (novice) to 6th level, a
Champion is a 7th level Knight, and a
Mage is a magic users who utilizes one of

five types of magic (Goety, Witchcraft,
Wizardry, Enchantment or Sorcery).
Rather than using conventional attributes as lifeless statistics, Swords
chooses a more direct, hands-on approach. Each character has two forms of
ratings: physical and mental. Neither are
displayed as numbers. The physical
ratings include speed, weapons skill,
strength and endurance. The mental
ratings feature such matters as
courage, tact, suspicion and calmness.
All of these details come out in game
play as a player becomes more familiar
with his character. Players discover, for
instance, that Bercilak is extremely
strong since he can take some opponents out with one blow, but they
notice that he is also quite slow (it
takes a few seconds for him to prepare
for the next sword thrust).
Another departure from traditional
CRPGs is a shift away from advancing
via increased levels. Some advancement
is possible, but it is neither the focus of
the game nor a delineation of one's
score. Instead, the characters have a
definite "quest" to undertake and this is
the objective. It takes plenty of good
deeds to advance a character, but character advancement is strictly secondary to
successfully accomplishing the quest.
All options, except magic, are handled
via the joystick. If the button is pressed, a
menu appears. Players can scroll through
all their options from shifting one's attitude to actually talking with people via
this simple interface. Magic, as noted earlier, is handled through the keyboard.
Each type of magic uses a different
process, but all of them involve typing
certain commands and/or mantras to invoke a magical effect.
It should be noted that only one champion and one magic user are allowed in a
single party. Therefore, the most common party (and from this writer's viewpoint, the most effective) contains a
Knight, a Champion and a Mage. However, neither a Mage nor a Champion are
absolutely essential to success and it is
possible to have a party with three
Knights, two Knights and a Champion,
or a Mage and two Knights. It is up to
the player's discretion.
The initial choices, as the manual aptly
states, are not extremely important, since
it is entirely possible (and even, sometimes advisable) to change the party at
various times during the game. As Albion
is a world which contains no evil, players
can practice conversation and object
manipulation with relatively little risk.
Magic does not work in Albion, however,
so a trip on the Rainbow Road is recommended for those wanting to experiment

with various types of magic. Before too
long, the players should become comfortable with game play and will undoubtedly
make a decision about a long-term party.
Repeated trips back to Gloriana's castle
in order to change the group can become tedious, so it is recommended that

the party stick with a group for some
time after the initial experimentation.
At this point, the game becomes a
quest for information, as the players must
unravel the intricate pieces of the plot.
Solving the game requires much more
than simply killing the Shadowlords and,
without good communications skills, no
party will get very far. Saving Albion will
require, not only might, but also wit and
an investigative ability to piece together
clues and hints. The Shadowlords have
been most thorough and time is definitely against the players. As the heroes trek,
night falls, dawn rises, and food/shelter
must be found while the Shadow creeps
ever closer to Albion.

Nicks and Scratches
(Critical Remarks)
While the game is, overall, very welldone, there are several aspects which
could have made it better. One of these
is game speed. Movement across the
map is often artificially delayed, especially
if the player party has an old wizard (such
as Inderal, who is "ancient as the mountains") or a wounded comrade. This is because the group of players must stay in
the same area, or else a "too far from
others" warning will appear. As soon as
someone hits the edge of the screen, this
annoying warning flashes. While having
elderly or wounded characters move slowly is a nice realistic detail, I wish the game
was not quite so intrusive and nagging
with its warnings. It would be better if the
slow character were allowed to drift slightly out of sight until the leading characters
noticed the predicament.
Another slow aspect of the game is the
delay during encounters. When a group
is first encountered, there is a lengthy

disk access as the computer loads the
proper graphics and an even longer delay
as the game decides where to place the
encountered party. This can become
frustrating and might have a tendency to
make some impatient players reticent to
encounter people (which would be bad,
since this is the most important aspect
of the game). Less drive access and a
faster search algorithm would be appreciated.
Two smaller complaints involve the
soundtrack and the manual. The
various soundtracks used in the game,
including the interpretations from
Wagner's Ring Cycle, quickly become
monotonous and one is tempted to
simply toggle them off. The manual,
while handling the technical aspects of
gameplay relatively well, fails to give
any sort of background for the game.
Would it have been too much to ask
the authors of the game to offer some
information on Albion's background or
the Shadowlords' histories?
Another major frustration revolves
around how the interface handles menus.
While it is understandable that the
programmers wanted all commands available by joystick, the menu lists can quickly become a hassle. This is especially true
if the character is attacked when not in
"Hostile" mode. In order to shift to an offensive position, the player must click
through the menu system, find "Hostile",
and then, exit the menu system to
"Move" before any offensive action can actually be taken. All this time, the player is
being pounded by enemies and taking
possible damage. Even common menu
commands (where life and death are not
an issue) can be frustrating. To give an
object to another person, the player must
shift through "Talk", "Offer", "What" and
then, find the object for donation. After
some time, the player becomes accustomed to the system, but it still seems
like an easier method could have been
used (or, at least, a more logical hierarchy of menus).

Razor Edge and Jeweled Pommel
(Commendations)
Despite these quibbles with the interface, Swords of Twilight is an excellent
game and well-deserving of praise. The
attention to detail alone make it worth
buying: the characters are groggy upon
first awakening; at dawn and dusk friendly strangers will provide food; a friend can
be made even friendlier with a small .. .
ah . . . donation (and even Ghouls won't
eat their friends); sleeping inside provides
more relief than sleeping on a stone;
eating a full meal defeats hunger better
(Continued on page 66)

Industry News

described a game called Abstracta which
they are attempting to market.

The
Rumor
Bag

Abstracta was somewhat inspired by
Jack Chalker's Well World" novels. The
player starts out with first person perspective as a being held in an alien zoo. To
succeed, the player must work his/her
way up the food chain. Strength, vision,
and perception all changes (and the display on the screen changes to reflect
this) as the player does. In one phase,
the player may see clearer and farther. In
another, the player may move faster. "I
suppose you are going to tell me," I interrupted "that game time goes by faster or
more slowly, depending on one's metabolism speed." He was not amused, but told
me that there are five different environments and tons of alien animals to keep
things interesting.

by
Richard
Bergman
Bogart
(Continued from CGW #67)

t was still dark and my head throbbed
like a contestant in a tournament for
drum and bugle corps. I seemed to be
in a moving vehicle and the powerful
humm in the background sounded like a
swamp cooler big enough to cool the
Astrodome. It couldn't be. Either I was
flying in a DC-3 or that was one heck of
a wheel bearing going out on that right
rear tire.

I

I sat up . . . gingerly . . . and realized I
was flying in an antique plane. That's
when I wished I were flying in either
Electronic Arts' new "LHX Helicopter"
simulation (a mission-based attack
helicopter game) or SpectrumHolobyte's "AH-64" simulator (with elements of the "Advanced Tactical Helicopter" thrown in). I'd show them! Whoever
had captured me probably didn't even
know that Spectrum-Holobyte would
be publishing an updated version of Falcon with even more types of planes and
an infantry game, all designed to interface with Tank and the others via their
Electronic Battlefield System.
The plane landed at a strange airfield.
Historical relics were all around. Carefully
peering out the window, I spotted a Sopwith Camel and a Spitfire before I saw
them. There, on the tarmac, a fellow in a
trenchcoat was talking to an incredibly
shapely blonde. I listened. "I don't care
what you tell him," he said, "the problems
of some rumor guy don't amount to a hill
of beans in this crazy mixed-up industry
of ours. Now, if you don't get in there in
the plane where you belong and tell him
about Data East's Drakkhen, you'll
regret it. Maybe not this issue, and
maybe not next issue, but some issue
and for the rest of your career."

She entered the plane as gracefully as
the Queen enters Buckingham Palace.
She smiled and told me that Drakkhen
would use a combination of bit-mapped
and polygon filled 3-D images to
generate graphics on the fly and offer
fast scrolling and scaling to provide the illusion of perspective and movement. I
looked sternly at her and she began to
cry. She said she was sorry someone had
said the program would have more than
200 spells. There were really 23 basic
spells which react differently according to
time, space, monster, etc. She thought
I'd really like it, though, along with a puzzle-solving science fiction game called
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess with
an emphasis on replayability.
She leaned over and bludgeoned me
with her exotic perfume as she whispered
in my ear. "So, what do you hear about
space games?" I couldn't help myself.
The combination of her sensuous
presence and the chemical potency of
her scent had lowered my resistance to
the danger point.
I confessed, "Microprose has taken
their space adventure off the back burner
and expects to publish it this year. And . .
. remember Starship Commander? Gilman Louie's starship simulation on the
Apple? Spectrum Holobyte will probably release a brand-new version of Starship Commander in the first quarter of
1991, sort of a "Starship Commander:
The Next Generation".
She led me out of the plane, where I
was met by a police captain in an
anachronistic uniform. I blustered that I
wanted to know why I was being held. He
asked me if I knew Bill Leslie, former
designer for Omnitrend. "Did you know
he has formed a new company called
FunLabs?" I confessed ignorance as he

Next, he asked to see my passport.
"Passport?!" I shouted, "I didn't even
know I'd left the country. I thought the
closest I'd been to visiting distant lands
was playing Mindcraft's The Keys to
Maramon, an action/adventure which will
be unlike The Magic Candle, but set in a
portion of the same game universe."
He pulled out his notepad and began
to scribble. "So," he continued, "you
admit you are a spy?" I denied this, but
he flashed some papers with the General
Electric logo on them, which he had earlier confiscated from me, and said, "You
arrive with no passport, have papers connected with a defense contractor in your
pocket, and hide your face in a paper
bag. Yet, you deny that you are a spy."
"I'm not. Those papers simply indicate
that Kesmai Corporation and GEnie
(General Electric Information Network)
have signed a contract to put an on-line
version of Harpoon on the network by
the latter portion of 1990."
"And these customs papers?" he fairly
snarled as he tightened the noose of my
impromptu interrogation.
"Just research," I protested. "I was trying
to find out exactly how many cartridges
of Nintendo's 'Christmas hit' were still
left in Seattle. Some guy told me they still
had 2 million copies of Dragon Warriors
which didn't sell in. Another guy said that
K-Mart still had a million bucks worth of
video game inventory after Christmas. I
just thought it might indicate that the
videogame market was softening faster
than people thought."
He pulled another paper from his pocket. "Perhaps," he ventured with a threatening tone, "you will leave such investigations to the video game magazines in the
future. We were just working on your
death certificate, but we can't make up
our minds: either you committed suicide
or you were shot trying to escape." He
deftly shot me with his pistol, but I don't
remember the bullet hitting .. .
(To be continued).

Review

HARPOON
by
M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:
Harpoon
SYSTEM:
IBM AT (640K)
SOUND SUPPORT:AdLib,
CMS/GameBlstr,
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Covox Sound Master,
and Innovation
Solitaire
$59.95
Three-Sixty Pacific
Campbell, CA

ased

No Whaling Simulation
on Larry Bond's award-win
ning miniatures/boardgame simula
tion of contemporary naval operations, Harpoon has a distinguished, albeit
convoluted, lineage. Mr. Bond's rules system served initially as a database for Tom
Clancy's novel Hunt for Red October
(later converted to a computer game), as
a basis for the novel Red Storm Rising
(written by Tom Clancy and Larry Bond,
and later converted to a computer
game), and now, after a wait of almost
three (3) years, Harpoon itself transitions
to the electronic medium.

B

The product itself is so comprehensive
and detailed that an in-depth discussion
as to optimized multi-platform usage
(naval terminology refers to individual
units as platforms, i.e. surface ships, submarines, airplanes) will appear in a future
issue. But there is no question that Harpoon is the most detailed simulation to
appear in the civilian marketplace. This
reviewer learned more from his first six (6)
hours of playing Harpoon than he did in
a one-year seminar of "Maritime Operations" in the Naval War College.

Harpoon itself consists of the Master
Program which includes the GIUK (Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom) BattleSet
(with twelve scenarios). Additional
bat-tlesets (scenario disks) are slated for
release, with BattleSet #2 (North Atlantic
Convoy) set for release by the time this article is published. BattleSet #3 will cover
Mediterranean operations, while BattleSet
#4 is tentatively set for Persian Gulf
operations. Each BattleSet will consists of
approximately fifteen scenarios, with a
base price of $30.
With the size/complexity of Harpoon,
various bugs have arisen, but ThreeSixty has taken the high road and any
registered user will receive the free
revision. In addition, the revision disks will
include additional scenarios. Thus, users
are encouraged to register (please note
on the registration card the particular format-3.5 or 5.25).

Everything You Always Wanted
To Know...
The documentation consists of three
manuals: (1) "Operations Manual" by

Lance Bernard. (2) "Tactical Guide" by
Larry Bond; (3) "Aboard the Marshal Ustinov & Otlichy" by Tom Clancy; )
Mr. Clancy's contribution is a roughdraft "after action" report of his visit to
two Soviet vessels; it offers no real insight
to Harpoon other than to add color. Mr.
Bond's guide notes that the scenarios are
not "play-balanced", but rather estimates
of actual operations as they might exist.
The "Tactical Guide" itself is an overview
of naval operations, very reminiscent of
what this reviewer received in his first
"Maritime Operations" seminar. The
various types of naval warfare are
covered: ASUW (Anti-SUrface Warfare),
MW (Anti-Air Warfare), ASW (Anti-Submarine Warfare), Strike (attacks by naval
assets against land targets), Amphibious
(projection of troop strength against
enemy land masses, i.e. invasions/landings) and Mine (Harpoon does not directly address mine warfare, although BattleSet #2 may well cover this important if
often neglected aspect of naval operations). Although the Tactical Guide gives
the user a comprehension of the "Big Picture", it does not yield any guidelines as
to efficient use of one's platforms in a
multi-threat environment—this requires
player experience and learning.
Mr. Bernard's Operations Manual is the
res gestae of the documentation. Play
mechanics and a short tutorial yield a
basic understanding of game play. However, the manual is somewhat akin to a
sex manual—it goes through the motions, but does not really put it all
together. There are numerous terms
which are unexplained in the text, although most of these are defined in the
appendix. Some game screens are somewhat cryptic, with the documentation failing to elucidate the ramifications thereof.
Replete with spelling and grammatical errors, the documentation presumes that
one has an understanding of contemporary naval platforms and operations.
Such an understanding may be gained
via play, but the learning curve may be
somewhat longer than desired.
The presumption of prior knowledge
may be partially attributable to the long
development time of Harpoon and the
use of knowledgeable Navy personnel as
beta testers. This is not to say that Harpoon is unplayable, but rather to state
that one must acquire a familiarity with
platform employment in the multi-threat
environment.
Much of the "hard data" is not in the
documentation, but encapsulated within
the program as "pull-down" menus.
These offer a fascinating picture of over
one hundred (100) platforms, with additional details as to arcs of fire, sensors,
etc. The smart user will avail himself of
this data. It is essential in order to deterContinued on page 15

Review

G

od smiled upon the
English, or so it had
seemed. For nearly 100
years, the English had led campaign after successful campaign on
French soil: trouncing the French
in every major engagement; capturing the northern half of their land;
subjecting them to merciless taxation; and becoming wealthy at the
hands of broken peasants. Claiming their king's right to the French
throne and boasting of divine support, the English were intent on establishing a medieval FrancoEnglish state.
In 1423 the English began another campaign in France, led by the Duke of Bedford. Over the next several years, armies
under Bedford would again defeat the
Dauphinists, capturing scores of towns in
central France. When two French dukes,
Philip of Burgundy and Jean of Brittany,
gave their allegiance to the English
crown, it seemed the end was near for
Dauphinist France. By 1428, Bedford
was ready to capture Orleans, one of the
Dauphinist strongholds, and planning to
use it as a base from which the English
could strike into the heart of the
Dauphinist territory. With a pitifully small
army of 6,000, Bedford began the siege
of the Orleans, figuring that the
Dauphinists would never be able to raise
a force large enough to threaten him.
The English never counted on a 17 year
old shepherdess leading 4,000 men to
march into Orleans and relieve the siege.
In doing so, this young girl proved the
English were not invincible; reclaimed the
divine support the English had claimed;
and revived the spirit of a broken France.
The teen-aged sheep herder was, of
course, Jeanne d'Arc.
Joan of Arc: Siege and the Sword
(Joan) puts you in the shoes of Charles
IV of France in 1428. Two of your dukes
have turned against you; Bedford is besieging one of your last strongholds; your
treasury is empty; your court is both corrupt and inept; and your people are both
war-ravaged and demoralized. Your only
hope is Joan's "miracle" army, with which
you must subdue the rebellious French
dukes and throw the English out of your
land.
At first glance, Joan looks a lot like a
Defender of the Crown clone. Actually,
Joan is similar to the Cinemaware
product in that the player's goal is to
raise armies and systematically conquer
provinces, but Joan is also a much more
detailed simulation which offers the full
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Joan of Arc: Siege and The Sword
Amiga, IBM
$44.95
The CHIP Group
Carlo Perconti
Rob Martyn
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

The Witch
of Orleans
Broderbund's Joan of Arc:
Siege and The Sword"
by Chris Lombardi

of the carnage, though, the sequence is so simple it quickly becomes tedious.
The second step in the siege involves one of the most frustrating action sequences ever to be played.
The player must maneuver a soldier
up the side of a bastion while
defenders stand atop the wall, throwing rocks and pouring boiling oil on
top of him. The player must either
put up his shield to block a rock or
jump to another ladder. Nothing can
be done about the hot oil. Players
can anticipate the rocks, but there is
no way to predict when the defenders will
pour oil and there is no way to avoid it. It
is frustrating when you work so hard at
blocking rocks and working your man to
the top, only to have an unforeseeable
gush of oil send him screaming to his
death (accompanied by a sickening
thud). Meanwhile, for every man you
lose, your army is proportionately
depleted. I have watched others play and
talked to others who have played Joan
and I have yet to meet anyone who is not
unduly frustrated by this sequence.
Give me my steeled coat,
I'll light for France!"

powers of a medieval monarch to the
player: taxation, justice, diplomacy, and
even the underhanded aspects of
espionage (assassination and kidnapping).
From battle and murder,
and from difficult
action sequences,
Good Lord, deliver us.
At the onset, however, these monarchial
prerogatives are unavailable to the player
and they will remain so until the player
relieves the siege at Orleans and undergoes, as a result, his coronation in the
city of Reims. In Joan, cities are captured
by means of siege warfare and this, in
turn, consists of two action sequences. In
the first sequence, the player must
maneuver his soldier across a bridge,
while fighting off the hordes of defenders
that issue from the castle and avoiding
the arrows that fall randomly from above.
The three action controls are: "run forward", "hack overhead", or "hack
sideways". Fortunately, the sequence is
quite easy to master. The easiest way to
succeed is simply to run up to a defender
and start hacking, continuing to hold
down the attack button until the
defender pauses in his attack and, hence,
either loses his head or arm. It is certainly
nice and gory: heads roll, arms flop to
the ground, and bodies pile up. In spite

While attempting to accomplish the initial objectives of capturing Orleans and
Reims, the player will run into an enemy
army or two. Thus, initiating a battle. The
battle sequences in Joan are reminiscent
of the Ancient Art of War system. The
player views the battlefield from the side,
with his forces on the left and the
enemy's on the right. Using a push-button interface, players command their mortar and archers to fire, their foot-soldiers
to advance and retreat, and their cavalry
to charge. The system is very simple, but
allows no room for tactical maneuvers.
Beyond firing your arrows and mortar accurately, there is not much the player can
do to sway the course of a battle. Since
there is nowhere to go but forward, the
two armies eventually clash head-on and
it becomes a war of attrition. The side
with the most men usually wins.
The computer opponent for these battle sequences is lousy. The computer
never uses its archers effectively. In most
battles the computer will send its archers
along with the foot soldiers in the main
charge. In this manner, the archers hardly fire and, if they do, they shoot aimlessly
off the battlefield or back onto their own
mortar. The computer also seems to
have problems with its cavalry. Either the
unit charges pell-mell through your
troops and off the screen or it sits there
impotently until you start pounding it
with arrows or mortar. It is clear that little
effort was put into fine tuning the artificial intelligence routines that handle this
segment of the game.
After fulfilling the initial objectives (it will
take several starts), all of the royal opContinued on page 16

HARPOON

Be The First With The Most

Continued from page 12

As noted previously, Harpoon is a
simulation. Captain Hughes' classic
treatise "Fleet Tactics" notes that the
most important element of naval warfare
is to "Attack Effectively First"; Harpoon
justly emphasizes this aspect of naval warfare. Generally, Soviet missile ranges exceed those of NATO, while Soviet sensors are much less advanced; this leads
to a "cat-and-mouse" game of seeking to
avoid or make contact and achieve the
much-vaunted first strike capability at sea.

mine the optimal offensive-defensive tactics. This information cannot be printed
out or reduced to hard copy, but since
the game-time "pauses" while one is accessing the information, no harm is
done. This reviewer would have preferred
an additional option of seeing a "split
screen" between NATO and Soviet platforms as to get a visual contrast, but one
rapidly learns the details. Alternatively,
one could acquire the boardgame version of Harpoon. This would provide
hardcopy data of all necessary platforms,
weapons, and sensors (albeit, this is a
$20 purchase).
A four-page errata/supplement has
been included, which raises an interesting question. Since Harpoon is a "living"
product, one which will grow and expand,
why wasn't the documentation looselybound with a three-hole type of arrangement. This would have facilitated easy replacement of pages and kept the manual
as a coherent entity.

"Real Men" Don't Use Stylized
Icons
Harpoon runs best in an EGA-mode.
The graphics are composed of three
main screens -- strategic, group and unit
(in effect, strategic, operational and tactical). Most of one's play will be involved in
the group mode. After all, one is simulating a fleet commander and not the captain of a single vessel.
The graphics are crisp and varied. One
may utilize grid lines on maps, range
circles for various platforms (sensor ranges, air ranges, missile ranges, etc.), and
icons depicting the actual vessels. Two
icon sets are available: stylized (a
ship/aircraft icon) or CDS (Combat Designation System). While the former is more
"user-friendly" to the novice, the latter
(representing actual NATO-type symbology) yields a better "feel".
The graphics are not akin to the tactical
portrayals in Lucasfilm's Strike Fleet, nor
are they intended to be. Rather than a
flashy view from the bridge, one gets the
data that an FWC (Force Weapons Coordinator) would receive in the CIC (Combat Information Center).
Missile launches and strikes are graphically depicted and illustrate the direction
of launch. Ship sinkings are accompanied by appropriate music (Soviet national anthem for NATO sinkings and
NATO themes, e.g. Peer Gynt for Norwegian, for Soviet losses). If one tires of
these renditions, they may be turned off.
Overall, the graphics give a proper
perspective and mood to the simulation.

After scenario selection, one may
choose his side, possible nuclear release,
snorkeling submarines, realistic weather,
maintenance failures, and full ordinance.
Weather can thereby play an important
role, with the sea state ranging from
smooth as glass to "feeding the seagulls".
No matter how lonely one feels at sea,
the simulation provides a staff assistant
who offers timely suggestions (e.g. do
you want to turn your radar on active
now?) and can handle the details via staff
notes(One simply types in a reminder
message which tells the Staff Assistant to
query at the designated time).
In addition to the plethora of game options which detail various aspects of
one's forces (sensor/weaponry/platforms),
there is also a formation editor. This appears as a concentric circle pie with one's
vessels and aircraft employed in formation. One may have to experiment in
order to achieve a better use of formations, but this is essential to game play.
The "Maritime Operations" midterm examination at the Naval War College
demands that the student do a proper allocation of a task force—both in terms of
vessel and commander placements. The
formation editor asks the same. The
chord slice of a particular vessel may be
enlarged or reduced. This allows one to
personally tailor his coverage. But be
aware that when the task force may be
cruising at 18 knots, a particular vessel
may be reaching speeds of 25 knots in
order to achieve its ordered station. This
accounts for why many users have been
confused as to why there is a difference
between group and individual speeds.
Sensors are always in a passive mode;
one must elect when and how to "go active". Experience is the most effective
teacher as to sensor usage, although it
can be difficult to determine the optimal
speed for best sonar results.
A future article will cover tactical employment in more depth. However, Scenario
1 involves a group of Soviet missile boats
(Nanutchka Ills) against a Norwegian
force (four Storm PT-type boats and a
heavier Leander and Oslo vessel). Details
of these ships may be accessed via winContinued on page 65

Continued from page 14

lions become available and the player is
allowed to pursue the goal of uniting his
country. The main game screen is a map
of France, divided into the major provinces. Clicking on a province will show the
major cities and any fortresses in that
province. Capturing the cities (and thus,
the province) is the key to winning.

Naturally, cities are either taken by siege
or by buying them back from the enemy
that holds it. Both methods require
money and funds are raised several ways.
The primary mode of income is taxation,
the king's best friend. As king, you have
the right to a yearly hearth tax from all
your provinces (though provinces may
also be taxed individually at any time).
However, taxation beyond the hearth tax
will lower the province's "Trust in the
King's Power" rating. Generally taxation
does not yield enough to field a decent
campaign army, so players may resort to
the medieval form of extortion. After
defeating an army, there is a good
chance of capturing the army's leader,
and these leaders can often be ransomed
back to the enemy king for large
amounts of money.

town. Whenever the player wishes to perform one of these unbecoming acts, he
chooses the character to do it and the
amount of pay the character will receive.
Higher rates of pay increases the chance
of success, but players will quickly learn
that some characters are simply not
suited for some acts and would not succeed if you gave them the entire treasury.
As king, the player also has the right to
mete out justice. Under the justice menu,
the player can execute a prisoner, arrest
a member of the court, or grant a pardon
to the same. Execution can be useful
when a very strong enemy character has
been captured, and the player does not
want to deal with him anymore. Of
course, such a strong character could
bring a healthy ransom, and players must
remember that the enemy leaders will not
take it too well if you decapitate their top
men. Though I've never seen the enemy
leaders return the favor, I have had
several negotiators imprisoned in retaliation of an execution. Players can also arrest and execute members of their own
court, though after playing several games
of Joan, I've never yet found any reason
to do so. The power is there if players
wish to play the Queen of Hearts.
Justice is also used when a province
revolts. Each province has a "Trust in the
King" value, and if that value falls below
a limit the province will revolt, rendering

... all the king's men,
couldn't put France
back together again."
One of the nicest elements of Joan is
the use of non-player characters in each
leader's court. Initially, the player's court
consists of 12 characters, including: Joan
of Arc, the Renault of Chartres, and
others. Each courtier is rated in the
categories of politics, strategy, and army
leadership. The player uses these characters as heads of armies and as
negotiators between kings.
Whenever making diplomatic negotiations for an alliance, a peace treaty, an armistice, or the release/ransom of a
prisoner, the player must first choose two
negotiators from the court, as well as the
location for the negotiations. Both
choices can have an effect upon the outcome of the talks.
The player has six other characters to
call upon to deal with the "other side of
kingship", the dirty work. These characters, such as Vivianne the Mad, and
Robert the Devil can be hired to poison,
assassinate, kidnap enemy characters, to
perform espionage missions, or report on
the military situation of a province or

it untaxable. To solve the problem the
player may wish to execute the leaders of
the dissenting province, which usually
put the province back on good behavior.
There are other 'kinder, gentler' ways of
restoring this trust value, such has signing a peace treaty, building a fortress in
the province, or being victorious in battle.
Success at the game is a matter of
keeping enough money in the coffers to
support an army to recapture cities, and
then mastering the siege and siege
defense action sequences. While the
number of diplomatic options outlined
above seems to offer a wide range of possibilities for the player, the game suffers
as a whole from imbalance of play. For
while the diplomacy aspects add flavor,
the action sequences are the meat of the
stew. Global success lies not in whether
the player executes this character or pardons another, but whether he has
mastered the action sequences or not.
And it is not only the centrality of these
sequences but the number of them. In

one game, I counted over 30 siege
defense and over 30 siege sequences.
Since sieges are actually composed of
two action sequences, that comes to
over 100 sequences. They are simply not
stimulating enough to endure that many
occurrences. After a while, they become
tedious, increasing their already frustrating quality.

There are a few problems of note with
the game system. One lies in the
routines for controlling the actions of the
enemy armies. If players negotiate a
peace treaty, all enemy armies will stop
immediately wherever they are and begin
to build up troops at an incredible rate,
even in one of the player's own provinces. In one game, after six months of
peace, three enemy armies had amassed
100,000 thousand men! The most we
could ever afford to field was 25,000.
When the armistice ended, the three armies tore through France and I was
powerless to stop it. Quite a major quirk!
Another qualm I have with the game is
the way it tries to maintain historical
events. Occasionally, in the course of the
game, a window will pop-up providing a
little historical tidbit. That's great. But
several times, in keeping with the historical occurrences, the game will eliminate
one of your characters. At one point,
Joan is kidnapped, tried and executed, as
it really happened. Again, that's fine if the
intent is to maintain historical accuracy,
but if Joan happens to be leading an
army at the time she is kidnapped, the
player ends up losing the entire army.
This also happens with the warrior
general, Xaintrailles. It seems silly that the
designers were such sticklers on some
historical events that they put the player
at a disadvantage, when they fudge on
other historical facts. (ex. The Duke of
Bedford, one of Henry's top men in the
game, was actually killed in the siege of
Orleans).
Joan has potential to be quite a good
game. Despite my complaints, I did enjoy
some aspects of it. It has a wonderful setting, a nice 'look and feel', and elements
that truly capture the spirit of the historical period, but the prevalence and nature
of the action sequences, along with the
quirks in Al and design, keep it from
being "all that it could be" and prevent
one from offering a wholehearted recommendation.

Review

a doctrine stressing agility, initiative,

Main BattleTank:
CentralGermany
by William Bulley

depth (of the battle area) and synchronization (of all arms and elements). Whether
our leaders' cognitive and leadership
skills can measure up to the demands imposed by this doctrine is open to question. Main Battle Tank: Central Germany
is presented as a study of command in
this setting.

Intelligence Report
(Game System)
In SimCan's system, players are forced
to assume the role of a commander with
all the attendant problems of control in a
situation filled with the fog of war. In this
game, the player is either a battalion or
brigade/regiment leader. Orders are communicated to subordinate maneuver, artillery, attack helicopter, and close air support units. In some scenarios, staff and
supply components are available. In all
scenarios, a player may elect to limit the
number of orders available in order to
simulate the inability of the command
level staff to process more than a certain
amount of communications.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Main Battle Tank: Central Germany
Apple II, Atari ST, and IBM
$60.00
Steven Newberg and
Stephen St. John
Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia CANADA

The past twenty years have seen
another revolution in the conduct of conventional warfare. The increased lethality
of modern weapons has combined with
simultaneous improvements in both the
means of command and control, as well
as the technology of disrupting those
means. As a result, the manner in which
current and future mechanized operations are conducted will be significantly altered.
The main protagonists in this situation,
NATO and the Warsaw Pact, have each
developed their own doctrines in order to
try to adapt to the above situation. Traditionally, Pact forces are considered to
have opted for a system based on more
rigid control than is seen in the West.
Only a simplistic view, however, fails to
take into account the latitude and initiative allowed Soviet officers within
doctrinal bounds. It is incorrect to think
of these officer as automatons. On the
other hand, NATO (specifically the U.S.
Army and the Bundeswehr) has
developed its own operational concepts
in order to deal with the situation. In the
U.S. Army, the result is "AirLand Battle",

One of the first problems facing a
player deals with establishing unit
doctrine. This relates primarily to a unit's
reporting frequency (how often a unit
reports to HQ) and to its characteristics
in combat. Players should beware of unnecessary reporting, however, because it
tends to draw indirect fire. On the other
hand, infrequent reports will lead to lack
of control due to a paucity of information. Therein lies the rub in modern
operations and some of the problems in
the game relate to this point.
A welcome new feature in Main Battle
Tank: Central Germany is the program's
capacity for performing a "postmortem"
of the game. This can take the form of
either simply listing the commands given
on each side or providing a compendium
of the combats which caused losses. In
addition, the movements and fates of
units can be graphed on the computer
screen. The "postmortem" is a vital tool
in evaluating player performance. This
feature becomes especially important in a
command-oriented game. Fog of war is
so intense in SimCan games that use of
the "postmortem" is extremely interesting
and instructive in assisting the player in
finding out the fate of lost friendly units
and discovering the actual results of attacks on opposing formations.

Disposition (Critical Notes)
Main Battle Tank: Central Germany
represents a significant departure in
terms of modeling mechanized battles. It
is intended to place the player in the
situation of a commander; that is, one
who is forced to make decisions based
on mission priorities and using incomContinued on page 19

Game Hints

arning: Although
"The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and
comfortable tavern of the
mind with a nice cozy fire of
vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating hints about
games. If the gentle reader eschews hints, let him beware!

W

Baby, it's cold outside! In
fact, this has been one of the
coldest winters we've had in
awhile. So, mosey on up to
the fire, while Fred prepares a
little something to help take
the chill off. This is the time
to think of warm places .. .
the islands . . . sun . . . sand
. . . surf . . . sex . . . (grin) . .

Scorpion's Tale

Leisure Suit
Larry III
As Told By Scorpia

Leisure Suit Larry 3: (LSL3)
picks up where the previous
game left off, although
several years have passed in
the meantime. Larry, who
seemed to have found true
love and a decent life at last,
is about to experience several
rude shocks that will send
him back on the "make out"
circuit with a vengeance.
This game is also much
more explicitly sexual than
"Looking For Love", which
was mainly farcical in tone
and content. Sex is the
dominant theme in LSL3,
and there is plenty of it, as Larry rolls in the hay with five different
women. Anyone who considers such antics offensive or repulsive
will probably want to avoid the game.
In an interesting departure from standard adventure fare, the action switches at the mid-point from Larry to Patti. During the first
half of the game, you guide Larry through his various make-out
maneuvers. During the second half, you guide Patti in her attempts to find Larry, who has run off into the bamboo jungle.
This division is sharper than it may first seem. The Larry portion
is somewhat open-ended, so if you miss or overlook something,
going back to get it is not much of a problem. The Patti portion,
however, is strictly linear in design. If you don't have all the items
you need, your only option is to restore the game, because you
can't go back. The trek through the jungles is strictly one-way.
Decked out in island togs, our hero starts the game at a point
overlooking the island. Larry meditates placidly on the changes
and events since his defeat of the nefarious Dr. Nonookie. He is
married to a beautiful woman; lives in a plush home; and has a
comfortable job with Natives Inc., which controls all development
on Nontoonyt Island. Surely this is all a dream-come-true for our
former lounge lizard.
However, as Larry is about to discover, some dreams are
nightmares. After poking (and peeking, very much peeking!)
around the lookout, Larry strolls home and suddenly, all is not so
serene any more.
In fact, Larry has just been kicked out of hearth and home.
Kalalau (his ex) has left him (well, actually she's staying, but he's

leaving) for another woman.
That's right, woman. Larry's
prowess in the bedroom
seems to have declined over
the years.
Crushed, Larry wanders off
and finds his way to Natives
Inc. The news here is no better, as Chairman Kenneth
(Kalalau's father) informs
Larry that he no longer has a
job, either.
Wifeless, penniless, homeless does our boy give up?
Not on your life! Now that
the preliminaries have been
taken care of, it's time to get
down to some serious business (making out with as
many women as possible in
the shortest possible time).

This is a good place to save
the game and map out the
area. It is not large. The outdoors is a mere fifteen
screens total. The only thing
to be careful of is the fact
that several screens have different exits in the same direction. For instance, the middle
right exit of one screen will
take you to the casino, while
the one in the upper right
takes you to Chip'n'Dale's.
An important point to keep
in mind, by the way, is to
return occasionally to places
- you have been before (except
Natives Inc.). Sometimes, things change while you've been gone.
It also helps to pick up whatever you find during your explorations . . . you never know what might come in handy in the future!
Once everything has been mapped, it is time to reflect on what
you've seen. For instance, there's the lovely Tawni, sunbathing
semi-nude on the beach. Definitely a candidate for Larry's surefire techniques. Or she would be, if she wasn't so interested in
buying souvenirs.
That's something to remember for later. Right now, Larry has
other things on his mind (and we have no doubts about what
that is, either!). However, Tawni's not about to give anything
away for free. Considering her acquisitive nature, there's really
only one thing to offer in return for sampling her charms.
Unfortunately, in the middle of this "sampling", there are some
interruptions. Get used to that, because there will be many more
yet to come. A vendor shows up and captures Tawni's interest
with a genuine ginsu knife. At least, the interruption is brief.
The same can't be said for the sand crabs, who put an end to
Larry's romantic interlude permanently. Oh well, at least he
managed to hang on to the knife, dull though it is. It might be
worthwhile to sharpen it, if Larry can find the right spot (which
isn't all that far away).
Maybe he'll have better luck with Cherri Tart (hey, blame Al
Continued on page 20

Main Battle Tank
Continued from page 17
plete information. It nicely illustrates the
frustrating constraints on communication
that exist in any combat situation. In addition, the vital importance of the
synchronization of the effects of modern
weapons can be illustrated. This is where
some problems in the simulation become
evident and the present writer will attempt to express these in terms of "AirLand Battle" concepts.

fires in support of those organizations.
No matter which side one plays, the
game uses a method which most closely
models a stereotypical Soviet unit where
all firing is coordinated through and allocated by higher HQs. In actual practice,
NATO regards the inefficiency and lack of
flexibility in the Soviet system as a major
advantage for themselves. In the game, a
player does not have a choice.

As mentioned earlier, the main tenets of
"AirLand Battle" are the qualities of
agility, initiative, synchronization and
depth. These terms are not just verbiage,
but are concepts that are supposed to be
applied at the lowest practical tactical
level. In Main Battle Tank: Central Germany, the player has all of the tools available in order to apply "AirLand Battle"
doctrine. The problem is that units simply
have a very hard time working toward any
unified goal in a coordinated way. Artillery
batteries can be dedicated to individual
maneuver companies, but beyond that,
local initiative and the ability to
synchronize firing is lacking. Protective
firing, company-directed air support and
engineer-constructed obstacles are absent. Further, synchronized offensive and
retrograde operations are nearly impossible, due to the very cumbersome limitations involved.

Finally, one must be frustrated with the
setting for the game. The background for
this modern campaign is a hilly part of
Germany in NOVEMBER! Instead of
having a game which illustrates the
capabilities of modern weapons, players
tend to find themselves in the middle of
meeting engagements with visibility down
to nil due to snowstorms. The depiction
of the effects of weapons would be instructive, but a game which does not try
to show the consequences of the employment of modern units in realistic conditions misses the mark. Night operations
are another matter. It would be nice to
see this explored with variable start times
for scenarios.

For example, it is not possible to use
routine control measures in preparation
for an attack. These would include coordinated movement to a line of departure
from an assembly point in conjunction
with pre-planned firing upon objectives
and masking fire as needed. Instead,
movement to the assembly area must be
done under "Move" or "Advance" orders.
Even then, a whole new set of "Attack" orders must be given whenever the opportunity arises, which imposes an unrealistic and dangerous delay. Additionally,
planned firing can be disrupted by any intervening fire support requests. If possible, it would be nice if some unit orders
regarding intermediate objectives could
be time sensitive in order to enable units
to execute coordinated attacks and movements. An alternative would be to allow
successive advance and attack orders to
be given at the same time along with the
appropriate temporal constraints.
The game's depiction of artillery does
not reflect reality in some ways. No matter which side one plays, offensive fire
must be requested through the highest
HO of either side, except when artillery
units are placed in direct support of individual companies. In reality, NATO fire
missions often originate from forward observers in artillery units which are attached to line companies. This arrangement gives small units great combat
power and, at the same time, increases
the flexibility of available artillery assets.
Soviet units try to do the same thing by
having artillery formations both accompany maneuver units and perform direct

So, what is left is a game in which
operational directives to subordinate organizations must be laboriously spelled
out. This seriously deprives those components of the agility and initiative which
is expected of NATO forces. Artillery and
airpower can be used to influence the
deep battle, but, from a practical
standpoint, only electronic measures can
be used for target acquisition. The player
assigns helicopters to terrain objectives,
but the player cannot otherwise impose
doctrinal constraints upon them. With
rare exceptions, indirect fire requests
originate from battalion or brigade headquarters. This centralizes command and
control at the expense of responsiveness.
While the above description would usually apply to the operational concept of a
Warsaw Pact unit, in the game, both
sides labor under the same constraints.
Many sources believe that Pact operational technique is better thought out than
NATO's. Does the game mean to imply
that SimCan agrees? More likely, the
programming constraints too limited to
reflect the uncertainty that is generated
by demanding subordinate units to simultaneously take risks while exercising
sound assessment skills (the algorithms
would be incredible!).
As usual, SimCan provides a useful mirror in modeling military realities, as painful as those often may be. It superbly illustrates many problems of command in
a modern environment. No one can tell
exactly how well it does its job, because
the only thing we know that would
definitely occur in the battles depicted in
MBT: CG would be the generation of a
colossal amount of destruction and confusion. In spite of the design constraints
noted above, Main Battle Tank: Central
Germany is a quality game.

Lowe for these names!), appearing nightly in the casino's show
room. Getting in to see the show would be a good start. This
may trip some people up, because you actually have an item that
doesn't show in the inventory . . . check out the booklet that
comes with the game.
However, the Maitre D' wants a little cash up front, too, and you
don't have a dime. So, how many
people have you seen handing out
money? Right! Now, all you need is a
little ingenuity, and Larry will soon be
carving a path to success, provided he
also remembers to skirt the issue.
The show isn't much (awwww), but
afterwards, Larry has his opportunity
with Cherri. She wants a little something up front as well. If Larry pays attention to what she says, her needs
will become abundantly clear. Luckily,
Larry can satisfy them . . . after a visit
to the lawyer.
And while he's there, he might as
well ask about a divorce . . . if Kalalau
can do it, so can he. All it takes is a mere $500 and Larry will
really be a free man. By the way, did you notice that the lawyer is
a woman? Too bad you can't ask her for a date . . . but perhaps
there are other ways of getting what you (or Larry) want.
Right now, though, Larry has pastry on his mind, so it's best to
hustle back to Cherri. Give her what she wants and, in no time at
all, it's backstage for a little taste. That's about all Larry will get,
too, as the next show starts in the middle of the action.
Oops! Larry better get dressed in a hurry. Too bad his sense of
touch isn't what it used to be (or maybe never was in the first
place). How he manages to squeeze into Cherri's costume is a
mystery, but there he is, feathers and all, right on stage in front
of everyone (say, y'know, he looks kinda' cute like that). Better
shake it, Larry . . . the crowd is getting restless!
After this embarrassing (but rewarding) episode, Larry should be
in pretty good shape, having enjoyed (at least to some degree)
three women (oh, did you miss Suzi? Tch! And I gave you a big
clue to that, too!). Now that he's had some practice, maybe he's
up for Passionate Patti, known (in more ways than one!)
throughout the island.
Patti, however, is a tough proposition (grin), being more
demanding than any of the others. She wants her men to be
single (well, the divorce should take care of that). She also likes
her men to be in good shape, and that potbelly of Larry's is a
definite turn-off. Looks like a trip to Fat City is in order here.
What's that, you say? You're not a member? Fie! Didn't you
look at everything that came into your hot little hands? No? For
shame! Restore and be more careful this time.
At Fat City, you come across Bambi, the aerobics instructor.
While Patti is your ultimate goal, there's nothing that says you
can't take out a little time to help her with her video (a last fling,
as it were). You need to be in shape for her, too, so you might as
well head for the locker room. Oh, by the way, do you have a
towel? No? Better go find one . . . you've seen it somewhere already.
The only problem with the locker room is that all the lockers
look very much alike. How do you know which one to go to or
what the combination is when you find it? Well, where would you
write down all the pertinent information?
Working out is simple, and you don't need any hints for that

(one of the few really straightforward things in the game). After a
quick shower, you're ready for Bambi, and after that, Patti.
Well, almost ready for Patti. Now, she wants a present. Perhaps
you can find a little something to lay on her. Fresh, mind you.
And then, there's the liquor! Patti enjoys a nip before bed. There
aren't too many places where liquor might be served, so check
'em out and you should find what you
need. Then, it's up to the penthouse
and, at last, some uninterrupted (and
satisfying) love-making.
Only, at the end of it, Larry
misinterprets Patti's murmured "Arnold", and runs off to the jungle. Now
comes the switch, as Patti awakes to
find herself alone in the room, with no
sign of Larry anywhere. After a quick
trip to the terrace and a look through
the telescope (or binoculars), she
knows where he's gone and it's time
for Patti to track down her man.
Take everything you can from the
penthouse. This is crucial. Once she's
been through the jungle, Patti won't be able to come back here,
so make sure she has everything before she leaves. Patti should
be fully dressed when she steps into the elevator.
While Patti won't need much money, she will need some and it
ought to be pretty obvious where to get it (after all, it's hers). On
the way out with the money, stop and look around carefully.
There is an item here that is critical. If you miss it, you will
scream loudly and in anguish later, because it is needed near the
very end and you'll have to restore and go through everything a
second time. You really don't want to do that.
On the way to the jungle, stop off at Chip'n'Dale's, which is now
open. Our friend the Maitre D' is there, but you know how to
handle him. Enjoy the show, and have a chat with Dale after (I'm
sure you can think of a couple of ways to get his attention .. .
remember his act). You can't, alas, make out with him, but you
may get some helpful information.
Now it's jungle time. The bamboo forest is nasty. Patti will need
a water supply to survive (and don't drink it too soon, either!).
There are two ways to get through: easy and hard. The hard way
is to map it out yourself. I don't recommend this, unless cartography is the joy of your life. The easy way is to get the directions
from the booklet, if you're in tune with the author. Then, it's just
a matter of following through (20 screens worth!) until you're out.
On the other side, the locale is more restricted. In fact, there
doesn't seem to be any way to go . . . except down the side of
the cliff. Bet Patti never thought she'd be doing this sort of climbing (grin). Well, there's nothing for it but to try going down (heh).
Check her inventory. She has something useful. Then, all she
has to do is get across the chasm (which is a lot wider than it appears to be).
There isn't much to work with here, but it's enough. Can you
think of another name for marijuana? (Those are marijuana
plants growing there, a relic from the days of Dr. Nonookie) And
don't overlook the coconut trees . . . they're important, too. Now,
all Patti needs is a little extra support, since rope-climbing over a
chasm is not something she does every day (or any day but this
one). Aren't short hemlines in again this year?
Whew! She made it over safely! Too bad the rope comes untied
.. . but then she wouldn't want to try that sort of thing again,
anyhow. Up ahead is another obstacle, the dangerous Feral Pig.
Continued on page 31

Review

Introduction
ANK is the latest product in the
armor simulation inventory; it is
Spectrum Holobyte's initial
entry into what is described as the
"Electronic Battlefield System". During
1990, Spectrum plans to release additional simulations/modules which can
interact with TANK (proposed subjects
include A-10 [close air support],
AH-64/Advanced Tactical Helicopter
[helicopter/gunship], an upgrade of
Falcon [with more aircraft included],
and Infantry [including the M2/M3]).
The "EBS" will be capable of modemplay and anticipates on-line
marketability on a GEnie/CompuServe type network in the near future. Since TANK has been released
shortly after Microprose's M1 Tank
Platoon, this article will offer both a
review and a comparison.

T

TANK

centrations; however, it should be
utilized when learning the game,
since it proves invaluable as an intelligence tool.

by M. Evan Brooks

TANK offers five scenarios in each
of three environments: Fort Knox
(training), Central Europe (Fulda
Gap region) and Middle East (IsraelSyria-Lebanon). The geographic environments are accurate renditions of
actual terrain. The "strategic" map is
a pixilated rendition, but the zoom
feature allows one to expand the
view until eventually one can zoom
down to three-dimensional space.
This is extremely well done and is
one of the strengths of the program.

LTC (USAR) Mark Evan Brooks
graduated the Armor Officer
Advanced Course in 1977.

In more advanced settings, the
zoom does not resolve to a full threedimensional setting, since this would
allow the player to "cheat" and learn
where the OPFOR is located. The
zoom and memory usage mandates,
at least, a 286-type machine for
TANK (which is noted both on the
box cover and in the documentation).

Documentation
The documentation is reminiscent of
an army field manual in that both illustrations and prose have been
deliberately styled in order to reflect
the tenor of military manuals. However, while the documentation adequately delineates the actual
mechanics of play, it does not
describe armor and/or OPFOR (opposing force) doctrine. Thus, the user
must develop his own doctrine.
Microprose's M1 Tank Platoon
manual devoted over half of the
documentation to a study of armor tactics and employment; TANK leaves
this for the user to discern on his own.
Important tactics are cursorily mentioned and, unless one has some
familiarity with the employment of
armor, a long learning curve may result.
Play mechanics are easily learned, but
proper techniques are much more difficult to assimilate. Hull-down is mentioned briefly in the manual, but it is essential to remember that use of hulldown and reducing one's vulnerability is
invariably a key to battlefield survivability.
The manual is modified by a supplement (Volume 1), a "Last Minute Additions" (a supplement to the supplement)
and a recent modification (a supplement
to the supplement to the supplement?).
Most of the additions are minor, but occasionally, one may become temporarily
confused. Finally, a two (2) page keyboard layout is available for the function
keys, commander and outside views, and
gunner and driver. This reviewer prefers
the "Microprose" keyboard overlay as
being more user-friendly, but this is a
matter of personal preference and some
users have remarked that they feel TANK
is easier to learn.

NAME:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

PUBLISHER:

TANK
IBM (640K req.)
1-2
$59.95
R. Anton Widjaja
Gilman Louie
Steve Perrin
Spectrum Holobyte
Alameda, CA

Graphics
The graphics are very well done. The internal instrumentation is very accurately
portrayed. The viewpoint is somewhat
first-person modified. When one switches
to the driver position, he may discern the
arms and feet of the driver. Similar views
are present for the commander and gunner—sort of semi-physical astral projection where Shirley McLaine would feel
right at home. The tanks are well-drawn,
while the strategic view utilizes military
iconography.
Again, similar to the Microprose armor
simulation, one can shift internally between driver, gunner and tank commander and among each of one's tanks.
However, the scale is somewhat expanded, and one may exercise direct control of more than one platoon. An outside, trailer ("chase tank") and drone view
(which allows reconnaissance of the battlefield in a very smooth scrolling fashion)
are included. The drone reconnaissance
view is not available at higher levels of expertise, since it would reveal enemy con-

Buildings are rendered in detail.
When firing the machine gun, one
can watch the shell casings spew out
of the gun. The main gunsight picture is very clear, and hits on enemy
tanks cause various degrees of
damage (from minor pieces flying off
to smoke/flames to the commander's
cupola literally flying into the air as
an enemy vehicle is reduced to slag).
The explosions are bit-mapped and
quite entertaining, although in this
reviewer's opinion they are somewhat too fleeting. Spectrum attributes this to the intensive use of
memory that a more durable explosion/smoke would require and the
requirements for memory use elsewhere in the program.
Terrain and slope are rendered in different colors. While admittedly artificial, it
does allow the user to gain a rapid appreciation of the degree of slope and is
much appreciated. This allows optimum
use of favorable terrain and an opportunity to deass from the "beaten zone".
Overall, the graphics of TANK are extremely well done.

Game Play
TANK may be installed on a hard drive.
There is no protection scheme. Joystick/keyboard selection is done when
beginning a scenario. One may also
select time (day/night), players (1-2) or
level (beginner-intermediate-advanced).
The scenarios build on one another, and
one can move from a single tank to command of a battalion minus.
OPFOR is generic. While his tactics may
improve somewhat at higher levels, there
Continued on page 62

I

Review

Manse
Macabre
Sierra's
"The Colonel's Bequest"
by Johnny L. Wilson

hen CGW first talked to Roberta
Williams about The Colonel's Bequest, she cautioned us that the
game was somewhat different than her
previous hits. We wondered how it was
different, especially since Mystery House
(her first game) was also something of a
cross between Agatha Christie's Ten Little
Indians and the game of Clue.

W

Roberta: First off, it's the first Roberta
Williams' design to use outside beta
testers. I don't particularly like for
people to see my games before they're
complete. Fortunately, some of the beta
testers tell us that it's really frightening.
Some quit playing it at night because
they kept looking over their shoulders.
Also, it's more story-based than puzzlebased. It's more of a suspenseful gothic
story. As the main character, you're
caught in a situation. One of the things
Ken and I want to do is move toward interactive stories as opposed to simply
designing adventure games. The idea is
making people feel like they're actually
there as opposed to simply trying to
solve puzzles.
Much of the intent behind The
Colonel's Bequest (TCB) has been realized. This will undoubtedly be a mixed
blessing for Sierra. Hard-core adventure
gamers (i.e. inveterate puzzle-solvers) will
be disappointed because the "game" is
too easy and there are not enough puzzles to be solved. Compared to most adventure games in general (and other
Sierra games in particular) where adventurers must scrutinize every locale and
manipulate every possible object, TCB
may seem empty and shallow. Laura
Bow, the protagonist who is directly controlled by the player, cannot "Get the
trombone" because she is not musically
inclined. She cannot play billiards because she doesn't know how. She cannot play a record on the Victrola because
they are not her records (yet, she can
play the player piano). All the restrictions
could drive the traditional adventure
gamer absolutely mad.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The Colonel's Bequest
IBM
(Amiga, Atari ST and Mac soon)
$59.95
Robert Williams
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

Yet, The Colonel's Bequest succeeds
on its own terms. One reason for the
restrictive limitations is incredibly obvious.
After all, the game takes up ten 5.25"
disks or four 3.5" disks as it is. Imagine
how much data would be required to
make all of these items "active". A more
significant reason for the limitations is
that they are irrelevant. The plot is not
puzzle-driven. It is conversation-, timeand observation-driven. It is often more
important to hear that bit of a key conversation than it is to open that dresser

drawer; to be behind that picture on the
wall at the right time than to try to get
that exotic weapon; or notice who is reading what than to try to get Dr. W. C.
Feels' medical bag. After all, even the
scoring system is handled differently in
TCB than in other Sierra games.

Roberta: TCB is like an interactive
PLAY. When we first started designing it,
we designed it in acts. It originally had
eight acts from which we expanded the
plot. The way the story is carried forward is that there are certain things
which must be accomplished in each
act. We call them "Must Do"s. Puzzles
are extras. In reality, you don't need to
solve a single puzzle in order to complete the game. There is no scoring system in the game. Players gauge their
progress in the wrap-up by means of a
notebook which rates them on their
detective skills. You have more fun if
you find the attic, spy on people, and
notice that the decanter has disappeared, but you don't have to. We hope
this product will help bridge the gap and
take gamers away from the cushion of
needing a score to see how well they
do. It's experimental to a degree, a real
departure for us.

As an interactive play, TCB is extremely
interesting. Players encounter the theatrical roots of the game from the very beginning. The first time the player views a
"performance" of The Colonel's Bequest
(as the game itself refers to each "playing"), he/she is treated to cinematic
credits which segueway into a pre-game
"curtain call" where the cast of characters
is introduced. This sequence is followed
by more film-style credits and scene cuts,
leading up to the dining room scene.
Like all the other interior scenes, the
dining room offers the feeling of a stage
set. The "fourth wall" is down, the
player/audience observes from the proscenium and there is no ceiling. The artists have succeeded in suggesting a
stage play through the way they "cut
away" the architecture of the house.
Speaking of set design, Roberta informed CGW that she spent some time in
New Orleans in order to get as much atmosphere and historical authenticity as
was possible. She pored over floor plans
of antebellum mansions, looked up
ghost stories related to the bayou country
and visited museums and plantation
houses. In earlier games, she used to

draw a sketch of each room/location. In
TCB, she gave the artists a floor plan,
lots of pictures of old plantation houses
and allowed them more freedom. Later,
they talked out problems like creating
somber pictures by utilizing a 16-colored
palette (the artists eventually dithered the
colors to achieve the atmosphere Roberta
wanted). The artistic touches are also evident in the conversation boxes which display the characters' lines. Their early 20th
century look is reminiscent of both silent
film "dialogue" and vaudeville stage
placards.
TCB also retains its theatrical roots in
terms of characterization. Like the
melodramas which were popular in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, the
characters in TCB tend to use "acting
gimmicks" like accents and reveal obvious character flaws in order to establish
themselves in the audience's (or in this
case, the player's) mind. The cast includes an alcoholic, a gambling
womanizer, an apparent shyster, an alleged quack, a sexy French maid, a black
cook with a background in voodoo, the
aspiring movie queen, a butler almost
Continued on page 32

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail
W

ell, it's time for another peek
into the mail sacks here in the
back room. I know it's a little
crowded (and will get more so), but I just
hate to throw letters away. It's amazing
the amount of mail that accumulates
after 6+ years, eh?
Anyway, before we get started here, I'd
like to remind folks (and set some minds
at ease) about this column. The Mail is a
bi-monthly feature, appearing in
February, April, June, August, October,
and December (that's one way to make
the year go fast!). I mention this because
a few people have asked why it wasn't in
a particular issue. Don't worry, you didn't
miss anything. And now, on to the mail.

Might & Magic H: Some folks have
penetrated to the center of the Dead
Zone with interesting, if unpleasant,
results. The safe way is to remember
Nature's Day (among other things). Also,
there have been queries about returning
to the present after messing around in
the past. Resting will do it, but sometimes not immediately. You may have to
rest several times before you're pulled
"back to the future". Just keep at it, and
you'll get there.
Dragon Wars: Yes, questions about
this game are starting to show up. People
are having problems breathing at the
Sunken Ruins. That's because they
haven't had a chat with the Queen of the
Underworld, yet. Another elusive matter is
that of the magic boots. Well, you don't
get something for nothing. A helping
hand (or spell) will go a long way towards
obtaining the desired item.
Battletech: A number of letters have
come in about finding the hidden mech
cache. It is not on the mainland . . . nor
is it at all visible on the screen. You'll just
have to walk around until you come
across it; there's no other way.
Ultima V: Several people are experiencing difficulties with the bottom level of
Dungeon Deceit. This one is a little
tricky. You may want to pay closer attention to the torches on the wall and experiment a little with this and that. In a short
time, you should be getting those
monster cubicles open (just what you
wanted, right?). By the way, everything
will be closed up again when you come
back (yes, the level resets when you
leave). There is a trigger on the ladder

side, but you may just want to go up a
different dungeon on the return trip,
especially if you don't want to fight your
way through again.
Wasteland: This game continues in
popularity (and questions). The Sleeper
Base vault (the one with the blue wall inside) shows up frequently. First, you need
a certain Secpass to open the door. This
pass is not found in the Base itself; you'll
have to look elsewhere for it. Second,
after you get the vault open, you have to
do something about the wall inside.
There is no key to it, so other means are
called for . . . violent ones (as well as persistence).
Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade: The Graphic Adventure:
Some folks are having a hard time with
the plug in the catacombs. Actually, it's
not as hard as it may seem. The real trick
is to be standing in the right spot (right
under the plug). The rest is almost automatic (well, if you have the right items, it
is!). There have also been queries about
the first of the three trials on the way to
the grail. Anyone who has seen the
movie knows what has to be done, and
anyone who hasn't can probably figure it
out pretty quickly on their own. The real
problem is how and where. Read the
diary (the hardcopy one that comes with
the game) and look for an X. That should
certainly give you some ideas.
Leisure Suit Larry 2: There are a few
people out there with bikini problems.
They seem to be missing half of it (tch!
grin). Well, you should have the top part
by the time you reach the island (if not,
restore!). The way to find it is to get in
over your head around the middle (I love
obscure clues, hehe).
The Fool's Errand: This isn't a hint,
but a recommendation. If you enjoy word
games and puzzles, anagrams, word searches and the like, get this game! It came
out several years ago for the Mac, and is
finally available on the IBM. It is unique,
original, and innovative, and one of the
best games I've ever played. The multitiered puzzles, story depth, and overall
design make this game a joy to behold
(and a refreshing change of pace, too!). If
you're looking for something really different, this is it!
Well, that's all for the mail this time
around. If you need help with an adventure game, you can find out how to
reach me by reading "The Scorpion's
Tale" column in this issue (hehe). Until
next time, happy adventuring!

Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Continued from page 20

Leisure Suit Larry
By this time, Patti doesn't have much of anything left. Still, what
little there is should be enough (coconut trees, remember?).
Now comes the worst part of the game, an arcade sequence.
Patti has to ride a log down the river, avoiding the various
obstacles that appear in her path. It's mostly a matter of moving
in the right direction at the right time. Save often as you make
progress along the river, and good luck!
Past the river, our heroine's tribulations are not over. Before you
can say "cookpot", she's captured by cannibal Amazons! Oh no!
But wait . . . it's not all bad! At last, in a cage suspended over the
cauldron, she is reunited with Larry!
Celebrations could be a bit premature, though, as a witchdoctor
makes her appearance and the pot starts bubbling by magic.
What to do? Well, maybe Patti has a little magic of her own. Anything is better than being boiled to death (we won't even think
about what comes after that!).
So, as our loving couple makes good their escape from a fate
worse than death, remember that if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi,
visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie, stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach
the Games RT). By US Mail (you must enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Colonel
too reminiscent of Charles Adams' eccentric cartoon family and more.
This characterization is vital to the
player, because most of what will happen
in the story depends on interacting with
the characters. Since conversation is important for both advancing and understanding the story, it might as well be interesting. Actually, Roberta was attempting to stretch the envelope in terms of
character and has successfully taken a
first step.
Roberta: We wanted the characters to
be semi-intelligent and have a distinct
personality. In this game, you "talk" to
the characters, but you can talk about
objects, environments and other characters. Of course, this presented a problem
because the question was, how much
can you ask about? How far does it go,
since it can go on forever? It was a real
dilemma. So, for this game, we established an artificial pattern.
In The Colonel's Bequest, players can
have Laura ask about: the other characters in the cast (whether they are still
among the living or not), any objects
which could be moved (whether they
have been or not), and locations. Of
course, asking doesn't guarantee success. Each member of the "cast" has his
or her own prejudices, their own limited
knowledge, and their own pre-set attitude
toward Laura. Their conversations will be
predicated on these factors (and the underlying script).
Roberta has taken an initial step in a
direction that many other designers will
probably take. Other designers are struggling with the definition and implementation of artificial personality. Since persons
can change their attitudes, be affected by
what is happening around them, and
learn, there will likely be algorithms to
allow such "artificial" personal growth in
the future. There is no indication that this
occurs in TCB, however. There is no hint
of "reaction rolls" or keeping track of interaction. There may be some, but it is minimal. Just as the non-player politicians in
Hidden Agenda offered somewhat, but
not totally, disappointing because they
did not "grow" as leaders and human
beings, even so, one wishes the characters in TCB could move beyond the
stereotypes. Still, one must remember
that the stated purpose of the product
was to create an interactive play. Since
plays are almost universally scripted and,
except for rare exceptions, actors almost

always tied to that script, one should not
carp too loudly about what the game did
not accomplish in terms of artificial personality.
The script itself will probably come as
something of a shock to those who think
of Roberta as a weaver of fairy tales. Instead, The Colonel's Bequest is a
patchwork quilt of bayou folklore, Agatha
Christie, Alfred Hitchcock and Stephen
King. Shadowy figures, secret passageways, insidious innuendo and horrific
anticipation are all ingredients in TCB's effective potion.
Roberta: I've always wanted to do a
scary adventure game. I've read Stephen
King's Danse Macabre, really a textbook
on horror writing. He said that people
tend to go for the cheap cop-out in horror writing, that they get lazy and just
go for the gore. He's even done that, but
he said that gore isn't really scary. It's
just a gross-out. He said that to be really
scary is an art form. You don't show
anything—you allude to it, build up to
it, but you don't actually show it. I've
tried to accomplish that feeling.
Normally, the murders take place off
stage in TCB, all the better to show
shadowy villains escaping or menacing
hands in the shadows. In "Act I" of The
Colonel's Request, the present writer instructed Laura to perform a normal
everyday activity. The scene shifted and
the demure soft color display changed
into silhouette. A knife came out of the
blackness, blood spurted from the shapely silhouette, and streaks of blood were
left on-screen after the deceased
slumped to the floor. Those who play the
game will readily recognize the scene
from a famous horror film, but the point
is that the shadowy scene is more disturbing than the same scene would have
been in broad daylight.
Another lesson which Roberta seems to
have learned well-from the masters of horror and suspense is the use of humor as
"comic relief'. At least, it was hard for this
reviewer to keep a straight face when
corpses kept disappearing and characters
reacted to Laura's story about like Bud
Abbott listened to Lou Costello when
they "met" all those Universal Pictures
monsters. It certainly didn't hurt to have
an early reference to Leisure Suit Larry
tied into one earthy location. One also
has to admire those horrendous puns
which kept appearing to greet every new
demise Laura could be directed to experience. At one point, Laura had been
sliced in two by this reviewer's persistent
attempt to get a sharp-edged weapon for
her (She won't need one until the
endgame and even then, it won't be an

"edged" weapon.). The program
proceeded to transform Laura into a
winged angel and ask if she had a "splitting headache". There are worse puns for
the daring adventurer.
Music and sound effects also play a vital
role in establishing the tone and atmosphere of horror/suspense. The
soundtrack of TCB is more carefully integrated into the game itself than, for instance, that of King's Quest IV. TCB also
uses more sound effects than the earlier
title.
Roberta: Because the composer of KQ
IV was a Hollywood composer and they
aren't used to scoring the film until the
movie is almost complete, we had to
have every detail thought out, complete
with time segments, loops, etc. In The
Colonel's Bequest, Ken Allen saw the
game in development. He used his talent
to determine what was needed in each
scene. Then, later, we talked together
about which scenes needed more, which
needed something else included, etc.
In summary, The Colonel's Bequest is
the forerunner of one style of future
entertainment software. Whether it is referenced as an interactive movie, play, adventure or story, it is a pioneer in a new
style of computerized storytelling where
the viewer/player/director has less burden
of advancing the story than in the past. It
is likely that many of the CD-ROM-based
products of the future will build upon experimental products like TCB.
As an experimental product, The
Colonel's Bequest has plenty to offer. It is
a well-rounded entertainment experience
with hours of exploratory play value.
Where it falls short is in traditional terms
of challenge, problem-solving and
strategy. Dedicated puzzle-solvers will cry,
"Pablum!" at the game's ease-of-use and
automatic advancement of the storyline.
Although it is certainly easier to say than
to design, one hopes that future
products will offer something of both
worlds: stories that progress without complex puzzles and an alternative scoring
system that could take advantage of complex puzzles within a sub-plot.
The bottom line, however, is that Sierra has forced gamers to shift their attention once again. In a product with plenty
of color, "chrome" and sound, garners
will find both an entertaining story and a
pleasant interaction. Roberta Williams has
courageously and successfully broken
out of the King's Quest mold. The
Colonel's Bequest could well leave its
own legacy in the world of computer
entertainment.

Winter Consumer Electronics Show

Entertainment Software
"On The Pass Line"
New Computer Games at the Winter
Consumer Electronics Show

gamer? It affects us in
two ways. The large
revenue returning to the
entertainment software
industry through licensing agreements with Nin-

tendo of America,
Sega, and NEC licensees will help keep the
disk-based side of the industry healthy and
flexible. Second, the
cross-fertilization between video games and
computer games will
necessitate advances
such as those currently
occurring with regard to
interface, sound and
storage.

The Screen Says It
All (Interface)

he word in Las Vegas is that
the computer folks at the Consumer Electronics Show and
Comdex are not gamblers. That may
or may not be true, but Las Vegas
may be an appropriate place to hold
the Winter Consumer Electronics
Show, anyway. Entertainment
software publishing has become
such a gamble that there are two
widely disparate opinions on the
health of the industry. Just like the
basic bet in "shooting craps" takes
place on the "Pass Line" (betting
with the shooter) and the "Don't
Pass Line" (betting against the
shooter), there are intelligent
businessmen "betting" with and
against disk-based entertainment
software.

T

Watching Out For NESsie
To those who find themselves on the
"Don't Pass Line" of the industry, diskbased entertainment has ceased to be viable as a mass market medium. They say

it will always be a niche market, largely
due to the success of the video game
market. Chief among the "monsters" who
have consigned computer games to this
niche is the Nintendo Entertainment

System (NES).
Nintendo faces a year of significant challenges which reflect everything from a
congressional subcommittee investigation to non-licensed cartridges from thirdparty developers (including ShareData's
violent Chiller cartridge, a horror game
complete with exploding body parts, at
an equally controversial $19.95). However, the bridge between NES and diskbased software seems to be turning into
a two way street. Where once the only
relationship (between NES games and
disk-based games) was that the most successful Nintendo titles were translated
into personal computer versions (often
poor facsimiles of the original games),
the market now supports Nintendo versions of computer games and computer
versions of Nintendo games.
How does this affect the computer

Many designers believe
that the popularity of action/adventures on the
dedicated game
machines, such as
Legend of Zelda on the
NES, is due to their accessibility. Garners can
simply insert the
cartridge, turn the system on, and start playing without reading
laborious documentation. Of course, designers of disk-based
software have rightly suggested that these action/adventures were
basically shallow and repetitive, but they
began to realize that they could learn significant lessons from the interface concepts used in the game machines.
"Whether it is conscious or sub-conscious," says Chris Roberts (Times of
Lore), "interfaces and design are being affected by the video game market. What
the Japanese market originally demanded
were certain constraints which did not affect the depth and quality of a game."
Without effective presentation, people will
not even look at a game, much less play
it.
Some computer role-playing designers
have already incorporated some of these
ideas. For example, Interplay's Dragon
Wars and Roberts' Times of Lore
(Origin) were significantly influenced by
products on dedicated systems. Now,
there is a plethora of products designed
with intuitive access in mind.

Origin is making a conscious effort at
Continued on page 38

Computer Gaming World 's
See Reader Input Device on page 72

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Winter Consumer Electronics Show

the characters as easily as Peg manipu-

Winter C.E.S.
Continued from page 34
this with their current lead titles: Ultima
VI: The False Prophet (a fitting and socially significant conclusion to the current Ultima trilogy) and Bad Blood, Chris
Roberts' post-holocaust CRPG using the
Times of Lore interface and offering a
story with much more depth and detail
(both titles will debut on the IBM, with
simplified C-64 versions to follow). Both
games are mouse-driven
with a simplified command
structure (players click on
the command, then click on
the direct object for the command to act upon).
This does not mean that
Ultima VI will be more
simplistic than its predecessors, however. For example,
every object "exists" in the
fantasy world. Objects have
weight (and apply to weight
limits), attributes (including
hit points), and uses. Unlike
its "ancestors", the game is
in a constant scale and realtime game time is an important aspect. Also, the personalities of the non-player
characters are more
developed and real-world
modeling is more
pronounced. To illustrate
the latter, players can actually buy wheat from an NPC
farmer, mill it at a mill, take
it to a baker, get bread and
have money left over.
Hence, setting up their own
businesses.

lates Al's wallet."
Data East unveiled the first two offerings in its Draconian line, Drakkhen and
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess
(Amiga, Atari ST and IBM). Both games
are being developed by Infogrames, the
French developer which brought us
Mindscape's Captain Blood. The icons
used to navigate through both games are
graphically attractive and the entire command structure is designed to be intuitive.
Accolade's Day of the Viper is an action/adventure (First Quarter on Amiga,

Mindcraft's The Keys to Maranon is a
CRPG/action game (Spring Release, initially on the IBM) which is menu-driven
by keyboard or joystick, offers considerable role-playing detail (conversations, research, weapon wear and tear, etc.) and
a style of combat which is handled similarly (in both graphics and action) to the
Melee sequences in Sword of the
Samurai.

Atari ST and IBM) which offers several
user-friendly features. The game uses
icons similar to those in Breach or
Paladin, but it also features automapping, auto-note-taking (a computer function called the object management system, OMS, which keeps track of everything players encounter like a computerized secretary would, making game
play more efficient) and storage boxes
(mini-windows) stretched across the top
of the screen to indicate inventory.

Later this year, ShareData plans to
market Married With Children as part of
their Monarch line of premium products.
It is, a graphic adventure (with outstanding VGA graphics) based on the
television series and using a command interface designed to be, in producer Chris
Erhart's words, "As simple as Lucasfilm's
Maniac Mansion, so the player can direct

Circuit's Edge is a graphic adventure
from Infocom that is distinctive in subject matter, audience, and approach. The
interface works extremely well with keyboard or mouse and allows the player to
simply point and click in order to use objects, interact with other characters and
choose options. The subject matter is
ominous and foreboding, a cyberpunk
universe taken from Hugo and Nebula

award-winning George Alec Effinger's
When Gravity Fails and A Fire in the
Sun. Effinger himself wrote the game's
storyline which is set between the events
of the two novels. The game is directed
toward mature audiences and offers the
added incentive of providing more than a
dozen looping nexus points which can
enable players to find a "different game"
or story.

Color My World (Graphics)
The demand for better graphics in
games can be observed in several areas.
First, one can quickly observe
that much of the excitement
about and popularity of
Sega's Genesis machine and
NEC's Turbo Grafx 16 is due
to larger and clearer sprites,
leading to more realistic-looking characters and objects.
The demand for larger onscreen characters cuts across
the genres on both personal
computers and in dedicated
game systems.
Beyond the improvements
in the dedicated game
system's graphics, however,
are the advances in
VGA/MCGA graphics. There
were numerous VGA versions/upgrades being
demonstrated at the show. Interplay is offering an
upgrade to Battlechess on
VGA for $15.00 and Lucasfilm was touting a VGA version of Indiana Jones and
the Last Crusade: The
Graphic Adventure.
Microprose is readying a
VGA version of Silent Service,
but it is expected to feature more than improved graphics.
In addition, Access Software offered
CGW an advance look at the most
detailed polygon-filled landscapes ever,
using polygons rendered extremely small
and scrolling extremely fast. The code
was rewritten twice in developing the
present state of high-definition. Also impressive is the use of tightly rendered
small polygons in the dragon flight
simulator from Strategic Simulations,
Inc., DragonStrike. The VGA graphics by
Westwood Associates are excellent.
Origin's Bad Blood and Ultima VI will
both use a 256 color palette in MCGA
mode, Activision's MS-DOS version of
PowerDrift will support VGA and
ShareData's aforementioned Married
With Children is being designed around
VGA graphics, among others.

Sound As A $200 Bill
Access led the way in disk-based
digitization with their Real Sound technique. Cinemaware has now followed suit
with Real Talk, for including digitized
voices, and Data East believes their AFB
Sound System garners the same results
as Real Sound, while using less memory.
Several producers/developers spoke of
the need for a sound standard. With the
proliferation of sound boards, each of
which needs its own driver, software publishers are having to pick and choose
which sound boards to support. This is a
delimiting factor which does not help
either the consumer who wants his/her
board supported or the software publishers who want everyone to buy their
products. There needs to be one driver
which can determine the number of
voices compatible with a computer's
sound system and read the necessary
data from a DSP (Digital Sampling
Profile) file. Until this occurs, confusion
will continue to proliferate.
Yet another sound board manufacturer
has thrown a hat into the ring. Advanced Gravis, well-known for their success in joystick manufacturing, has
developed M/Sound. M/Sound comes in
both basic and deluxe configurations.
The basic unit connects between a
computer's parallel printer port (without
interfering with the printer's function) and
a printer. Users can connect via RCA
plug to a regular amplifier system or plug
into the headphone jack on the front of
the system. At $69.95, the system offers
10-bit digitally sampled sound running at
8 Mhz and providing four voices at Midi
and/or games standard. The deluxe configuration uses an internal card; is Adlib
and Tandy TL compatible (plus intercepts the standard PC sound); can
sample a DSP at 5 MIPS (Million Instructions Per Second), offers recording as

well as playback; and acts as true 16-bit
stereo with CD Quality sound. At
$199.95 retail, it is likely to compete very
favorably with the Roland sound boards.
Other interesting developments in
sound revolve around audio stored on
compact discs. Camerica is bringing out
a CD-Games Pack for C-64/128s and
IBM compatibles that will enable
gamers to access games from their
home stereos. Currently, the company is
marketing disks in Europe with up to 30
arcade-style games on them and has a
development team, Code Masters ❑.K.
developing four large games which will
take advantage of the storage space available and use the CDs audio capacity for
having soundtracks for each game which
are not only music industry standard, but
utilize hit performers from that industry.
The basic interface cable should retail
around $45.00, but CGW has been
warned that game access may be too
tough on a standard CD player. Perhaps,
the company is responding to that by offering a complete package of portable
player and interface cable for circa
$125.00.
Finally, in announcing It Came From
The Desert, Cinemaware's CD-ROM
game on NEC's Turbo Grafx 16, Ken
Wirt revealed that, not only will the Turbo
Grafx' CD-ROM drive play the games
designed for it, but it will enable standard
CD-Audio disks and CDG (Compact Disc
Graphics) standard graphics albums to be
played on the system.

Give Me Your Befuddled Masses
A non-technological trend seems to be
reflected in efforts to expand the
audience for computer games. Virgin
Mastertronic has taken an abstract
strategy game with elements of "Reversi"
and "GO", added exceptional graphics
with delightful animation (Rob Stein,

primary artist on the game, has used 7Up's "Spot" character to "moon walk",
skate, dance, pole-vault and dive into
squares as the player makes each move)
and entitled it Spot. Available in the
Spring on the NES system, IBM compatibles, and Amiga computers, Spot is
certain to appeal to both sexes and a
wide range of ages.
The same may be said of Sid Meier's
new game for Microprose. The working
title is The Golden Age of Railroads, but
the game is a dynamic mix of rail building (with a map editor reminiscent of Sim
City), economic planning, and model railroading. Not only does one have the satis
faction of building a railroad (purchasing
right of ways, laying track, building stations and acquiring rolling stock) with
plenty of strategy therein, but one has
the opportunity to finance the operations,
schedule the runs, select cargo/passengers, modernize the equipment,
and/or attempt to take-over other lines.
Though the game has competitive elements, it seems to reflect a trend toward
broadening subject matter and emphasizing a style of play which is more exploratory than confrontational and entertaining than competitive.
Sierra seemed to point in that direction
with its just-released The Colonel's Bequest (see review on p. 26), SpectrumHolobyte has expanded their base of customers with their international series of
puzzle-based games: Tetris, Welltris (and
more Soviet designs rumored lurking in
the wings), and Soko-Ban (from Japan),
as well as Solitaire Royale. Taito successfully implemented this strategy in action/strategy games like Arkanoid,
Arkanoid 2: Revenge of Doh, and QIX.
Now, they are developing Puzznik, a fastmoving puzzle game (late Spring on
Continued on page 42

Winter Consumer Electronics Show

Making A Connection

Winter C.E.S.
Continued from page 39
Apple IIGS, Amiga, C-64/128 and IBM)
with 147 levels. Simple in concept,
players match shapes to similar shapes
while avoiding moving obstacles. In addition, Miles Computing recently shipped
Living Jigsaws (see p. 70) and is ready
to release Puzzle Gallery, Cliff Johnson's
Macintosh game with color, digitized
sound and around 180 puzzles.
One of the foremost names in gaming
with a mass appeal, Parker Brothers,
has developed an IBM version of Trivial
Pursuit®: The
Computer Game
for one to four
players ($39.95).
The computer
implementation
includes questions from five
different editions
of the
boardgame, as
well as six computer opponents
(each with a
specialty) and an
ability to customize the
game. Previously, Parker
Brothers had licensed such successful
boardgame titles as Monopoly and the
recently released Clue: Master Detective
and Risk to Virgin Mastertronic. Now,
the company intends to market an entire
line of different Trivial Pursuit®: The
Computer Game products.

Another realm of changing expectations
is in the arena of CD-ROM games. Currently, Cinemaware is shooting live action footage for It Came From The
Desert on the Turbo Grafx 16's CD-ROM
player. The procedure is roughly akin to
film-making and uses the digitized
footage and audio soundtracks to enhance the game's entertainment value.
The game will allow players to explore
roughly 200 hours. Other game concepts
tested in this format include a music
video type game where players would create their own "broadcast" videos or a
soap opera game where players could try
their hands at solving some of the messes created on-screen. These games,
which de-emphasize the shoot-'em-up nature of both computer and video games,
should widen the demographic profiles of
garners considerably.

Another continuing trend which could
be observed at this WCES, was the
decision to support connectability by
modem and network. Not only have earlier products from Electronic Arts (F-16
Combat Pilot and Modem Wars) and
Spectrum-Holobyte (Falcon and Vette!)
supported modem play, but Three
Sixty's Harpoon and Britannica
Software's Guns & Glory (a strategic
naval wargame on the IBM and running
under Windows, previously known as,
Fleet Action) will have modem play
capability. GEnie and Kesmai intend to
have a network version of Harpoon by
the end of 1990.

In addition, Spectrum-Holobyte has
made a commitment that ALL their new
simulation products will be modemcapable and their Electronic Battlefield
System will be on-line with Compuserve
by the last part of the third quarter of
1990. Coordination in those games will
be handled using a command structure
based on a priority/promotion list which
will, in turn, be based on performance
and hours. Spectrum-Holobyte will also
produce Vette on the Sega Genesis
machine with connectability for the TeleGenesis option. Falcon is likely to follow
on that system.
Dan Bunten has brought his multiplayer design talents to Microprose for
what is tentative entitled, War! (IBM,
Spring Release). It is expected to be an
abstract, strategic level game of global
conflagration under the technological
constraints of World War I, II, or III. The
game can be played solitaire against the
computer, but should reach its optimal
level in modem-to-modem play.

Front Line Players (Wargames)
Spring of 1990 will offer something that
smells like victory to traditional war-

garners. Not only do important new
simulations like M-1 Tank Platoon, Tank,
and Harpoon include important wargaming elements, but there are several new
wargames on the horizon. Strategic
Studies Group is now shipping Panzer
Battles (Apple II, C-64/128, and IBM), a
colorful command simulation of the Eastern Front during World War II. SSG is
continuing to refine its EGA graphics,
has changed its packaging to reflect the
American market, and hasn't forgotten
their 8-bit roots. Panzer Battles uses the
Battlefront system.
IBM wargamers should be bowled over
by Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s spring
release, Second Front. Originally intended as a remake of Gary Grigsby's critically acclaimed
War In Russia
(CGW Hall of
Fame member),
this strategic
level game allows players to
command all
the way down
to individual
tanks, planes
and units.
Players can
plan individual
bombing runs
or allow the
computer to do
it for them.
Players can call
up tons of reports or let the computer
handle what it does best. It looks like
SSI may have actually hit upon the right
formula for pleasing both grognards and
novices in a challenging traditional style
wargame. The graphics are clear, crisp
and colorful, as well!
Britannica Software demonstrated
Guns & Glory, a strategic level naval wargame using 800+ fighting naval units
from a World War II order of battle. Although the player can only choose which
historical period's units will be available
from a European roster, the game is
played over a global map and a second
product is expected to offer a similar
roster from the Pacific Theatre. If the computer opponent accomplishes what the
company hopes it will, this product could
be a naval wargamer's dream, due to the
massive amounts of data and the constructability factor.
A fascinating departure for Virgin
Mastertronic will be the release of a wargame with a point of view. Conflict
places the player in the role of an Israeli
leader with the responsibility for totally
defeating the neighboring Arab states.
Other games have, at least, some
Continued on page 47

Review

A

Personal Confession from the
Reviewer: Excuse the triteness of
the expression but, "Commuting is
hell". People who don't have to deal
with this daily horror would never understand some of the thoughts that go
through my mind as I'm creeping 5
miles an hour down the Santa Monica
freeway, pinned between two 18
wheelers, with my signal on, my exit
slowly fading in the rearview mirror,
and the trucker next to me communicating the universal sign of "No way in
hell!". In a recurring fantasy, / see myself
in an M-1 tank sending such jerks
straight to the great big car pool in the
sky.

Murder
on the
Backstretch
Activision's "DeathTrack"
by Chris A. Lombardi

Of course, such violent id urges as
these are never actualized. They get
repressed and sent back to the seething
pit of my psyche where my insane lust
for Kim Basinger and my desire to take
an ax to my neighbor's disco CD's
reside. I grit my teeth, take a large
breath of exhaust, and fume my way
home. Any psychoanalyst will charge
your first-born to tell you this is not healthy behavior, but alas, where to find
relief?
Well, I've found the perfect therapy. it's
an outstanding new action game from
the people at Activision. This game,
Deathtrack, puts the player behind a
wheel of a super-sports car, armed to
the teeth with the latest in high tech
weaponry, and lets the driver 'act out'
his or her hostility on a track with 10
other drivers whose minds are as
twisted as their own. A small, dark
comer of my psyche becomes giddy just
thinking of it.
Deathtrack is an intense joystick jammer held together by a thin ribbon of
strategy. The player enters the
Deathtrack racing circuit with a choice of
three super cars and $10,000. The object
is to race well, manage one's money, and
complete the ten race circuit with both a
pocket full of dough and one's head intact.
The Dynamix design team has performed magic with their '3-space' polyfilled graphics system in such recent
releases as David Wolf: Secret Agent and
MechWarrior. They are no less guilty of
techno-sorcery in this product. Though
the cars themselves may not seem graphically stunning, they have a very realistic
feel. The cars corner tightly (depending
on the quality of your auto's equipment)
and their up-down motion is especially
realistic. When airborne after a jump, one
almost feels as if he/she is coming out of
their seat and when one comes down,
there is an expectation of a kidney bruising jar and one's suspension to collapse.
It's most impressive when flying off a
jump in a pack of cars and seeing the
competition soaring right along beside
the player's car, as well as in the rear

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

view mirror. The graphics system is extremely well done, though not altogether
perfect. Many times, when being passed
by another car, the two cars will collide
and merge together so that they are sort
of inside each other until one car can
break free. It's a minor glitch, something
of a non-linear digital cohabitation, but a
glitch nonetheless.
As exciting as racing can be, one of the
things that is often disappointing about
many racing simulations is the lack of excitement the action exudes. Sure, the
speedometer says "200 MPH" and the engine audibly screams, but that

DeathTrack
IBM
(Joystick Recommended)
$44.95
Darak Lukaszuk
and Terry Ishida
Activision
Menlo Park, CA

'intoxication' with speed is simply missing. Au contraire with Deathtrack. With a
powerful engine, a good set of spoilers,
and a super transmission, the car moves!
In fact, one really need not graduate
beyond the middle-sized engine because
the largest engine simply goes too fast.
This sense of speed, coupled with the
authentic up-down action, and the thrill
of hunting other racers really pulls players
into the game.

Continued on page 46

Continued from page 44

They Didn't Teach This In Auto
Shop
Though success requires lightning
reflexes on the track, many races are won
and lost in the parts and weapons shops.
In the parts shop, players choose be-

tween six auto parts: engine, brakes,
transmission, tires, airfoils, and armor in
three performance classes. Choosing
which combination of parts to employ is
the primary strategic decision in the early
stages of the game. Buying a turbo engine to outrun the competition is one
strategy, but this leaves a car weak in
armor and performance parts. Beefing up
with armor and weaponry makes a car extremely dangerous, but leaves it slow, unmaneuverable, and at the rear of the
pack. The choice is left to experimentation and personal taste.
The weapons shop offers nine types of
weaponry, also offered in three calibres of
performance. Particle beams, missiles,
machine guns, and lasers are the projectile weapons; caltrops (mini-mines) and
mines act as obstructives/explosives; and
the ram and wheel spikes facilitate
bumper-to-bumper combat. A little experimentation will yield an optimal
weapons system. Missiles tend to be the
most destructive, though most expensive;
mines and caltrops are cruel on an auto's
soft underbelly; and ram spikes are just
plain wicked, catering to the same mentality that enjoys butting heads with
rhinos.

The Mad Max School of
Accounting
Money management is key in

Deathtrack. During the average race,
even the most skilled drivers will take significant damage (even if it is from running over the smoking chassis of an excompetitor). If the player cannot afford to
field (track?) a race-worthy car, he/she is
forced out of the circuit. Thus, if a
player's car is completely knocked out of
a race, resulting in a huge repair bill, it
usually means the end of his/her career.
Keeping the coffers full is accomplished
in two ways. The most common, of
course, is to place highly in a race. First
place will earn $13,000, second $9,500,
down to $250 for ninth. Fulfilling death
contracts (put out on other drivers) is the
other mode of income. Often, players will

be approached before a race by a shady
character offering a little blood money.
Fulfilling the contract earns from $2000$7000 (and the animosity of the victim
and his family). This is a great way for the
'bullies' of the circuit to pick up some
mad money.

Here is a very effective strategy for those
who like to outrun the competition. After
placing highly in a race, load up on the
explosive of your choice, either caltrops
or mines. In the next race, as soon as
you are allowed to use weaponry, lay
down your entire stock of mines while
your competition is still bunched
together. With a little practice and luck,
you'll be able to take out your stiffest
competition at the onset.

Deathtrack has a number of small
graphic touches and interface niceties
that bring the product up a quality notch.
For instance, each of the nine competitors has their own personal profile, including a digitized photo of themselves
and a poly-filled graphic of the car they
drive, along with personal information
used as the documentation based copy
protection. Another nice touch is the
changing graphic backgrounds of the different tracks. San Francisco has a backdrop including the Golden Gate, while
New York displays skyscraper scenery and
freeway-like light posts.

The Rocket's Red Glare, Your Competition Bursting Into Air: This strategy
is useful if you have a slower car, or end
up with terrible pole position. Load up on
rockets or terminators, and take out the
leaders at the onset. An expensive but
very effective strategy.

The driver's seat view includes a welldone instrument panel. Along with the expected fuel gauge, damage gauge, and
speed indicator, is an overhead view of
the track showing the player's car in red
and the others in black. There is also a
screen showing the driver of the car currently in the player's tracking range,
along with that car's current place in the
race. There's nothing like finding the #1
driver in your sights, pelting him/her with
machine gun fire and watching him/her
explode into a very realistic fire ball (and
running over his/her burnt-out shell just
for kicks!). There's also an indicator showing the player's current position in the
race and the number of laps completed.

"Yo, tracker!" Here's a
little shopping list to
help ya with your .. .
agreements, yeah das'
it. Happy huntin'!."

Deathtrack is excellent, a must for action garners who want high speed action,
quick decision-making, and strategic planning engineered into a high-performance
package destined for the winner's circle.
Also, for anyone on the brink of traffic induced lunacy, it is gratuitous violence at
its therapeutic best.
Survival Guide for Rookie Drivers
Keep Your Eyes on the Road (and
keep your hands to yourself!): A very
common mistake among rookie drivers is
to become so intent on making a kill that
they end up on the shoulder and in last
place. Know your tracks. Be especially
careful on the winding tracks of Seattle
and SanFrancisco.
The number of laps in a race can be
set by the player and used to his/her advantage. If one's strategy is to outrun the
competition with a monster motor, a
shorter race ( 5 laps or less) is ideal. It
gives the competition less chance of
taking you out, though there is little opportunity to recover from a driving error.
Those who wish to fight their way to the
finish will find a longer race (7-10 laps)
more beneficial.
Mine Tires Have Seen The Glory:

DeathTrack's
greatest hits

Sly - Black car w/yellow
bumpers
Megadeth - Black car
w/red tail lights
Killer Angel - Red car
w/black rear grill
Lurker - Grey car w/ white
bumper
Preying Menace - Grey on
white car w/black bumper
Crimson Death Turquoise car Motor
Maniac - Black car
w/yellow & red tail lights
Wrecker - Turquoise w/
blue rear grill
Mellisa - red car w/ yellow
red tail lights

Winter Consumer Electronics Show
Continued from page 42

Winter C.E.S.
military basis. Chris Crawford's Guns &
Butter (early 1990/Macintosh, Spring
release/IBM) is Mindscape's abstract
strategic game which presents both
economic and military principles in an interesting and replayable game.
Crawford's interest in artificial personality
makes the diplomatic elements of the
game challenging; his background as an
educator is reflected in the depth of the
database; and his concern about game
play seems reflected in the interface.
Speaking of original Crawford designs,
his next game will be released on Earth
Day (April 22). It will be entitled Balance
of the Planet (Macintosh) and will be an
environmental policy simulator. Maxis
and Spectrum-Holobyte both have environmental simulations in the works, as
well.

games with the champions, just like
teams tend to in real life. The important
departure is that there are 340 different
individual/team statistical categories
which can be printed onto hard copy.
There is also a coach rating to improve
competition through adding a handicap.
Though TV Sports Baseball follows the
company's tradition of action-based
games, it has plenty to offer to the stat
player. Beyond Software (a software
development company founded by Don
Daglow, original producer of EA's Earl
Weaver Baseball) is developing the
product for Cinemaware. The statistical
model is based on the Saberrnetrics system, popularized by Bill James' Baseball
Abstract. Like earlier products in the
series, the game allows players to reserve
certain games for human-human or

New World Computing has just
shipped Nuclear War on the Amiga. If
garners do not find a spoof on nuclear
war to be offensive, they will find this
computerized version of the classic
Flying Buffalo card game to be
humorous and diverting. Avril Harrison's
graphics are perfect for expressing the
game's satirical tone.

Bo Knows Computers? (Sports
Games)
Data East announced their celebrity
license for Bo Jackson Baseball. Their
baseball game is predominantly actionoriented with a distinctive point and click
interface, but the most interesting part of
the game may well lie in another direction. Data East also distributes the
software for the USA Today Sports Center, a network which emphasizes sports information, fantasy leagues, pick 'em contests, and on-line tournaments for poker,
backgammon, "Go", and more. The fascinating news is that players will be able
to download current baseball statistics
from the USA Today Sports Center into
Bo Jackson Baseball so that player's can
manage current teams instead of last
year's players.
Cinemaware is rapidly expanding their
TV Sports line with TV Sports Basketball
and TV Sports Baseball. The basketball
game allows up to four players to compete anywhere from two-on-two to
five-on-five. Players can take 28 teams (27
NBA cities plus Cinemaware) through a
24 game league schedule, followed by
post-season playoffs. Then, once the
player wins the championship, the other
teams get better. They "get up" for the

human-computer competition, while allowing the computer to get on with the
rest of the league. TV Sports Baseball
will come with 26 teams which will include the greatest players ever to play for
each individual franchise. Season data
disks will be available later.
Last, but not least, is Greg Norman's
Ultimate Golf: Shark Attack, a golf simulation that is sure to get plenty of attention.
Up to four players can participate and
computer opponents are provided. There
are several choices with regard to rules,
the computer opponents can be customized using attribute sliders, the terrain
is laid out in a grid system, a "caddy option" can be toggled on/off and there are
more decision points than in most golf
games.

Full Speed Ahead (Simulations)
Simulations continue to be market
leaders with flight simulations out in front
(although new vehicles are being
modeled).
LHX Attack Chopper from Electronic
Arts is a mission-based game in the tradition of FA/18 Interceptor where players fly

the Apache, Blackhawk, Osprey or LHX
version of the advanced tactical helicopter. Paul Grace produced the game which
features random weather, light-hearted
graphics, and MCGA graphics with a 256
color palette.
Accolade is the first U.S. company to
allow players to fly Soviet Migs in Strike
Aces. Based on NATO bombing competitions, the game (much enhanced from its
original design as Fighter Bomber by Activision (U.K.) uses 13 planes in 16 missions, polygon-filled graphics, many
zoom features, AdLib and CMS sound
board support, and a mission design feature.
Air Transport Pilot, the flight simulation
from Sublogic which allows players to
"earn" their air transport pilot certificate
(50 flight hours and 12 successful landings) and compete via performance, earnings, and assignments, is almost ready to
ship. 26 details of airports, complete
down to taxiways and terminal buildings,
are included in the scenery and there are
five levels of image complexity, ranging
from "Very Sparse" to "Very Complex"
(depending on how fast players want the
simulation to run). The next major
software product from Sublogic is
designed to cover instrument landings
and is tentatively entitled, Instruments
U.S.A..
Software is not all that is new from Sublogic, however. The company plans to
market a heavy-duty control yoke (the
prototype is impressive) for $199.95 and
realistic control pedals for $49.95. The
company hopes these features will further
add to the realism of their simulations
and is seeking FM approval of this
hardware for part of actual flight school
credit.
Based on the popular novel by Stephen
Coonts, Spectrum-Holobyte is preparing Right of the Intruder, in conjunction
with U.K.'s Mirrorsoft, for late summer
release (IBM). Scenarios for this A-6 and
F-4 simulation come right out of the
book and include nap of the earth (NOE)
flights. As an added bonus, the game
release on the IBM is expected to coincide roughly with the release of the movie.
Another vehicle being modeled is the
Vietnam-era gunboat, similar to the one
seen in the film, Apocalypse Now. It will
be curious to see if Tom Loughery, designer of Steel Thunder, is leading the way
for another pack of simulations with Gunboat: River Combat Simulator.
Accolade's latest mission-based simulation has an interface which is extremely
similar to the earlier product and allows
Continued on page 71

Review

old of the Americas is a
strategy game for those
who like grand scale imperialism, exploitation, exploration,
betrayal, enslavement, mayhem
and tax evasion. Ian Trout (Russia,
Reach for the Stars, etc.) and newcomer Stephen Hart have concocted a simple, but highly challenging game of imperial expansion in the New World. Gold of the
Americas covers 300 years of mad
expansion in 30 turns (roughly two
hours). Four players, human or
computer (with three levels of difficulty), direct one imperial power:
Spain, Portugal, France or
England. By 1800, Spanish could
be spoken from Patagonia to San
Francisco Bay or the U.S.A. could
be revolting from Portugal.

G

The game screen is divided into
two halves. The left hand side is a
map of the Western Hemisphere
divided up into 31 areas. The right
hand side displays information and
command menus. The stylized
map is colorful and the icons of
men, ships, buildings, etc. look absolutely delightful in EGA graphics.

Discovery of the Game
(Mechanics)

Exploration
and Exploitation
Strategic Studies Group's
Gold of the Americas"
by Chuck Moss

Chuck Moss is
a political
columnist for
the Detroit
News who
feels that there
is more to life
than listening
to politicians
at rubber chicken banquets
and trying to
breathe in
smoke-filled
rooms.

home support automatically
known, the Spanish treasury is
$600 and the secret fund holds
$700. Spain has provided two armies and two colonists, as well as
two explorers: Pinzon (rated three
stars) and Ojeida (one star). Since
everything costs $500, it seems
reasonable to purchase two additional armies.
Next, comes the "Orders" phase.
This is 1500, not 1492, so three
provinces have already been explored. Texas turns out to be full of
gold and looks like the optimal territory to place colonists. Two armies are placed as garrisons and
two are sent with "Three Star" Pinzon to explore Louisiana. Poor
Ojeida goes to Mexico without any
troop support whatsoever (Lotsa'
luck!). For colony management,
"Placation" seems prudent. This
costs time in development, but
there are lots of Indians in Texas
and placating keeps them happy
until European diseases can kill
them off.

In Turn 2 (1510-1520), all four
mother countries have one colony
each. France is settling in Buenos
Aires, England in Hudson's Bay,
and Portugal at the mouth of the
Amazon. The Spanish colony is
successfully established and the
foray into Louisiana finds riches.
The expedition into Mexico
vanished without a trace, leaving
only the graphics of a skull and
broken lance beneath a strange and bloody sky to
mark their passing.

Gold of the Americas begins with
most of the map unexplored. First
is the "Acquisition Phase", where
the player buys and places: armies,
TITLE:
Gold of the Americas
colonists, ships, slaves, explorers,
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
and/or privateers. Since colonists cannot be placed in
REVIEWED ON: IBM
unexplored territory, exploration is the player's firsttask.
PRICE:
$39.99
DESIGNERS:
Stephen Hart
This requires an explorer accompanied by several arNext, an odious-looking representative of the
Ian Trout
mies. Once an area has been explored, it will take two
Crown demands $1,000 out of the player's
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Studies
to three colonists, a couple of armies and some luck to
Group
$5,500. This is unusual. Usually, the Crown takes
Walnut Creek, CA
develop a thriving settlement. Once the colony is setall of the player's money.
tled, players can set the colony to one of three levels:
"Development", raising the colony's level of civilization but alienatSince armies and warships must be re-purchased every turn,
ing the natives and settlers; "Placation", keeping everyone happy
the acquisitions phase is extremely significant. Spain is currently
but taking most of the profit out of the operation; and "Exploitalimited to three colonists and no slaves (expedient, if morally
tion", providing lots of non-reported income, but tending toward
reprehensible) can be placed until ALL the Indians are gone from
revolution.
a province. The Spanish Government does have two excellent explorers who can double as raiding commanders. Since the disAfter each "10 Year" turn cycle, income is subject to an exorplay says France has declared war on Spain, one should purbitant taxation. Fortunately, the secret funds are exempt. Howchase plenty of armies, as well as trading vessels for the future. A
ever, should the official treasury be short, secret funds can be
warship? No, it's better to leave a surplus in the coffers, for now.
used to make up the shortfall. The rulebook warns about failing
to pay taxes, but this reviewer found that both taxes and "supAfter placing two colonists in Louisiana, supported by two arport", i.e., colonists and armies provided free by the mother
mies; one colonist in Texas, supported by one army, in order to
country, actually vary independently of the income cycle, regardbeef up that colony; and two armies as part of "Three Star"
less of whether one pays his taxes or not.
Balboa's expedition to Missouri, it's time to send two armies and
"Three Star" De Solis to raid French-held Argentina. Magellan
If the player places the colonies intelligently; arms them effectivestrikes out alone to find Florida (So long, sucker!) and the traders
ly; manages them wisely; and keeps the profits high, he should
are placed in the Caribbean without protection, while both the
emerge victorious. Victory is ultimately decided by a point system,
Apaches and Choctaws are placated near the colonies (Smallpox
with credit going to the nation with the most and best developed
will get them soon enough).
colonies.
All of this makes for a busy turn. Trading income is up; a
Colonial Power (Sample Game)
plague in Texas kills off the Indians; the deceitful Portuguese raid
Texas and make off with a lot of gold; Missouri is opened up; and
In this brief sketch of game play, the reviewer controls Spain
(surprise!) the expedition to Florida vanishes. Fortunately, the
and the computer controls the rest. Choosing "Random New
World", with neither the location of gold nor the actual amount of
Continued on page 52

Continued from page 50

Spanish raid on Buenos Aires makes up for the loss to the Portuguese. The taxman settles for $4,500 out of $7,700 and a new
realm of possibilities emerges.
Later, things won't be so rosy. Income will dry up and growth
will be strangled as the shortsighted taxman cleans out the
colonial treasury and rival French and English powers surge
ahead in terms of available resources. Worst of all, as the
colonies develop, they become restive and
head for independence.
As the tax bill becomes more onerous,
players must resort to "Exploitation" to fill
their tax-exempt accounts, virtually assuring
revolution. It requires a juggling match in
order to win. As said before, this game is
very simple. It is not simplistic.

Verdict of History
Gold of the Americas is a challenging and
entertaining game with a bit of history and
good deal of replay value thrown in. The
documentation is good and the graphics are
excellent. The relatively short game time virtually ensures that gamers will boot up this entertaining item
again and again. For God, King, Gold, Glory and Microchip, Gold
of the Americas is the best way possible to rewrite colonial history.

Historical Hijinx (Hints)
Warning: Readers who dislike hints should skip this section.

Spain starts out strong and fades in the stretch. Players should forget
about history, grab the richest colonies in the first five turns, buy plenty of
armies, and hold on tight. Spanish colonies tend to revolt easily, so players
should avoid using "Exploitation" until the endgame. Portuguese colonies
require intelligent management of small, but constant, resources. It is best
to stake out claims around a central area and avoid overextending one's
resources.
Both France and England start with nothing and surge. At the beginning
of the game, it is the most one can do to plant a
few strategic colonies and put one's money into
traders and raids. After the colonial support builds
up, it becomes possible to plant colonies all over
the map. Then, toward the end of the game, one
can pick off Spanish possessions just prior to their
inevitable revolutions, when their loyalty is way
down. Also, the slow growth in French and English
colonies will mean that their colonies are much
younger at the end of the game, so they will have
acquired less grievances. Hence, one can exploit
them more freely than the Spanish and Portuguese can.
In general, all countries need to purchase armies
whenever possible. Better (Three Star) explorers
should always be accompanied by, at least, two armies. Always protect the better colonies or raids
may wipe out the cash flow. If one has a limited number of available armies, a good explorer can raid enemy colonies, even without military support. Note that newly independent states cannot be conquered.
Finally, all countries should exploit even their most loyal colonies during
the last five game turns. They will need the extra cash and there is not
enough time for the colonies to revolt. Remember, "Exploitation" is tax-exempt and, when it comes to taxes, the rule of thumb is this: The crown
will take all your money.

Review

n November of 1942, Lt.
General Purkayev
(U.S.S.R.) initiated an assault upon the German-held
Soviet city of Velikiye Luki
(aka Velikie Luki and Velikije
Luki), located in the western
provinces ("oblasts") of the
U.S.S.R. (due south of
Leningrad). Historically, the
Soviets' goal was to encircle
Velikiye Luki, capture the rail
lines, bridge the Lowati River
(aka Lovat River and Lowatj
River) and bring their artillery
to bear. The Soviets
managed to gain a tactical
victory by inflicting an estimated 22,000 German
casualties (or more).

I

lack of strategic ability. When
commanding the Soviets, the
computer opponent lacks a
killer instinct. It will neither
obliterate the bunkers nor
cross the river. Since the
computer-commanded
Soviets will primarily "barrage" rather than advance,
human players commanding
the German side can utilize
their ski units to block supply
routes, hence killing the
Soviet player's barrages. The
German forces inevitably
take significant losses from
the opening barrage, but
players can avoid facing further barrages by cutting
Soviet supply.

White Death
by Wyatt Lee

When the computer opponent commands the Germans, it is even more conservative than traditional Al
routines. It takes positions
and simply holds them until
the Soviet player presses
those positions, missing
numerous opportunities for
successful counterattacks
and not cutting off Soviet
supply like a human player
would.

White Death, a computerized version of Frank
Chadwick's critically acclaimed boardgame of the
same name, is based on this
campaign. In many ways, it is
a careful adaptation that has
succeeded in solving some of
the drawbacks of earlier
boardgame to computer
game conversions. In other
ways, it emphasizes those
drawbacks.
Like Command
Simulations' Blitzkrieg at
the Ardennes, the game offers a solid
solution to the map problem. Players can
get the "big picture" from the complete
map and zoom in for an "up close and
personal" perspective with a simple point
and click. This aspect of the game simulates the ability of a boardgame player to
see the entire game board at a glance
and then, lean over to focus in on one
particular area of the board. It accomplishes this extremely effectively. Like
the boardgames it emulates, White Death
also features colorful and legible
"counters" and attractively rendered
hexes. Even better, the game adds an arsenal of impressive sound effects on the
Amiga (the best we've heard since SSI's
Amiga Kampfgruppe).
The drawbacks which White Death and
Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes have not
solved involve questions of interface. Although the programmers have offered
players the option of using keystrokes or
pull-down menus for delineating and
resolving movement, barrages, and combat, the entire process is awkward. In
combat, for example, one must select the
target stack followed consecutively by
each stack of attacking units and each individual unit. If the player's adrenalin
causes him to click on the "OK" box
before every individual unit is selected for
the attack, there is no way to back up.
One repeats the process for all possible
combat before resolving the defensive

fire. If not, there is no way to backtrack.
Then, one must designate the coordinating headquarters for the attack (by clicking on the stack, followed by the in-

dividual unit), delineate the participating
artillery units, individual target unit, (in
order to resolve artillery fire), and resolve
the attack. A process fraught with perils
until one gets used to it.
Further, the computer opponent still
leaves much to be desired. It is de rigeur
to complain that a computer opponent is
slow and there are certainly times in
White Death (on either machine) when
the human player will feel like the computer has locked up. On the other hand,
who hasn't had a feeling that a human
opponent was moving with glacial
deliberation whenever he was ready to
press the attack.
Of more consequence, perhaps, is the

In spite of the drawbacks,
White Death is a successful
translation of the
boardgame. It offers a satisfying (if not always challenging) gaming experience in
the long run, though there is a steep
learning curve for non-grognards at the
very beginning. If Command Simulations advances the routines for the computer opponents, reduces the learning
curve, and offers more thought toward
"idiot-proofing" the interface, its series of
boardgame style computer wargames
could finally fill a long-neglected niche in
the hobby. Those who are unwilling to
wade through documentation will want to
pass on White Death, as will those who
feel a need for either "real-time" decisionmaking or bit-mapped pyrotechnics to
stimulate their adrenalin. For those who
desire the detail of a boardgame where
the computer both performs the bookkeeping functions and provides a built-in
opponent, White Death is an extremely viable choice.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

White Death
Amiga (w/ 1 MB)
and IBM (w/ EGA)
REVIEWED ON: Amiga
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$59.95 (Amiga)
$49.95 (IBM)
DESIGNERS:
Frank Chadwick,
Shelby Stanton,
Al Benincasa, and
Joseph Benincasa
PUBLISHER:
Command Simulations
Bldg. 3, 297 North Street
Hyannis, MA 02601

Review

he torpedo lifted the
proud old greyhound out of
the water and broke her
back effortlessly. A few of the
crew members lived long enough
to comprehend, at least on a subliminal level, that a streaking silver fish had wrought the explosion that preceded blackness.
The men trapped in the forward
section were, perhaps, the most
unfortunate, as the blast knocked
the superstructure askew and the
off-balance weight dragged the
destroyer's barnacle-coated belly
toward the sky. Denied the
privilege of dying together, small
knots of survivors struggled and
hoped for several hours in the
watertight tomb until, mercifully,
it slid toward the mud of
Ironbottom Sound. Amazingly, the after
section and its occupants
emerged relatively unscathed
from the ordeal. Defiant to the
last, they even managed to fire
several rounds from the one
remaining functional gun mount
at their retiring foes.

T

vantage and concentration of
firepower to achieve the desired
result.

Action
Stations
Tactical Naval Simulation
From An Officer's
Perspective

The history of the Second World
War is replete with stories of
valor, stories of men making the
most of what remained in
desperate situations. Although
numerous computer products
have covered naval surface combat during this period, none have
depicted the desperate drama of
fighting to keep a ship alive as
well as Action Stations. The program was written by a professional naval officer who invested
nearly seven man years into
verification of the authenticity of
ship interiors and development of
gunfire resolution and damage
control routines that realistically
portray the impact every type of
damage has on the ship's
capacity to continue the fight. As
another professional naval officer,
with experience in actual shipboard fires and flooding, this
reviewer may state unequivocally
that his portion of the product is
unparalleled in today's market. Of
course, this is only one part of
the entire program.

Getting Underway
Action Stations is an extensive and
detailed look at the surface officer's art of
war at sea. The "glory hog" flat tops
(aircraft carriers) and denizens of the
deep (submarines) have no representation in this game. Additionally, all
other forms of air power have been eschewed with the exception of spotter
aircraft which were frequently carried by

by Lt. H. E. Dille

TITLE:

SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER

Action Stations:
Naval Surface Combat
Tactical Simulation
1922-1945
IBM
$49.95
Alan D. Zimm
Conflict Analytics
119-2 Norfolk Road
NAS Alameda, CA 94501

the larger warships. A certain degree of
historic ambiguity is introduced by the
decision to exclude air power in toto, largely because the presence or threat of
air power often influenced command
decisions (the Battle of the Komandorski
Islands is a case in point). The elimination of these elements does, however,
focus players on those factors through
which a surface officer plies his art directly: knowledge of enemy capabilities and
limitations, tactical maneuver to gain ad-

The program offers thirty total
scenarios from the time period
covered, as well as the ability to
build scenarios or specify certain
parameters and let the computer generate a scenario based
upon those inputs. Smaller
scenarios may be played in as little as fifteen minutes utilizing
the automatic gun director and
formation features of the game.
Some larger scenarios contain
as many as forty-nine ships and
may take several days to complete. Night scenarios, with star
shells and searchlights, require a
bit longer to execute than
daylight ones, due to additional
rules regarding visibility under
such conditions. Herein lies one
of this reviewer's concerns. Turn
execution time, especially on
standard XT compatibles, is
slow! On larger scenarios, one
may expect to wait three
minutes between completion of
order input and turn resolution.
Although this may not sound
like a lot, it translates to hours
of dead time over the course of
a big game. Fortunately, the
problem is less noticeable on
AT compatible machines.

Once a scenario is selected,
play centers upon the main battle plot display. Essentially, this
is an x,y coordinate grid similar
to those found in shipboard
Combat Information Centers. All
contacts are displayed as circles
(friendly) or squares (both hostiles and unknown), with vectors
indicating the speed and direction of travel for each one.
Dotted lines represent gunfire
distribution; yellow circles represent star shell looms; concentric
circles indicate an explosion;
and numerous other standard
naval symbols are used to
graphically portray events on the
plot. Plot scale is variable such
that one may zoom in on a
given section of the action. Although this system may not be
as aesthetically pleasing as the
graphics of a game like Harpoon, it does accurately represent the
plots utilized by tactical action officers of
the time.
From the main battle plot, one may access a number of pull-down menus for
the issuance of orders, as well as several
report screens. Briefly, players possess
the ability to control all movement (individually or in formation); assign guns to
Continued on page 60

Origin/CGW Omega Tournament

Origin/CGW
Omega
Tournament
Report
AUSTIN (CGW) -- The Origin/CGW National Omega Tournament enters the
homestretch with the completion of the
December tournament. A total of 79
tanks blasted there way through the
monthly tournament. The top six
finishers have been added to the 24 that
have already qualified for the
Omega/CGW Championship Round. The
Championship Round will be hosted by
CGW at the beautiful Britannia Manor
(home of Lord British) in February. A full
report of the Championship Round will
appear in the April issue of CGW.
The winner of the December tournament was Steven Schafer of McHenry,
MD. Steve's OMEGA level design,
STRYKB2, was designed with the IBM version of Omega. Also reaching the Top
Six in the December Tournament was

DRAGON2 (Dennis Belcher, Princeton
Junction, NJ); TYSON (Barry Lampert,
Hollywood, CA); HIBLE (Bill Mechefske,
Canada); STRIKER2 (Steve Schafer, McHenry, MD); DORSAI (Gus Smedstad,
Kentwood, MI). The results of the
January Tournament will be published in
the March issue of CGW.

Comments From OSI Officials
In the December Tournament we
revisited the battlefields of Austin, Houston, and Small. The tanks
seemed to maintain aggressive design, although few
were bold enough to charge
into battle with abandon.
The level of sophistication of
the designs have greatly improved over the months, and
this tournament was no exception. OSI officials were
also pleased to note that
even larger numbers of
"employees" were able to participate. OSI hopes that at
least 100 of its nearly 1000
"employees" will participate in
the January Tournament.

OSI MEMO: All cybertank engineers are
reminded that the battlefields used in the
tournaments are subject to change or
modification. Tanks should be designed
with a variety of terrain expected.
If you are uncertain whether or not you
have qualified to participate in the Championship Round, OSI has a list of currently qualified engineers available for
downloading from the OMEGA REMOTE
ACCESS BOARD at 1-512-328-8402.

Continued from page 56

Action
Stations!
directors and directors to targets (or have
this accomplished automatically); compute torpedo firing solutions and launch
same; and control smoke, searchlight
and star shell placement. The options to
flood ammunition magazines and
counterflood spaces to reduce list are
available under damage control.
In addition, the various report options
are also quite comprehensive, containing
far more information than can be adequately elaborated upon in a standard
sized review. A concise synopsis follows.
The "Damage Status" report offers data
on individual ship status, including: all
gun/torpedo mounts, directors, engineering/steering degradations, remaining flotation, list, damage control teams remaining, etc. Other reports include:
"Lookout/Radar" (detailing what can be
seen from the vantage point of any ship
in the force), "Fleet Deployment" (summarizing unit positions by grid location),
"Fleet Battery" (noting the rue distribution
for the entire force), "Current Hits"
(recounting actual hits incurred by friendly vessels and offering an estimate of the
effectiveness of fire on the enemy during
the preceding three minutes of game
time), and "Range/Penetration" (providing
information regarding optimal ranges for
vertical and horizontal armor penetration
from any selected ship to a particular target).
With all this data at the player's fingertips, the input of data for a single turn
may vary widely from less than a minute
to fifteen minutes, depending on both
the size of the action and the number of
menus accessed. Obviously, one need
not access all of these menus each turn.

Hit Alfa! Hit Alfa! Amidships
As damage levels begin to mount, Action stations comes into its own. The
gunfire/torpedo resolution routines are
quite complex. Once a hit is determined
to have occurred, the angle of the fall of
the shell is calculated; one of forty-two
distinct zones is determined to be the
most probable hit location; armor
penetration is calculated in accordance
with zone and shell type; and this is factored against the "dud rate". Even duds,
of course, can inflict penetration damage
and knock major pieces of equipment off
line. Hits to the bridge and other control
stations may affect steering or gun director assignment, as well. For example, in
one game, the lead cruiser of a three
ship formation was struck in the bridge
by a light calibre shell. In the ensuing
confusion, her sudden course change
caused a collision with the cruiser directly

astern. Both ships were severely
damaged by the collision, one dead in
the water for the remainder of the game
and the other reduced to a mere nine
knots maximum speed, all because of a
lucky shot from a Japanese destroyer.
Such are the fortunes of war.
Based upon the location of fires,
magazines might have to be flooded,
spaces adjacent to the fire might have to
be evacuated (leading to the temporary

no longer shipping. Version 2.0 corrects
all of these problems, adds several new
features and improvements based on consumer feedback. Conflict Analytics will
automatically send the updated disks, absolutely FREE, to all registered owners of
version 1.0. Don't despair, however, if
that registration card hit the circular file.
Those who purchased the game directly
from Conflict Analytics were automatically registered and those who purchased
from TEVEX can simply mail their names
and addresses directly to Conflict
Analytics. for verification.

Where's The Bloody Fog?

loss of those facilities, engineering
spaces, gun mounts, etc. until the fire is
extinguished) and additional equipment
may suffer as the fire progresses. Discerning commanders may opt to cease firing
temporarily to allow their gun crews to assist the damage control teams in combating the blaze (if the situation permits, of
course). As long as damage control
teams exist, every effort is made to
preclude progressive damage and some
forms of battle repair are being undertaken to restore as much capability to the
ship as possible.
Torpedo resolution takes into account
the angle at which the ship is struck
(precise to less than one yard and within
three seconds for impact time). Once the
location of the hit is determined, dud factors are once again considered and the
explosive impact calculated for all spaces
in the affected area. Damage control is
handled as thoroughly as in the shell hit
routines with, of course, attention to list,
loss of flotation, and shock damage factored in.

Abandon Ship!
Every silver lining has a cloud wrapped
around it and Action Stations is no excep
lion. As the first offering from a fledgling
firm, it is not surprising that the initial
production run of disks escaped with
some bugs intact (program crashes on
scenarios using Fleet 1 or 2; CSENE malfunctions as players call up the battle plot
by using the "Previous Point" option in
the first turn; ships 23 and 33 in the
"Barents Sea" scenario must be
maneuvered apart in the first turn;
AUTOWARRIOR disengages forces automatically in the "Calabria" and "Spartivento" scenarios; close range anomalies exist
which can lead to abnormally high hit
rates; and several minor errors exist in
the gun data files).
Because of these errors, version 1.0 is

At last, one cannot evade an issue that
has sparked a fair degree of heated
debate within the industry, especially
within these pages. How good is any
game that does not accurately reflect the
fog of war? Action Stations, by virtue of
allowing the player to stick his nose into
every detail, is aligned farther toward the
realm of omnipotent board gaming that
many of us cut our teeth on than some
players will like. Granted, enemy ships
must still be identified at night, smoke
and stack gasses still preclude perfect
visibility, and there is an uncertainty to
the degree of damage inflicted upon the
enemy, but the natural breakdown of
coordination between elements of the
same force does not occur. In discussions with the designer, it was determined that the option to command from
the flagship only (significantly more realistic) was scrapped due to memory limitations and to avoid disk swapping. Although this option will not be included in
version 2.0, it will most likely be included
in the next title released by the firm.

Rescued At Last!
Action Stations, despite the criticisms
advanced in this review, is a superlative
first effort. The play value is superb and
completion of all the scenarios included
with the game could take players up to a
year of standard play to master. Regardless of how much is packaged with the
game, some players have already lobbied
for an additional scenario disk. One is
planned for release in early 1990 at a
price of $9.95. It is expected to incorporate a lot of traditional historical
debates like, what if the Washington
Naval Treaty never happened and Japan
went to war with the U.S. in 1930? Or,
even better, what if WWII didn't start until
1945 and Germany had completed her
shipbuilding plan (including a proposed
battleship with 20" guns)? Interesting possibilities, to say the least.
On a final note, the designers at Conflict Analytics have proven extremely
responsive to feedback. This fosters a
somewhat unique environment where
players may take a very active role in
molding future products from this firm.
Don't pass up the opportunity.

I

I

Continued from page 22

TANK
is not the
second-line-first-line-veterans-elite that M1 Tank Platoon offered. On
the other hand, one will often be unaware of the caliber of the enemy until
such knowledge is achieved too late and
at too high a cost.
There is no acceleration key, since the
use of one would cause the Al to interact
somewhat strangely. This means that
scenarios may often take some time to
develop. However, time is of the essence!
Victory conditions are based on mission
objectives within a specified time limit.
This can be frustrating, but it is accurate.
Combat often requires sub-optimal
maneuver if a timely success is to be
achieved.

The strategic map uses standard
military icons, not a rendition of armor silhouettes. This reviewer considered such
usage to allow a more operational level
gestalt; a friend noted that it does not
allow one to perceive who is firing at
whom and from what sector a la M1
Tank Platoon. This is true, but one has
to decide whether he wants to remain as

a platoon commander or graduate to the
rigors of battalion command. Exact handling of vehicles is indeed more difficult,
but this may well reflect the tribulations
of the battalion commander.

well expand the modemability to include
battalion engagements.
This reviewer covered tactical considerations in a review of M1 Tank Platoon
[December 1989, page 241. Those observations remain true.

Doctrinal Questions
NO INFANTRY!!

The scenarios are related to their
geographic environment, but not linked.
Thus, success or failure in one mission
will not affect subsequent missions. A
comprehensive campaign would have
been appreciated; this may well come to
fruition as Tank is modified in the near future.
Tank is playable by modem, although
only in a tank vs. tank engagement.
Some initial problems with the modem
have been corrected and it is available as
an option. Version 2.0 (late 1990?) may

As the Israelis discovered in 1973, the
use of armor without infantry support can
be fatal. As Army officers are fond of
saying, "You know what we call tanks
without infantry?—DEAD!!" Sadly, Tank
has no infantry; both sides are armor
heavy. This could well occur in rare instances, but the absence of infantry is
sorely missed in what purports to be a
simulation of the contemporary battlefield.
Laser Gunsight
In version 1.0 (replaced by version 1.01
within a week of release), the laser gunsight was able to immediately lock onto
any enemy vehicle and yield virtual certain hits; no lead was required for crossing targets. Based upon comments by
users, Spectrum modified the ranging system and it now requires three (3)
seconds to achieve a lock-on. This is

taken directly from the actual M1 Tank
Manual. However, while the vehicle is in
motion, the stabilization system performs,
at best, poorly in the simulation. Achieving speeds of greater than 15 mph yields
a gunsight picture guaranteed to induce
vertigo. The automatic gunner mode is
capable of stabilized sighting; the human
player cannot do so. Spectrum is aware
of this problem and is working on a
revision which should alleviate the problem. However, currently, the simulation is
more reminiscent of an M60 (mid-1960
vintage) than a contemporary Ml.
Logistics
Tanks, while arguably the best vehicle
for securing the parking spot of one's
choice, are notorious gas guzzlers. Tank
reflects this and it is very possible to run
out of fuel in the middle of combat (not
exactly yielding a "warm fuzzy feeling",
but rather a high "pucker" factor). But
there are fuel depots to refuel; just
remember that refueling takes time and
the clock is ticking! This also forces one
to choose between slower speeds (more
fuel economical) or higher speeds
(presenting less of a target and closing
with rapid shock firepower—the raison
d'être of armor).

Vehicle Mix
Older tanks (both U.S. [M-60] and Russian [T-64]) have been omitted. Both are
still used, especially by Third World nations (Syria probably still retains some T64s, although it lost most of them to Israel in 1967 and 1973).
Victory Conditions
Victory conditions yield a victory point
Fitrep (Fitness Report). Since this is not
measured against any external standard,
one is not really sure of how well one succeeded. Even more important, the term
FITREP is a navy term and is not utilized
in the army. The proper terminology
would have been ER (efficiency report),
OER (officer efficiency report) and EER
(enlisted efficiency report).

Conclusions
In comparing M1 Tank Platoon and
TANK, this reviewer would note that
Microprose Software furnishes a product.
Once it reaches market, changes are
minor and updates are not designed.
However, the product is well-executed
and buttressed by excellent documentation. Spectrum Holobyte utilizes a dif-

ferent perspective; when one purchases
Tank, he is purchasing a process and not
a product.

As with Spectrum's Falcon, the simulation undergoes numerous evolutions and
revisions. The revisions are made available at a reasonable cost, and such
revisions reflect the comments and
criticisms of the gaming public. Future
revisions may well include hard-copy
maps (essential for plotting defensive
positions and alternate positions as well
as determining axes of advance).
By the time the "Electronic Battlefield
System" is functional, Tank Version 2.0
will be released (owners of older versions
will be allowed to upgrade as per usual
Spectrum policy). The EBS concept is intriguing and should be very entertaining.
At the present time, in a head-to-head
comparison, this reviewer feels that M1
Tank Platoon is a more accurate simulation (especially due to the lack of infantry
in Tank). However, as the Schaefer Beer
jingle used to go: Spectrum may well "be
the one to have when you're having
more than one!"

Continued from page 15

HARPOON
dow, but the scenario itself is quick and
easy to learn (as it involves only surface
combatants). As noted above, Soviet missile ranges far exceed those of the Norwegians, while the latter may acquire targets earlier. This means that a gradual
creeping of NATO is doomed—it will permit the Soviet more time to acquire the
target. Therefore, NATO strategy damns
the torpedoes and full speed ahead! The
Storms are valuable for their offensive
power and decoy status. Often, they may
be able to destroy the Soviets, although
they can also die in place. Any left-overs
can be picked up by the heavier Oslo
and Leander. As for Soviet tactics, they
should seek to destroy the heavier vessels
first and then turn on the Storms and
launch while still relatively safe from the
counter-thrust. The Soviets may win
without the loss or damage of a single
ship; NATO will generally have to lose the
Storms in order to achieve victory.
The scenarios grow in both intensity
and size, each acting as a semi-tutorial
for the next. Harpoon does not allow the
computer to play itself (a good learning
device), but if one is confused, switching
sides and seeing the view from the Other
Bridge will yield better insights.

database is sufficient to keep all but the
most jaded naval gamer happy.
Some users have criticized Harpoon for
not emphasizing EW (electronic warfare)
on the user level, but it is not actually an
aspect at that level of command. Also,
heavy EW environments tend to yield little talk and less action! There are no antitorpedo options (nixies), but again, these
are at a lower level of command (Ships
launch SAMs as a defensive measure
automatically. A similar message could
have been added for nixies, but their effectiveness is limited enough that such a
message would be rarely useful).

Harpoon is a large program—requiring
at least 550 free K for even the smaller
scenarios. TSR (terminate and stay resident) programs may have to be disabled
in order to play the simulation. Also,
larger scenarios have a dismaying tendency to crash, and should be saved frequently. The first revision (18 January
1990) should have, hopefully, reduced
the fatal crash errors. However, in addition to the revisions, Three-Sixty is planning a major update for the fourth
quarter of 1990 which will incorporate features desired by users (e.g. in-flight refueling of air assets). Indeed, the users have
been vocal. On GEnie (a modemplay
electronic network), a Harpoon topic
generated 66 messages in 14 days.

Somewhere Over The "Horiz"

High Water Mark

Some confusion may arise for the nonnaval user. Often, a range circle may indicate a target within range, but the staff
assistant will deny the potential for attack.
This is because locations are approximate and may vary by dozens of
nautical miles. Remember that information received is imperfect at best.

Harpoon is a must-have for the serious
naval gamer. Its depth recommends it,
even with its current annoying tendency
to crash at higher scenarios. The designers should have the newer generation of
bugs decimated by the date of publication. For the person whose naval desires
do not extend beyond sinking an occasional destroyer with his "rubber
duckie" in the bathtub, Harpoon may
prove a stone best left unturned. A person lacking any expertise in Naval affairs
will learn many lessons from this simulation, although the learning curve may be
somewhat steep. Nevertheless, for the
gamer interested in naval operations, Harpoon is the current benchmark.
Documentation and crashes notwithstanding, Harpoon is here to stay.

Certain missile ranges are noted as
"horiz". This refers to radar horizon, and
not visual range (generally up to 25 nautical miles), and can make a major difference in when targets may be acquired.
Speeds of groups may be adjusted to
creep, cruise or maximum cruise.
A command "ungroup same type
weapon" may appear semi-cryptic. This
merely allows the user to individually examine each gun mount/arc of fire on a
vessel. Many of the terms used in the
simulation are unfamiliar but will become
easily understood through game play.
Certain ship classes have been omitted,
e.g. Soviet Trantul III (missile boats,
generally found in the Mediterranean, but
some might be assigned to the Northern
Fleet), Kara (CG) and Kanin (DDG). However, a similar class is found in the GIUK
BattleSet. This reviewer was hoping that
the future scenario editor would allow
one to transfer ships from different BattleSets. This will not be possible, but the

(c) 1990, all rights reserved
Please box this paragraph.
M. Evan Brooks will host a live modem
conference on GEnie's RoundTable
(page 805) with Harpoon's Larry Bond
and Gordon Walton on 12 February
1990 at 9:30 PM (EST). Interested users
may inquire about joining GEnie at 800638-9636. A transcript of the conference
will be placed in the the Library there for
future downloads. This is part of a monthly conference with noted guests in the
simulation field.

Conversions
Received

Action Stations
(Conflict Analytics) IBM
After Burner
(Sega) Amiga
Blue Angels
(Accolade) C-64
Double Dragon II
(Mastertronic) C-64
The Fool's Errand
(Miles Computing) IBM
Jam Session
(Broderbund) IIGS
John Madden Football
(EA) C-64
John Madden Players Disk '87 -'88
(EA) IBM
Magic Johnson's Basketball
(Melbourne) Amiga,C-64
Omega
(Origin) Mac
Omni-play Horse Racing
(SportTime) C-64
Planet of Lust
(Free Spirit) ST
Populous
(EA) IBM
QIX
(Taito) IBM
RoboCop
(Data East) Apple II
Romance of The Three Kingdoms
(Koei) Amiga
Sentinel Worlds I
(EA) C-64
Solitaire Royale
(Spectrum) IIGS
Starflight
(EA) Amiga
TV Sports Football
(Cinemaware) IBM

(Continued from page 9)

Swords

of Twilight

than a "Journey Ration"; etc. The intricate details are numerous. The eight
worlds of Swords feel rich and complete
in every way, as do the actions of the
people living in the worlds.
Such attention to detail carries over to
the conversations with the various
denizens of Swords. Every race and each
different monster says things in a different manner offering different nuances
and even the nuances change further
with different attitudes (e.g. a "Wary"
wraith will speak differently than a "Polite"
wraith). In addition, conversations carry
over throughout a world, helping to build
a reputation. While a race of creatures
may start "Hostile" to the players, it is possible to eventually convert them to
"Friendly". The reverse is also true, as
wanton slaughter will not help one's
reputation. There are too many CRPGs
available which completely ignore the
conversational aspect of gaming. One of
the major delights of Swords is how well
this area is handled.
Perhaps an even stronger aspect of the

game is its flexibility. While there are
definite objectives to be accomplished,
there is never only one solution. The
game allows a player to get exactly what
he wants from it. If the player wants to
hack-and-slash, it is possible to run
about killing anything in sight (of course,
this makes conversation more difficult). If
the player wants to take a more peaceable route, it is possible to attempt friendly relationships with everyone. Such a
course makes food gathering, information hunting, and even Shadowlord assassination much easier. At last, a game
where Virtue is more than its own reward.
Regardless of how a player opts, this attempt to provide a non-linear, unrestrictive game extends to most facets of
game play (either a key, or brute strength
can open doors, and the Shadowlords
can be killed even without the proper
"Sword").
Of significant importance to the success
of the game is the multi-player system.
While it is possible to play a solitaire
game, this is not recommended; the computer handles NPCs extremely well, but
the full experience of fantasy teamwork
cannot be enjoyed unless other human

players participate. Much of the fun
comes from dealing with other people
through the game environment, as
Mages argue about protection and warriors hassle over the various armaments
and magical treasures. If possible, the
player should get two friends together
and have all three slots filled with
humans, using the computer only as a
temporary substitution.

The Glowing Blade (Conclusion)
Without doubt, Swords of Twilight is
one of the best CRPGs to ever come to
this writer's attention. While there are
some snags in the interface and with the
occasional sluggish response, the game
offers a depth and realism rarely seen in
any computer game. Through interesting
conversations and otherworldly travels,
the player discovers a world rich in detail,
and danger. The magic is fun, the combat invigorating and the dialogues involving. Add to this a truly simultaneous
multi-player system, and the game wins
my vote for CRPG of the year. One simply cannot recommend this game highly
enough.

Continued from page 6

Peek
($49.95) & C64 ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #5.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
BUDOKAN: Ah grasshoppa! You have
followed the path of enlightenment, and
it leads to Budokan, the definitive martial
arts simulation. Players have the opportunity to learn and master four martial
arts, Karate, Kendo, Nunchaku, and Bo
(does Bo know Bo?), each with 30 moves
to master. After players have gained basic
command of the moves through sparring
with an instructor, they can fight opponents on three levels of difficulty. If
they are successful they can then face
the ultimate test of their skills at the
Budokan. Gorgeous graphics and a nice
sound track round out this outstanding
package. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

Fanfare
c/o Britannica Software
345 Fourth Street
San Francisco, CA 94107
EYE OF HORUS: You don't have to be
"born in Arizona" and "move to
Babylonia" to play this action/exploration
game set in Egyptian mythology. As the
son of a god, you have the gift of avian
transformation, and you must use this
power to explore an ancient pyramid alive
with metamorphosized gods, searching
for the amulets needed to avenge your
father's death at the hands of Set.
(bump, spike) Amiga Circle Reader Service #7.

Free Spirit Software
PO Box 128
58 Noble Street
Kutztown, PA 19530
BRIDE OF THE ROBOT: Brad Stallion,
intergalactic space stud, and his vessel,
Big Thruster, are back in another adult
graphic adventure from Free Spirit. Fighting a vicious hangover, Brad must rescue
Miss Galaxy from a runaway robot with a
bug in his sex drive. The game has a terrible parser, and worse puzzles, but a lot

of raunchy humor. Amiga ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.

Microplay Software
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030

GameTek
2999 N.E. 191st St.
Suite 800
N. Miami Beach, FL 33180

RICK DANGEROUS: Rick Dangerous is
a "heavily armed, rigorously trained, and
highly motivated" adventurer, who fights
hostile Amazons, explores Egyptian
temples, and destroys a Nazi missile base,
among other heroic feats. The story
sounds a lot like a certain movie hero
and the action game plays a lot like
something you'd see on a certain dedicated game machine. IBM, Amiga
(34.95), and the C-64 (29.95). Circle
Reader Service #11.

WHEEL OF FORTUNE: America's
favorite game show goes gold with a new
Gad Edition. This vision has over a
tho sand new p_zzles to keep you spinning, and a pr_ce that won't land you on
'B nkr_pt'. IBM, C64, and Apple II
($14.95). To buy a vowel, Circle Reader
Service #9.
JEOPARDY: "I'll take Computer Games
for $14.95." The answer is: "An updated
version of a computer game based on a
classic TV show, with 2,000 new answers
that need a question." "What is Jeopardy:
25th Anniversary Edition?." IBM, C64,
and Apple II ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

MicroSearch, Inc.
9896 S.W. Freeway
Houston, TX 77074
PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL SIMULATION: If you're looking for an extremely

sophisticated football simulation, look no
further. If you'd like an elegant interface
along with it, you're out of luck. This program has everything: complete league
play, statistics, weather conditions, instant
replay, modem play, 136 offensive and
104 defensive plays, you name it. Unfortunately it's got a horrendously complicated command interface to boot. If you
don't mind entering commands like
"OR.HB8PFQ.FBLFLL" (A blocking assignment for a sweep) then this is the last
football game you'll have to buy. Amiga
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #12.

Miles Computing
1810 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
LIVING JIGSAWS: A popular rainy day
past-time comes to life in this product.
Players attempt to reconstruct beautiful,
animated puzzles with pieces ranging in
complexity from 'super easy' to 'hard'.
The Help Elf will lend a hand if the player
has trouble, and an animated sequence
rewards the players success. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13.

Mindscape Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
SGT. SLAUGHTER'S MAT WARS:
Players take the duel role of wrestler and
manager in this simulation of the
glamourous sport of championship wrestling. Players bid for wrestlers in an auction, place bets on their fighters, and
then bite, scratch, and slug it out in the
ring with the typical array of pile drives
and head locks. C64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.
STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER:
The voyages of the starship Enterprise
continue (what happened to the five year
mission?) with the player in command of
this action/adventure which, obviously
enough, follows the plot of the most
recent film. With an Enterprise at half
capacity and under control of Sybok, the
renegade vulcan, the player must fight off
Klingon warships and avert an interstellar
war; all this while on a journey to the
legendary planet of Sha Ka Ree. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #15.

Psygnosis
P.O. Box 483
Addison, IL 60101
NEVER MIND: This is a unique, abstract
strategy game where the player must
reconstruct a scrambled painting in a 3
dimensional world. Transporting squares,
dissolving tiles, and chess pieces complicate things, and a puzzle time limit keeps

the action intense. The graphics are of
typical Psygnosis quality (gorgeous!) and
the game play, stimulating. Amiga. Circle
Reader Service #16.

Omnitrend Software
P.O. Box 733
West Simsbury, CT 06092
BREACH 2: The Breach tour of duty
continues with this new and improved version of the original squad-level game of
tactical combat. New victory conditions,
items, weapons, and opponents have
been added, as well as improved graphics
and a smoother interface (including
diagonal movement). This is the first of
Omnitrend's Interlocking Game System
(IGS) modules, promised to work as a
submodule of other games that will be
released in the future. Amiga, IBM. Circle
Reader Service #17.

Raecreations Software
7371 Pebblebrooke W. Dr.
Indianapolis, IN 46236
LAWMAN: This here's a wild west
simulation created usin' the World
Builder adventure creation system.
Players become the green horn sheriff of
a po-dunk town, filled with lawbreaking
varmints and such. The town includes a
General Store where shootin' irons can
be purchased, a doctor for removing lead
from yur hide, and a saloon where
players can gamble their buckaroos
playin' Faro and the Shell game. Tie yie
yippy yippy yeah! Mac ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #18.

Sierra On-line Inc.
Coursegold, CA 93614
Leisure Suit Larry III: See feature article
on page 18.

UBI Soft
1810 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
PRO TENNIS TOUR: Are rainy days or
an arthritic elbow keeping you away from
the courts? Well with this tennis simulation you can play at Wimbledon, the US
Open, Roland Garros, and the Australian
Open without lacing up your sneaks. The
game allows players to play an entire pro
tournament circuit against 3 levels of
computer competition. Players can compete against another player or they can
practice with an intelligent tennis
machine. IBM, ST ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #19.

Visionary Design Tech.
45 Whitehom Cres.
North York, Ontario
Canada M2J 3B1
VORTEX: A swirling whirlpool of energy
is the setting for this action game with a
different spin. One or two players try to
cool down the vortex by depriving it of its
anti-matter fuel, while avoiding the
molecular nasties that fly from its core.
Amiga. Circle Reader Service #20.

Winter C.E.S.
Continued from page 47
garners to encounter guerillas on the jungle
rivers of Colombia, Panama and Vietnam.
In more traditional terms, Dynamix was
demonstrating their A-10 Tank Killer scenario
disks with a new campaign that automatically
replaces the old ones. The new campaign is
available free off the company's bulletin board
or garners may purchase a disk and documentation for $12.95. Speaking of Dynamix, F-14
Tomcat was originally developed by the company for Activision. It was a hot product on
the C-64. Now, the MS-DOS version supports
both AdLib and Roland boards, offers bitmapped explosions, adjustable wings on the
Tomcat, digitized voice command directives
and ability to skip "flight school" if one so
desires.
Simulation fans who like driving games will
also have plenty to keep them busy in 1990. Indianapolis 500: The Simulation from
Electronic Arts has just shipped. The physics
of the model are more accurate than those in
its predecessor, Ferrari Formula I. "Ferrari"
was based on a two-point fulcrum, but "Indy"
uses a four point fulcrum. Any adhesive change
to any wheel causes a reaction. We felt like the
cars handled much more realistically, plus

there is all sorts of chrome, like "Instant
Replay" and being able to turn completely
around and crash head-on into other cars [Ed.
Note: for the truly sick gamer (you know who
you are!)]..
Spectrum-Holobyte was demonstrating
Stunt Driver, a race course construction set
that lets players drive Porsches, Mustangs, Vettes and more over courses that resemble a
cross between a miniature golf course and a
test track.

Place Your Bets
When the action gets fast and furious at the
Las Vegas craps tables, observers have to
move back and make way for the "players".
Right now, there's more action than we can fit
in this particular article. Next month, CGW will
try to make the appropriate "points" regarding
adventure/role-playing games and action
games.
Finally, for those who wonder where CGW
stands in this entertainment software "craps
shoot", we have placed our presence firmly on
the "Pass Line". We believe in technological advancement and believe that entertainment
software will drive it. Right now, disk-based publishers show the kinds of creativity that we
respect and believe that our readers will
respond to. So, hand us those chips. We're betting with the shooters.

Reader Input Device

