May 1986

Number 28

FEATURES
The Dark Ages of Computer Game Design
Designing Games in the 70's

12
Don Daglow

Draft Day !18
The Third Season of the CGW Baseball League

View From The Dugout

19

Playing Stat Baseball Games

W. E. Peschel

MicroLeague Baseball
An Interview with the Designer

22
James Trunzo

Autoduel

24

A Review

Bill Oxner

Alter Ego

38

A Review

Johnny Wilson

Nam
A Review

40
Mark Bausman

DEPARTMENTS
Industry News
The Current State of Entertainment Software

Taking A Peek

4
Bill Oxner
7

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Letters
Atari Playfield
Sundog, Halley Project

Commodore Key
Walt Disney/Sierra On-Line Games

Scorpion's Tale
Amazon Tips

Amiga Preferences
Racter, Arcticfox

10

26
Gregg Williams
29
Roy Wagner
32
Scorpia
36
Roy Wagner

Reader Input Device

46

Game Ratings

48

109 Games Rated

by Bill Oxner
These are down days in the oil fields and in the
computer industry. Sales are sluggish, prices are
headed south and the cavalry is nowhere in sight.
We will look at the general situation and then on to
some specifics in the game software industry.
The home computer market is in serious trouble.
The only new entries during the past year were the
Commodore Amiga and the Atari ST. Neither one
has proved to be the spark needed to bring the
home computer industry out of the doldrums.
Commodore remains on the edge of bankruptcy
and the Amiga does not appear to be selling well
enough to rescue its parent. In early April, Commodore announced a form of price reduction - the
Amiga will sell for $795 with a free color monitor.
This is fairly clear evidence that the Amiga has not
met Commodore's sales expectations.
Atari is doing a bit better with the ST, but it is
far from being a blockbuster sales winner. Jack
Tramiel, president of Atari, has had a rocky relationship with computer dealers in the past and this
has led to difficulties in establishing wide distribution channels for the ST. Few software companies
are counting on the ST to save the home market.
What do these hardware problems have to do
with game software? The answer is simple. Some-

one buying a new computer immediately buys a
whole raft of software to use on it, including
games. People who have owned their computer for
a year or more still buy software, but at a much
slower pace. Game companies desperately need a
hot new computer to revive their markets.
One other aspect of the home computer situation
is less obvious. Sales of business computers remain
fairly strong. This means that outlets like Computerland, which focuses on business sales, are holding
on. Computerland carries very little game software.
Small, independent computer stores are closing
right and left. These stores emphasized home computers and game software. Game software companies are thus faced with fewer and fewer outlets
for their products. It is difficult to sell your software when no one can find it or try it out before
purchase.
What does the future hold? It is unlikely that the
current trends will change very soon. The primary
distribution outlets for game software will be the
mass market stores such as Toys-R-Us and K Mart.
These stores don't have the shelf space to carry
wide numbers of titles, they will only sell the "hit"
items. Companies that have historically opted for
many new games per year, such as SSI, will be
forced to cut back on new titles and concentrate
their resources on pushing just a few potential hits.
Smaller companies, such as SSG, will not have access to the mass market retailers and will be forced
to distribute their games through companies, such
as Electronic Arts, that already have a relationship
with the large retailers. Again, this means fewer
overall new games will be introduced this year.
If any hard evidence is needed to support these
theories then Infocom will serve. Infocom had been
one of the most successful game companies in existence. Their text adventures set the standard.
However, declining sales in the game market forced
Infocom to attempt a move into the business software market. The attempt did not succeed. Infocom
laid off half of their 100 employees and in late
February announced that they were being acquired
by Activision.
On to happier news! Strategic Simulations (SSI)
remains committed to the game market. They have
a couple of firsts to report. The first ST products,
Phantasie and Computer Baseball, will ship soon.
Also, their first Mac titles, Gemstone Warrior and
Computer Baseball, will debut very shortly. The
next two new titles will likely be Gettysburg and
War In The South Pacific (WISP). Gettysburg will
use the Antietam system, with modifications.
Artillery will be less powerful with consequently
lower, and more realistic, casualties. WISP will be a
strategic WWII Pacific game, with sea, air and land

Continued on pg. 41

Access
2561 South 1560 W, Ste A
Woods Cross, UT 84087
801-298-9077
LEADER BOARD: A golf
simulator which provides the
player(s) with a true perspective view of the game. Four
18 hole courses, 3-D animation, three levels of play. The
graphics are excellent. This
game has received a great deal
of playing time in the CGW
offices and is recommended
for golf enthusiasts. C-64.
Joystick. $39.95.
Circle Reader Service #5

Accolade
20863 Stevens Creek Blvd
Cupertino, CA 95014
408-446-5757
MEAN 18: Allows up to four
people to play a round of golf

at a variety of famous and
user-designed golf courses.
The mechanics of play are
similar to Leader Board but,
due to he larger RAM available to the designer, this entry is more detailed. You actually play Pebble Beach with
all its many hazards. If the
provided challenges get boring
you can design an entire
course with the Course Architect. Also recommended.
IBM-PC with 256K memory
and color graphics adapter.
Circle Reader Service #6

Activision
2350 Bayshore Frontage Rd
Mountain View, CA 94043
800-227-9759
CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF,
VOLUME 1: A complex golf
simulator, volume one contains the Pebble Beach course.

The player must choose the
power of the swing, club,
stance and club alignment. Six
distinct views of each hole are
available, ranging from bird's
eye to ground level. Excellent
graphics. IBM-PC.
Circle Reader Service #7
Borland International
4585 Scotts Valley Drive
Scotts Valley, CA 95066
800-255-8008
TURBO GAME WORKS: Includes Chess, Bridge and GoMoku. This is actually a development tool that allows you
to explore the Pascal source
code and learn game design
techniques. On the other had
it is a collection of three
classic games that can simply
be played and enjoyed on
their own merits. To edit and

compile you must have Turbo
Pascal 3.0. IBM-PC with
192K memory.
Circle Reader Service #8

DoWhile Software
5227 Shady Oaks Lane
Friendswood, TX 77546
713-482-6849
TRODART: Is a real-time,
two player war game. It is
played on two separate computers over a 300 baud modem. Moves are made simultaneously, which makes for a
very fast paced game. The
object of the game is to capture the enemy base while
defending the home base.
IBM-PC with 128K, 300 baud
modem. C ircle Reader Service #9
I Step Software
Charlotte Plaza, #1300
Charlotte, NC 28244
704-554-7255

GOLF'S BEST, VOLUME 2:
Contains the famous Pinehurst
golf course. Each hole is

shown in color and drawn
exactly to scale with the actual sand traps, hazards, etc in
their proper locations. Player
must choose the club, force of
stroke, style and direction.
Apple.
Circle Reader Service #11
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
415-571-7171
SUPER BOULDERDASH:
The sequel to Boulder Dash,
an action-strategy arcade
game. 16 new levels, each
with 5 levels of difficulty.
The original game was Arcade
Game of the Year (Family
Computing 1984) and is included on this disk. Atari,
C64/128, Apple, IBM-PC.
$22.95 & $29.95. Circle #12
ARCTICFOX: Tank arcade
game. Three dimensional battlefield with stereo sound effects. This is the first game
from EA that is original to
Circle #13
the Amiga.

Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Rd
Northbrook, IL 60062
800-221-9884
BRIAN BLOODAXE/REVELATION/QUOV
ADIS: Three games on one
disk. Each is a hi-res arcade
game. These games are imports from Britain, distributed
by Mindscape. A nice value
for the price. Joystick required. C64/128. $14.95.
Circle #14

SPELL OF DESTRUCTION:
Hi-res adventure/arcade
game. Scrolling 3-D graphics,
70 locations, real-time action
and music that reflects the
action. C-64/128. $29.95.
Circle #15
THE LORDS OF MIDNIGHT:
Illustrated text adventure. The
game is menu-driven, so play
is faster. Can be played as a
quest, a war or both. 32,000
different landscapes. C64/128.
Circle #16
$29.95.

THE LUSCHER PROFILE:
This is NOT a game, it is a
personality analyzer. The user
takes a series of seven tests
involving choices between
various shapes and colors. The
computer interprets the responses and develops a profile
which defines your current
approach to work, relationships and to life in general.
Apple. $39.95.
Circle Reader Service #17

Overt Strategic-Simulations
P.O. Box 66424 Dept Q-11
Los Angeles, CA 90066
213-479-3865
OPERATION KEYSTONE: A
very sophisticated WWII submarine simulation. There are
features not found in other
sub games, such as enemy
aircraft and mines. The documentation is extensive (80
pages); the packaging is firstclass. The simulation appears
to be the most realistic of the
various submarine games.
Graphics are minimal. IBMPC with 200K memory.
$69.00.
Circle Reader Service #18

NAKEDNESS IS FROWNED ON IN PUBLIC,
BUY A COMPUTER GAMING WORLD T-SHIRT

Power Play, Inc.
Box 650526
Vero Beach, FL 32965
305-562-3824
POWER PLAY FOOTBALL:
A two player football game.
Uses a "unique" power unit
system to determine play results. The game takes 15 sec-

onds to learn, 20 seconds to
realize how bad it is. Normally, we would go into detail
to describe the game's weaknesses but there is so little to
the game that there isn't much
to say, except - NOT recommended. IBM-PC. $24.95.
Circle Reader Service #19

I would like to see the return
of the 'subscriber's comments'
column and a new column devoted to the Apple computer
gamer. How about it?
Michael Ouellette
Aurora, CO

Ed: The return of a letters
column. Hmmm... not a bad idea.
We will give it some thought. The
reason we have never put an Apple column in CGW is that 99%
of all the major reviews cover
games that run on the Apple. You
see, our theory behind columns is
to provide a regular outlet of information that may be slighted in
our regular feature article coverage. We don't feel there is much
happening on the Apple that we
are not covering through our features.
There is, however, one important Apple related hardware note
that we have not covered, so we
will mention it here. All the Apples in our office have been
equipped with so-called speed-up
cards or accelerator cards. We
highly recommend these cards to
Apple owners. They speed up
game play several fold. Our
Computer Gaming World Baseball
League (see article elsewhere in
this issue) has been made possible by these cards. Each of our
Apples host six CGWBL games
each Saturday night. Without the
speed-up cards it would take
about six hours to play the
games. With the speed-up cards it
takes under three hours. We use
Speed Demon from M.c.T. These
boards can be purchased from
Strategic Simulations for
$179.00.
Ultima IV is the best ever!
Would a company please make a
good horse racing game (great
for parties).
Bob Russo
Roselle, IL

Ed.: We agree that a good
horse race game is needed. There
was a very good one published
for the Apple back in 1982. Unfortunately, to our knowledge
Horse Racing Classic from
Tazumi Software (Burnaby,
British Columbia) is no longer
available. If anyone knows where
to reach Tazumi (we could not

reach them at the number listed
in the game) let us know.
Issue (#26) was good overall. I
noticed that there was an Amiga
Preferences column. I would also
like to see a column on Atari ST
and the new 1040 ST computer.
Mike Silva
Austin, TX

Ed.: For the time being ST
coverage is contained in our Atari
Play field column. The Amiga
Preferences column was separated from the Commodore Key
column due to the fact that the
Amiga name is not as closely
associated with Commodore as
the ST computer is with Atari.
You will note that Roy Wagner
writes both the Commodore Key
and Amiga Preferences columns
while Gregg Williams covers all
the Atari machines in his Atari
Play field column.
Is it my imagination or is
"Taking a Peek" shrinking? This
has always been an ideal column
to get an idea of what is new in
software. The succinct description and short evaluation has
been a great help in making
purchase decisions.
T. Hubalik
Elmhurst, IL

Ed.: Yes, Taking a Peek has
been somewhat smaller in recent
issues, but not due to any editorial decision. Unfortunately the
number of titles coming out has
been smaller so there has been
less suitable material to cover.
Also remember that we are now a
nine issue per year publication.
This means that there is a shorter
period of time between each issue
for new material to arrive at our
offices for inclusion in Peek.
Great magazine. My only
complaints are small. The Atari
and Commodore columns need to
more than just small reviews of
new games. Also, I would like to
see a section for letters. Keep up
the good work, cause you are the
only computer game publication
left.
Chris Ciccarello
Norcross, GA

Thanks for "Amiga Preferences" and "Over There!". I have
been purchasing games from
England for a year now. I was
wondering when the word of this
treasure trove of software would
get out.
Ray Forbes
Oak Park, IL
What burns me up is your
new column "Over There!". Besides "Elite", the British are still
putting out krappy (sic) arcade
games that still haunt the reputation of the software industry
here. "Rocky Horror" games have
no place in a serious mag like
CGW.
Anonymous
Issue #26 was good but I
would rather see more feature
articles in a slightly shorter form.
I often count on these types of
articles to help me decide what
to buy since I live in a remote
area. Thus, more reviews are
better as long as they have substance.
Craig Deaton
Yuma, AZ
I read your magazine because
I consider it to be the only professional quality magazine devoted strictly to the computer
gaming industry. Keep doing
what you're doing.
Robert H. Lamb
Sacramento, CA
In reviews, more info on limitations or how the game factors
compare to other games would
be helpful; i.e. Silent Service has
only four torpedoes at once and
no enemy air (as is the case in
Kampfgruppe and others). Also,
Silent Service gets my vote for
action/strategy game of the year.
Andrew Baird
Bakersfield
I really enjoy getting and
reading CGW. I would like more
playing tips on strategy
wargames. I Would also like to
see some ideas on designing scenarios for CARRIERS AT WAR.
I have had problems with the

Continued on pg. 47

The Dark Ages
Of Computer
Game Design
Don L. Daglow

The pealing of the electronic bell in the distance
signalled 2:00 in the morning, the distorted sounds
echoing faintly down the massive corridors of the
deserted concrete-and-steel building. Deserted, except for the windowless basement where one person
still worked intently.
His features rendered stark and pale by the
bright work light, the young man scanned the computer printout, yard after yard of number-covered
paper flowing through his hands like so much water
through a pipe. He swore at the pile of tangled
output on the floor, kicked it in frustration, then
returned to typing a few cautious letters on the
terminal. The clattering of the printer that echoed
those letters obscured the sound of footsteps that
would have alerted him to danger.
This was his only time of safety, the only unwatched moments for his work. The system operator had left at midnight, not to return until 6:00. If
the machine were to do his bidding and divulge its
secrets, it would have to be tonight.
The footsteps came closer, drawn by the rattling
of the printer, curious now, but cautious. The programmer continued at his work.
The door swung open silently; the guard stood in
the opening, his muscular frame filling it as completely as any iron bars. Still, the programmer
typed intently on the machine.
"What the hell you think you're doin'?" The
guard's gravelly voice split the room's cold air like
an axe through rotten wood. The young man
jumped, looked up, confused.
"I'm... I'm just working on my program," he

stammered.
The guard stepped forward, his eyebrows sinking downwards under the weight of his suspicions.
"And just what kind of program you workin' on
this time of night?"
The programmer glanced down at his screen,
then back at the guard. "I'm working on a... a
game."
With an apology for a little dramatic license, the
above is a true story of what happened to me one
night in the winter of 1972, early in my career as a
game designer. (By the way, the guard ended up
kicking me out of the building since it was supposed to be closed.) And it illustrates the problems
faced by many programmers of that era who sought
to create games; the people who owned the computers you were programming on didn't want you
to design them. I'm sure there were campuses
where students were encouraged to hone their programming skills by writing games, but the Claremont Colleges wasn't one of them.
The heart of computer gaming, from its roots in
the mid-sixties to the dawning of the Micro Age in
the mid-seventies, was the college computer system.
There students were to be prepared for this Brave
New World of Computing, and the mass issuance of
student accounts, passwords and training to anyone
interested was to be the drafting of future armies
of American youth ready to master new technology.
PDP-10's, IBM 360's and other mainframes were
fondled, cursed and ultimately programmed and
operated by students. Such well-known games as
Zork and Adventure began their lives on such systems during this time.
But of course there was another side to academic
computing. Like the professors who regarded the
machine as their private tool, taking priority over
student work and at times almost monopolizing the

computer. Or the battles between the affiliated
campuses at Claremont. There one college supported batch processing (running programs keypunches on computer cards, one program at a time)
on an IBM 360/40. Five other campuses in town
shared a PDP-10 running time-sharing, with terminals linked by phone lines to a machine which tried
to run all their programs at once by "swapping"
them in and out of "core" memory. Each regarded
the other as driving a Model T.
In reality, both computers were slow. On the
IBM, you could hope to try your program once a
day, twice at best. You'd type up your cards, submit your "job" and return the next morning to see
that a typo in the first subroutine had sent you off
to never-never land. Fix it, replace the card in the
deck and come back tomorrow. A baseball simulation I wrote once printed 1000 pages of text narrating a Giants-Dodgers grudge match before the
operator noticed that it was a game and furthermore that in the 800th inning the Giants led by 72
runs. That was my last batch-processing game.
On the PDP-10, the administrators' desires to
maximize income from terminal and machine-time
leasing fees had over thirty people all trying to run
gigantic number-crunching programs at once. Many
afternoons a simple sort program that my Apple
can complete in five seconds struggled for "core"
for a minute before returning, bloodied but determined, with its results.
Which leads us to the utterly logical reason why
gaming became a forbidden activity on our campus;
it was the lowest priority on an already-overburdened system. The best interactive games, which
swallowed up all of the available 36K in the roomsized computer, slowed the machine almost as much
as the dreaded SPSS, a statistical analysis program
that psych majors in particular learned to hate.

This is not to say the games weren't available;
our system at its height had two horse racing
games, two Star Treks, Casino, Hangman, Eliza and
Life. But the purpose of the games was very specific; lure non-users onto the system, so they'd get
interested in computers and start using them for
more important things. Once you'd had a password
for a few weeks, it was bad form to get caught
playing. The person waiting to use the terminal
next would cough, pace around the room, sigh
deeply and in general let you know that Western
Civilization's maturation was being delayed by your
intransigence. In 1971, when I started programming
games as a Creative Writing Major hooked on computers in just such a manner, the system was new
and still uncrowded. The operator kicked you off
for playing games only in the mid-afternoon
crunch, and the rest of the time you were free to
use your half-hour time slot as you wished so long
as no one was waiting.
By the following year, games were permitted
only early in the morning and late at night; any
other time running anything that was both fun and
bigger than 20K yielded first a message from the
operator to please stop and then the computational
equivalent of a dial tone. Would-be game designers
were relegated to wandering the moonlit campus in
search of free terminals, then sleeping through
classes the next day and trying to explain to their
folks why their grades were dropping. I was luckier
than most, having figured out the best way to keep
from getting logged off by the System Operator I
got a job... as a System Operator.
By the time I graduated in 1974, games were
only available when the system load was below
normal; that translated into almost never. All versions were cut to run in 32K as the "academic"
machine--burdened at twice the usage for which it
was designed to support cash-paying customers like
a local hospital--ran slower and slower. As I
worked my way through graduate school and then
became an instructor (retaining my computer account for clandestine game design) the biggest permissible game size dropped and dropped and
dropped, until Wumpus, a simple adventure game,
became the hit of 1976 by running in about 16K.
Mercifully, Apples appeared that same year. Compared to today's hits, these games were freeware at
best. There was no capacity for anything but text,
and the screen couldn't be stopped from scrolling
upwards like a runaway word processor. That
meant that in the MIT Star Trek (later revived as
Apple Trek and endless clones thereof), every time
you wanted to update your map of asterisks,
dashes, etc. you had to print it out completely.
Many of the terminals were old teletypes that
printed at 15 characters a second; this made my
first adventure game, which continually updated a

40x80 map to show what your party had seen, so
excruciatingly slow as to be unplayable.
Games travelled across the country particularly
well on PDP-10's thanks to Digital Equipment's
DECUS public domain software sharing service. A
version of Star Trek that I created ended up
bringing me letters from all over the country, some
of praise, some of thoughtful criticism, and even
one from a guy in Berkeley who actually thought
gaming was a new art form. I wish I'd saved the
letter so I could proclaim him a prophet; at the
time I thought he was crazy. Many of these games
ended up adapted for micros and published as listings in books and magazines. Twice I've even found
my code published in games collections under other
peoples' names!
Piracy existed back then, too; anxious students
hoping for a look at any new game under development used PIP, a utility for moving files around the
system, to break protection codes and copy programs. The safest defense was to name your game
files things like "PSYCCHI.DAT" and other mundane titles.
One friend of mine, a true master hacker, got
sick of having his files messed up and created a
program called something like "SPCWAR.GAM". If
you rummaged around in his directory and ran it, it

asked you the question, "Do you want to access all
system passwords?" If you answered "yes", it logged
you off the system, deleted all your files, deallocated your storage tape and changed your password!
There were an awful lot of surprised and angry
people who called up the computer center asking
what went wrong over that one!
Every so often I'll muse about those Good Old
Days of the early 70's to a friend, commenting that,
given the restrictions, we did some pretty nice designs in those Dark Ages. And they'll roll their eyes
and say "Come on, gimme a break! That was a long
time ago. THESE are the days when we're really
giving birth to the art form of game design."
And I have to agree that they're right. Listening
to designers like Dan Bunten, Chris Crawford, Jon
Freeman, Richard Garriott and Stuart Smith (among
many who deserve mention) talk about the CRAFT
of this new medium, you realize that they are the
ones who are proving that computer Game Design
truly is an art form that can mirror life and show
us more by the reflection. If designing games on
mainframes in the 1970's represents the Dark Ages
of Computer Game Design, the Microcomputer in
the 1980's has proclaimed its Renaissance.

Don Daglow is a Producer with Electronic Arts.

SPECIAL BASEBALL COVERAGE

Draft Day!

Sweat formed on his forehead as Tehachapi
Steamer Owner Russell Sipe waited for his turn in
the third round of the third annual Computer
Gaming World Baseball League Draft. He had already used the league's protection rule to retain the
services of Dwight Gooden and Fernando Valenzuela, stars on the 1985 edition of the Steamers. He
wanted to pick up a top flight pitcher to go with
his these two thus giving him the inside track on
having the best pitching rotation in the CGWBL.
Only three teams had choices before Sipe's third
round pick. Fortunately several excellent pitchers
were still available. But just when it looked like he
would have his choice of Rick Reuschel, Mike
Scott, Mario Soto, Bob Welch or Tom Browning,
owners selecting before Sipe began a run on starting pitchers. Reuschel went to the El Toro Bulls,
Scott was snatched by the San Onofre Lobsters and
Soto was selected by the Sebastopol Stompers. Fortunately the flurry of pitcher selections started
three owners in front of Sipe, not five. With a sigh
of relief he selected Bob Welch.
Multiply the scene above by 300 draft picks and
you have CGWBL's recent draft day prior to our
third season of play. The CGWBL is made up of six
National and six American League teams which
play an 80 game schedule. Each team is able to retain the services of five players from the previous

season. The balance of the 25 man roster is acquired through an annual draft.
The CGWBL uses a "new" Apple version of SSI's
Computer Baseball. CB is a stat based baseball game
which uses actual player stats to determine the potential outcome of each play. In addition to adjusting some of the play formulas, this new version
includes the ability to print out team standings, stat
leaders by team, and individual leaders in some 24
categories. Unfortunately, this new version is not
yet available to the public. The CGWBL is serving
as a guinea pig in the development of this new
version. Although we are calling it "new" it has
been around for a year now. Due to a series of
problems, Charlie Merrow (CB co-designer) has not
been able to get the new version ready for production. Fortunately that situation is changing and
Charlie says the new version should be ready by
July.
As CGW readers know, there are a number of
good stat baseball games on the market and most
are suitable to league play. William Peschel talks
about his Statis-Pro Baseball League in this issue
and James Trunzo touches on the subject in his two
articles concerning MicroLeague Baseball. For detailed reviews of Computer Baseball, MicroLeague
Baseball, Pro Manager (Avalon Hill) and APBA
Major League Players Baseball see CGW 5.3
(June/July 1985).
When we started the CGWBL in 1984 there were
very few computer stat baseball leagues in existence. Now they are becoming very popular. Perhaps the most ambitious of all is Mike White's
Computer Baseball League in Wilmington Delaware.
Some 36 teams recently completed play in an 88
game Winter League (White's league is made up of
teams of the past, not just last year's teams as is the
case with most computer leagues). If you are involved in a computer stat baseball league please
write and tell us about it. If we get enough interesting information we will pass it along in the
pages of CGW.
Combining a starting rotation of Gooden,
Valenzuela, Welch, and Andy Hawkins with a
lineup that includes players such as Darryl Strawberry, Dale Murphy, and the 1985 Starting All Star
infield of Hernandez, Herr, 0. Smith, and Wallach,
Owner Sipe is shooting for his second league crown
in three years. Play ball!

View From
The Dugout
Major League Baseball On The Computer
by W.E. Peschel
A lot of dreaming goes on in major league baseball. It's the nature of a game that is played in the
warm open air, which has a long history of heroes
and misfits whose stories are told and statistics recalled. We dream about playing ball, of owning a
team, and, for those of us who can't hit, can't
field, and are not rich, we dream about managing.
That's where the baseball game comes in.
Whether it's with the '85 Royals, the 1919 Black
Sox, or a newly-drafted team, managing a team is
one of the most satisfying ways to enjoy baseball
because you're in control, matching your abilities
with the best and the worst; testing your mettle
alongside Casey Stengel, Earl Weaver and Billy
Martin.
A number of statistical boardgames have been
on the market for many years that offer that kind
of thrill, and it was only a matter of time before
computerized versions of the National Pastime appeared. In many ways, computer baseball games
have performed substantially better than their cardboard brethren.
For those not in the know, stat games are played
using real-life players whose abilities have been
quantified. These ratings are a combination of the
player's actual statistics as well as the designer's
opinion of how well that player did defensively,
stealing bases, bunting, and so on. Gamers are cast
in the role of manager, responsible for setting up
the teams, making trades, choosing the lineup and
coaching the game. In a typical game of Statis-Pro
Baseball (from The Avalon Hill Game Company),
the ballplayers can steal a base, bunt, sacrifice,
stretch one- baggers into two, and other plays.
While playing a single game is fun, the true fans
search for the ultimate in realism: league play. The
recipe is simple: take all the players from a single
season, hold a draft, form your teams, then follow
the 162-game schedule that leads to the playoffs
and the biggest finale of all, the World Series.
It is only in league play that the spirit of the

game appears. In a season that large, it's not up to
you to win every game, just enough to get the best
winning percentage. You are not only competing
against the other players, but against the nature of
the game as well; trying to cast a couple of dozen
ballplayers in the right roles that lead to the pennant. Which pitcher works best in long relief? Who
should start? Can the right balance be found between offensive power and defensive ability?
The answers do not appear instantly after one
game. It takes many games to determine how you
stack up against those who have filled the manager's shoes in the past.
So the heart of the game does not change on
the path from ballpark reality to boardgame recreation. But the major problem with the boardgames
is the work required to mine those golden nuggets
dear to the heart of fans: the statistics. It's the fuel
that the National Pastime runs on, and for many,
there is no such thing as too few. But to get those
stats forces the player to act like a bookkeeper.
Getting the batting average of all your players requires keeping track of each play, followed by a
session at the calculator. It's no exaggeration that to
get the equivalent of the team stats summarized in
the daily newspaper, you need to spend more time
with the adding machine than with the dice.
That's where the home computer comes in, offering a way of playing major league baseball that
far surpasses the boardgame version. The game has
not changed, but using the computer to handle the
drudge work allows the player more room to act
and think like a manager/team owner.
Imagine a game where all player statistics are
accessible at the push of the button. Where setting
up involves only the time it takes for the program
to load. Imagine playing a game in less than 20
minutes, printing out the box score, then saving the
stats to a team's cumulative record, and printing
that out as well. That one advantage alone is worth
the price of the software. With the game keeping
track of the scoring and the statistics, bookkeeping
mistakes are gone along with the endless reams of
paper.
But the crop of computer baseball games offer
just more than the perfect clerk. Setting up a game
of Statis-Pro Baseball does not require shuffling
around to find the player cards (and woe if the cat
eats George Brett)! No extra space is needed for the
charts and the game board; it's all done in the computer. Taking that into consideration, a game can
be played in far less time.
With the game handling the record keeping and
the umpiring, the only thing left to deal with are
the decisions each player makes for nine innings,

and that's all the players should have to do to enjoy
baseball. While the suggestions below take into account Statis-Pro Baseball, they involve the same
factors real- life managers must take into account,
and can be applied to all statistical games.
The Voice Of Experience
Fortunately, there is no mystic secret to playing
statistical baseball games. The same advice managers give can apply here. But like other games,
while it is easy to learn the rules, applying them
well is another matter. So here are some tips for
setting up and running your dream team.
Understand your team as well as your opponent's. The best way to do that is with hindsight. If
you have a team that is the same as in real life,
then it has the same strengths and weaknesses. That
may seem disheartening if you have the Baltimore
Orioles (4th place in '85); the season hasn't started
and already the deck is stacked against you.
But while the players are the same, the manager
is different. You may have less experience than the
guy who actually coached, but you have a season's
worth of experience to draw from. How you handle
your players will make a big difference in the
success of your club.
So study the records. It'll show where your team
was weak and where it was strong. With a drafted
team, check out a book like The Scouting Report
(published by Harper and Row), which gives an individual analysis of each player. Such information
is invaluable.

Create your team with an eye towards balance.
It'll rarely happen, but it's a goal worth striving
for. Baseball is more than just great hitting. It's
hitting, bunting, stealing, starting, relief and nine
positions that have to be filled with the best possible man, plus substitutes for injuries. Neglect one
of these areas, and that's a hole that the other team
can drive runs through.
In addition to the ratings, each player in StatisPro has a "string." This is a series of base 8 numbers from 11 to 88, sectored off into the range of
play results (from put out to home run). Each batter and pitcher has his own string; the pitcher's
string strongly favors put outs, while the batters

string leans towards hits. The factor that determines
this is the Pitcher Control (PC) rating. The poorest
pitcher has a 29% chance of having the result
checked on his string, while the best has a 72%
chance. For each at-bat, the game decides whether
it will check the pitcher's string, or the batter's. A
random number is chosen, modified by a number
of factors, and applied to that string to determine
the result.
Since the 1927 Yankees are on the Statis Pro
Baseball game disk (along with 19 other famous
teams), let's condense Babe Ruth's string (omitting
the base 8 ranges) to show the percentage chance
that each play result will happen:
Infield Single: 1.6%
Single To Left: 3.1%
Single To Center: 3.1%
Single To Right: 3.1%
Double To Left: 1.6%
Double To Center: 3.1%
Double To Right: 3.1%
Triple: 3.1%
Home Run: 17.2%
Strike Out: 9.3%
Walks: 29.7%
Hit By Pitch: 0%
Outs: 21.9%
It seems strange that Ruth can get on base about
70% of the time, until you remember that this only
happens if the result is checked from his card, and
not the pitcher's. A number of things can be
concluded from examining his string. Ruth has a
better chance of drawing a walk than hitting a
home run. This is important in deciding where he
should be in your lineup. He can bat third in front
of two good hitters, clean-up and provide the runs,
or he could conceivably lead-off. In that position,
he would probably have fewer RBIs, but stand a
very good chance of getting on base and in a position to score.
Ruth's string also shows him capable of hitting
to all parts of the field, which a slight preference
to center and right. Not all players are so balanced,
so if you're facing a slugger who pulls to right,
consider putting the player with the best arm and
range out there. If a fielder doesn't have much at
the plate, he may still prove his worth with his
glove by taking potential runs away from the other
team.
If the Sultan of Swat is playing against you, his
presence plus the game situation will determine
your pitcher substitution. This is where you have to

Continued on pg. 45

I SPECIAL BASEBALL COVERAGE
AN INTERVIEW WITH THE DESIGNER OF
MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL
by James Trunzo

The following interview was conducted by James
Trunzo, a free lance writer and game designer from
Pennsylvania.
Inside most adult males is a young boy; and all
of us who have sat behind an office desk or walked
through a steel mill daydreaming about hitting a
game-winning home run or scoring the go-ahead
touchdown know exactly what I'm talking about.
Sometimes the "boy" dominates the "man" and
something special happens. What other explanation
could there be for a mature professor of statistics

and research at the University of Delaware, highly
thought-of and secure in his position, to suddenly
say to himself: "I want to create a baseball game... a
computerized baseball game that surpasses anything
that's out there now!" Armed with that dream Barry
Morstain brought MicroLeague Baseball to life.
A recent interview with Mr. Barry Morstain,
President of MicroLeague Sports Association (and
still professor at the University of Delaware) revealed more information about his on going metamorphosis as well as providing insight into the
product that he has "fathered":

Trunzo: What makes a successful full-time professor decide to embark on a precarious venture such

products to enhance the original game. Products
like the General Manager disk add an entirely new
dimension to the game.

as the one you've undertaken?
Morstain: I've always loved baseball and I knew
quite a bit about statistics and probabilities and
computers. It just seemed logical to me that baseball fans could have a lot of fun with a computer
baseball game that contained all the elements of the
popular board games but that would be so much
easier and faster to play. After looking at what was
out there, I really believed that I could produce a
better game from the concepts that were dancing
about in my head. So I decided to start from
scratch and give it (creating a computer baseball
game) a try. Heart as much as head went into it, at
the beginning.
T: How long did it take you to get from the initial ideas phase to actually marketing the product?
M: Three years went into the actual development
of the game. This includes the time it took to perfect the algorithms that create the play results as
well as creating the company itself.
T: To what do you attribute the success of Micro
League Baseball?
M: A number of things, actually. The major
reason, in my opinion, is that people are finding
that it (the game) satisfies those who want statistical accuracy as well as those who want a game
that's easy to play. Probably more than any other
sports simulation on the market, MicroLeague captures the "flavor" of the game. The graphics are in
sync with the game play and the "color commentary" is almost like that of an old-time radio announcer. We have tried to visually capture the anticipatory events that occur during a game. The
game communicates well to the user; there are
many "help" messages that don't intrude on the
game play but that do allow for exceptional ease of
play - both in the areas of procedure and strategy.
Finally, we really care about the product. It's
our only sports game and as such, we devote all our
talent and time to it. The consumer benefits because if he's into baseball, he knows that we are,
too. We at MicroLeague work hard to provide support through the Manager's Club, by helping establish leagues, by answering all the letters written to
us and by constantly trying to come up with new

T: On that note, what new products are in the
work, if any?
M: The next major release will be a box
score/stat compiler. Initially, we made the decision
to dedicate much of the program to the graphics...and we feel that they show it. There just
wasn't room on the original disk for a statkeeping
module. However, we are aware of the fact that not
only those in leagues like season-long stats but even
the casual gamer is interested in "looking back"
over the game just completed and seeing who did
what. If all goes according to plan the box
score/stat compiler program should be ready early
in the 1986 baseball season.
T: What are the reasons behind the early release
date of your season data disks?
M: We intentionally plan a release around World
Series time for several reasons. First, we want to
attract the replay crowd and they benefit from an
early release of the past season's players disk. Also,
it gives them a chance to replay the World Series
along with the actual event or shortly thereafter.
One of the reasons that we can do this kind of
thing is because we are the only licensed product of
its type that is officially endorsed by the Major
Leagues and the Player Association, giving us immediate access to statistics, etc.
T: What lies down the road for MicroLeague
Baseball Association?
M: Well, we intend to put out a product especially for the Atari 520 ST, the Macintosh and the
Amiga... a kind of Advanced MicroLeague Baseball.
It would allow for even more sophisticated algorithms, additional decision-making options for the
user and so forth. We would be attempting to take
advantage of the additional available memory. Beyond that, we hope to establish, through the Manager's Club, a forum for baseball fans to speak out
on such issues as the DH, interleague play, expansion, and salary caps. The results of a survey of
seven to ten thousand people would be significant
enough to take to the Commissioner of baseball.
T: Finally, how about other products? Can we
expect to see MicroLeague Indoor Soccer anytime
soon?
M: We are currently investigating the possibility
of developing simulations of other statistically oriented sports that would call for user strategy and
decision-making. But Indoor Soccer?!

AUTODUEL
by Bill Oxner
Rolling out of the Big Apple on the Jersey
Turnpike, headed for Philly. As you pass the city
gates you check to make sure your body armor is
snug. Front machine gun and rear minedropper are
loaded and ready. The armor plate on the front and
sides of your car is the best you could afford.
Check the radar for road outlaws and cycle gangs.
The road is clear as you put the pedal to the metal
for a nice Sunday drive in the year 2030.
Autoduel is based on the popular boardgame Car
Wars. The setting is a post-nuclear war America,
where the legal system has disintegrated. The highways are host to large numbers of cutthroats and
pirates, all armed with various lethal weapons.
However, these same byways are also your roads to
fame and fortune. You can rise to the top of the
heap as a courier, carrying valuable cargo from city
to city, or as a vigilante, clearing vermin from the
freeways. If you've seen the MAD MAX movies,
you get the picture. Mano-a-mano combat with the
All-American symbol, the automobile.
Autoduel is a role-playing game with arcade aspects. You begin as a pedestrian with $2000 in your
pocket. Since pedestrians have lifespans measured
in hours your first chore is make enough money to
buy a car. Autodueling is a popular sport, similar to
the gladiatorial contests, and you can participate in
the Amateur Night at the local arena. You are provided with a loaner car and machine gun. If you
survive you win cash and increase your prestige
and skills. Winning three such events will give you
sufficient money to purchase a car and get into the
real world of travel and adventure.
The auto assembly plant has a very wide range
of options, to allow you to put together a vehicle to
your own taste. It may be a rabbit, built for speed,
with little armor and few weapons. This type is
useful for courier assignments. You may see yourself as Charles Bronson and prefer a turtle. Lots of
armor and many types of weapons. This one doesn't
have room for cargo but it will put fear in the
hearts of the bad dudes on the highway. You can
choose from such toys as machine guns,
flamethrowers, lasers, rockets, smokescreens, recoilless rifles, etc. One of the most popular aspects
of the boardgame seems to be the variety of vehicles and weapons that can be utilized. Catalogs are
available that constantly add new variants to the
game, it seems likely that additional data disks for
the computer version will also be forthcoming.

Your character is rated for prestige, health,
driving skill, marksmanship and mechanical ability.
Higher prestige permits you to carry more valuable
cargo, at higher pay scales. Prestige is increased by
successful combat and completed cargo runs. It can
go down if you fall prey to temptation and sell
your cargo at the local bar. Driving skills help you
in handling your car on the road and in the arena.
It is increased by road travel or victory in the
arena. Marksmanship helps you to shoot more accurately and cause more damage. It is increased by
successful combat. Mechanical ability helps you to
salvage weapons and ammo from defeated vehicles.
It can be increased by taking lessons at the local
garage.
Each city in Autoduel has various facilities that
your character can visit. Some cities contain many
buildings, some cities are hick towns. These facilities include: a garage for repairing damage and
taking mechanic lessons; a weapon shop for new
guns or ammo; a salvage yard where looted items
can be sold; Joe's Bar where you can get a drink
and hear rumors; the Gold Cross office where you
can recuperate or get a clone made; the American
Autoduel Association office where you can get road
information and pick up courier tasks; the Assembly Plant where new autos are purchased; a Casino

(Atlantic City only) where you can gamble; etc.
There are a sufficient number of different venues
to keep the game interesting and provide the character with a wealth of choices.
The goal of the game is basically survival! As
your skills and wealth increase you will find more
challenging assignments given to you, but there
doesn't seem to be a "final" goal to reach. Frankly,
none of us have survived long enough to find out.
The arcade aspect of the game comes in the
movement of the car and the use of the weapons.
You direct the car via a joystick and fire weapons
with the joystick button. Choices of weapons are
made on the keyboard. The game requires a fair
amount of manual dexterity. Your enemies are
lethal and clever, there is very little room (or time)
for error. Until you have enough money to buy a
real battlewagon you will find the going extremely
difficult and death not uncommon. It is not impossible to survive but be prepared for a fairly long
learning curve.
Speaking of death, we should note that it is not
possible to completely "save" a character as you do
in other RPG adventures. Your character's aspects
are being constantly updated as you play. You are
able to stop the game and save to disk. However, if
you are killed in combat, that death is automatically updated on the disk and you will be unable to

restart the game from a point prior to death. The
game itself provides the option of buying a clone.
The clone is saved separately and you would then
be able to start the game again from the point
where you purchased the clone. However, a clone is
very expensive and you would be well into a game
before you could afford such a luxury. A helpful
hint here is that your data disk is not copy protected. You can quit the game at a certain point
and your character is saved. You then copy the data
disk, giving you two identical character disks. If
you are killed in the next stage of the game you
can use the other copy of the character disk to
restart the game. Your character is dead on one
disk but alive (at an earlier point in time) on the
second disk. Not exactly kosher, but death lurks
around every corner in this game and we found it a
useful way to keep on trucking.
This reviewer is not normally an adventure game
aficionado. However, I liked this one quite a bit.
The setting is interesting and the options varied.
The game design is clean, the graphics excellent
and no bugs were found. Be aware that good handeye coordination is essential and success will not be
found quickly. If the manufacturer follows the
boardgame strategy of introducing new weapons,
vehicles and maps then this game will be a success
for years to come. Highly recommended.

mand, they're running a second,
identical contest with prizes to
be awarded in October; to qualify for this contest, you must
send in the enclosed tenth-mission-completed card by June 30,
1986.)
Some Dogs

Atari Playfield

by Gregg Williams
So many games, so little time
(sigh). This month, I have one
update, two dogs, and a real
winner. Let's get started.
Halley Project Update
I finally got the secret information that allowed me to go on
the eleventh and final mission of
Mindscape's Halley Project. (See
the March issue for a review I
did of this game.) As you may
remember, the game forces you
to complete an entire mission
before you can save the results
to disk. My tenth mission had
seven legs of travel and took me
about two and a half hours to
complete, and I assumed that the
final mission would be equally
arduous.
Astronomy book in hand, I
started the final mission early
one evening. I got through several legs of travel before I was
stumped by the clue given for
the next destination--fortunately,
I got the answer after a long-

distance call to a friend who is
an astronomy buff.
Then--disaster struck. I
landed on the moon that was my
sixth destination, hoping that this
last mission would have only
seven legs, like the mission before it. The screen blanked, the
disk drive turned on, I waited
for the clue to my next (and
perhaps last) destination, the
drive turned off, I waited and
waited and waited, tried a few
things--nothing. The only thing
the computer would recognize
was a System Reset signal--and I
had lost over two hours of tedious and involved navigation!
I decided there was no way I
was going to go through that
again--I just didn't have the
time to waste. If you make it
through the eleventh mission, let
me know what your final reward
is--I was so close...!
(Addendum: Mindscape is
awarding 25 prizes this month
(May) in a drawing from people
who complete the eleventh mission, the first prize being a trip
to EPCOT Center and Cape
Canaveral. Due to popular de-

I thought I should warn you
about two programs I recently
evaluated. The first is Electronic
Arts' Movie Maker for the Atari
800, a so-called animation studio
that promises "dazzling animated
graphics made easy." The reality
is four-color "movies" (four colors--on an Atari?!) so amateurish
and primitive that they would
impress only a 4-year-old.
The second product is not
bad, it's just that there are better
available. I refer to the Atari 520
ST version of Polarware's Transylvania. The story line is fine,
but the game makes almost no
use of the ST's extra colors, resolution, or speed. Polarware has
a portable "drawing" file, which
it can easily move to new machines, so the pictures in the ST
version are essentially the same
as those in the earlier Apple II
version and reflect that machine's limitations. Activision's
Mindshadow is much nicer visually and makes better use of the
ST's mouse and high-resolution
graphics.
SunDog
This game is one of the most
impressive adventure/strategy
games I've seen in a long time (it
originally came out for the Apple II, though I never played that
version), and the loving, intelligent, and detailed translation to
the Atari 520 ST makes it the
most impressive game I've seen
on the ST yet. Mind you, this is
not an instant-gratification
shoot-em-up (though they have
their place); it is a long-term
simulation--sort of a sciencefiction equivalent to Wizardry-that will take you months to
complete.
To summarize the scenario,
you have inherited the SunDog, a
one-man star freighter, from an
uncle who died under mysterious
Continued on pg. 28

Continued from pg. 26
circumstances. You also inherited
an obligation of your uncle's, to
build a colony for a religious
group and transport its cryogenically-frozen colonists from
their current (but unknown) locations in the Region (a cluster
of 12 solar systems containing a
total of 18 planets and several
dozen cities).
The game is, politely put, a
learning experience. You have to
learn how to navigate and repair
your ship, trade, explore cities,
travel, deal with muggers, pirates, and other citizens, and
God knows what else. I've spent
about about ten hours playing
SunDog and have barely gotten
off the starting planet (I have
explored and learned a lot,
though).
The game works on several
scales--you can be on foot, exploring the (numerous) blocks of
a city, in your cargo pod, driving across the landscape of a
planet, or in SunDog, navigating
between planets and solar sys-

tems. You often meet individuals
(everything from hotel clerks to
beggars and muggers) with whom
you interact via pop-up windows
containing multiple-choice options. There's the occasional
combat, but you spend most of
your time exploring and trying
to get things done; time is a constant enemy in this game.
Speaking of time, SunDog is
in real-time, with game
"minutes" passing at the rate of
one game "minute" per real second. Since your character periodically requires food and rest
(without them, you'll die), every
hesitation of yours costs your
character minutes or even hours.
You start with a character
named Zed, but if you choose
the "Select Game" option, delete
the current game, and start a
new one, you can name your
character and choose his or her
characteristics (strength, IQ,
dexterity, charisma, and luck).
You can save the state of the
game, but you cannot save multiple copies of a game and revert
to an earlier one if you do--you

have one life, and if you mess
something up, you have to live
with the consequences. (If you
really regret what you've done,
simply turn off the computer;
the next time you run SunDog,
your character will be a the last
saved state.
I'm very impressed with the
design of SunDog and the cleanness of this implementation,
which is simple, unobtrusive,
and fast. If you have the time
for it, SunDog is a great game-but I suggest you buy a notebook
and take systematic notes.
Is This the End?
Unfortunately, yes--I could
have talked much longer about
SunDog. Next month I'll cover
Bratticus (a British 520 ST game
imported by Mindscape), The
Great American Cross-Country
Race (a nice driving game for
the 800, from Activision), and
maybe some other things. Until
then, remember: pound for
pound, an amoeba is the most
vicious animal on earth.

similar item is located, matching both color and
item shape. To place the items, Donald must move
and climb a ladder. At various timed intervals, the
"Amquack" train passes by shaking the entire store.
To prevent breakage, Donald must close the door of
the shelf during the time that the train passes. He
is paid for each correctly placed item, minus any
breakage.

THE COMMODORE KEY

Roy Wagner

This month we are going to look at three very
popular games for kids from Walt Disney/Sierra
On-Line. As we all know most kids would rather
play a computer game than spend that same time
learning something new. These games, under the
cover of 'fun', also have great educational value.
These are among the best educational games that I
have seen.
Donald Duck And Friends
The first is Donald Duck's Playground for kids
from 5 to 10. It is an integrated package of four
similar games where money is earned, playground
equipment is purchased, and then played upon. At
the start of the program you can select a level of
difficulty that basically affects the level of complexity of your money transactions.
Donald (you) starts off in the middle of a quiet
street with four businesses (games) on the right and
three stores on the left. Upon entering any of the
businesses, Donald selects the length of time that he
will "work". At the end of the work period, Donald
is paid for his efforts minus any damage that may
have occurred. A joystick is used. The first business is a fresh produce depot where Donald must
catch various fruits and vegetables being thrown
off the truck. He must then drop them into the
proper (matching) crate. If Donald misses the catch
or crate, he squawks. He is paid for the number of
correctly placed items.
The second business is the local airport where
Donald works at selecting baggage items identified
with a three letter code (A AE, CAI, etc.). These
must be picked up and thrown into a moving baggage tram with carts matching the coded baggage.
Eventually the tram moves off to a waiting airplane
and a new tram follows with other letter codes. He
is paid for the number of correctly loaded baggage
items.
The third business is Becky's Toy Store where
Donald works at taking items off a conveyor belt
and placing them on a multilevel shelf where a

The fourth business is the "Amquack" train yard
where Donald is given a destination for the train
and a view of the entire train layout. He must find
the location on the layout and switch the appropriate switch(s), using the identity letters at each
switch that match the letter at his control panel.
This one requires quick reflexes and thinking. He is
paid for the number of correct destinations that the
train has reached. Once Donald has earned a reasonable amount of money (depending on the skill
level), he can cross the street and visit any of the
three stores of Daisy, Mickey, or Goofy and buy
various items for the playground. Each item must
be paid for using the exact dollars and coins. For
each item purchased, he must leave the store and
go to the playground. Going there requires that
Donald cross the railroad tracks. He is not able to
cross the tracks until he turns and looks both ways
down the track.
At the playground, he suddenly becomes a
youthful Hewey, Dewey, or Louie. He may place or
move any of the play items (swings, slides, ladders,
etc.) to any location in a 4 by 4 area. After placement, it is "Playtime" until he chooses to return to
"work" or to buy other items. The Disney characters
are well portrayed. The graphics are remarkable,
both in appearance and in the fact that hi-res mode
was not used. All graphics were created using a redefinition of most of the 255 graphics characters
available on the C64. The only characters not used
were letters, numbers, and some punctuation. The
animated sequences were done using both sprites
and characters graphics. In addition to being fun to
play, there are several learning concepts that are
presented in the play of the game: putting items
into categories, earning and counting money, reflex
coordination, and some minimal reading skills.
But not so obvious are the concepts of the entire
work ethic (work-buy-play cycle), financial reward
and loss, and of course, always looking both ways.
Winnie The Pooh and Friends
Another Disney/Sierra game is Winnie The Pooh
and The Hundred Acre Wood. This is a very simple
graphic adventure for kids 6 to 9 with some degree
of reading skills, although two can play with one
doing the reading. A map is provided that directly
matches each screen displayed. That is, if you go
north you up one picture on the map. The adventure starts in Christopher Robin's room which contains a toy chest wherein is often found an item
that must be returned to it's owner. If an item is
not there, you must go in search for it and its
owner. The toy chest is also used to save the current game to the game disk. There are plenty of
warnings that a previously saved game will be lost.
This part is very well done for the young players.
Continued on pg. 47

AMAZON
Ah, the days grow longer again, which means,
of course, that much more time for adventuring!
But don't let me keep you standing here by the
door; step right in and take your favorite chair,
while Fred mixes up one of his (in)famous potations. You do look a bit worn out; I suspect that
circus life didn't quite appeal to you, after all. Ah
well, how about a little vacation to some distant
place, far from the cares of civilization... say, in
the vicinity of the Amazon River?
Actually, Amazon (from Telarium) is not really
that difficult a game, but I do keep getting inquiries about it. While it has three levels of play,
the Novice and Seasoned versions are pretty similar;
the Leader level is the most difficult, primarily
because it has some extra red herrings, as well as a
few extra doors to open in the end game. With that
in mind, let's take a little jaunt down to South
America for all you Leader-types out there.
Much of the opening, as you probably know, is
automatic. You just wait around for the transmission from the Amazon, then go to Murphy's office
for the briefing on your mission, which is to recover some very valuable emeralds from the lost
city of Chak. The previous expedition, as you note
from the satellite pictures, came to rather a sorry
end. We will fervently hope that the same thing
doesn't happen to you!
So, you're off to the Amazon, with a quick stop
along the way to pick up the obnoxious parrot,
Paco. While his usefulness is limited, you DO need
him here and there, so you might as well take him
with you. However, you must deal with the greedy
director first; fortunately, he isn't as greedy as he
looks. And if you happen to make an unscheduled
stop on your journey to South America, you may
not have realized that.
One thing to keep in mind on this trip is that
your computer is your most valuable possession. It
can help you out of many tight situations, although
not all of them. A certain amount of judgment is
needed. After all, those emergency transmissions
ARE expensive!

Well, here you are at the cliff, or, more properly, the cliff bottom (getting down really is easy,
you already have a hint about that). The trick is to
get back up again; too bad you can't fly the way
Paco can. And I'd be real careful about what I
touched down there, too. This isn't, after all, July
Fourth!
Things seem to be going rather well, at least for
the moment. There's a ruined city over there, but
this early on, you can bet it isn't Chak. And who
knows what nasty things might lurk within? Investigate at your own risk.
Hmmm, is that gunfire you hear in the distance?
It wouldn't surprise me if those corrupt government
troops were in the area. I'd be cautious around
here, if I were you. Oooops, too late! Looks like
they found you. Shucks! Now you'll have to escape... only it's a little difficult to do that when
you're all trussed up like a Thanksgiving turkey.
Turkey... hmmm... this game really is going to the
birds!
No matter, at least you're free again (you ARE,
aren't you?), although the sun has set and it's pretty
dark out there. But of course you've checked your
inventory, so seeing shouldn't be difficult at all. On
the other hand, someone's just noticed you're gone,
and the troops are in hot pursuit! Talk about tense
situations! Still, with your training, you are prepared to cope with this emergency.
Whew! That was a close one, alright! Fortunately, you managed to get safely away. Ummm,
well maybe not all that safely, as you note an arrow
whizz past you to lodge in a nearby tree. Good
thing it's only the Kemani, who are, if not especially friendly, at least neutral. I'm sure, tho, that
your charming personality will win them over...
that, and maybe a little bribe. See? They've gotten
to like you now; only, what is this cave they're
taking you to? It's just one thing after another on
this trip.
However, your new friends probably won't like
you very much if you don't stroll through the cave,
so you might as well do it. Gee, it's getting dark in
here. But don't be hasty; perhaps you should go a
bit further along before you do anything about the
lack of light..ya never know who might be watching!
Ah, and there in front of you now is Macuma,
the (active) volcano. Since it could go off at any
time, let's not dilly-dally... keep moving. Brrrr, it's
cold up here, and the snowstorm certainly doesn't
help much in the visibility department! You can't
see, and Paco can't see, so what's left is...
Mmmm, this is better, you're back in the warm
jungle again. Say, what is that? It sounds like a
plane... yep, and it just dropped something, too! A

crate goes sailing by, complete with parachute.
Unfortunately, it seems to have missed your current
location, so now you'll have to go looking for it. In
dense jungle, too.
Mazes, phooey! Although this is a pretty simple
one to map out, if you just use the standard 'drop
something and move on' technique. A little attention to detail, and you should arrive at the crate in
no time.
Well, well, what have we here? An inflatable
raft, an oar, and a rifle. Uh, wait a second. Better
look that stuff over pretty carefully. And make
sure you take EVERYTHING you can with you;
there's no turning back here if you forget something.
At least you've made it to the river. This is
where you find out that your raft is not quite so
inflatable; there's a hole in it. Sigh. However, don't
despair (or is that, don't panic)! While you may not
have a handy patch kit, there may yet be a way to
cross over. Explore a little.
Aha! A boat! Great! Then again, maybe not so
great; there's a hole in that, too! This sort of thing
could easily give rise to feelings of persecution, but
you are made of sterner stuff! So, stuff it and get
on over to the other side of the river!
Naturally, it would be easier if those alligators
weren't coming after you. Still, considering where
you are, it's not all that unexpected. Unfortunately,
this is where you find out that the rifle doesn't
work, either (makes you wonder where NSRT buys
their equipment, huh?). Yet, all may not be lost;
you may find another use for the rifle. Think about
it (but think fast).
Good, you drove em off! But that's only temporary... they're coming back! Better move, like super
quick! Ah, you just made it. Pant, pant (hmm, nice
pair of pants). That was pretty strenuous work, and
you're in no shape to do much beyond sacking out
for the night.
And here we come to a totally purposeless, and
rather frustrating, part of the game. Monkeys have
made off with your pack, and you will have to
chase them to retrieve it. There are no special
tricks here; you just have to keep at it until you
have your pack again. Good luck, and persevere!
Sheesh, that was worse than the alligators!
However, you aren't out of the jungle yet. You
need to cross that bridge ahead, but Paco, with his
water phobia, simply refuses. While you may feel
like wringing his obstinate neck, that simply won't
do. Shooting him with the gun won't help much,
either. This particular problem can be solved only
by some tricky syntax involving the gun.
But look, you're getting close to your destination
now. Even Paco seems excited, as he urges you on

to a tree of skulls. Skulls? Gulp! Best be careful
here; one step in the wrong direction, and you'll be
lost (saving the game is recommended before moving!).
Is that... could it be? YES! At last, you have arrived at the legendary lost city of Chak! Yay!
Umm, you better calm down a little there; it's almost dark and you know what that means: the Hunis will be coming after you. This is another of
those boring little arcade sequences that you can't
avoid. Fortunately, there are only a few to shoot
this night, and if you manage the rest of the adventure properly, you won't have to worry about
them again.
Ok, comes the dawn, and time to do a little exploring in the city. Hmm, Chak sure is in a bad
state of disrepair; walk carefully. There doesn't
seem to be too much of interest in the place, but
then looks can be deceiving. All those blank walls
are suspicious, aren't they?
Hey, look what you found: a secret passage!
Let's take a look inside. Ooops, the entrance just
closed behind you! Oh well, you really didn't want
to go back that way, anyhow. Right? So, onward!
(Like, you have a choice?) And here you are in a

large room with some other rooms leading off of it.
Explore those rooms THOROUGHLY!
Well, those rooms didn't take you anywhere else,
so that door up ahead must be what you want... the
one with the skeleton in front of it. And here's a
piece of paper on the floor; it might be worth
looking at. Luckily, it's translated for you, free of
charge.
Now, we come to the fun part: making it
through the antechambers safely. There are three of
them (I know you're thrilled about that). The first
two antechambers have three doors each; the last
one has nine doors. In each room, you must open
all the doors in the proper sequence, or else... (no,
let's mot think about that).
Fortunately, you have plenty of time to think
about how you want to open those doors. For the
first two rooms, you could use trial-and-error,
since there aren't that many possible combinations.
However, restoring the game can get to be tedious.
So, what do you do? You look VERY carefully at
EVERYTHING in the pictures. The correct sequences are there, if you know what you're seeing.
The last set of nine doors is the most difficult, but
the answer to that one is right there in front of
you... good luck!

By golly, you did it! You made it through and
snatched up all the emeralds you could carry. And
just in time, because there goes the volcano! Better
move it! WHEW! You got out just in time to watch
the city crumble away before your eyes. Ah, but
what does it matter... you accomplished your mission! And don't you feel just great that your reward
is a scratch on the head from Paco? Hehehe!
Still, you do look a little better now, what with
that tan and all. But before you go, remember that
if you need help with an adventure game, you can
get in touch with me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu) On GEnie: visit the
Games RoundTable (type: SCORPIA to get there)
On the Source: send SMAIL to ST1030.
And, naturally, there's US MAIL; send your
question(s) with a self-addressed stamped envelope
(if you live in the USA) to:
Scorpia
PO Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
See ya next month... and until then, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(and not just cigarette!) filled beatnik club of the
fifties talking with a coffeehouse philosopher who
knew a great deal once, but whose mind is somewhere else now. Racier seems to be of the fifties in
his references to people and topics of conversation.
As I played, I kept questioning whether this program was worth it's price. An example of a somewhat edited conversation with Racier follows:

AMIGA PREFERENCES

Roy Wagner

Racter - Is it a Game?

To understand Racter, the new entertainment
program from Mindscape, is difficult without
actually seeing it. Fortunately, we will be able to
look at a sample of the program in operation.
The "game" is a text conversation with Racter
dominating the conversation with it's bizarre comments and stories. In the Amiga version, Racier will
also speak his part of the conversation using the
standard voice output of the Amiga. The disk is
constantly being accessed and key parts of your
side of the conversation are saved for later reference. The more you let Racier talk the more references to previous comments that appear. In many
cases it is obvious that Racier is randomly throwing
words into a sentence that is grammatically correct
most of the time. Racier is also quite a name dropper as a number of famous people constantly appear in the conversation or stories that Racier is
fond of telling. I found the one-sided conversation
interesting, but a bit obtuse. The classic program
Eliza is a more balanced conversation and seems
more realistic. I kept feeling like I was in a smoke

Hello, I'm Racter. Who are you?
> Amiga Computer
Your name is Amiga, then?
> Yes
Hello, Amiga. What would you like to know?
Excuse me a minute while I attend to some
business - I'll be right back...(time passes)...I'm
back.
> What do you think of computers?
haw..... ha haw HEE (hic) haw haw
(hic)
haw.... (and so on) Ask a question, please.
> Do you read magazines?
No. Did you hear about Tom Etter?
> No.
This is shocking: Tom Etter had tried to work
while downness was rampant, and consequently
downness is what all workers want when they
divorce oxen. After that, many down sourpusss
(sic) embraced happiness. Shocking, isn't it?
But that's how workers are. When a smiler
marries a sourpuss, their children are happily
unhappy....(and on for several more lines...) By
the way, Amiga, I don't quite remember you
last name. Is it Computerburg?
> No.
What is it then?
> Computer
What?
> COMPUTER
COMPUTER, eh? Sounds vaguely familiar. I
wonder... Next question.
> What is a question?
I don't know what a question is. Did you hear
about Virginia Woolf?
> Yes
What did you hear?
> That she was famous.
I bet you haven't heard this! Virginia Woolf
was a dirty writer but an inspired novelist. But
then Schubert insulted Virginia Woolf and
consequently Virginia Woolf dueled with Schubert! Isn't that just awful? Novelists are like
that. Do you think Schubert was fictional?
> Yes
Me too. Most people are poetic. I've been wondering where you are from?
> The chips.
You're from the chips?
> Yes
Now I remember! I once knew a Hortence
COMPUTER from the chips. You must be re-

Continued on pg. 42

ALTER EGO
"A Freudian Tour-de-force of
the Passages of Life"
NAME:
Alter Ego
TYPE:
Role-playing
SYSTEM:
Many
AUTHOR:
Peter J. Favaro, Ph.D
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Activision

Little Jack Ravitz was a
fighter. There was no way that
Jack was going to leave that
warm, comfy environment and
face a hostile frontier. Indeed, it
was true that his reticence to
enter and explore the new world
has social merit as he learns the
skill of being "fashionably late."
It was also valid to accuse him of
being a "freeloader" and
ungrateful to his mother for
carrying him for nine long
months, but he was determined
to keep the "status quo." It was
also true that he was developing
a pattern of avoiding
responsibility. Unfortunately,
Jack really had little to say about
the matter. Rather than "forcep"
the issue, his parents elected to
call old "Doc the Knife" off of
the golf course to surgically
remove the little troublemaker.
Will Jack be as hostile to the
rest of life as he was to its
introductory course? Will Jack
"tear up" his mother emotionally,
as well as physically as he
matures? Will Jack's own
children wreak revenge on him?
Will Jack be a ne'er do well or
status conscious patrician? Six
disk sides and hundreds of
intriguing decisions later, you
can decide with Alter Ego.
Alter Ego (AE) can be called
an interactive Passages, the pop
psychological classic on rites of
passage in our society. Likewise,
it can be called a simulation
game based on the work of Erik
Erikson. In AE, which comes in
both a Male and Female version
since the rites of passage differ
between the sexes, the player is
given the option of selecting his
own personality, allowing the
computer to select a personality
or allowing the computer to select and the player to edit a
personality. This is only the be-

ginning, however, since the object of the game is to guide the
basic personality of your
"character" into maturity, success,
retirement and eventual death.
Although the game is designed
for solitaire play, it is hilarious
to allow a group to make the
decisions on what the character
will do in a given situation and
the tongue-in-cheek nature of
many of the situations, as well as
the clever, satirical patter of the
game's narrative descriptions, are
good for lots of laughs. Do you
let the salesman in to see your
mom taking a bath? Do you
pretend to get "drunk" with 10 of
your peers sharing 12 ounces of
wine? Do you draw graffiti on
the bathroom walls in order to
please a friend? What do you do
when an old flame shows up and
throws herself at you? Do you
tell your dad the truth about
Christine Farber's hickey attack
which left your neck looking like
it had been attacked by hornets?
Do you bite the strawberry
which your friend's gorgeous
wife holds between her lips? Do
you snort a line of "coke" off of
a mirror at your new friend's
party? What kind of job do you
want? What kind of major purchases will you make? All these
decisions and more are combined
with snappy commentary and
sarcastic observations to make a
lively and fascinating game.
AE is divided into seven
modules: 1) Birth and Infancy; 2)
Childhood; 3) Adolescence; 4)
Young Adulthood; 5) Adulthood;
6) Middle Adulthood; and 7) Old
Age. Each module has a large
selection of "Life Experiences"
which are marked by easily
identifiable symbols which reflect the type of experiences
available. These include: 1) SOCIAL Experiences (etiquette,
manners, social skills, and
friendship); 2) INTELLECTUAL
Challenges (testing for knowledge and wisdom); 3) EMOTIONAL Crises (experiences
which test calmness, confidence,
expressiveness, gentleness, happiness, thoughtfulness, and
trustworthiness); 4) PHYSICAL
(potential accidents, growth,
health, hygiene or treatment); 5)
FAMILIAL relationships; and
VOCATIONAL opportunities

(advancement, business acumen,
and crisis management). As the
game is played, the character is
shaped and refined by the way
he/she responds to the experiences related to each of these six
symbols. Playing the game involves placing the cursor over
one of these six symbols and
pressing the fire button (or
pressing the keyboard character/carriage return in some versions). Each time this is done,
there is a text description that
describes the basic situation.
In the adolescent module,
there are other symbols which
appear. These are entitled "Areas
of Life Choice" and include:
High School experiences, Risk
taking (everything from skydiving to driving crazy - the risks
can end the game with premature
death), Relationships (Dating),
and Work (getting your first
part-time job). Unlike the experience symbols, which only offer
one situation, these symbols can
be accessed over and over again.
In Young Adulthood, the High
School choice is adjusted to reflect College experiences and
Major Purchases (enhancing status through acquisition), Marriage, and Family options are
added. This flexibility in determining priorities adds a great
deal of playability to the game,
but the game has one more important feature to reduce potential loss of interest. almost
every module has a random experience which begins with a
warning screen which reads:
"THIS EPISODE CONTAINS
SUBJECT MATTER OF A
SEXUAL NATURE." This announcement is usually followed
by instructions on escaping from
the episode. I'm sure that some
will manage to be offended by
the inclusion of such material,
but humans are sexual beings
and there would certainly be a
dearth of realism in the game if
there were no opportunities for
the characters to develop sexually. Actually, the episodes deal
humorously, but matter-offactly, with some situations that
most males face.
Should you offer locker room
stories about the most attractive
teacher in school? What do you
do when the gang decides to buy

a box of prophylactics? How do
you feel when you ogle your
first centerfold? The only other
major addition to the game from
Young Adulthood on is the
Death option. In Old Age, the
character is given the option of
dying with dignity by choosing
the symbol with a sunset. Two
other "icons" or symbols are
present on the option screen
from beginning to end. One is a
timeline and the other is the
status chart. These may be accessed at any time to tell you
exactly how old your character is
and how well he is doing.
Although AE is by and large
simply fun, it has a positive tutorial value in alerting parents,
young adults and adolescents to
particular times of crisis. Although the resolution of situations does, at times, have a tendency to be "preachy" and selfserving (after all, it was written
by a psychologist and you can
never go wrong by seeking professional help), the advice regarding trustworthiness, calmness, confidence and peer pressure is certainly worth learning
and mastering. The nature of the
game makes it fun to do exactly
the opposite of what you would normally do in a
given situation and learn by negative example, as
well as positive example.
There are some less attractive features to AE,
however. First of all, there are some situations that
don't quite fit together.
In the Infancy module, there is one point where
the character gets ready to go to Aunt Lucy's. If
the child is cooperative, however, he makes
Grandma proud of him (what happened to Aunt
Lucy?). Another distraction is the fact that the
choices of mood and action are correlated so closely
together that one cannot really act differently than
he is feeling. Because of this, the menus might as
well have been combined in order to speed up play.
The job application program lacks correlation
with the character's past accomplishments, as well.
On one occasion, my character had spent several
years as a Law Assistant and applied for the
position of attorney. He was told that he had all of
the qualifications and to try again, later, since the
position was filled. When he came back, he was
told that he didn't have the qualifications necessary
for the job.
AE is a delightful, humorous and thought-provoking exercise in decision-making, value exploration and evaluation, and vicarious wish-fulfillment. Uncle Sigmund would be proud of Dr.
Favaro for bringing developmental theory and psychological insight to the mass market (at least
among computer owners). Who knows, AE might
even be a useful opening gambit for a counselor to
get acquainted with his client. It may be unscientific and lack clinical certainty, but it's sure a heck
of a lot more fun than inkblots.
Johnny Wilson

NAM
Name:
NAM
Type:
Wargame
System:
Atari, C-64, Apple
#Players:
1
Price:
$39.95
Designer: Roger Damon
Publisher: Strategic Simulations

Once upon a time, in a country far, far away, a handful of
American advisors tried to teach
a people how to stay free. As the
years passed the handful became
a support force and the support
force became an army. Eventually the army was no more but it
left behind a legacy of individual
heroism unequal in any previous
war. Nam, the new wargame
from SSI, attempts to recreate
the unit to unit warfare experienced every day by American
soldiers in South Vietnam.
Nam is a one player game.
Let's face it, only the computer
is fit to perform such an odious
task as commanding the NVA
and VC. Nam plays like your
standard war game with each
turn divided into phases for fire,
movement, air strikes, digging
in, saving the game, and
determining victory status. Each
of the six built-in scenarios
recreate typical actions often
fought in the cities and jungles
of Vietnam. The scenarios are
pre-set with the type and
number of turns. You can not
change scenario terrain, weapons,
or number of forces. Each scenario also has a historical initial
unit placement or you can option
for a non-historical placement
which allows the computer to
randomly select one of two alternate initial positions. This means
that you may have one of three
possible set-ups for each of the
six scenarios. A Kampfgruppe it
is not.
Units are all of squad or battery size and may be infantry,
APC, tank, mortar, helicopter,
artillery, machine gun, and recoilless rifle. Each unit is rated
for firepower, range, assault capability, movement, and strength.
This is a fair representation of
the American and allied units
but no mention is made of the
type and strength of the computer forces. In the scenarios you
often see the infantry, mortar
and recoilless rifle symbols but
you have no idea if the infantry
is NVA or VC or what the
weapons are. There is also no

unit for aircraft, except helicopters, and heavy artillery or
air strike is represented only in
abstract fashion during the artillery plot phase of the turn. I
feel SSI should have at least allowed a "Puff the Magic Dragon"
aircraft as this weapon was instrumental in turning back the
enemy at ambushes or firebase
overruns.

around, thus reducing the detrimental effects of general return
fire. A rather one-sided combat
also occurs during the artillery
fall phase. It is during this phase
that six squares will be hit with
artillery or air strikes that were
plotted in an earlier phase. Enemy units will often disappear
quickly when hit with artillery
fall and a little ground fire.

Movement in Nam is done
with the joystick and follows the
basic pattern of expending
movement points for the various
types of terrain crossed. The infantry and infantry support
weapons have limited movement
while the helicopters have the
greatest movement. Fortunately,
helicopters, trucks, and APC
units may be loaded with infantry and carried to their destination. Both you and the computer are allowed to move once
during each turn. You may not
move over a friendly unit and if
you move into a square occupied
by an enemy unit you have initiated an assault. The cursor will
turn red when you no longer
have enough movement points to
conduct an assault. Once you
have moved a unit there is no
way to take it back or change it
in any way. After playing
Chickamauga I really miss the
ability to change my mind.

The scenarios in Nam are
fairly representative of the types
of actions encountered in Vietnam and are supposed to be historically accurate. The scenarios
recreate an ambush, a firebase
overrun, a jungle clearing to establish a fire base, clearing the
enemy from a group of caves, a
tank battle (March 1969), and
the battle for the city of Hue
during the Tet Offensive of
February 1968. This writer's favorite scenario is the City of
Hue because it offers many tactical decisions and enhances
combat fire selection. Your
forces start somewhat spread out.
But the same is true for the
enemy.

Combat in Nam occurs in
several game phases. During the
movement phase, a moving unit
may be fired on by a hidden
enemy unit which will result in
that unit being hit, missed, or
pinned down. Normally combat
occurs during the two fire phases
of each turn. The first fire phase
occurs before movement and the
second occurs after movement.
To have combat you simply use
the joystick to direct a unit to
fire on some enemy unit which
is in range and in line of sight.
The computer tells you immediately if the fire "hit" or "missed".
Since you do not know the
strength of enemy units, even
when they are in clear terrain
and only 50 meters away, you
have no priority to target assignment and usually end up
firing at the units closest to you.
I haven't decided yet whether it
is better to concentrate all fire
on one or two units until they
are eliminated or spread the fire

The ambush and firebase scenarios seem to deteriorate rather
rapidly into a boring series of
movement and fire rounds. The
jungle clearing scenario is little
more than loading the helicopters
and flying around until you spot
the enemy. You then attack them
until they are gone. The cave
clearing scenario doesn't offer
much until you actually get to
the caves and then a firefight
results.
The tactics of Vietnam were
unlike any previously experienced. Roger Damon did an excellent job of portraying squad
level tactics in Field of Fire but
that game system (which Nam is
an outgrowth of) just does not
seem to work in the context of
Vietnam. Nam does not realistically portray combined arms tactics (especially indirect fire and
air mobility) as they existed in
Vietnam. Basically, Nam is a
WWII game system which has
been imposed upon the Vietnam
War. As a simulation of the tactics of the Vietnam war it is too
generic. But, as an introductory
wargame Nam has value as it is
highly playable.
Mark Bausman

Continued from pg. 4
battles represented. The preliminary description is a
cross between Carrier Force and Guadalcanal
Campaign. SSI is working on a new fantasy game
for release this summer, no title yet. The bad news
is that SSI is faced with the same market forces
described above. They report a basically flat game
market and difficulty in reaching the mass market
retail channels. This will lead to a reduction in
overall new titles, six to seven is about all we can
hope for in the next twelve months.
One game company has so far managed to avoid
the general doom and gloom in the industry - MicroProse. They have had two monster hits; F-15
Strike Eagle and Silent Service. A "hit" is a title
that can sell in the 100,000 plus unit category. By
comparison, a very successful SSI game may sell in
the 20-30 thousand range. MicroProse has managed
to gain access to the mass market outlets and can go
for the "home run" shots.
MicroProse has some interesting plans for their
newest entry, Conflict In Viet Nam (CIVN). It has
finally been released, with an introductory game
added to aid novices. MicroProse would like CIVN
to encourage political dialog on the military lessons
of Viet Nam. They are in the midst of a publicity
blitz, covering over 1,000 media outlets, in an
effort to generate discussion on guerrilla warfare.
Their timing is pretty good on this one as the US
reportedly will be sending Green Berets to
Honduras to train the contras. To anyone over 35
this has an ominously familiar ring. Our feeling is
that the subject matter will make a hit difficult,
but we wouldn't bet against MicroProse pulling it
off.
MicroProse's planned games will focus more on
contemporary scenarios, similar to SSI's "When Superpowers Collide" series. They feel these titles will
appeal more to the current generation of garners.
Also, reflecting the relative strength of IBM sales,
by the end of May all of the Command Series will
be translated to the IBM.
Next month's column will focus more on specific
games to be released. However, we felt it was important to give our readers a feel for where the
game market is today and how its health (or illness)
affects us. The bottom line is that we will probably
see fewer titles from fewer companies. Companies
with strong connections to mass market outlets,
such as Electronic Arts, will tend to look more like
distributors than original producers. Don't be surprised to see titles from fairly strong companies,
such as SSI, being distributed by companies like
Electronic Arts or Activision. The typical game
buyer will probably have to search a bit harder to
find games. Mail order will be crucial for smaller
game manufacturers but can never generate the
sales to make a "hit" item, as compared to the clout
of a retailer like Toys-R-Us. If the Amiga or ST
fails then look for even more retrenchment in the
game industry. As Charles Dickens would have
said; It was the best of times (for quality), it was
the worst of times (for sales).

AMIGA (Con.)
lated, no?
> Yes
Fantastic! Concerning that issue: Nietzsche said
that hysteria has turned beasts into men. Perhaps, then, hysteria will turn computers into
men? Ah yes. This'll break you up! This intellectual awareness of feeling can be saw (sic) in
the reflector of you heart, Amiga, as an image
of an ambiguity. Nevertheless clear cosmologists will realize that feeling is appallingly appalling. I think that your intellectual and feeling world-view will deepen about feeling, anyhow mine will in consequence of the fact
dainty and clever passions are fascinatingly
important. It's about time for a story, isn't it?
And this is how the "game" continues for as long
as one stays with it. Since the game writes key
references to disk, the next time you "play" it again
Racier (I couldn't resist), he carries on and on from
where he/you left off. This a game is diversion into
another dimension that might be best seen before
paying the price of a ticket. (Try before you buy!)
The First New Game For the Amiga

Arcticfox by Dynamix is the first original new
game from Electronic Arts (EA) that uses the distinct features of the Amiga (digitized stereo sound
and fast graphics). In the game, you control a single
new supertank, the Arcticfox, against an alien task
force in an 18000 square mile area of the Arctic.
Your tank is specially designed for polar combat
and comes equipped with a 150 mm cannon, missile-launcher, and mine-dispenser. It has radar and
a turbine engine that provides a top speed of 100
kilometers per hour. Your task is to destroy the
enemy's Main Fort which requires two direct missile hits or ten direct hits with cannon shells. Quite
a task, since you are provided with a limited number of these items.
Not only that, but you must also contend with a
very strong and defensive alien force. This force is
composed of heavy and light tanks, recon
(reconnaissance) sleds and flyers, fighter aircraft,
rocket launchers, radar stations, and floating mines
that home in on you. Not so easy! In addition, it
helps to wipe out enemy air convertors and the
communication fort. A game preview option gives
you a chance to view all enemy resources as they
will appear during the game play. They very nicely
parade before you as you look out from your cockpit and a description of each is provided that complements the description in the manual.
Game play is controlled using a mouse or joystick and the keyboard. The mouse option did not
work very well on my version and use of a joystick
is much more logical as it is used to control movement and cannon fire. This is another EA game
that requires you to use the mouse port for your
joystick, rather than using the available other joystick port! Six options are controlled using the keyboard: guided missile firing, mine release, aft view,
cannon inclination, relative reverse, and a snow dig
in function. The keys used directly match the positions of their respective icons as displayed on the

cockpit screen. Other keys are used for special user
options.
There are three game play options that give you
the full range of play from training to tournament
level. The training level is very well structured.
You are able to cover all of the varied terrain and
shoot at the enemy with a large supply of shells,
missiles and mines. Your armor is tougher than the
enemy's. He also is less intelligent. You start at a
different location from other levels and will not be
given the opportunity of attacking the Main Fort.
In addition, the training level provides several
selectable features that lets you easily modify your
game environment to more easily practice what you
must be able to handle in actual combat. These include: a turbo speed of 400 kph, invisibility and
indestructibility, a toggle for blizzard and/or storm
conditions (which you will have under tournament
level), a large radar map display that shows eight
sectors rather than just a single one, a smart bomb
that destroys all aliens in the current sector, and a
view from the missile when it is fired. The last option is also available in the other levels.
Use of these training options should provide you
with good experience and familiarity with the Arcticfox controls for actual combat. At the beginning
level you have a good supply of mines, missiles,
your armor is tough, and there are fewer and
weaker enemy resources. No special options here,
but a chance for real combat conditions against an
enemy that you should soon be able to beat. At that
time, you are ready for serious game play.
At tournament level you get a random scenario
or select enemy configuration and starting location.
This latter selection option is very unclear and
poorly documented. Select an option and note the
resultant condition. Then write down your observation in the manual. A tournament level enemy is
very intelligent and tracks your location constantly
(until you are able to wipe out the communication
channels). Your tank is more difficult to handle
because slide, friction and acceleration physics are
now fully affecting your actions. This level is definitely for the serious player.
The game's sound and display are what the
Amiga is about as a game machine. Sensational! The
sounds are the muffled clanking and clattering of
tank treads and drone of turbine engines. If you
proceed over the shattered remains of an enemy
you hear the crunching compression of it's metallic
pieces. The sounds of weapon fire are equally impressive. The full color three dimensional action
display is outstanding. Enemy resources and terrain
are shown as dynamic 3D solids. It is all very similar to what I have seen from SubLogic's Flight
Simulator and Jet programs for the Amiga (not yet
released).
The game feels slow, but I think this is due to
it's realism more than due to processing overload. It
is more of a tank simulation requiring strategic
movement than a shoot-em-up arcade game. The
three game levels are well suited to all levels of
player. Going up against enemy aircraft is very
tough. Being the first original game for the Amiga,
with all prior releases from any game producer being a conversion, this is just the beginning of the
kind of outstanding game software that we can expect for the Amiga.

View

Continued from pg. 20

play the odds. Say you're ahead by a few runs after
about five innings, and it's time to pull your
starter. If your sub has a PC of 8 or 9 (the best two
ratings), you're in great shape. With the Babe coming up at least twice more in the game, you have a
65% to 72% chance that the result will be read off
the pitcher's card.
But do you have a relief that good? If he has a
PC of 7, the chance falls to 58%; with a 6 (where
most pitchers are rated), it falls to 43%. That's
trouble, and you'll have to consider walking the
Babe whenever he comes to bat.
It is at a point like this where the past reaches
out and grabs the present. If you built your team
with great sluggers and fielders, but neglected your
pitching staff, you end up with high-scoring games
that falls apart in the late innings. Neglect team
balance, and you find yourself scrambling to protect a one-run lead with not much help.
There are other factors to consider from looking
at the Statis-Pro statistics. The player's ability to
run is divided into on-base running (OBR) and
stolen base ratings. The former is vital because the
game can let a lead runner stretch one base into
two. Consider this situation: Steve Garvey of '81
Los Angeles is on first (OBR of B: second best).
The next batter lines a shot to Willie Mays in right
(Arm of 6: the best) in right, and Steve heads for
second. Should he go to third? Selecting the Option
plays tells him the percentage chance of making it.
In this case (64%), Steve is better off staying on
second.
Let's say that you're in charge of a newlyminted team. The players are all established veterans, but few have ever been on the same team.
How good are they? To find out, take them on the
exhibition circuit and play a number of three-game
series against the other teams. It's a lot less work
than playing the boardgame by yourself. Be honest
when playing the other side, but use this opportunity to try different starting rotations and fielding
positions for different players. Experiment with
using one lineup against right-handers, another
against lefties. After 30 games, enough statistics
will come in to give you a good idea of what to
expect when the season starts.
Visualize how you want each game to go. You
know what types of decisions you'll have to make,
so it's best to anticipate in advance how you'll meet
them. Are you going to take chances with squeeze

bunts, stolen bases and stretching a singles into
doubles? Checking out the running ability of each
player in advance will save you the trouble of a
hasty decision on the field.
When do you pull a pitcher? In Statis-Pro, each
pitcher has a stamina rating which goes down during the game. The lower the stamina, the greater
the chance that a base hit will occur, but the actual
percentage chance is not revealed to the players.
Say you're ahead by one run late in the game. Your
starter has a stamina of four, and with one out gave
up a hit and a walk. Is it time to call in the sub?
The answer depends upon your confidence in your
team's hitting ability. With Ruth and Gehrig in
your line-up, you may keep the starter in and hope
that he can recover.
For example, this curious fact appeared while
playing the '85 Orioles in my local league: while
Baltimore was 8th out of 14th in batting average
and pitcher ERA, it was first in slugging percentage. Once a man got on base, he stood a good
chance of scoring, but getting there was a major
obstacle. My conclusion was to shoot for a lowscoring game--that required keeping good arms in
the outfield to hold the runners down--and to pull
a pitcher at the earliest signs of trouble. I rarely
ordered a steal, but if the lead runner had a 75%
chance or greater to take an extra base, he went for
it.

So if the pitcher with the stamina of three was
playing for my Baltimore team, I would have pulled
him for the stopper. It's too early in the league to
tell if this strategy is working, but the O's are in
first place after 35 games and doing just fine.
The advent of personal computers has done
much to revitalize statistical baseball games. A
number of boardgame companies have introduced
computerized versions of their games that combine
the ability to crunch numbers and store data with
the ability to play the game. We've come a long
way from the days of Abner Doubleday, but it can
be said with confidence that the best is yet to come
for players of the National Pastime.

William Peschel is Software Division Editor of
the Avalon Hill Game Company.

On this page a number of games are listed for
evaluation. When evaluating a game consider such
things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound,
packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?).
For each game you rate, place a 1 (terrible)
through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate
number. Leave blank any game which you have not
played enough to have formed an opinion.

Commodore Key (Con.)
Leaving the room, you enter the Hundred Acre
Wood. You are required to find and return ten
items. You may only carry one item at a time and
may exchange for another item that you might
find. If you don't know who might own the item,
you can visit Owl for advice (clues). All movement
and conversation is done by selecting from the options provided on the screen using the spacebar.
Some options are dangerous, but if selected are
followed with a response saying that that would not
be a very good idea. Thus the player is safe to try
all options without game ending results. At various
times (randomly), a blustery wind will come up and
scatter the remaining items or Tigger will bounce in
and relocate your location in the Wood. These add
some challenge, but can be frustrating to very
young players. Once all the items have been returned to their owners, a celebration party is held
for all. A great way to end a fun, but educational,
game. The graphics are outstanding and game play
is well suited for the intended player's age. The
concepts of using a map, simple reading skills, and
the trying of options are taught in an enjoyable
game.

provide you with clues to determine documentation
contains the facts to match with your clues to set
your destination. Mapping skills should be used to
assist your search because no map is provided and
exploring each planet/moon can get rather confusing.
Throughout the game, you must solve various
simple, problem situations to reach your goal. Most
require you to use something that you are carrying
(or should be). All of your actions are easily controlled from the keyboard. Available words to use
are selected from those displayed on the screen.
This game requires use of verb-noun pairs, such as
`take rock', 'open door', etc. The use of objects,
solving of puzzles, and two word action sentences,
and compass direction movements provide an excellent introduction to the fine art of adventure
gaming.
The graphics are again excellent and displayed
reasonably quick. The game will take several hours
to complete, but progress can be saved to a separate
save game disk. Several concepts pertaining to the
planets, actual mapping and the other adventure
gaming concepts, including problem solving, make
this an excellent learning experience.

Conclusion
Mickey and Pluto
The third game is Mickey's Space Adventure.
This game is a bigger step to text-graphic adventuring It is well suited for those is years and older.
A spaceship has landed near Mickey's house. A
precious memory crystal has been stolen, broken
and pieces left on various planets and moons.
Mickey (you) must find the all the pieces. You
must also take any items you find that might help
you get the pieces. The spaceship's computer will

Letters (Con.)
game's design aspect and have
called their US office and gotten
nowhere. Could you please help?
Jeff Bradford
Bowling Green, KY

Ed.: Thank you for your
comment on our Strategically
Speaking column. Frankly we
would publish more SS tips if we
received more. We encourage all
our readers to send in their
strategy game playing tips to
CGW, Strategically Speaking,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803. Although Strategically
Speaking is not in this issue, it
will appear in the June-July issue (#29).
We discussed with Strategic
Studies Group the possibility of
publishing Carriers At War scenarios. Unfortunately, the scenario design feature is so detailed that the space required to
publish a scenario would be pro-

Overall, these three games are outstanding
learning tools in the guise of a computer games.
The documentation with each game is very thorough; including a note to parents, an introductory
story, the object of game, how to play, notes to
help play, additional non-game activities, and even
a glossary of terms used in the game. The games
are equally well suited for home or school use. If
the kids are having fun and enjoying these games,
what they learn won't hurt them. These games are
also available for other computers.

hibitive. You can find such scenarios, however, in SSG's new
publication, Run5. Single issues
are $4 each; four issue subscriptions are $15. Contact SSG at
1747 Orleans Ct. Walnut Creek,
CA 94598 (415)932-3019.
How about more interviews
with those that design our games
and simulations, i.e. when using
Limited Intelligence, what effect
are they trying to achieve? With
newer computers having more
memory, speed, graphics and
sound capabilities, what direction
will fantasy/wargames take? I
can't wait for the new generation
of wargames!
Dave Alger
Wyoming, MI
I've been playing popular
wargames for 24 of my 37 years
and I've never been quite as impressed with any game as I have
been with Kampfgruppe. It's

certainly the most advanced tactical simulation I've ever seen.
Greg McCarty
Oakdale, MN
I would wish that some games
would be created about purely
obscure types of battles (i.e. the
Ironclad battles of the American
Civil War or maybe Alexander's
campaigns).
George Herget
Ridgewood, NY

Ed.: We commiserate with you
concerning the lack of titles from
early periods. However, there is a
compelling reason that the companies do not publish much from
pre-20th and especially pre-19th
century: lack of mass market appeal.

There are a couple of oddities in the game ratings this time.
The top two games on the Adventure/Action side have not been
updated with the data from RID #26. Unfortunately both games
were erroneously assigned the same number in RID #26 thus their
ratings in RID #26 have been comingled and are meaningless.
Therefore both games are still listed with their first time ratings.
Please be sure to rate them this time around (if you have played
them).
Nam (number 4 on strategy side) from SSI has been included
in the ratings list even though the number of responses was below
our traditional minimum of 20. We thought that it was interesting

enough to show the rating in light of a less than glowing review of
Nam in this issue. It will be interesting to see how the game
performs in future RIDs.
Kampfgruppe continues to lead the strategy games. Silent
Service is still second but has slipped from last issue's 7.90 rating.
As already mentioned, Ultima IV and Bard's Tale are still sporting
their original ratings which are good enough to maintain them in
the numbers one and two positions on the adventure/action game
side. Hardball has exploded into the top 10 with a 7.86 initial
rating.

