October 1990

Number 75

Features
Dynamix and the Red Baron

6

The World War I Fighter Simulation / Russell Sipe

10

Storm Across Europe

Familiar Style of Continental Conquest / M. Evan Brooks

Hits and Misses for Strategy Gamers

11

M. Evan Brooks Rates Pre-20th Century Strategy Games

Their Finest Hour Strategy Tips

16

A New William Tell Overture

20

Nuclear War for Fun and Profit

36

Pre-Flight Briefing for German Pilots / Roger White
Electronic Zoo's Action/Adventure / Allen Greenberg

New World's Fast-Playing Strategy Game / Chuck Moss

Imperial Strategems
Strategy Notes on

Empire / Glenn Kenny

43

Electronic Arts' Projectyle

48

Tri-Ball Tips and Tactics / Alan Emrich & Chris Lombardi

Search for the King Hints

51

CGW's Free-for-All Page

72

"Scorpion's Tale" Offers Talented Tips / Scorpia

A New Feature Offers a Chance to Win Free Goodies

Departments
Taking A Peek
The Rumor Bag
Letters from Paradise
Scorpion's View (Secret of the Silver Blades)
Over There (European Games Report)
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Reader Input Device
Editorial

8
14
22
27
32
40
41
67
80

Sneak Preview

T

he Chinese are noted for

seen, however, we think they could
well accomplish their three goals.

naming years after animals;
The Year of The Snake, The
Year of The Horse, etc. Computer
gamers can use the same technique. For computer garners, last
year was The Year of The Tank (M1 Tank Platoon, TANK, Abrams
Battle Tank, Steel Thunder). This
year will be known as The Year Of
The Dogfight. No less than four
WWI air combat games are poised
to swoop down upon us (Red
Baron, Wings, Blue Max, and
Knights Of The Sky). Each is due
out before Christmas and gets
preliminary nods of approval from
the CGW staff.

In game play you choose between
single missions or the campaign
called Career). The single missions
include: Patrol The Front; Take
Down A Zeppelin; Escort a Bombing Raid; Dogfight A Famous Ace;
Stop A Bombing Raid; Fly An Historical Mission; Dogfight A
Squadron; Defend A Balloon; and
Escort A Reconnaissance Mission.
When you embark upon a Career
(campaign) you begin as a 2nd
Lieutenant. You are assigned a duty
station somewhere in Europe and
are assigned an aircraft. With success comes promotion, some say
as to your assigned duty station, a
better choice of planes, and assignment as the squadron commander.
As squadron commander, you give
general assignments and tactical
commands (attack, drop below,
retreat, etc.) to the planes in your
group.

Microprose's Knights of The Sky
will allow modem play; ThreeSixty's Blue Max (originally entitled Ace of Aces 11) has several options including a pure strategy
game, split-screen two-player control, and modem play; and
Cinemaware's Wings cinematic/action game is based on the diary of
an actual WWI pilot. CGW received
a detailed advance look at another
of the games, Red Baron from
Dynamix.

The terrain includes all of the
Western Front. London, Paris, Verdun, and The Somme are all there
in nice detail. The campaign game
is linearly progressive. For example,
as action at Verdun heats up, the
chance of being assigned there increases.

When playing Red Baron, one is
impressed with the amount of hard
work that went into the presentation
(graphics and sound), interface,
realism, and game design. How
much hard work? According to Red
Baron designer Damon Slye, the
game has required five man-years
to develop! Compare that to the two and
a half man-years it took to develop last
year's A-10 Tank Killer and you begin
to understand how much energy has
been put into this WWI simulation.
Dynamix has three goals in mind with
Red Baron: get the flight dynamics
right; make sure the dogfighting is realistic; and get the historical color right (i.e.,
get the famous aces to perform as they
did in real life). Our sneak preview was
based upon a version that had most of
the flight dynamics "up and running"
realistically, and the dogfighting in place.
However the strategic (almost roleplaying) aspect of the game was still in
pieces (designwise). From what we have

Dynamix Comes
Out of the Sun
by Russell Sipe

Dynamix has worked hard to
recreate the important elements of
the dogfight environment. The environment the aces had, you will
have. For example, when you fly
towards the sun you become blinded.
The screen goes yellow/white and only
objects close to you are visible. Also,
when you fly into a cloud, your visibility
is greatly (although not completely)
reduced. Thus, as in real life, you will
learn to use the sun and the clouds to
your advantage. You will learn or you
will die.
There is a big emphasis in the game
on the flight dynamics. Different aircraft
perform differently. For example, the Fokker Tri-Plane is the best climber in the
simulation but it is slower then other
planes. The realistic dynamics will allow
you, we are told, to do a peculiar

Sneak Preview

maneuver in the Fokker Tri-Plane known as Rudder Only Turn (it
takes about 1/2 the time of a normal turn). Then there is the Sopwith Camel that, because of engine torque, turns much sharper to
the right than the left (albeit with increased chances of a stall).
The various aces in the simulation will perform as they did in real
life. For example, Richtofen (known as "The Hunter") was very conservative. He would not expose himself unnecessarily. He was a
stalker. That's how he acts in the game. On the other hand, British
ace Albert Ball fought with reckless abandon. He would not think
twice about diving alone into a group of enemy planes. He survived
because he was a great shot.
Perhaps the most exciting aspect of Red Baron is it's new, improved "Look Honey" feature (i.e., VCR replay option). Like
Lucasfilm's Battlehawks 1942 series of games, Red Baron has a
VCR replay feature. But it has some nifty new twists. When you
review a "videotape" of your mission you can jump to a number of

view angles and use a elegant joystick interface to maneuver your
"camera" position. What it different is that 1) the interface itself is
easier to use and more intuitive than former VCR features and 2) the
change in view angles can be saved on your video. In addition to
this, you can jump back into the simulation at any point during the
replay and be in "live action" again. Thus you can be the actor who
flies the plane, the director who uses different camera shots to
record the action, and the producer who can make the decision to
"reshoot the whole thing" (or any part of it). When Lucasfilm came
out with their VCR replay feature we were impressed. Dynamix has
taken a good thing and made it better.
The IBM version of Red Baron will be released in October
($59.95). An Amiga version is planned but no release date has been
announced.
Up to now it has been all quiet on the Western Front. That's about
to change in a big way.

Taking a Peek

Accolade
550 South Winchester Blvd. #200
San Jose, CA 95128
JACK NICKLAUS' UNLIMITED GOLF &
COURSE DESIGN: Here's a chance for
players to put(t) their creative energies
into their favorite sport. This product, the
latest in the Jack Nicklaus line, gives
players all the sand, rough, and green
they need to build a course from the
divot up. Players control green contours,
wind direction, background scenery—in

short, everything one needs to "build"
their favorite clubbing grounds. Compatible with all of the Jack Nicklaus
products. IBM ($59.95) Circle Service #1.
Capstone
14160 S.W. 139th Court
Miami, FL 33186
BILL & TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE: Like, if you caught the feature
film (totally triumphant!) then you have
no doubt as to the ultimate coolness of
Bill and Ted, time travellers and excellent
dudes extraordinaire. In this action/adventure game, our heroes reenact their bodacious round-up of neat dead dudes
throughout history. They'll meet Marie Antoinette (the cake chick), Abe Lincoln
(the pres), and Socrates (pronounced So
Crates) as they weave through time in
their travelling phone booth. The
graphics are most excellent but the
game is little more than a loosely strung
group of rather mediocre action sequences (bummer). In a word—Bogus! IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #2.

Electronic Arts
P.O. Box 7578
San Mateo, CA 94403
FLOOD: In this arcade style game, our
hero, Quiffy, has got a dirty job to do.
This slightly overweight green "blobbie"
(it's an English game) has got to eat all
the trash left in the flooding underground
of an ancient civilization. Of course, there
are such vicious Quiffy-eating life forms
as Psycho Teddies, Bulbous-Headed
Vongs and Vacuous Gombos. Designed
by Peter Molyneux ("Populous"), this cute
action game offers plenty of arcade adventure for the buck (or the pound, in
this case) if you don't mind games which
are essentially rehashes of previous efforts. Atari ST, Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
IMPERIUM: Romans in space? Sure,
with "Imperium" the player must manage
all levels of the empire, and each in great
detail (although they may be computermanaged). This is one space strategy
(Continued on page 76)

Review

Storm Across Europe
by M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:
Storm Across Europe
SYSTEMS:
IBM/Amiga/C-64
REVIEWED ON: IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-3
PRICE:
$59.95 (16-bit)
$39.95 (C-64)
Dan Cermak
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

The options exist for all sides, and modifications are simple to
implement.

Fishing Off The "Doc"
The documentation is generally adequate, but not always helpful. It is far better than that found in Second Front in that it
reads smoothly and appears to cover major areas, but significant
weaknesses appear once one settles down to play the product.
Naval movement (particularly amphibious invasions and troop
transport) could well use a tutorial similar to that provided for the
land aspect. Similarly, paratroop operations could have
benefited from a more detailed coverage. Only actual play will
reveal the nuances of optimal play.
torm Across Europe (hereinafter SAE) is a strategic simulation of the World War II struggle to defeat Nazi Germany
(1939-1945). The scope of the product covers the ETO
(European Theater of Operations), Africa, and the Russian Front—
all in a game that can be played in a single (if somewhat
prolonged) sitting.
Initially published in 1989 for the C-64/128, SAE took over a
year to reach the 16-bit market. Reviewing it at this time—after
the release of the 16-bit versions— emphasizes even more the
dominance of the higher-end machines and the gaming market
in 1990, i.e., "until it's out for Big Blue, it ain't through!"
A solitaire player can only play Germany, while a second or
third player can portray the Allies and the Soviet Union. Thus,
only a multi-player game will give one the option of learning the
Allied strategies and perspectives unless one plays multi-sides.
Although the simulation comes with multiple scenarios, SAE allows one to expand even further and in effect redraft the starting
positions or year for the Crusade in Europe. For example, you
could give the Germans the A-bomb in 1939 or better and more
paratroopers—or an expanded Navy.

Does Not Contain Explicit Graphics
The graphics are standard 8-bit graphics—adequate if unspectacular. Icons of armies, tanks, airplanes, etc. are used in lieu of
military symbology. The map utilizes area movement as opposed
to a hex grid. Overall, graphics are acceptable, since the main
strength of SAE is its strategic gestalt.

European Games (Game Play)
Mouse: For the first time, SSI has introduced a mouse in one
of its IBM wargames. The mouse implementation suffers somewhat from its use as a replacement for the 8-bit joystick and certain idiosyncrasies in centering it over some regions, thereby becoming more of a cross between Mickey and the Norwegian
brown rat. Changing game phases, reinforcements and strength
transfers are cumbersome, and keyboard inputs are often more
efficient than the mouse (and faster), yet this reviewer was still
appreciative of the mouse availability.
Game Phases: The sequence of play is German, Allied, Russian, with each side going through certain actions (Reinforcement(Continued on page 38)

Pre 20th Century Survey

Computer Strategy and
Wargames: Pre-20th Century
An Annotated Paiktography ("Game"ography)
by M. Evan Brooks

R

ichard Berg, noted paper wargame

designer, enunciated the "3-N
Theory" of game design. He postulated that only the inclusion of Nukes,
Nazis or NATO could possibly make a
commercially successful wargame, and
that the more of those elements present,
the more successful the game. (His
thesis was first stated after a somewhat
lukewarm consumer response to his
design on the Crusades.) [Editor's note:
a paper wargame is actually coming out
with the title of Nukes, Nazis and
NATO, presumably to seize upon this
marketing "reality".] With regard to pre20th century warfare, noted computer
wargame designer Ed Bever has added
the "Bever Corollary", in which subject
matter of pre-20th century computer wargames has to be limited to the American
Civil War, Napoleon and, occasionally, a
dash of Roman Empire.
Much of this seems true, and wargames
other than World War II and modern do
not constitute a vast percentage of the
market. However, there have been
numerous releases, and it is the purpose
of this review to cursorily cover each and
every one of them. Some periods have
been completely neglected by game
designers, e.g. the Thirty Years War
(1618-1648), Egyptian chariot warfare,
etc. This does not necessarily mean that
such games would be fascinating entertainment products, but it does reveal the
prejudices and interests of the
marketplace.
Machine Use: Once again, the MS-DOS
type machines clearly dominate the
market. With a 69% coverage of all pretwentieth century wargames ever
released, MS-DOS is in a category by itself. The 8-bit machines run a distant
second (Atari, 32%; Apple II, 33%; C-64,
36%), but it is even more noticeable that
such coverage is limited to older
releases, no longer in print. No future
releases can be anticipated for the 8-bit
machines, and unless one wishes to
covet an ever decreasing market, the

wise buyer would take heed. The Amiga
and ST each garner 23%, the Mac 10%,
and the II-GS 4%.
The only conclusion that can be drawn
is applicable to computer gaming across
the board. No matter the merits of a particular machine, the MS-DOS is where
the greatest number of products are
being produced.
Explanatory Notes:
Game Title (Machine Availability: At =
Atari 800; C = Commodore 64; Ap =
Apple II; I = IBM; M = Macintosh; S =
Atari ST; Am = Amiga; GS = Apple II GS.
An asterisk {*) following the machine
type indicates that that format is
forthcoming. Numbers (#XX) refer to the
issue of Computer Gaming World in
which that game was reviewed). [Publisher, Date, Price. 0/P means Out of Print].
Finally, the ratings are on a one-to-five
star system as defined below:
Rating:
Avoid
**
Marginal
***
Average to Good
****
Very Good
***** Highly Recommended
N/R
Not Rated
Ancient Art Of War (Ap/I/M; #5.2) [Broderbund; 1984; $44.95; ***]. A tactical rendition
of various "battles," this product is an enjoyable game, but any relation to history (or the
book of the same title by Sun Tsu) is purely
coincidental. Some of the scenarios are unbalanced, but the game is easy to learn and
has its own scenario editor/ generator.
Ancient Art Of War At Sea (Ap/I/M; #41,
CGF #2) [Broderbund; 1987; $44.95; ***].
Using a system similar to Ancient Art of War,
it, too, plays well as a game, but not as a
serious study. In fact, optimal tactics herein encourage use of single ships to defeat enemy
fleets as opposed to fleet actions.
Ancient Battles (I; #59) [CCS; 1989;
$39.95; ****I. One of the more serious
simulators, this covers the Battles of Hydaspes
(326 BC), Zama (202 BC), Cynocephalae
(197 BC), Pharsalus (44 BC), and Chalons
(451 AD). The graphics are not awe-inspiring,
but are adequate, and a scenario generator allows for user expansion and creativity.

Annals Of Rome (C/I/S/Am; #58) [DataSoft; 1988; 0/P; ***+]. A grand strategic view
of the Roman Republic/Empire, this simulation offers many innovative concepts. However, it is graphically dull and suffers from a
lack of completeness. Even with its flaws, for
a game which feels only partially done, it succeeds on many levels. (Note that the 16-bit versions are much more playable than the 8-bit
ones).
Antietam, Battle of (At/Ap/C/I; #27) [SSI;
1985; 0/P; ***I. A detailed simulation of this
Civil War battle, it is detailed and relatively accurate (although the map is reversed, with
north being portrayed at the bottom of the
map). McClellan's "slows" are depicted in a
frustrating lack of command control which
reveals just how golden was his opportunity to
destroy the Army of Northern Virginia in a setpiece battle.
Armada (I/S) [PSS; 1990; ***]. A British
product, this covers the defeat of the Spanish
Armada (1588) by a motley crew of English
adventurers, opportunists and patriots. Using a
"commander viewpoint" and typed-in commands, it is somewhat difficult to learn the
basic system. (cf. also Waterloo, Borodino).
Austerlitz (I; #70) [Cornerstone; 1990;
$49.99; ***]. The Napoleonic Battle of Three
Emperors, it is a logical successor to
Krentek's earlier products (Napoleon At
Waterloo and Borodino 1812). Incremental
improvements do not disguise the fact that the
graphic system is obsolete.
Bandit Kings Of Ancient China (I; #65)
[Koei; 1989; $59.95; ***]. A "simulation" of
12th century China, the game utilizes some
magic as well as Chinese medieval strategic
play. One of the more esoteric computer
games ever designed insofar as subject matter
is concerned.
Battle Cry Of Freedom (working title) (I)
[SSI; N/R]. The name is still in doubt (as this
is a working title), but this is Ed Bever's followon to Revolution '76. A strategic military and
diplomatic simulation of the American Civil
War (1861-1865), it should prove extremely interesting.
Battles Of Napoleon (Ap/C/I; #57,60) [SSI;
1988; $49.95; ***** ]. A detailed tactical
study of the Napoleonic Wars, this product
may lack the graphic flash of some of the
more popular designs, but its play value and
historical accuracy mandate its acquisition for
anyone interested in the period. Included
scenarios are portions of the Battles of
Borodino, Auerstadt, Quatre Bras, and Water-

Pre-20th Century Survey

*+]. A board game company's foray into the
computer simulation market, the game is
marred by poor graphics and slow play.

Franklin, and Nashville. Since these are mostly set-piece battles, they are less interesting
than those in the earlier volumes.

Chickamauga, Rebel Charge At
(At/Ap/C/I/Am; #40) [SSI; 1987; $14.95;
***]. Another of SSI's Civil War battles, this
covers the subject quite well, although the battle itself often degenerates into a confused slugfest through the ubiquitous heavily-wooded terrain.

Defender Of The Crown (C/I/S/Am/GS;
#34, 39) [Cinemaware; 1987; $49.95; •*+].
Graphically superb, this medieval simulation of
the Norman-Saxon reunification of England is
a series of arcade sequences loosely strung
together. With sword duels, tournaments and
sieges, the major elements are present; it is
just that the simulation resembles a series of
arcade trials held together by story boards.

Civil War (I) [Avalon Hill; 1988; $35.00; "-].
Based on the Victory Games boardgame of
the same title, this product covers the
American Civil War (1861-1865). It shows how
one can take a highly playable boardgame
and turn it into an unplayable computer
"product." Civil War is marred by incomplete
rules, incomplete graphics and incomplete
programming. Interestingly enough, Avalon
Hill has noted that a corrected disk will be
available, although at last check (June 1990),
it was still "a month or two in the future."
Hmmm.. .

loo plus a scenario editor. CGWs Wargame of
the Year for 1989.
Blue Powder/Grey Smoke (Ap/C/I; #35)
[Garde; 1987; $49.95; **+]. A Civil War tactical game covering portions of the Battles of
Sharpsburg, Gettysburg, and Chickamauga. It
utilizes an interesting graphical approach, but
one which becomes tedious and distracting.
An ambitious design, but one which did not
meet with critical or consumer success.
Borodino: 1812 (At/C/I; #41) [KrenTek;
1987; $59.95; ***]. This Napoleonic battle is
covered in an operational approach. The
game is eminently playable, although the
graphics are no longer state-of-the-art.
Borodino (VS) [PSS; 1990; ***]. A British
simulation of the Napoleonic battle utilizing
the "commander's eye view" approach (cf.
Waterloo, Armada).
Broadsides (At/Ap/C; 4.3) [SSI; 1983; 0/P;
***** ]. Probably the most successful
ship-to-ship simulation of Napoleonic warfare, it has
vast entertainment value. While some
maneuvers are over-simplified (e.g. tacking), it
remains the standard.
By Fire & Sword (I) [Avalon Hill; 1985;
0/P; *]. A semi-historical abstraction of
medieval warfare, this game is below Avalon
Hill's usual standards in computer gaming.
Centurion: Defender Of Rome (I) [EA;
1990; $49.95; ***+]. A graphic tour de force,
but a historic tour de farce. Chariot racing,
gladiatorial combats, and detailed military battles would seem to be the answer to an
Emperor's dream. However, its relation to historical verisimilitude might be more accidental
than coincidental.
Chancellor Of The Exchequer (Mach-Ina;
1983; At; 0/P; 4.3) [•*+]. An economic
simulation of the British Empire, this is a textintensive product. Somewhat dated, but it
remains an interesting simulation.
Chickamauga (At; 5.2) [GDW; 1985; 0/P

Diplomacy (C*/I/Am*; 4.5) [Avalon Hill;
1984; $34.95; ****]. While this rendition of
the famous board game ostensibly covers
Europe circa 1914, scenarios with less than
seven opponents simulate the world of 1805
or 1870. The play remains the same, and the
computer opponents are not overly intelligent.
However, the basic game system is present
and this is sufficient to gender a recommendation.

Clear For Action (At) [Avalon Hill; 1984;
$5.00; "+]. Napoleonic naval warfare, this
"Age of Sail" simulation is probably worth the
current asking price. Marred by poor graphics,
poor interface and marginal entertainment
value.

Excalibur (At; 4.4) [APX; 1984; 0/P; ****].
Chris Crawford's rendition of the Arthurian
legend, Excalibur is a strategic rendition of
the unification of Great Britain. Good graphics
and an interesting story line cause this
product to still generate a recommendation,
even on an obsolete machine.

Clipper (At)[PBI; 1982; 0/P; *+]. An "educational" simulation (with all the baggage that entails), this simulation represents a voyage of
an 1850 Clipper Ship attempting to deliver its
cargo and maximize its profits. Its high point
(?) lies in teaching one basic compass directions (0-360 degrees).

Genghis Khan (I; #55) [Koei; 1989; $59.95;
****]. A detailed strategic and diplomatic
simulation Genghis Khan's drive for conquest,
this simulation is thought-provoking and challenging. cf. also Nobunaga's Ambition and
Romance of the Three Kingdoms.

Colonial Conquest (At/Ap/C/S; 5.5) [SSI;
1985; 0/P; ***+]. A strategic simulation of
19th Century Europe attempting to dominate
the globe, this is a very playable, albeit ahistorical, game. Supply and logistics are non-existent, and some strange results can occur (e.g.
Japan invading Africa with 1,000,000 troops),
but as a light diversion, Colonial Conquest
can be fun to the point of addicting.
Computer Napoleonics: Battle of Waterloo
(Ap) [SSI; 1980; 0/P; **]. The first computer
simulation of Napoleon's most famous battle,
this game is clearly showing its age.
Decision At Gettysburg (I; #72) [Tiglon;
1990; $49.95; **+). An operational simulation
of the Gettysburg Campaign, its inspiring
graphics (VGA) are not sufficient to overcome
the lack of a friendly user interface.
Decisive Battles Of The Civil War: Volume
I (Ap/C/I; #49) [SSG; 1988; $40.00; ***+).
The Battlefront system adapted for the
American Civil War. SSG products inspire
either vast admiration or marginal distaste,
with their emphasis on "fog of war" and lack
of command control. DBACW: Volume I
covers the battles of: Bull Run I-II, Shiloh, Antietam, Fredericksburg, and Chancellorsville.
Decisive Battles Of The Civil War: Volume
II (Ap/I; #54,65) [SSG; 1989; $40.00; ***+].
See above. Covers the battles of: Gaines Mill,
Stones River, Gettysburg, Chickamauga and
Chatanooga.
Decisive Battles Of The Civil War: Volume
III (Ap/C/I; #57)[SSG; 1989; $40.00; **+].
See above. Covers the battles of: the Wilderness, Spottsylvania, Cold Harbor, Atlanta,

Gettysburg: The Turning Point
(At/Ap/C/I/Am; #33,51) [SSI; 1986; $59.95;
****]. Possibly SSI's best seller in the Civil
War simulation market, Gettysburg is a
detailed grand tactical recreation of the Civil
War's most famous battle. While its graphics
may appear dated, the game play is still high
enough to garner a recommendation. CGWs
Strategy Game of the Year for 1987.
Gold Of The Americas (I/S/Am; #68) [SSG;
1989; $40.00; ****]. A semi-light hearted look
at the Age of Discovery in the New World, this
game may lack a serious gamer's historical

Pre 20th Century Survey

basis, but it more than makes up for it in ease
of play and entertainment.
Halls of Montezuma (Ap/C/I/M/Am*; #45)
[SSG; 1988; $40.00; ***+]. The history of the
U.S. Marine Corps, most of the scenarios
herein cover the 20th century. However, the initial scenario (Mexico City) does cover the anticlimax of the Mexican War in a tactical rendition. Using the Battlefront system, the game
is accurate, but does not have the spirit of
19th century warfare.
Heart of Africa (C; #25) [EA; 1985; 0/P;
**+]. A less successful sequel to Seven Cities
of Gold, this product is an arcade-like African
explorer game. It owes its ancestry more to
Hollywood (King's Solomon's Mines) than to
history.
High Seas (Ap/I; #43) [Garde; 1987;
$49.95; **]. An "Age of Sail" simulation, this
product emphasizes joystick maneuverability.
Graphics are somewhat convoluted, as is overall game play.
Hundred Years War (I) [GEnie; 1990(?); OnLine Charge, 10 cents/minute; N/R]. A
forthcoming multi-player simulation on GEnie
(the electronic Bulletin Board), designed by
board wargaming icons Jim Dunnigan and Al
Nofi. Covering the English-French Wars (13371453), a full review is planned once the
product is "released."
Incunabula (I; 5.5) [Avalon Hill; 1985; 0/P;
***]. A Civilization-type simulation, one must
attempt to found a lasting culture. Political/military from the macro-scale, with marginal graphics.
Joan of Arc (I/S/Am; #68) [Broderbund;
1989; $44.95; **+]. The first game released
covering the Hundred Years War (or an aspect
thereof), Joan of Arc is more of an arcade
game than a serious simulation. Adequate
graphics and coverage of a hitherto neglected
period of warfare do not fully make up for a
series of arcade sequences couched in a historic milieu.
Legionnaire (At; 2.6) [Avalon Hill; 1982;
0/P; **+]. A Chris Crawford sequel to East-

ern Front, it was not a commercial success.
Easy play and adequate graphics could not
otherwise overcome a marginally historical
simulation of Roman tactics.
L'Empereur (I) [Koei, 1991(?); $59.95(?);
N/R]. Currently available in Japan, this simulation covers the Napoleonic Campaigns. The
Japanese edition also has a CD-version.
Lords of Conquest (At/Ap/C/l/S; #32) [EA;
1986; $14.95; ****+]. A classic wargame, this
abstract simulation is easy to learn and play.
Highly recommended, although later conversions to 16-bit systems are not up to the
machines' standards.
Lords of the Rising Sun (Am; #61)
[Cinemaware; 1989; $49.95; ***]. A graphic
masterpiece, it is only marginally a game of
the unification of Japan.
Napoleon at Waterloo (At/C; 4.3, 5.2) [Krentek; 1985; 0/P; ***]. An early version of
Napoleon's Waterloo, the game is commendable for ease of play, but marred by ahistorical tactics necessary for victory.
Napoleon's Campaigns, 1813, 1815 (Ap)
[SSI; 1981; 0/P; **+]. One of the first
Napoleonic simulations ever released, its obsolescence is clearly visible in the lack of computer graphics (it utilizes a board and
counters), as well as its heavy dependence on
the foggiest "fog of war" this side of the
English Channel.
Nobunaga's Ambition (I; #51) [Koei; 1988;
$59.95; ****]. A fascinating simulation of the
attempt to unify Japan under the rule of an effective leader, this product emphasizes
diplomatic and economic as well as military
perspectives.
North & South (I/S/Am) [DataEast; 1990;
$39.95; *+ (*** for arcade gamers)]. The
comic-book version of the American Civil War,
this product leans heavily toward arcade-type
play and graphic sequences. A French import,
it is just about what one would expect from a
country which has made Jerry Lewis a national icon.
Pirates (C/I/M/S/Am/GS; CGF #1) [MicroProse; 1987; $44.95 ($59.95, M); *****]. A
genre break-through, this is a fascinating
simulation of the Age of Piracy. This
reviewer's initial impression was somewhat
muted, in that he did not know if the product
had "legs," but it stands up far better than
most computer simulations. "If I had one
review to change..." Be aware that the
various versions differ in quality. CGWs Action Game of the Year for 1988.
Pirates of the Barbary Coast (At/C/I/S)
[TDC Distributors, Inc; 1986; 0/P; *]. An arcade-like game with mediocre graphics and
marginal gameplay. Rescue the merchant's
daughter, kill the pirate; "In like Flynn" but
without his panache and elan.
Railroad Tycoon (I; #71) [MicroProse; 1990;
$59.95; ***** ]. A moveable feast, Railroad
Tycoon simulates the growth of the railroad
from 1828 onwards in various areas (Eastern
U.S., Western U.S., England and Europe). Richly detailed and graphically inspiring, this is a
gamer's game—both in terms of economics
and the mechanics of railroads. CGWs Game
of the Year for 1990.

Rails West (At/Ap/C; 4.5) [SSI; 1984; 0/P;
****+]. A simulation of corporate empire-building and greed before the terms were co-opted
by the savings and loan . institutions. Marginal
graphics and some internal bugs detract from
this otherwise fascinating picture of railroad
building and finance in the latter half of the
19th Century. Lacking the graphic splendor
and detailed train mechanics of Railroad
Tycoon, its economic modeling is even more
detailed and accurate.
Ram (I) [Avalon Hill; 1985; 0/P; *]. A tactical simulation of trireme warfare. An often-ignored subject in wargaming, the treatment
herein renders it hors de combat.
Revolution '76 (I/GS; #65) [Britannica;
1989; $49.95; ****+]. A thought-provoking
look at the American Revolution, involving
both political and military aspects. Different
regions have different perspectives and the
user must forge the "Clamorous Colonials"
into a unified and effective nation.
Road to Gettysburg (Ap) [SSI; 1982; 0/P;
**]. Like Napoleon's Campaigns: 1813 &
1815, this Civil War simulation relies on an offscreen map and counters for its display, text
messages to handle movement and "fog of
war" for its challenge.
Romance of the Three Kingdoms (I/Am;
#49,51) [Koei; 1988; $69.95; ***+]. A simulation of the unification of China. Using the
same system as Nobunaga's Ambition and
Genghis Khan, it emphasizes aspects of roleplaying to a larger degree than the former
product. CGWs Strategy Game of the Year for
1989.
Rome and the Barbarians (At) [KrenTek;
1984; 0/P; ***+]. A strategic approach to the
Roman Empire, it remains a challenging
simulation. Graphics are marginally adequate,
but play value is high.
Saratoga (At) [APX; 0/P, *]. An unabashed
clone of Chris Crawford's Eastern Front, this
(Continued on page 70)

Rumor Bag

The Rumor Bag
for the delay in ... er,
what's the name of that
game? Some Time? Lag
Time? No Time Soon?
Mean Time?"

S

itting in my D.C. cab, I found
myself simultaneously trying to figure out what congressmen may
have gerrymandered the taxi zones to
their advantage (so they could travel
from their houses to the capitol without
crossing a zone boundary) and figure out
how to stay alive while this crazy cab
driver drove like a "real life" version of
The Duel: Test Drive II. The frightening
expedition did remind me, however, that
Accolade's Tom Loughry (Steel
Thunder and Gunboat) is working on a
sequel to Test Drive which will use his
graphics techniques and feature three different vehicles in much more realistic terrain and circumstances. I'm not sure
what those "circumstances" are, but I've
heard that weather and cross traffic will
probably be two of them.
The cabbie dropped me off at an
entrance to the capitol building and I
managed to get through the metal detec-

tor without any problems,
in spite of the bag over my
head. I did have to show
the guards that my computer was functional, so I
booted up Loom and gave them a little
show. They were impressed by the
graphics, so I told them they hadn't seen
anything, yet. "Loom is currently being
converted to two different CD-ROM formats." They were suitably impressed and
wondered if there was going to be a sequel. So do we. With Brian Moriarty
moving from Lucasfilm Games to
Lucasfilm Learning and changing his
focus from games to educational concepts, we don't know if a sequel is on or
not.
"If you think those graphics are great," I
told the guards, "wait until you see the
computer version of Sky Realms of
Jorune. I thought I was looking at VGA
graphics and they were actually EGA.
The artist on the project is Miles Teves,
an artist who worked on the special effects team for Total Recall, among
others."
I was on Capitol Hill to cover the hearings on "Computer Software Rental
Amendments" in the House Judiciary
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual
Property, and the Administration of Justice. Bruce Davis, CEO of Mediagenic
was going to be testifying on behalf of
the cartridge game industry with regard
to compensation for video game rentals.
As I reached a committee room with
more green felt than anywhere this side
of Las Vegas, I briefly imagined myself interrogating Davis before the C-SPAN
cameras. "So, Mr. Davis," I would warm
him up in my best Jimmy Stewart voice,
"as the ... the dis
. dist .
uh, company that distributes Interplay's
products, can you describe for the corn .
.. comm
uh, this group the reason

He'd probably say something about the more
than 2,000 man-hours
being spent on making
the maps and encounters
for the time-travel roleplaying game. He'd
definitely say that the
game is, at least, six
months off. I doubted
that he would have anything to say about
Electronic Arts' alleged
decision to introduce a
new Bard's Tale trilogy
without Interplay's assistance. Bard's Tale IV is rumored to be
nearing completion and should be out no
later than first quarter of 1991, possibly
by Christmas of this year.
I wouldn't let up in my imaginary interrogation of Davis, though. "And how do
ya' ... would ya' I mean, how could
ya' explain the tendencies toward
monopoly in this industry? It seems like
there is only one company in the industry that produces most of the adventure games on the market and they don't
seem to be showing any signs of slowing
down."
I could almost imagine him pointing to
Accolade's new line of graphic adventures, Infocom's own Circuit's Edge and
Lucasfilm's graphic adventure series as
counter-examples. If he knew what I
knew, he might even cite MicroProse's
latest affiliated label, Legend (formerly
known as GameWorks). Legend is expecting to release Steve (Planetfall and
Leather Goddesses of Phobos for Infocom) Meretzky's new game, Spellcasting 101, a challenging new graphic adventure, before Christmas. If he really
knew his software companies, he might
even mention Strategic Simulations,
Inc.'s Eye of the Beholder, being
developed by Westwood Associates.
Eye of the Beholder is expected to be a
point-of-view fantasy role-playing game.
In addition to the three-dimensional
graphic engine, VGA graphics and "point
and click" interface, it is the first product
in their Advanced Dungeons and
line to use rules from
Dragons™
AD&D™'s second edition.
(Continued on page 73)

Strategy

Luftwaffe Uber Alles
Ten Tips for Routing the RAF in Their Finest Hour
by Roger White
guns as "hard tracers" for the
20s. Shoot the machine guns
and watch for pieces of the target to come flying off. When
pieces start coming off, it means
the pilot is both on target and in
range. Thereafter, pilots who
open up with the 20s will find
that the end will soon come for
their enemies.

"Veil, ze boys are ready for Adlertag. Today, ve begin filling
der channel mit surplus Spitfires. Tomorrow, ze glorious
svastika vill be flying uber
Downing Street!
"Hans, Karl, Hellmuth, vat are
ze reports?"
"Veather ist goot, Herr Gruppenfuhrer."

Note: Luftwaffe planes can be
played quite pleasurably as a two
player game with one player handling the joystick and the
machine gun while the second
controls the keyboard functions
(point-of-view, map, and engine
speed) and fires the 20mm cannon with the "period" key.

"Ze crews are ready and vaiting."
"Dawn ist in 40 minutes, Herr
Gruppenfuhrer."
'Zen no more delays! Finally
Goering ist letting us finish zem
off once and for all. Goot hunting, mein Herren!"

Tip Vier: Clearing the skies
with a single Bf109 takes considerably more finesse than doing
so with a Bf110. The plane is
nimble, but delicate. It has no
rear gunner, only 60 rounds of
20mm cannon ammo and a minimal fuel supply.

The Fighters
Tip Eins: Start as a fighter
pilot. This is because the NonPlayer Character (NPC) Luftwaffe
bombers can bomb well if undisturbed. Unfortunately, NPC
Luftwaffe fighters are not effective in keeping the NPC RAF off
the player's tail if he chooses to
become a bomber pilot. Therefore, it pays to apply oneself
toward becoming a "super pilot"
and learning to single-handedly clear the
skies of RAF fighters.
Tip Zwei: Fly the choice of Werner
Molders—the Bf110s. With the player at
the helm, the 110 is a formidable
Luftwaffe hammer for beating the RAF.
The plane is fast, has a comfortable fuel
supply, will take considerably more
damage than a Bf109 (the traditional Spitfire opponent), and, most importantly,
carries a lot more ammunition (120
more rounds of big-punch 20mm canon
shells and a rear-facing gunner with
another 900 rounds of standard ammo).
The Bf110 is admirably suited for that
simplest of air-combat tactics; flying headon against the opponent with guns ablazing (aka the "John Wayne" or "Chicken"
maneuver). In the 110, if the pilot doesn't

kill his opponent during the head-on
pass, the tail gunner gets a chance to
finish him off, right after the pass-by. Further, the pilot still has the option of performing a half-loop to continue the fight—
this time with the German pilot diving
upon the Brit from above, while flying inverted. Should the German pass his target once more, after flying at him inverted, there is still the option of performing a half-Immelmann (outside loop) and
chasing the Brit further—this time, while
flying right-side-up.

Tip Drei: The 20mm cannon is devastating. This author has seen Spitfires go
down after taking as few as three bursts,
but it's a short-range weapon with limited
ammunition and it has a separate trigger.
To get the most from one's 20s, it is
profitable to use the standard machine

Playing "Chicken" is risky in a
109, so the player will want to
spend most of his time chasing
tail (ahem). If an encounter starts
as a head-on, the player can
usually convince the NPC to turn
away by firing a warning burst just before
penetrating the enemy's actual range.
Usually, the Brit will turn, the German
can follow, and the chase is on. The 109
doesn't have much ammo, so the German needs to get close and make every
shot count.
An advanced technique is mastering
the wingman position. Bringing a leader
is like bringing a second load of ammo,
but he'll die quickly if the player doesn't
keep the RAF off the leader's tail. If the
German pilot can keep his leader alive,
however, his commander will both shoot
down planes and distract the RAF from
shooting at the player himself. The fine
art here is to shoot straight, know how to
find the leader after chasing off an attacker and be able to decide when to break

Strategy

off a pursuit and return to the leader's
side.
Tip Funf: German pilots must give
themselves time to clear the skies. One
puts pants on one leg at a time and one
clears the skies one fighter at a time. Do
this by starting the bombers at inland
fields while having the fighters start near
the British coast. This will afford the
player about ten minutes to clear the
skies before the bombers get into the
area.
Tip Sechs: When the last fighter goes
down, the program advises the player to
hustle back to his own airfield and quit.
However, if one wants the bombing part
of the mission to count, he must be certain to wait until after the bombers have
made their run before quitting.
If the player doesn't want to watch the
bombing in person, it can still be seen by
using the wing cameras. Being "high
tech," the wing cameras record the entire
battlefield so that the player can watch
actions taking place miles away. Simply
head for home and use the in-flight map
in order to judge the right time to turn on
the cameras (i.e. when the bombers are
over the target). Then, use the target option on the camera to watch what happens at the target site!

The Bombers
The bombers have two objectives. The
quick and easy one is to drop bombs on
the selected target. The long and hard
one is to reach France while being
dogged by swarms of Hurricanes or Spitfires.
Hint: It's the buildings that are the tar-

gets. The antennas, the runways and the
roads displayed on the targets are for
show only. Once a building takes
enough hits, it's destroyed and turns gray
Stuka Tricks: Stukas demonstrate well
the value of dive bombing in a pre-smart
bomb world. Stukas are, in fact, a primitive smart bomb—just dive straight down
on the target and release the bombs
when close! One usually finds Stukas are
easier to score hits with than level bombers.
Tip Sieben: Bomb low. Real Stukas
like to start from about 7,000 feet and
the NPC Stukas will do best if they are assigned to fly in at that altitude. If the
player is flying the Stuka, however, he'll
want to start a lot lower. When starting at
7,000 feet, one is forced to dive past
every RAF fighter in the area and they
are quite prone to line up on the player's
tail as he goes down. This can be very
distracting and hazardous to one's health.
Start low at, say, 1,000 feet, and stay
low. Try to slip in under the cover. Drop
bombs at around 500 feet and then,
make a descending turn and head home
at about 300 feet. Once on course and
on altitude, put on the automatic pilot (affectionately known hereafter as Otto)
and man the rear gunner position. Now,
it's time for the long, slow part of the mission: getting home alive.
Tip Acht: Fly bombers back low.
Flying low prevents RAF pursuit from
taking advantage of one of their favorite
tactics, diving down and flying underneath. They are forced to do either partial dives or switch to a side-to-side attack pattern which isn't nearly as effective for them.

As a gunner, the player must be acutely aware of how much ammo is left. Otto
Gunner (Otto Pilot's cousin) probably
used up a fair amount fending off
fighters on the way in. Therefore, note
that one of the most common ways to
fail to return is to have gunners run out
of ammunition before the "coast is
cleared."
Tip Neun: The key firing position on a
level bomber is the dorsal gun. Most RAF
planes will start high and dive for a strafing run at the bomber. Staying in close
formation with other bombers is a help.
Once again, running out of ammo is the
overriding concern. If this happens to the
dorsal gunner on a bigger bomber, one
has a tricky option not available to the
Stuka pilot. That is, one can flip the
bomber over and fly inverted. This will
put the belly gunner (who, hopefully, still
has plenty of ammunition left) "on top."
It's tricky to get one of these lumbering
beasts over, but once accomplished, the
plane is stable. Just don't let Otto fly in
this position!
Tip Zehn: If one decides to fly the bombers, it is important to build up some experienced Bf109 pilots first and take
them along as CAP (Combat Air Patrol).
They will be more aggressive than new
pilots (although still not great survivors).
Pick targets like Rye Chain Radar that
have lots of sea around them. That way,
fewer pilots will be lost to enemy capture
after they get shot down. Instead, they
can be fished out of the English Channel.
109s are also better for CAP than 110s,
as even experienced NPCs have
problems keeping Bf110s aloft against
the RAF.

Review

Tell Tale
Heart(ache)
by Allen L. Greenberg

which the player guides William Tell through the
countryside and Gessler's
menacing fortress. The object
of the game is to rescue Tell's
son from Gessler and inspire
his people to cast off their oppressive Austrian ruler's yoke. There are a hundred and forty
screens to be explored, among which are scattered the objects,
food and weaponry which Tell will need to complete the quest.
There is also quite a bit of hacking and slashing which the hero
must both provide and endure along the way.
TITLE:
The Legend of William Tell
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Atari ST
REVIEWED ON: Amiga
# OF PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER:
Electronic Zoo
Baltimore, MD

Each scene of LWT displays a two-dimensional view of the
hero's surroundings along the top half of the screen. Although
movement is restricted to East and West, there are usually exits
in all four directions. The lower half of the screen shows a rather
complex set of icons. These icons represent every item which
can be found in the game. When Tell actually obtains the item,
the icon becomes highlighted and the object is then available for
use. There are essentially three ways an item may be used in
LWT—it can be offered to another character as a gift, aimed with
deadly force at an enemy, or eaten.
Items of value include treasures, keys and scrolls. Treasures are
used to induce a friendly character to provide some other item of
value. Keys allow Tell access to certain restricted rooms and
areas, while scrolls will satisfy certain characters who are interested in such things.
Weaponry, on the other hand, is reserved for encounters with
evil characters—the subtle presence of whom may be detected
by their "Tell"-tale attempts to murder the hero. Battle with these
villainous Gessler-supporters is an arcade sequence in which Tell
uses one of the weapons he's managed to find in his previous explorations. Each weapon, including sword, staff, axe, mace and
morningstar, is effective at a different distance. As Tell, the
player must figure out how far to stand from his adversary and
how to time his attack.
William Tell is, above all, an archer, and his greatest strength
lies in the crossbow. There are several of these available to him,
with different sights and different mechanisms called "winders."
When Tell selects the bow, a window appears at the bottom of
the screen which represents Tell's view of his target. Unless Tell
is using one of the better (and more difficult to obtain)
crossbows, he will find himself able to focus on his target no better than if he suffered from a tremor-producing nerve disorder.

H

aving lost most of his celebrated overture in a no-limit

card game with the Lone Ranger, Swiss folk hero William
Tell still manages to stay active
by slicing apples at parties with the aid
of his son Jem "Mohawk" Tell. Recently, Tell's exploits battling the fourteenth
century Austrian tyrant "Gessler" have
become the subject of the computer
recreation program The Legend Of William Tell (hereafter, LWT). In what was
hoped to be an exciting interview with
the legendary figure, Tell's comments
turned out to be restricted to such noncommittal fare as "Good day, sire..."
and "Greetings, friend..."
This was a bad start (and things got
worse).
LWT is an action/adventure game in

Food is actually William Tell's most basic need. A long sword,
which stands to one side of the screen, represents his energy
level and diminishes in size as Tell's energy becomes depleted.
This happens rapidly (very rapidly
when Tell is in combat). This happens
even more rapidly when Tell shifts into
"warp attack," during which he fights
harder and faster (provided he can last
long enough to draw his sword). The
only way to keep Tell from running out
of this precious energy is to keep him
stuffing his face with the food which is
scattered among all those screens of
play.
Should Tell collapse from starvation,
fatigue or defeat in combat, he does
not necessarily die. If among friends,
he will be taken to some other area in
the game. If he has been struck down

Review

by an enemy, he will find himself in Gessler's dungeon.
From either place, the hero will be able to resume his quest. Occasionally, Gessler will call for some entertainment and will have
an apple (the fruit, that is, not the computer) placed on the head
of Tell's young son. Tell must then slice the apple with an arrow
in order to continue the game. Of
course, there is the possibility (if the
hero's aim is a bit low) that this event
will bring the story to a sad and early
conclusion.
The graphics in LWT are adequate,
but not very exciting. The sound effects, on the other hand, are quite imaginative, but they have very little to do
with what is taking place on the screen.
A character's footsteps, for example, as
he walks across the screen, sound like
two buckets being crashed together, inexplicably alternating between the right
and left speakers.
LWT comes on one Amiga disk, or
two for the Atari ST. An additional, formatted disk is required in order to save
a game in progress. Only one game may be saved per disk, only
one drive is supported and the copy-protected program may not
be installed on a hard drive. For these reasons there is, at times,
quite a bit of disk-swapping.

Truth To "Tell" (Game Hints)
The game package contains a 10" X 14" map which represents
the 140 scenes from the game. Only a few of these squares
come filled in with information. The other squares should be
filled in by the player indicating exits,
objects and characters encountered at
each location. These will not change
from game to game, so the map
remains valid even when the game is restarted.
Players should practice using the
crossbow. It is Tell's greatest weapon
and its extensive use is vital for making
progress in the game.

A Dismal Conclusion
The Legend Of William Tell is a very
limited product for adventure gamers
and offers only a modicum of appeal
to the action gamer. What little adventure is present in the game is
smothered under excessive hack-andslash. Were the lead character able to express himself at all, he
might have something defensive to say on the subject. Instead,
all he can do is turn to his audience and mutter "Good day . . .".
Pity.

Letters

"Conflict" Over Price
I recently purchased Conflict by Virgin
Mastertronic (reviewed in CGW #73). I
agree with Mr. Emrich that the game is
quick to learn, easy-to-play and quite enjoyable. His review quotes a list price of
$9.95 for the game. Although I purchased a copy from a major software
store chain below list price, the suggested price on the box was $14.95!
I'm not complaining—as I feel the game
is easily as entertaining as many that are
2 to 3 times the price—I'm just writing to
bring this price discrepancy to the attention of your readers.
Ingram Roberts
Derwood, MD
When the staff checked on the price
of Conflict, they were given the standard budget line price from Virgin
Mastertronic, $9.95. The correct price
is $14.95. Look on the bright side,
though, our error might start a price
war over Conflict.

California Screamin'
I like playing computer games. That's
why I buy CGW. Your last commentary
leads us to leave the game table and discuss morality. Since you are so confident
in your position, let us examine it a bit
further. In today's American society, the
majority decides the moral atmosphere.
Hence, the majority believe it is wrong
for a man to assault a woman. Thus,
rape is illegal. The majority believe it is
wrong to kill, so it is decided that murder
is illegal. Your statement about "those
who want to use the law as a means of
enforcing morality" is very tired. The law
does just that. It enforces the morality as
set by the people. The question is not
whether the law should enforce morality
(it does), but rather what law? In
American society, the majority decides,
but is that correct? I give Germany in the
1930s-1940s as an example of the
majority rule enforcing morality in a negative context. If not majority rule, then

what? Where do we come up with the
law that will enforce a code of behavior
that is fair and just, if not by majority
rule (a la the USA). How about the rules
being decided by a few (as by dictatorships or the U.S.S.R.)? Again, I believe
the evidence speaks for itself. So, the law
should not be implemented necessarily
by the many, or by the few. Then how? If
you want to exert your influence in the
philosophical arena, so be it. But leave
the gaming table, please. I buy CGW to
read reviews of the latest games, not
debate whether the American way of
deciding morality is correct. I do not care
what is going on in California. That is for
Californians to decide. Use your page better to describe the latest game(s) you've
received, and leave the politicking to the
weasel lawyers and scumbag politicians.
We get enough negative news now.
Please stop inserting it in a game
magazine.
Don Sniff
Palm Beach Gardens, FL
Matters of survival (i.e. violence, murder and numerous forms of physical
and economic repression) and matters
of moral opinion are not necessarily
synonymous under the rubric of
"morality." The editorial in CGW #72
was specifically mentioning matters of
free expression, a basic right which
should not automatically be curbed by
majority opinion. Indeed, our country
was founded by dissidents. More to
the point, however, most software publishers are in California. California legislation, whether passed or considered,
impacts those latest games you desire
us to cover. The editorial is not intended to either shortchange review
space or ramble on about philosophy
that does not affect the entertainment
software industry. Rather, it is a considered attempt to formalize discussion
of issues within the industry that are
either already affecting the products
you'll see on the shelves or may affect
the products you will see in the future.
If you take the California legislature's

generic opinion, computer games are
not a legitimate art form with appeal
to adults. Rather, the legislature perceives them as entertainments
designed primarily for children. If you
wish to see a dramatic decline in the
concerns addressed and considered in
computer games (or the arts in
general), all you have to do is continue to believe that what happens in
California doesn't affect anyone outside it. Frankly, we pay attention to
what is happening on the east coast,
in the midwest, to the northwest and
in the south, as well as what is happening in California. Note, for example,
that the Steve Jackson Games' controversy took place in Texas, but we
think it was an important event.
We're sorry you dislike the focus of
the editorials, but we assure you that
they will not simply become another
page of game reviews. Feel free to excise that page from your copy. Fortunately, some readers (like the one
who wrote the following letter) enjoy
the editorials.

Norwegian Good
Many people who read newspapers and
magazines do not read the editorial article. It is with interest that I have read
your editorial articles as long as I have
had CGW. It is very interesting and you
are not afraid to criticize the industry,
government, etc. For a person like me,
whose interests are RPGs and simulations, your magazine gives me what I
want, but your editorial stuff gives me a
deeper insight into the game industry,
etc. I hope that you will continue the fine
editorial line: controversial and critical. I
do not know if your "ethical" line costs
you losses in advertisements, but I would
think many of your readers support this
fine magazine. We have some in Norway,
but no one comes up to your standard.
Ole Kittilsen
Rjukan, NORWAY
Thanks, Ole. I'll just slide this onto
the publisher's desk right away. After
reading Don's letter, it might not hurt.

Book Him
Please continue interviews with authors
concerning book-based adventure/roleplaying games. I enjoyed reading George
Alec Effinger's insights/comments on
Circuit's Edge (CGW #73).
We will try to publish these "celebrity
backgrounders" whenever appropriate.
After all, we're fans, too!

v

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
Scorpia Reveals the
Secret of the Silver Blades

S

corpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to be able
to provide this forum for her distinctive
and, sometimes, controversial perspective.

take advantage of the higher-level spells;
a human fighter, to get the two attacks
per round at higher levels; and certainly,
a human cleric for those powerful healing
spells.
My own party consisted of two Elven
Fighter/Magic-Users (brought over from
Bonds), a Human Cleric (also brought
over), and a Human Paladin, Ranger, and
Magic-User (all created new). This team
worked rather well, although an ordinary
fighter would probably be better than the
Paladin.

Deep in the heart of the crystal ball, the
mists begin to dissolve. Slowly, claws,
fangs, talons, and gaping jaws'swim into
focus. Not a pretty picture at all. I see
trouble ahead in your future, and plenty
of trouble at that.
Secret of The Silver Blades from SSI
could easily have been sub-titled "Hackmania," as the main occupation in the
game is combat. You fight your way to
the Well, fight your way through the
ruins, fight your way through the mines,
fight your way through the dungeons,
fight your way through the ice crevasse,
fight your way through the castle, and,
finally, fight the ultimate bad guy (UBG)
in the climactic battle.
It's great if you want to work off a bad
mood or you're looking for a game that
does not require heavy thinking. Blades
is pretty much straightforward
hack-ndsl,witomanyfrls.
It is also the most linear of the gold box
series from SSI. Unlike previous games
such as Pool of Radiance and Curse of
the Azure Bonds, where you had some
choice in where to go, there really isn't
any here. Each location is the entry to

the next one, so you have to do them in
sequence mentioned above.

A Matter of Character
(Initial Considerations)
Since this is a follow-up to Azure
Bonds, you can transfer characters over
from that game into Blades. Whether or
not you want to do that will depend on
the make-up of your Azure Bonds party.
Levels go rather high here. In fact, they
go up to fifteen. Non-human characters
and demi-humans (half-elves) will be at a
disadvantage, since their levels are
restricted. Only thieves (of any race) are
not affected.
So, Blades is the first AD&D computer
game where having humans in the party
really becomes important. At the very
least, you will want a human mage, to

You need powerful characters because
they will face (not unexpectedly) powerful opponents, such as high-level mages,
fighters, and clerics, not to mention assorted basilisks, umber hulks, Driders,
purple worms, remorhaz, medusae, iron
golems, and a few red dragons, among
others.
On the other hand, you have a
measure of control over how powerful
the opponents are. Blades has the "level
of difficulty" feature first seen in Champions of Krynn: you can set it to any
one of five levels, ranging from Novice to
Champion. This can be done at almost
any time in the game.
It doesn't change the type or number of
opponents, it simply gives them a lesser
or greater number of hit points. More hit
points makes them harder to kill, and
provides more experience for the sur-

Scorpia's Column

vivors. Fewer hit points makes them
easier to kill and provides less experience
Character creation is the same as
before: standard races (Human, Elf,
Dwarf, etc.) and classes (Fighter, Ranger,
Paladin, Cleric, Mage, Thief) are available, with the ability to modify stats
before the character goes adventuring. If
you plan to play the game at Veteran
level or higher difficulty, I definitely
recommend boosting the stats.
New characters will come in at fairly
high levels, since they have to be, at
least, adequate to face powerful opponents. Therefore, if you haven't played
Bonds (or took it off your drive), you
needn't worry about being stuck with lowlevel beginners.
There is one problem with rangers in
the game. They do not seem to be getting their special bonus versus giant-class
monsters. By AD&D first edition rules
(which this game uses), a ranger does
one extra point of damage for each level
he has when fighting against giants. It
was obvious that this bonus was not
being calculated when Travis, my 11th
level ranger, hit a giant for only 9 points
of damage (and this sort of thing happened on many occasions). As there are
many giants and giant-class monsters in
the game, this is a serious drawback.
The game begins with the party arriving
in the small mining town of New Verdigris. They arrive without weapons,
armor, equipment or money. This includes characters transferred from
Bonds. Yes, once again, all your hardearned goodies are taken away at the
start.
Fortunately, while SSI felt the need to indulge in this odious practice again, they
have at least partially made up for it by
providing some Neat Items at the very
start. After the party's arrival, the mayor
explains why they are here (monsters
have appeared in the mines and curtailed
mining activities), and presents them
with several pieces of magical equipment, including, among others, a halberd+2 and everyone's favorite, Gauntlets
of Ogre Power. A small sum of cash is
also distributed so the group can fully
equip at the local armory.

Circle Up the Dragons
(Encounters and Locations)
The party's first task is to clean out the
area around the Well of Knowledge. The
Well is an ancient artifact, which provides
information in return for a payment of
gems. At the moment, the vicinity of the
Well is infested with red dragons of vary-

ing power, ranging from hatchlings to a
large Ancient Red Dragon (about the size
of the big Reds at the conclusion of
Champions of Krynn).
Once these dragons have been killed
off, the Well area becomes safe and the
Well itself will impart information to the
group, providing they donate the necessary 100 gems per piece of information.
This is where excess money goes, since
healing in town is done free of charge
and, after awhile, there is little to buy at
the armory. Money is still useful for getting items identified, however.
Surrounding the Well is a series of
teleporters. These can transport the party
to and from various locations scattered
through the game. The catch is that,
before these transporters can be used,
you have to find the "other end" first
(somewhat reminiscent of the teleport
system in Dark Heart of Uukrul). Once
you have found the second of the
teleport pair, you can use the teleports
any time.
This is quite handy and a good feature
in the game, as each of the dungeon
areas has one or more teleporters in it. If
the party needs to heal up, restore spells,
exchange gold for gems (gold is very
heavy in large amounts!), etc., they can
slip out with a teleporter instead of
having to fight their way out.
Of course, the teleporters aren't all that
common, either. There are times when
going back to one isn't practicable, and
the party will just have to take its chances with camping out in a dangerous
place. The "Fix" command is usually safe
to use for healing purposes (although a
Cleric may wish to use a high power
spell first on anyone severely injured to
save time), but memorizing spells is always a chancy business. This is particularly the case at higher difficulty
levels, where the party is apt to be interrupted by wandering monsters.
With the Well secured, the party can
now settle down to the business of exploring the ruins of the old town that surrounds the Well area. Auto-mapping does
not work in the ruins, so you will have to
make your own maps. I recommend
doing this. The ruins can be very confusing as many parts of them look very
much the same.
In the ruins, you will have to find the
headquarters of the Black Circle (the
name alone tells you these guys are not
good) and clean it out, as well as discovering the shaft that will take the party
down into the mines. Along the way, a
number of minor treasures will be found

(gems, jewels, magic items, and
weapons and armor usually in the +2
range), mainly after combat.
Down in the mines, the party will have
to recover eight pieces of a magical staff.
This item can't be used by the party, but
they will need it for something later on.
The mines are infested with umber hulks,
cockatrices, mobats, giant slugs,
basilisks, and wyverns, among other
nasty critters.
Also in the mines, the party will free
Vala, a female warrior with exceptional
fighting abilities, who is willing to join the
party. She comes with her own weapons
and armor, and is a great addition to the
team. Unfortunately, like most NPCs in
these games, she tends to be impetuous,
taking the fight to the enemy. You'll have
to be careful with area damage spells
with her in the party.
The bottom level of the mines is the
entryway to the dungeons. Aside from
having to fight the usual assortment of
hostile beings, the party must also contend with the dungeon's guardian. This is
a sort of spirit or projection of the Dreadlord (the main bad guy). In addition to
harassing the group in various ways, this
spirit controls the stairways up.
Each time the party arrives at a new
stairway, the ghost appears with a riddle.
You have the choice of trying to answer
it, or fighting the stairway's guards, which
happen to be Iron Golems. Your best bet
is to go for the riddles. If you give a
wrong answer, you simply get
transported to the Well, which will provide the solution in return for the usual
gem donation. Of course, then you have
to make your way back to the dungeon,
but there are several transporters in the
dungeon to make this a little easier.
Once you've answered a riddle correctly,
the stairs can be used without further
problem.

Driders on the Storm
(Finale)
The final level of the dungeons leads to
the ice crevasse. Be prepared to spend a
long time going through this area. It is
long and winding with two main
branches (east and west) that must be
traversed. You can expect to encounter
Black Circle adherents, as well as such
delightful things as white dragons and
remorhaz (something like a purple worm,
only it isn't purple and is much nastier).
Camping out in the crevasse is
dangerous, especially at the higher difficulty levels.
Eventually, the party will reach its ul

Scorpia's Column

timate destination, the castle of the
Dreadlord. The castle levels, especially
the ground floor, are full of tricks and
traps, so proceed cautiously. Sargatha, a
devious Medusa, will greet the party soon
after they enter, and request that they
sign the guest book. Would you trust a
Medusa? I wouldn't.
Throughout the castle you will be fighting Medusae, basilisks, storm giants
(which is odd, since Storm Giants are
good, not evil, in traditional AD&D),
Driders, and Iron Golems. Fortunately,
there are only four levels to the castle,
and this makes the task slightly easier.
Finally, you reach the room where the
Dreadlord (who happens to be a lich of
powerful abilities) and the remnants of
his followers await. This is the concluding
combat of the game, and can be a very
hard one at high difficulty levels. The
Dreadlord cannot be turned, is immune
to a lot of spells, is invisible (no ranged
weapon attacks) and has some nasty
spells of his own. The best tactic here is
to get your best fighters over to him as
soon as possible and hack away (a thief
in the rear for a possible backstab is also

a good move), while the rest of the party
deals with everyone else.
After the lich has been defeated, the
game does not end. You can take your
party anywhere, although at this point,
there isn't much to see or do except beat
up on hapless monsters (by this time,
your group will be extremely powerful).

Crystal True Persuasion
(Conclusions)
Blades has several good points: the use
of teleporters for quick travel; the town
vault, where weapons, items, armor, and
money can be stored (and gold exchanged for gems); a fair number of
magical items early in the game to
properly outfit the party; improved
monster graphics (ogres, for example, no
longer look like comic fat men in
diapers); and an interesting story buried
beneath all the bodies.
On the down side, there is little scope
for real role-playing in the game, as the
emphasis is on heavy-duty fighting;
rangers are not getting their special
bonus versus giant class; the look-up-the-

word copy protection uses the
adventurer's journal paragraphs (why
won't they use the rulebooks?); and once
again, characters who fall (but do not
die) during combat do not share in the
experience awards afterwards.
Overall then, Blades is a typical product
in the Forgotten Realms series, likely to
be enjoyed most by those who enjoyed
the previous gold box games or are
devotees of hack and slash.
And so the crystal ball clouds over until
next time. If you need help with an adven
ture game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi, stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie, visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (you must enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in
the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Foreign Correspondence

machines I'll give a brief description of
each followed by the support modules.
STOS replaces the ST's GEM environment with its own propriety system to
speed things up, as well as freeing 32K
of memory. You get an editor, which contains most features expected of a word
processing tool. The system can hold up
to four programs in memory at once,
and all four of the program listings can
be simultaneously displayed (or an overlay of 13 windows). There are a variety
of powerful functions for manipulating
sprites, such as moving and animating
15 sprites as well as grabbing sprites
from other programs to use in your own
games; there is a music utility; there are
a variety of screen special effects—you
can cycle through the whole 512-color
palette, fade a screen and so on; there is
a GEM-like painting package and there
are 16 different scrolling zones included.
STOS was originally released as an arcade creation program but users have
created such a diverse selection of
programs with this powerful utility that
Mandarin has given it a rethink in
regards to marketing. Examples include
creating spreadsheets, databases,
graphic/text adventures, strategy games,
RPGs, and more! In fact, the ST's first adventure magazine on a disk, Syntax, is
being published via STOS (Note: it contains reviews, solutions, hints and tips,
features, etc. — write to Sue Medley, 9
Warwick Road, Sidcup, Kent, England,
DA14 6LG for information on how to get
a copy of Syntax).
The utility comes with three disks and a
whopping 283-page ring-bound manual;
three games are included for you to examine as well as a plastic-coated reference card.

T

wo major utilities released by the

UK software house, Mandarin,
have caused several ripples among
the large European Amiga and ST communities. Called AMOS and STOS, they
are specialized implementations of the
BASIC language. AMOS has just been
released while STOS has been on the
market for quite a while. However, the latter has achieved a level of maturity that
has attracted a variety of add-on
modules not yet seen for the younger
AMOS program. As each program uses
the unique features offered by both

AMOS has just been released here in
the UK. In keeping with Mandarin's
marketing rethink, AMOS is just
described as "The Creator," rather than
STOS's original "The Game Creator." In
fact, some of Mandarin's application suggestions include arcade games, adventures, demonstration programs, educational programs, databases, video titling
sequences, etc.—so you can see how versatile AMOS can be.
Among AMOS's features are the ability
to define and animate hardware and
software sprites (called bobs); display up
to eight screens at once, each with its
own color palette and resolution (including HAM, half-bright and dual playfield
modes); create multi-level parallax scrolling; create complex animation sequences; play Soundtracker, Sonix or Games
(Continued on page 74)

Review

New World's Nuclear War
by Chuck Moss

uclear

War is a hawk's dream and a dove's nightmare.
The player takes on the role as leader of a nuclear superpower—one of five with an arsenal which bristles with impressive megatonnage and a propaganda department standing
ready to dispense Goebbels-like (or maybe Orwellian) information. Four other leaders, from a pool which includes some of the
most, er .....dangerous," politicians in "history" (Tricky Dick,
Gorby, Infidel Kastro, Mao the Pun, Ghanji, Jimi Farmer, Colonel
Malomar Kadaffy, Ayatollah Kookamamie, Ronnie Raygun and
Prime Minister Satcher) challenge the player's leadership skills.

N

Recently released for the Amiga, and now available for the IBM,
Nuclear War is a computer version of the classic GameScience,
later Flying Buffalo, card game by Doug Malewicki. What distinguishes computer Nuclear War from the card game is its
solitaire nature, clever graphics, and wickedly hilarious rogues'
gallery of computer opponents for the player to face. Supporting
CGA, EGA, or VGA/MCGA and controlled by either mouse or
keyboard, Nuclear War is fast (15-20 minutes on average), enjoyable, and, as you've probably guessed by now, not to be taken
seriously.
Each player starts with five cities on an island nation, surrounded by a stylized map with four other nations of five cities
apiece. Each city receives a randomly generated amount of
people (much like its predecessor's old population cards). As a
city's population grows (through judicious use of propaganda) or
shrinks (because of nuclear attack or enemy propaganda), its
icon will change, running from a high of domed cities down
through skyscrapers, mansions, cottages and, finally, to straw
huts before (possibly) ending up as a nuclear crater. Arsenals
consist of missiles, warheads and bombers in a handy variety of
strengths, sizes and capacities, plus ABM (Anti-Ballistic Missile)
systems.
[Verse]
They were afraid to come out of the shelter,
They were as nervous as they could be!
They were afraid to come out of the shelter,
They were afraid of what they might see!
[Chorus]
One, Two, Three, Four, Tell the people we're at war!
It was an itsy-bitsy, teeny-weeny 20-megaton "Bikini"
That we dropped on that island, today!
It was an itsy-bitsy, teeny-weeny 20-megaton "Bikini"
So, in the shelter, they wanted to stay!
One, Two, Three, Four, read the review to find out more!
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Nuclear War
IBM, Amiga
$49.95
Eric L. Hyman
New World Computing
Van Nuys, CA

A player's turn consists of deciding between the following options: building
weapons (adding to
one's nuclear arsenal), broadcasting
propaganda to woo
enemy population
over to one's side, activating an ABM system to protect
against anticipated attacks this turn, or, of
course, launching a
nuclear strike.
One must build
weapons as often as

Review

possible in order to have the firepower to "waste" one's enemies,
but building for two turns in a row is considered "stockpiling" and
will cause all the other leaders to gang up on that player. It is
possible, however, to build early and often, as long as the player
uses propaganda or launches a missile in between his or her
crash building programs.

"happy face" in each leader's display shows your current
diplomatic attitude towards him—from smiling to Mr. Yuck. The
leader's face will give an appropriate expression and extend appropriate phrases to the player (sometimes—don't forget about
those liars).

Utilizing propaganda effectively is somewhat tricky. Although
successful propaganda strikes will often redistribute population in
the player's favor, the odds seem to be about even that the
propaganda will utterly fail, activating an icon of departing
peacenicks defecting to one's very foe!

These graphics are among the game's high points. "Satcher" is
calm until war starts, then her icon goes wild and looks positively
vampiric! Kastro's cigar lights up, Ghanji looks sad but stern, and
Gorby smiles a lot. The exquisite piece de resistance is Tricky
Dick, a circa-1968 Nixon who grins engagingly, raises his
eyebrows and professes undying amity (while nuking one to
vapor).

A nuclear attack is mounted by activating a missile or bomber
on one turn and arming said vehicle with an appropriate warhead
on the next turn. Once the warhead is in place, the player
chooses a target and it's "bombs away!" If the missile or bomber
makes it through without crashing, misfiring (two random
events) or being shot down (as a result of an enemy deploying a
MegaCannon defense system), the attacking player will see a
mushroom cloud grow over the city and can "joyfully" read a
casualty count. The affected city's icon will then change to reflect
its lower population base, as described previously.
Victory is determined by sole survivorship and the extent of victory is scored according to the number of millions in population
who survive. If anyone survives the "final
retaliatory strike," that is. If everyone is
reduced during the "final retaliatory
strike" (where the computer determines
how many deliverable warheads the
eliminated country has in its arsenal and
evenly delivers them to all the surviving
countries), there is no winner, simply an
animated graphic showing the world
being blown to smithereens. There is no
save game feature in Nuclear War, but
no need exists as the games are really
quite short.

The game's degree of difficulty lies in the four opponents one
selects. Raygun, Satcher, Kastro and Farmer are a pretty easy
bunch to manipulate. Ghanji and the nutballs, Kadaffy and the
Ayatollah, are tougher. For a real hairy time, try Gorby and
Tricky Dick together. A sane nuclear policy is further complicated by random events like city-killing earthquakes and "Cattletech" bovine bombs.

Presidential Briefing (Game Hints)
Make no more than one enemy at a time. Two active foes will
whittle a player down fast. If Tricky Dick or Gorby are in the
game, the player already has one active
enemy. Build every other turn and, under
no circumstances, stockpile (even
Raygun will get mad). Raygun, Satcher,
Kastro and Mao will usually leave the
player alone if they are left alone. Do so,
and take out any nuts or liars first. Then,
before the game ends, get Satcher mad,
just to see her crazy icon!
Even though propaganda is a weapon
that can misfire, it is better then stockpiling. Try to run propaganda against tent
and hut cities. This is because a city
which is totally depopulated, so that it
turns into a crater, is out of the game
and cannot be repopulated.

No Flash Pictures, Please
(Game Play)
When playing, the question is, "Whom do you attack, and
when?" Ahh! Here lies the truly demented genius of Nuclear
War. There are ten wily and ruthless opponents which the player
must choose from and then deal with, each guided by his or her
own artificial intelligence / personality (and some have vastly
more intelligence than others).

One should keep track of current missile and bomber deployments. Failure to load a proper payload on the right delivery system not only junks the missile or bomber, it annoys the other
leaders. Use ABMs carefully, and don't waste them!

Final Verdict

There are five "personality groups," each with two characters
apiece. The simple "Warmongers" are Ronnie Raygun and Prime
Minister Satcher—these are the easiest to stay friends with, although irascible Maggie lets fly an occasional missile with no
hard feelings. "Pacifists" are Ganji and Jimi Farmer (a truly
hilarious little Carter who sheds tears when bombed). These two
rely heavily on propaganda.

Nuclear War is fast, entertaining, easy to learn and play, but
challenging enough to enjoy a good replay value. It makes a
great addition to a hard disk for that idle moment or end of a
frustration-filled day. The cleverly written documentation is
simple, clear and funny, while the graphics are crisply executed
and entertaining.

"Cooler Heads" (at least, in this game) are Mao the Pun and Infidel Castro, whose policies are, roughly, "live and let live." There
are also the "Chaotics," which include a certain Ayatollah and an
eccentric Libyan Colonel. They have no pattern and actually
laugh when nuked! Finally, there are the "Liars:" Tricky Dick and
Mikhail Gorbachef. They are the hardest to defeat, as they start
right out at the player's throat and never tell the truth.

Quibbles? Yes, one! Quality control evidently failed and allowed
two different misspellings of "propaganda" to slip through.
C'mon, people! Here, also, is a caveat: when this reviewer first
bought the Nuclear War card game in 1968, his mother called
him "sick." Six or seven years ago, this game would have inspired a boycott. For those of us with a sense of humor, however, who like fact-paced games with a "liberal" dose of satire,
Nuclear War provides lots of (ahem) bang for the buck.

How do they lie? Nuclear War's screen includes, not only the
world map, but a display of the other leaders' faces. A yellow

"Mr. President, we must not allow a mine shaft gap!"

Review

Storm Across Europe
(Continued from page 10)

Replacement, Production-R&D [only in the Spring], Strategic Options [land-naval-air movement], and Combat). Each turn represents three months, and attacks are seasonally dependent (e.g.,
each unit may attack 3 areas in summer, 2 in winter or autumn,
and only 1 in spring [spring thaws make movement difficult]).

The Arneson Assault (Notes on Strategy)
First, I would like to offer my thanks to playtester and fellow
wargamer Dave Arneson for his insights herein. Note that the German initial deployment is inefficient. So, immediately form two armies in central Germany: 1st Parachute and General Reserve.
Transfer all paratroops to the 1st Para together with sufficient tactical air elements; these units are too expensive to waste in
general attacks, and could well be used for Sea Lion (invasion of
England) and Crete/Malta. The General Reserve Army can absorb reinforcements that cannot be placed in the Field Armies
(an army can only hold a combination of 99 factors).
Reallocate garrison troops (move them to the three areas bordering France) and the maneuver elements. Since armies with
less than 5 armor units derive little benefit, a concentration of
armor is advisable.
For the initial assault, hit Poland with only two armies—East
Prussia and southern Germany. The other armies should be
poised for the Western Assault (no Sitzkrieg here!). The Western
Assault should use one Army to seize Denmark and one to seize
Holland. Then, move onto Antwerp, while the main Schwerpunkt
should smash diagonally through the Maginot Line to seize Paris.
Interestingly enough, the Maginot Line will not deter the German advance, and this allows one to cause the Fall of France in
Winter 1940 (Turn 2). Do not waste time/assets seizing areas of
France that will become Vichy anyway.
Remember to transfer garrison troops to the Polish borders,
since partisan troops can appear there. A minimum of 15 per
area is sufficient, but more should be transferred as a Russian
deterrent.
Build an airbase in Brussels, create numerous armies (with
small staffing) along the Russian-Polish border, and reallocate
Garrison Troops to the borders. Dave recommends an immediate
assault upon the British Isles, but he notes that his success was
only achieved with a slightly optimized German initial set-up (in
terms of amphibious transport). Alternatively, one may choose to
seize Sweden with its important natural resources. Historically,
neutral Sweden was in effect a German ally and served a useful
political purpose. SAE does not consider political ramifications,
so Sweden may well prove a tempting target. This reviewer does
not consider Sweden so tempting. The main enemy will be Russia. The Western Allies serve as a nuisance and a diversion.
Their early elimination will restore a One Front War, and this is
probably more important in the long run than the Swedish resources.
In the Production Phase (Spring 1940), generate Amphibious
Transports. As many as 20 per turn can be utilized for the British
Invasion. A success will render later production obsolete, but
production adjustments will have to wait for another year. Place
all ships, submarines and planes into the North Sea for the invasion Transferring amphibious transports from ports in Germany to Brussels may be fraught with danger, even with air
cover and escorts Rather than risk the invasion on a transfer,
(Continued on page 59)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 67

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.
CGW welcomes
Microprose's F 19
Stealth Fighter to
the Hall of Fame.

Strategy

Using Statistics To Improve
Your Command Of Empire
Conquering Worlds The Most Efficient Way
by Glenn Kenney

Table I: Percentage of Times the Attacker Defeats the Defender
Defender
Army Fighter Transport Submarine Destroyer Cruiser Aircraft Battleship
Attacker
Carrier
Army
65.8
65.8
27.8
*
7.4
0.0
0.2
0.0
Fighter
65.8
65.8
27.8
30.8
7.4
0.0
0.2
0.0
Transport
*
80.1
56.4
11.6
18.6
0.0
0.3
0.0
Submarine
*
85.2
94.7
74.5
84.7
1.9
29.9
0.5
Destroyer
*
96.0
90.4
32.0
57.3
0.6
4.0
0.0
Cruiser
100.0
100.0
100.0
99.7
99.7
57.1
99.0
8.4
Aircraft Carrier *
98.5
96.8
81.5
88.7
1.0
51.9
0.0
Battleship
100.0
100.0
100.0
99.9
100.0
94.7
100.0
55.3
* = Attack prohibited

s I sat at my computer, I watched
the red and yellow flashes on the
liscreen. In a few seconds, it was
over. My destroyer had been completely
annihilated by the enemy battleship. The
battleship moved a few spaces and
situated itself at the choke point dividing
my amphibious landing force from the
major portion of the land mass. The battleship would certainly chew up any of
my armies that tried to pass. What
chance did I have of removing the battleship with the forces I had left?

strength, and maximum number of hits,
a model encounter between any two
specific units could be formulated. Of
course, one encounter tells very little.
However, by using a simulation software
package, 1000 encounters were quickly
simulated between the various units. The
statistics that resulted are presented as
the basis for this article.
The first thing most players want to
know is the chance of winning an encounter between any two undamaged
units. Table I shows the results of such
confrontations, with the table yielding the
percentage of times the attacker will win.
For instance, if a submarine was attacking a destroyer, you would find a result

of 84.7%, meaning the attacking submarine will
win 84.7% of the time.

One can draw several
interesting conclusions
from Table I. First, the attacker always has an advantage. The only exception to this rule is when
attacking with aircraft
carriers. The most
dramatic result is for armies and fighters. When
an army attacks another
army or fighter, the attacking army has a
65.8% chance of winning. Thus, the attacker wins two out of three times. The
same is true for fighters against armies
or other fighters. This explains how
enemy fighters always seem to cut
through one's tightly grouped armies waiting to load on the transports!

Other encounters bear out the "attacker
advantage" theory as well. When a
fighter attacks a sub, the fighter has a
30.8% chance of winning. When a sub attacks a fighter, the fighter only has a
14.8% (100%-85.2%) chance of winning.
The lesson here is: be the attacker.

One must frequently ask questions like
this when playing Empire. What chance
do the units sent into battle have of winTable I also presents several other interning? The answer might be helpful in
esting figures which would indicate the
deciding which units are best to use
best employment of one's units. First, a
against specific enemy
units. With the help of a
spreadsheet, a simulaTable II:
tion package, and some
Expected Value of Damage the Attack will Inflict upon the Defender
knowledge of statistics,
this author came up with
Defender
Army Fighter Transport Submarine Destroyer Cruiser Aircraft Battleship
some numbers to help
Attacker
Carrier
players optimize the use
Army
0.66
0.66
1.62
*
0.96
0.75
1.52
0.75
of the units they comFighter
0.66
0.66
1.62
1.11
0.96
1.00
1.52
1.02
mand.
Transport
0.80
2.33
0.71
1.46
1.01
2.00
0.50
Submarine
*
0.85
2.84
1.49
2.54
2.21
5.34
2.22
A spreadsheet was
Destroyer
*
1.00
2.88
1.12
2.33
1.99
4.03
1.02
used to simulate a
Cruiser
1.00
1.00
3.00
1.99
3.00
6.51
7.98
5.90
generic encounter beAircraft Carrier *
0.99
2.96
1.78
2.85
2.68
6.75
2.03
tween any two units in
Battleship
1.00
1.00
3.00
1.99
3.00
7.85
8.00
9.67
Empire. By adding the
specific attack factor,
* = Attack prohibited
defense factor, hit

Strategy

submarine is a good choice for hunting
another submarine. There is a 74.5%
chance of a win for the attacking sub.
Some other units have a better percentage for a win, but these units will also suffer damage as a result. Since a submarine gives three damage points per
hit, and only takes two damage points to
sink, one need only inflict a single hit to
win. Thus, the attacking sub will either be
destroyed or triumph unscathed. Note
that a cruiser or battleship may take significant damage before it sinks a submarine.
Oddly, destroyers are not very useful
against submarines. One has the same
chances of sinking a submarine with a
fighter as with a destroyer. Since
destroyers take much longer to produce,
one is better off using fighters. Consequently, when one sees a submarine
snooping around a friendly city, it is best
to mobilize the air force to sink it.
Destroyers are best suited for intercepting and destroying transports deep in
enemy territory. The destroyer has a
90.4% chance of sinking the transport
and is relatively impervious to enemy
fighters. With the advantage of three
spaces per turn movement, destroyers
can quickly get deep into enemy territory
and overtake a transport moving at only
two spaces per turn, If one can find a

small island in enemy territory and capture it, that will enable a forward base for
destroyers to be established. The

destroyers can then use it both for
repairs and to provide a safe haven from
larger ships.
Capital ships present a special problem.
By examining Table I, one notes that
only a battleship has a reasonable
chance of destroying another battleship.
The cruiser and aircraft carrier are also
difficult to destroy because of the large
number of hits they can absorb. So, does
this mean that a player must produce battleships to engage the enemy's battleships? Certainly not. With the
knowledge of the damage different units
can inflict, a strategy develops for the softening up of these larger units. This will
allow less powerful units to destroy a
more powerful one.
Tables II and III show data on damage
that an attacker will inflict and damage
that the attacker will sustain in any encounter. For instance, when a submarine
attacks a transport, the submarine will
receive on the average of .25 units of
damage (see Table III). The phrase "on
average" is important. These numbers
represent a weighted average or "expected value." In the case above, the submarine will take zero hits 80% of the
time; one hit 14.7% of the time; and two
hits 5.3% of the time. The expected value
is arrived at by multiplying the number of
(Continued on page 54)

Review

True Aim
With
Projectyle
by Alan Emrich and Chris Lombardi

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Projectyle
Amiga, Atari ST
1-8
$39.95
Marc Dawson
Steve Wetherill
Electronic Arts

Projectyle

is similar to
Psygnosis'
Ballistyx, in
that the object is to get
the ball into
the other
guy's goal,
except in
Projectyle,

W

hat is it about a game that could turn a
dyed-in-the-wool wargamer (Alan) and a
dedicated adventure gamer (Chris) into
excitable joystick jockeys? Where did Projectyle
come from and why can't we stop playing it?
The time was when the term "British import"
brought a bad taste to the mouth of computer
gamers. Electronic Arts, however, has really cherrypicked some winners with the likes of Imperium,
Populous and Projectyle. The "British import"
stereotype of great graphics and sound combined
with games that had little replay value has literally
been shattered. We stare and yell at the monitor
for hours on end, playing Projectyle. What is it
about this game?
Page 48

players
nudge,
bump, and
slam the ball
(and opponents)
with their
team
members'
"bodies" instead of shooting at the ball with projectiles. With
almost as much sound and fury as Ballistyx,
Projectyle might be thought of more as "Rollerball" meets Air Hockey, with leagues, role-playing
and team management carefully blended in for
good measure.

That's The Way The
Ball Bounces
Projectyle features eight teams (or "tribes") who
compete at the game of "Tribal." Tribal is a threeway ball game (tri-ball, get it?) where there are five
square arenas, four of which are connected to
(Continued on page 56)

Game Hints

arning: Although "The
Scorpion's Tale" is a warm
and comfortable tavern of
the mind with a nice cozy fire of
vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. lithe gentle
reader eschews hints, let him beware!
Ah, summer's on the way out, and
autumn is on the way in. Now we're getting into my time of the year. Falling
leaves, cool days, long nights . . . Fred,
of course, is especially fond of long
nights (grin). He's back from the annual Grues Convention and is a bit confused at the moment. He wonders how
this can be the October issue when it's
September, and I'm actually writing it
in July.
He believes we've lost a month somewhere, and he's determined to go look
for it. While he's doing that, you can go
off on a search of a different kind.
Search For The King is a graphic adventure from Accolade, in a style somewhat reminiscent of Sierra games. The
feel of play and the interface are similar,
and the hero is along the lines of a
Leisure Suit Larry: a perennial loser
trying to make good. Unlike Larry, however, Les Manley is interested in one particular woman and decides to impress
her by finding THE KING on his lunch
break.
THE KING (always capitalized in the
game) is a rock star cross between Elvis
and Howard Hughes: immensely popular
and amazingly reclusive. In fact, no one
has seen him in a while, although there
have been "sightings" reported
everywhere. Sleazy TV station WILL,
whose ratings are basement-bound,
figures to give itself a boost by running a
contest: a million bucks for anyone who
can really find THE KING. It's a gimmick,
of course. They don't really expect
anyone will ever collect.
There are several caveats about the
game itself: the parser is likely to drive
you up the wall, the program may upset
your system clock so that you have to
reset it after each game session, some of
the puzzles are not exactly fair, and, on
occasion, a save game will restore with
graphic difficulties. Twice when I played
the game, different saves came back
with picture graphics, but no Les. The
keyboard was locked out at these times,
as the game did not respond to any
keys, although the "quick restore" function key did work.
Further, you have to be careful with the
game's copy protection, a "look it up
with red cellophane" job where you have

calendar back in Les' office might be a
clue here.

Scorpion's Tate
Search for the King
As Told By Scorpia
to find the price of a part displayed on
the screen. If you make a mistake, the
game immediately exits to DOS with no
second chance.
Also, "Search" belongs to the single-solution/linear progression school of adventuring where each puzzle has only one correct solution and, once you leave a particular location, there is no going back except by restoring the game. So, it's essential to have, at least, one save in each of
the three locations (New York, Las Vegas
and the Kingdom) in case you need to
go back and get something you overlooked. Fortunately, whenever you arrive
in a new location, the game will at least
tell you if you don't have everything you
should (a blatant indication that a restore
is in order).
Finally, you can complete the adventure without a perfect score of 500
points. While Les will garner points for
doing things that advance the game, he
will also get some for doing things that
really have nothing much to do with it.
So if you come up short at the end, it's
nothing to worry about.
Okay, so here's Les in his grubby little
hole-in-the-wall office in the basement.
After looking around and taking everything he can grab, he moves along to explore the environs, which aren't very extensive (by the way, I recommend really
slow speed through most of the game, or
you'll have a lot of trouble moving him
around).
The only places of interest are a door
(locked, of course), the up elevator and
his boss's office, where, just by coincidence, a key is sitting on the desk. I'll
bet that's the key to the locked door.
However, if Les is smart, he won't take it
while Mr. Burnbaum is watching.
Since, Les really does need that key, he
must divert Mr. B's attention long enough
so our boy can snarf it. Y'know, that

With the key in his hot little hand, Les
nips out to see what's behind that
mysterious locked door. What a disappointment . . . it's just a storage room,
although there might be one item of interest.
Now, it's up out of the depths to the
real world (or as real as this world ever
gets). OK, so it's actually the lobby,
complete with Dave the dozing guard.
He may not look like much, but he's extremely important in this game. Especially when he's not awake (although
you may want to wake him up once to
see what he has to say, hint hint).
Outside the station, New York is pretty small. It stretches in a straight line
from the empty lot on the far right to the
circus on the far left (gee, that sounds almost political). The bus station in the
middle, alas, is mainly for show; Les
won't find anything of value inside.
However, there is the apartment building. Can Les gain entry? Sure, if he has
the right item with him. Once he does
get past the door, he can have a nice
chat with Bobbi, a real KING fanatic, as
the pictures on the wall amply
demonstrate.
The object of interest here, though, is
the scarf, a genuine memento of THE
KING that Bobbi got at his last concert.
As you might expect, she's a trifle reluctant to give it up, but she might be willing to show it off (it's her most prized
possession, after all). Now, all Les needs
is a little refreshment, and he's set. Just
be careful, we don't want any accidents
here (or do we?).
After escaping from the house (and
picking up the scarf), it's time to visit the
circus. Too bad Les doesn't have a ticket
(can't see the attractions without one),
but if he isn't bothered about doing a little manual labor, that should not be a
problem.
Now, Les can visit Mme. Zarmooska fortune-teller, Luigi the strongman, Helmut
the miniscule (world's smallest man!),
and the big top, which contains hungry
lions and a high-diving act.
Les should spend a little time talking to
all these people (except the lion, of
course!) to get an idea of what to do
about them. As with much of the game,
the what is usually obvious; it is the how
that is obscure. For instance, it takes no
great deductive ability to realize that Les
has to give the rosin to Frederick Von
Leep (the high diver). Getting the rosin
from Luigi, however, is another matter.
Speaking of Luigi, he won't tell you

Game Hints

what's really bothering him of his own accord. You have to figure it out for yourself. Just take a good look at him, then
at his picture on the sign. With a little
thought, Les might be able to straighten
out the problem.
And then, there's Helmut. Poor little
guy, he's feeling even more depressed
than Luigi. As the world's smallest man,
he doesn't have much to do besides sitting around on stage all day. Helmut
would love to have something to look forward to. Maybe Les can provide it.
As for Mme. Zarmooska, what's in her
wagon is far more important than any fortune-telling she might do for Les. Of
course, he won't be able to grab anything while the lady is around. So, how to
get rid of her? It's easy, if you know she
isn't quite real. Just make sure Les gets
two things before he leaves.
Well, it looks like our hero is pretty
much finished with the circus, and is
ready for Las Vegas. Of course, there's
the minor problem of getting him there.
Interesting, how there's no obvious
transportation around (except the bus to
New Jersey, and Les isn't taking that).
Les is just going to have to be imaginative here, and take the stratosphere express (no, , there's nothing by that name
in the game; you'll figure out what I
mean, hehe).
However, there's Helmut. He isn't going
to make that trip in very good shape. In
fact, it's better not to take him along at
all. Yet, Les is certainly going to need
him later on, so Helmut has to get to Las
Vegas somehow. The solution to this one
is on the improbable side, so you might
want to send Les to Vegas, and see if
anything catches your eye upon arrival
(something Les has seen elsewhere earlier). Just be sure you save before Les
takes off.
All right, Les is on the outskirts of town.
To the west is a hotel, and to the east is
a desert. If you don't care much about
points, you can bypass the desert entirely. The only reason to trudge out there is
to get a completely irrelevant phone call
from Stella. Les obtains some points for
this (and getting out of the desert again),
but that's it. The real action is at the
hotel.
Scouting the hotel, Les finds the front
desk, the dry cleaner's, the pool, and an
elevator. Let's see where we can go by
elevator. Hmmm . just a typical floor,
with Juanita ("no speak-o English-o") the
maid cleaning up, and a cart with supplies. Supplies and a skeleton key, that
is. I'll bet that key is important.
It sure is, since trying to take it gives

Juanita conniptions. Well, maybe Les
can think of something to keep Juanita
occupied while he swipes the key. Look
around, Les. Something is there, even
though you can't see it (every room has
one, hint hint). And don't forget to check
out the room itself carefully; you never
know what you might find.
After sneaking back to the elevator with
the key, Les finds himself going to yet
another floor. This time, the doors open
right into a room. Pretty fancy one, too.
However, it isn't the decor that's of interest. I suggest Les give close attention to
the hot tub (careful, Les...we don't want
you slipping down the drain, hehe). And
remember: Les should leave with everything he came in with, plus whatever he
manages to find in the room.
Heading to poolside, Les finds Lyla
Libido, THE KING's ex-wife, and her current "boyfriend", Mr. Fabulous . . . and
Fab's bodyguard, Vito the unpleasant. If
Les sticks around, he'll find out just how
unpleasant Vito can be. However, our
boy should talk to Fabulous once, since
the response he gets contains the clue to
getting Fabulous out of the way.
Darn! All that trouble for nothing. Instead of being able to chat with Lyla
about THE KING, Les just sits there and
watches while she goes for a dip in the
pool. Oh well, at least she left a souvenir
behind, so it wasn't entirely for nothing.
So much for Vegas. Yep, Les is done
here already (fast worker, that Les). Now
it's time to move along again. The
Kingdom (THE KING's tourist-attraction
mansion) beckons, and once more, Les
has to find some transportation.
Let's think about this a moment. He
can't walk there, he has no money, and
there's no handy "stratosphere express"
around. Ok, that simplifies matters, because there's only one way to travel
without money (or credit cards), and
people do it every day in real life.
So Les arrives at the gates to The
Kingdom, his last stop (well, not quite,
but he can worry about that later). The
layout (once he moves from the initial
screen) is the same overhead view as the
circus. However, there is much less to
look at here. In fact, the only areas Les
can get into are Red's Bar and the mansion itself.
Red's Bar is not easy to find, because
Les must step on an exact spot to reach
it. Walk Les across the bottom of the
large building in the upper right; he
should be as close to the building as possible.
Well, look at that: the bar is holding a
celebrity look-alike contest. At least, now

Les knows why he's been collecting parts
of a costume throughout the game. Too
bad that, in this case anyway, clothes do
not make the man. Les' performance is
slightly less than stellar. Still, it does give
him entry to the mansion.
THE KING's home is a pretty luxurious
place, although Les isn't going to see all
of it, just the important parts. For instance, the trophy room, where THE
KING's many awards are on display, as
well as his guitar (with a broken string)
and a microphone. It's a shame that the
alarm keeps Les from grabbing anything.
Of course, an alarm implies a switch. If
Les can find the switch, maybe he can
turn off the alarm. It's around somewhere, Les, I guarantee it. Not in the
trophy room (that would be just too obvious!), but somewhere in the house.
Look in everything.
Then there's the kitchen (see the back
of the game box for some ideas on how
to reach it). If Les remembers what
Bobbi told him back in New York, he
should have a pretty good idea of what
to do here. This is a little tricky, because
he has to get something that isn't visible
on the screen, and is not mentioned at
all when he looks at the room. Still, if Les
knows what he wants, all he has to do is
get it (keep this in mind for the fruit bowl
in the dining room, too).
Les must be getting better at this (or
possibly the puzzles are becoming
fewer), because he's done with the mansion. Now what? Well, he's still dressed
like THE KING, and he has the guitar
and the microphone. That ought to suggest something (especially as there
aren't too many places to go from here).
And at this point, player interaction
comes to an end. Once the final sequence is initiated, you need only sit
back and watch the animation that takes
Les on the journey to THE KING and
beyond (and, we hope, back!). Nice
going, Les. You won the contest, and a
whole lot more.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock it's
that time again. If you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie,
stop by the Games Roundtable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By CIS
Mail (remember to enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope if you live in
the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Command of
Empire
(Continued from page 46)
hits by the percentage chance of getting
the hits and adding the results. The expected value gives an indication of the
relative damage that occurs when any
two undamaged units have an encounter
With that knowledge, one can decide

which units work best for softening up a
particular enemy.
Up until now, the tables presented have
only considered two undamaged units. It
make sense that a unit with some
damage is easier to destroy than a unit
with no damage. Therefore, what are the
chances of destroying units with different
amounts of damage? Figures 1 and 2
show the results of attacking a battleship
or cruiser that is already partially
damaged.

For example, from Figure 1, a cruiser
with no damage attacking a battleship
with four hits has about a 34% chance of
sinking the battleship.

Using a combination of the above
tables and figures, one can develop a
strategy for successfully attacking a battleship or cruiser with whatever units are
available. To sink a battleship, for instance, it does little good to throw a
cruiser up against it unless it has been
softened up first. The
cruiser simply does not
have a fighting chance
Table III:
until the battleship has
Expected Value of Damage an Attacker will Receive from a Defender
at least four hits. Six hits
on an enemy battleship
Defender
Army Fighter Transport Submarine Destroyer Cruiser Aircraft Battleship
are optimally required
Attacker
Carrier
for an attacking cruiser
Army
*
0.34
0.34
0.930.93
1.00
0.99
1.00
to get a decent chance
Fighter
0.34
0.94
0.34
0.69
0.93
1.00
0.99
1.00
of sinking it. (Players
Transport
*
1.10
2.07
2.65
2.74
3.00
2.99
3.00
can tell when a batSubmarine
*
0.53
0.25
0.73
0.55
1.96
1.99
1.62
tleship has six hits as it
Destroyer
*
0.49
1.13
2.04
2.67
2.06
2.98
3.00
only moves one space
Cruiser
0.24
0.48
0.67
0.70
1.59
5.86
2.32
7.76
per turn).
Aircraft Carrier *
0.99
1.69
4.13
6.56
8.00
3.86
7.96
0.24
Battleship
0.52
0.16
0.80
0.50
4.99
1.69
8.88
Using Table II, you can
see
that a submarine
* = Attack prohibited
(Continued on page 62)

True Aim with Projectyle
(Continued from page 48)

depending on which teams are being played and on whose home
court the game will be held. Characters play only in their assigned
zone for the duration of the game, and injuries can become a serious
matter during league and sudden death play.

Moving Up In The Ratings
Each character in the tribe has attributes
which affect different aspects of play. "Rate" is
a character's speed; "Power" is the ability to accelerate (especially important when hitting the
joystick trigger, which thrusts the character
towards the ball for a powerful strike); "Slide" is
equivalent to hitting the brakes, making the
character more "controllable;" "Boing" is the
amount the characters recoil in a collision; and
closely related is the character's "Mass", which
is helpful in shoving other characters around.
Finally, each character has an Intelligence
rating which indicates the skill level of the character's Al when the team is controlled by the
computer (although these seem to differ very little from character to character).

Pocketbook Training

each of the four sides of a central square. Thus, the central square
has four exits, with the top, left and right exits leading to each of the
three player's defensive zones (i.e., where they must defend their
goal from the other two players). The bottom exit from the central
square leads to the wild "Frenzy Zone." Here, each player has a goal
to defend (and, conversely, two in which they can score a point).

Around and A Round
Three types of competitive play can be selected for one's spaceage gladiators: League Play, Sudden Death and a Single Game.
League play can be thought of as the "campaign game" where
teams play 3 games per week over a 6- to 21-week schedule with the
team having the highest score at the end of the season being the winner (sorry, Yanks, no World Series or Super Bowl in Projectyle). Sudden Death is like beginning a "playoff" season. Six quick preliminary
games determine which six (of the eight) teams advance to the semifinals. The two winners plus the best runner up will meet in the
finals. Points are scored as follows:
8 points for a win
4 points for second place
0 points for a loss
6 points for a winning draw
4 points for a three-way winning draw
2 points for a losing draw
The game has great potential for office tournaments and
such, as up to 8 human players can compete in a league. Only
three humans ever play at the same time, and they must have
a parallel/printer port adapter to enable the third joystick to
operate on the Atari ST or Amiga computers for which Projectyle (and most European import computer games) is designed.

First Class Coach Fare
The player also takes on the position of "coach" of his or her
tribe. This means assigning players to the different positions on
the playing field before each game. Coaches must determine
who will make the best Centers, Defenders, Offensive players
(for the opponent's defensive zones), and who the best allaround player is to cover the Frenzy Zone. Strategies may vary

Players manipulate these character attributes
by accumulating DOSH pellets during game
play. Each DOSH is worth 25 credits toward
the adjustment of character's ability scores.
Ratings cost between three and ten credits to
raise or lower by a single point (players will
want to lower their character's Slide and Boing,
while raising all of the other ratings). While each tribe's character
ratings have certain floors and ceilings (see the chart included with
(Continued on page 64)

Storm Across Europe
(Continued from page 38)

one may well wish to move the amphibs one at a time; alternatively, one could move in a massive group and use a restored
game if the Royal Navy is too successful.
Once the Invasion begins, get four armies ashore, reinforce and
quickly knock the Western Allies out of the war. Since partisans
do not appear in Britain, the garrison requirement is nil.
Post-British Blues: Mop up small areas, seize Sweden now, as
well as Yugoslavia and Greece. Unhappily, the Russians will attack the turn following Sea Lion. However, do not overreact to
their assault. The Barbarossa initial assault advantages are still
available once the German crosses the Polish demarcation line,
so an early offensive will waste away such advantages. Gear up
for Russia, and initiate the assault in the summer, when armies
can assault three areas. Production should be shifted to armor,
paratroops and infantry.
War in the East: Go East, Young Man. No matter what Bolsheviks are nipping at one's heels, keep the Panzers moving.
The defeat of Russia is difficult, and requires tactical skill,
strategic finesse and luck, but it can be achieved.
Production: The German Kriegsmarine (surface navy) is
generally wasted. Production should concentrate on amphibious
transports for Sea Lion and submarines (to interdict Allied shipping). Once Britain falls, the need for a navy disappears. Research into nuclear weapons may be a forlorn hope; however,

maximum research efforts can yield a two-increment increase.
Since Germany begins at zero and needs an eight to employ the
Bomb, optimal and maximal research can potentially yield
dividends by 1943 at the earliest.
Without resorting to numerous restarts and saved games, this is
unlikely, and the effort may well be wasteful; yet, there is still that
fascination about the NSB (National Socialist Bomb). For the
remainder of research, one may choose to concentrate on

Review

priority items (armor, infantry, etc.) or a random scattering
across the board (and hope for the luck of the draw).
Miscellaneous Observations: German allies aren't worth a
bucket of warm spit. They are good for garrison duties and
eliminating partisans, but should be used on the front line only
for short-term emergency duty.
If Sea Lion fails, North Africa will fall. The African sideshow is a
diversion of effort and troops that could better be used on the
Eastern Front. Concentrate on the main theaters of operation;
Spain and Turkey/Iran should be avoided. A Spanish ulcer will
allow an expanded front for the Western allies, while an invasion
of Turkey/Iran will open additional avenues of approach for Russian armies.

Conclusions
The graphics and user interface may reduce one's enthusiasm
for this game. One must remember that this is a straight port
from the 8-bit world. (Amiga owners with "only" 512K may have
trouble believing this, as they must disconnect their external disk
drive in order to play the game without seeing any gain in
graphics quality over the C-64 version.)
Even so, the game can be a diverting entertainment package to
those who are patient with the interface and do not overly mind
the historical abstractions/simplifications necessary to create a
strategic game playable in one sitting. SAE is slightly more
sophisticated than the standard "beer and pretzels" game and is
certainly a step up in complexity from programmer Dan

Cermak's former design, Colonial Conquest. For those who
liked Colonial Conquest and are looking for a similar game
based on World War II, Storm Across Europe should offer an interesting interlude.

Recommended Reading List
John Erickson, Road to Stalingrad and Road to Berlin: Detailed
analyses of the Eastern Front with special attention paid to the Soviet
High Command.
Vincent J. Esposito, West Point Atlas of American Wars: The standard
map reference, which includes excellent maps coupled with succinct narrative.
David Irving, Hitler's War: Revisionist history from the Fuhrerbunker
viewpoint. If British Professor Irving had written this type of history in
1943-45, he might well have been sentenced to hang with Lord Haw-Haw.
John Keegan, The Second World War: A new history, better read in discrete parts rather than straight through.
Francis Miller, History of World War II: A contemporary (1945) account of the entire war.
Alexander Werth, Russia at War: The best one-volume history of the
War in the East.
Peter Young, ed., Atlas of the Second World War: As good as the
West Point Atlas, but somewhat harder to find.
Copyright 1990, All Rights Reserved

M. Evan Brooks, LTC, IN, USAR, has been mobilized for active duty
and will be taking an unplanned, extended leave of absence.

de grace to be inflicted.

(Continued from page 54)

has an expected value of 2.22 hits per attack on a battleship. This is the best
average of the "minor" units. Consequently, on average, the submarine is the best
unit to utilize in softening up a battleship.
Note, however, that it may take several
submarines to inflict enough damage for
the coup

It is important to note, too, that there is
no difference between using a destroyer
or fighter to soften up a battleship. They
both give the same 1.02 damage units
and have the same probability of sinking
the battleship at all hit point levels. The
lesson here is that, it makes little sense
to throw a destroyer away against a battleship.
One can do the same analysis for the
cruiser using Figure 2. Note that with two
hits, a cruiser becomes easy prey for
another cruiser. From
Table II, a submarine

Table IV:
Chance of
Destroying a
Submarine
with X Number
of Hits

Table V: Chance of
Destroying a
Destroyer with X
Number of Hits

Attacker
0
1
*
*
Army
Fighter 30.8 79.6
Transport 11.6 60.9
Submarine 74.5 74.9
Destroyer 32.0 80.7

Attacker
0
2
1
Army
7.4 21.1 66.2
Fighter 7.4 21.1 66.2
Transport 18.6 44.6 81.4
Submarine 84.7 84.7 84.7
Destroyer 57.3 80.2 96.6

* = Attack prohibited

* = Attack prohibited

should be able to inflict the required two
points of damage on one try. Even a
destroyer can inflict close to two damage
units on average.
These figures are also good from a
defensive standpoint. If one's cruiser has
five hits, it is very vulnerable to other
cruisers, submarines, and destroyers.
With seven hits, all units will have a good
chance to sink it. These numbers should
help when deciding when to go in for
repairs and what to watch out for on the
way.
Tables IV, V and VI show similar data
for transports, destroyers and submarines.

Table VI: Chance of
Destroying a
Transport with X
Number of Hits
0
Attacker
1
2
Army
27.8 49.3 86.3
Fighter
27.8 49.3 86.3
Transport 56.4 81.5 95.8
* = Attack prohibited

This author has only scratched
the surface of what one can do
with the above information. The
tables and figures can be interpreted in many ways. What is
presented here is the raw data
from which to make informed
decisions about how best to use
one's units. Armed with the above
examples of how to use the data,
players now have the tools
needed to take on Empire and
conquer the worlds of their choice.

True Aim with Projectyle
(Continued from page 56)

this article), their actual numerical values are relative to other characters rather than absolute. This is interesting, since no other character's ratings seem to decline as another's are built up. These
reviewers can only surmise that this relativity is only applied when
the characters are actually interacting with each other. The final purchase element is the repair of character injuries, which can vary in
costs. Often these are expensive propositions, so the depth of one's
eight-player bench can, theoretically, become severely tested during

league or sudden death play. Theoretically, because we played
several leagues on the ST without ever seeing an injured player. Injured players are, for all practical purposes, worthless on the playing
field. Sweating out a game with an injured player can be an excruciating experience.

A Pitch For The Home Team
Each team in Projectyle has their own home field, or "pitch" (as
the Brits call it), which looks and plays much to the team's style. For
instance, the Eldritch Cats play at The Podium in Liverpool, England.
The Podium is designed with a psychedelic, 60's-flashback decor and
plays up the cats' quick and bouncy style. The ball rockets off of the
walls on this pitch, complementing the cats' blazing speed. On the
other hand, The Devils play in "Hell" (where else?) where the court is
made of sulfurous rock. There is little action on the ball down there
and players move with the ease of an ox, bringing the quick teams
down to the Devils' slow pace and allowing the Devils to inflict their
powerful style of play upon visiting tribes.

Picking Up A Few Things
To add a bit of spice to the game play, certain bonus objects occasionally materialize and litter the pitch. They might alter Boing,
Power or Slide (for either the individual character who first touches it,
or for the entire Pitch), or might generate a "special effect." These
special effects include sealing the exits, teleporting the action to the
Frenzy Zone, making the ball "loony," awarding the player a "chip
shot" ability where the ball hangs in the air for a while (useful for hitting over a defender) and the dreaded "about face", which causes the
character to shoot away from the ball when the player presses the
power button (better to sit in the corner and eat worms than to suffer
an "about face" effect). The best effect one can obtain is the "free
kick," where the other two characters in the zone are frozen in their
place, leaving the "kicking" character to maneuver the ball as he or
she (there are female characters) pleases. The effect lasts only nine
seconds, which seems but an instant to the kicking player (who
must carefully line up the correct "shot"), and an eternity for those
who must endure being frozen, passively watching in the midsts of
such an active game as Projectyle.

The Whole Is Greater Than
The Sum Of The Parts
While, perhaps, none of this might sound new, it's the remarkable
blending of these elements as they directly translate into game play
that makes Projectyle a game we simply cannot stop playing. One
actually can feel the difference between controlling different characters. One starts making mental notes to work on this one's Boing or
that one's Mass. The speed of the game pumps up players'
adrenaline levels to the point where yelling, screaming and "high
flying" abound. Injuries seem to injure player morale as well a character's performance. Coaching can be just as challenging (and important) as playing, sharpening both a player's strategy and arcade
skills.

More To Come?
While nothing is on the designers' slate at this time, there may be
future game expansion modules for Projectyle. New teams with new
home stadiums and a playoff system for league play (requested by
Americans who just love their championship series) are all possible
features of future disks. It seems these upgrades will depend on sales
of this product and on the whim of the designers (who are, by the
way, Marc Dawson and Steve Wetherill and who together comprise
Eldritch the Cat).
Projectyle would be just another "Rollerball" rip-off if it weren't for
the flavor that is added in terms of individual players with ratings in
6 statistics, unique home fields with personalities of their own, and
special effects objects that add twists to the game play. Combine this
with "coaching" the players in one's tribe to different playing field
locations, fretting injuries, and trying to beat the mighty Devils (especially in their home court), makes this a game to be reckoned with
and replayed often.

Reader Input Device

Conversions
Received

Codename: Iceman (Sierra)
Amiga
Colonel's Bequest (Sierra)
Amiga
Conquest of Camelot
(Sierra) Amiga
Double Dribble (Konami)
Amiga,C64
Dragons of Flame (SSI) C64
Hero's Quest (Sierra)
Amiga,ST
Solitaire (Sierra) Amiga
Strike Aces (Accolade) Amiga
War of the Lance (SSI) IBM
Where in Time is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) Mac

Pre-20th Century
(Continued from page 13)

product proves that a World War II game system does not necessarily transfer well to the
American Revolution.
Seven Cities of Gold (At/Ap/C/I/M; 4.3,.5)
[EA; 1984; $14.95; ****]. A classic rendition
of the Exploration and Conquest of the New
World. Graphics on the 16-bit machines are
relatively poor (considering the capabilities of
the machines), but on the earlier releases, the
game remains a classic. CGW Hall of Fame
game.
Shiloh, The Battle of (At/Ap/TRS-80) [SSI;
1981; 0/P; ***+]. SSI's first rendition of the
Civil War battle, it is a true beer-and-pretzels
type of game. Easy to learn and play, it is
marred by marginal graphics and ahistoric
results.
Shiloh: Grant's Trail in the West (Ap/C/I/S;
#43) [SSI; 1987; $39.95; ****]. SSI's more
recent and more accurate rendition of the Battle of Shiloh.
Six Gun Shootout (At/Ap/C; 5.4) [SSI;
1985; 0/P; ****]. A Western simulation,
owing more to Hollywood than history, it is an
easy-to-learn game and one which is still fun
to play. Do not expect to learn any historical
insights into the Old West. Just sit back and
go along for the ride.
Sons of Liberty (At/Ap/C/I; #46) [SSI;
1987; $14.95; ***+]. SSI's Civil War engine
simulates the American Revolution. Covering
a somewhat neglected period, this simulation
is accurate and detailed, offering three different battles: Bunker Hill, Saratoga and Monmouth.
Sword of Aragon (I/Am; #65) [SSI; 1989;
$39.95/$49.95; ***+]. A medieval
sword-and-sorcery simulation, this game yields a high
playability factor, although its graphics and
user interface are only marginal.
Sword of the Samurai (I; #67) [MicroProse;

1989; $54.95; ****). The unification of Japan
as seen by MicroProse. In the same vein as
Pirates, the game was not as successful, although game play, historical research and
game atmosphere are near perfect. Duels,
melee sequences and set-piece battles characterize this Oriental oeuvre.
U.M.S.—The Universal Military Simulator

(I/M/S/Am; #43,48,51) [Rainbird; 1988;
$39.95; **+]. A visual feast, but a playable
desert, U.M.S. is incorrect on two counts—it is
neither universal nor a simulator. It lacks a
naval option, and the user interface is quite
clumsy. The initial disk includes the Battles of
Arbela, Hastings, Marston Moor, and Waterloo
(the last of which omits the Prussians in toto).
U.M.S. Civil War Disk (I) [Rainbird; 1989; $
; N/R]. An expansion disk for U.M.S., it includes the Battles of Gettysburg, Shiloh, Antietam, and Chatanooga. It requires the U.M.S.
game disk.
U.M.S. 11 (I/S/M/Am) [MicroPlay; 1990?;
$59.95?; N/12]. A sequel to U.M.S., this simulation is more detailed, and will cover the Campaigns of Alexander the Great. Other planned
scenarios include the Campaigns of Napoleon.
To be reviewed upon publication.
Wargame Construction Set (At/C/I/S) [SSI;
1986; $14.95; **+]. A design-your-own simulation covering warfare from a tactical level
throughout history. Marred by a system more
attuned to World War II tactics than to a
generic battle system.
Waterloo (I/S/Am; 73) [SSI; 1990; $59.95;
***]. SSI's import of the British simulation of
the famous battle, as seen from the
"commander's eye". Much more of a wargame
than the historic staff simulations more commonly produced, it is a fascinating, albeit
frustrating, game. Designer Peter Turcan has
also designed Borodino and Armada.
Wooden Ships & Iron Men (C) [Avalon Hill;
1986; $35.00; **+]. A board game classic,
this computer rendition suffers from poor
graphics and a limited computer opponent.

The Rumor Bag
(Continued from page 14)

In fact, he might even cite Elvira,
Mistress of the Dark as an adventure
coming from a different source. He could
say that Accolade is importing HorrorSoft's action adventure, loosely based
on the persona of the bewitching
television film hostess, which is garnering
so much attention in Europe. Having the
player journey through an ancient castle
in order to retrieve six keys sounds
rather like standard fare, but the graphics
are supposed to be something extra-special. I doubted if he'd say anything about
GEnie's new Dragon's Gate game using
an Etruscan pantheon or being the first
computer role-playing game to factor
aerial combat into the equation. After all,
I had just cadged that out of designer
Mark Jacobs a couple of days ago.
"Do you know or have any knowledge
of who might know anything concerning
Sierra's decision to ... ah, modif .
alter . . . er
. change the name of the
Hero's Quest series?" I would have continued in my daydream interrogation of
the well-known CEO. My subconscious
surprised me, though. Davis quickly
noted that Milton Bradley had
trademarked the name Hero's Quest at
an earlier date. In my daydream, he continued to unfold revelations like the fact
that Origin's WingLeader had become
Wing Commander in order to avoid confusion with Nova Games' Wingleader
and cited possible confusion in the future
between Paragon Software's Imperium
(based on the Game Designers
Workshop boardgame) and Electronic
Arts's European import with the same
name. He also noted that GDW's World
War I aviation game and Three-Sixty's
upcoming World War I game had the
same name, Blue Max.
Naturally, I pressed him further in my
imaginary interrogation, trying to find out
if there was to be any additional name
confusion in the industry. He doubted it,
since many of the upcoming titles are
licenses of successful boardgames or
pen and paper role-playing games.
Chaosium has licensed Call of Cthulhu
to French publisher Infogrames;
Paragon Software will publish versions
of Space 1889 (with a significantly improved combat system over MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy
and the ability to create your own
"careers," i.e. character classes) and
Twilight 2000 (Marc Miller, creator of
Traveller, will be writing the story);
Supremacy Games is nearing completion on Computer Supremacy; and
GEnie is preparing to unveil an on-line

Dungeon Master's Assistant, licensed
through TSR, that allows players/dungeon masters to create new characters,
monsters, treasures and dungeons (or
even adventure through a dungeon online) more efficiently than ever.
Unfortunately, I wasn't able to listen to
Davis' actual testimony. I ended up in
some kind of armed services subcommittee by mistake (all these committee
rooms look the same to me). The congressmen were talking about so many
mega-billions of dollars for new planes,
subs and the like that I started paging
through my hard disk to see what kind of
advanced goodies I had. I found out that
I had Das Boot, a German U-Boat simulation from Three-Sixty that is expected to
go head-to-head with Silent Service II, a
dynamite WWII sub simulation which
takes place in the Pacific Theatre. I also
noticed that the name of one of my
games had changed. Ace of Aces II, the
WWI aerial combat simulation from
Three-Sixty, is now being released as
Blue Max: Aces of the Great War.
The tone of the hearing changed and
received my complete attention when
some of the congressmen started debating the Iraqi situation. Evidently, they
weren't the only
ones concerned
about the situation. A page
brought me a
note from a congressman which indicated that MicroProse plans to
have an Iraqi
scenario in UMS
2, their MicroPlay
line's improvement over the
original Universal
Military
Simulator. The
note went on to
suggest that
scenarios from
the campaigns of
Alexander the
Great, Napoleon,
the invasion of
Normandy, and a
science fiction battle will grace the
product.
Then, the low-life
politician went on
to make fun of
my boss, Editor
Wilson (I do, too,
but somebody has
to defend the unarmed in a battle
of wits). It claimed
that he had

misspelled Paul Jaquays' name in The
Lord of the Rings: Volume 1 sneak
preview. Then, he had the audacity to
claim that I had made a couple of mistakes. Apparently, I had placed Loren
Wiseman among the stalwarts at FASA
instead of GDW and mislabeled GEnie's
upcoming Feudal Intrigue as Feudal
Entry. Hey! It's hard to hear with a
tapped phone! GEnie is lucky I didn't
call it "Futile Entry."
I scribbled a note in reply that told the
congressman that MicroProse wasn't the
only company scrambling to add Iraqi
scenarios to Fall products. "For your information," I underlined this sentence so he
would know that he wasn't the only person who had classified information, "a
source inside Spectrum HoloByte has
indicated that a Fall product could have
an Iraqi scenario (probably the new Falcon mission disk) and Activision's F-14
Tomcat could feasibly have such a
scenario.
Gee, no wonder nothing seems to get
done in Congress. All the committees
look the same. Maybe someone ought to
do a congressional subcommittee simulation (volumes of documentation and very
few action sequences).

Over There
(Continued from page 32)
Music Creator tunes or IFF samples; use
the copper lists to create rainbow effects;
plus you can transfer STOS programs to
your Amiga.
AMOS comes on two disks, with a 293page manual and a separate index booklet and newsletter.
In addition to the above, when you
register, you are sent a regular bi-monthly newsletter which includes hints/tips
and readers' queries as well as news of
forthcoming updates, modules, etc.
STOS users also get a copy of the
"STOS Word" word processor program
free.
There has been a wealth of support for
STOS. At the moment modules include a
STOS Compiler (which speeds up
programs), STOS Maestro (a music package that enables you to add sampled
sound to your programs), STOS Maestro
Plus (that includes a sampler cartridge)
and STOS Sprites 600 (which includes
over 600 ready-made sprites for you to
use). In addition, a four-game compilation, called Games Galore, has been
released which includes four games that
have been created using STOS. Included
in this pack is a copy of STOS Squasher
— a program to squeeze STOS files to a
fraction of their normal size.
The AMOS package has some catching
up to do, it seems. However, Mandarin is
already planning to release AMOS Compiler and AMOS 3D, a utility which will
enable Amigans to create 3D games (a
STOS implementation of AMOS 3D is
not far behind).
If that little lot isn't enough, there is an
AMOS and STOS public-domain library
which contains games, fonts, music files,
anti-virus programs, etc. Also, a hotline is
present to answer any queries. Then
there's the £5,000 cash prize which will
be given to the person or team which
creates a high-quality, marketable game.
The winner of the 1989 STOS competition, Simon Cook, has his game, called
Cartoon Capers, on the market now.
The runners-up had their efforts included
in the Games Galore compendium mentioned above. Finally, (whew!) there is a
book available for STOS (the AMOS version will be available soon), called The
Games Makers Manual, written by
Steven Hill, who wrote the AMOS
manual. Apparently, the AMOS version
of the book will have many new sections
to cater to the extra facilities and power
available to the Amiga.

Contact the usual mail-order addresses
for information on prices and availability,
as listed elsewhere.
Topologika is back! Remember the
text-only PC adventure, called Avon, mentioned in a previous "Over There?" Well,
now make way for Return To Doom.
The second in a planned trilogy of adventures featuring the planet Doomawangara
(ask Topologika about the first episode
You are the only—CountdwTDm).
explorer ever to survive the dangerous
planet of Doom. But an unexpected distress call sends you back. It appears that
an ambassador has been kidnapped by a
bunch of renegade robots. Weird and
wonderful puzzles are promised—strange
weather conditions, alternative universes
and so forth. Coming on a single 5 1/4
inch disk, with on-line help, Return to
Doom can be obtained from Topologika,
PO Box 39, Stilton, Peterborough,
England, PE7 3RL. Tel: 01144 733
244682. Visa is accepted.
Speaking of adventures, Zenobi
Software, from England, have a couple
of adventures for your ST. In the first adventure called, "imaginatively", The Adventurer, you play Jason Kirkwood, who
has won through to the finals of the
World Famous Adventure program,
screened on National Cable TV. The aim
is to become the "Adventurer of the
Year". After being introduced to the
audience you are tested for the last time,
then you enter the portal to complete
your quest. The Adventurer, which arrives on a single disk, is a pure text
game with around 200 locations. Price is
a measly £6.95 (which includes a free
blank disk).
The second Zenobi game is a
text/graphic adventure called Whiplash
& Wagonwheel. It is 1958. You are John
Masterton. Hitching a welcome ride from
a friendly trucker, you gaze out of the
window as the rain lashes the road
ahead. After a short drive the trucker
pulls in to a diner, leaving you in the
truck. When the driver doesn't appear for
some time you decide to investigate.
Sure enough, there's no sign of the man
and everyone denies ever seeing him—
even though you saw him walk into the
place with your own eyes. So what happened?
The display includes a half graphic/half
text format along with three pop-up windows that contain objects present, people
present and available directions. The
price is £6.99.
Both ST adventures can be purchased
from Zenobi software, 26 Spotland Tops,

Cutgate, Rochdale, Lancs., England,
OL12 7NX.
From German software house, Rainbow Arts, comes Khalaan (PC, ST and
Amiga). You play one of four great
caliphs, great rivals all, suddenly united
by the realization of a dark prophesy. A
dark intruder threatens to possess the
land and only by defeating him can you
hope to call yourself The Great Caliph.
You'll require diplomatic, tactical and war
campaigning skills to negotiate, trade
and battle your way to victory. The game
includes action sequences which, rather
unfortunately, take the place of tactical
battle scenes. The digitized sound and
graphics are well done, however, adding
to the atmosphere. Khalaan was coded
by CHIP, responsible for Day of the
Pharaoh and Joan of Arc.
Finally, from the English software
house Impressions (who've just
clinched the Omnitrend distribution deal
over here), may I present Rourke's Drift.
It is January 22nd, 1879. A supply depot
is manned by 137 British soldiers (36 of
which are hospitalized). News has just arrived that 1,500 men have been wiped
out at lsandhlwana by a large Zulu army.
Now 4,000 Zulus are approaching
Rourke's Drift.
You control each of the 137 British
troops. The play sequence is divided up
into an order phase and a battle phase.
You can give a variety of movement commands (via point-and-click mouse commands). Other commands include
kneel/fire and stand/fire. The target is
selected by mouse pointer. Close combat
is another option. Medics and quartermasters complete the British complement. Available for ST and Amiga.
The above games, and any of the other
games mentioned in "Over There" in past
issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World
318 Kensington
Liverpool, England, L7 OEY
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
SDC
60 Boston Road
London, England, W7 3TR
Premier Mail Order
Trybridge Ltd.
8 Buckwins Square
Burnt Mills, Basildon
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ
Telephone: 01144-268-590-766
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international operator
for assistance.

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 8)
game with depth! Minutia concerning
every major political personage in the empire (especially their loyalty), every conceivable economic concern (talk about
"Guns or Butter!"), establishing military
credibility and imperial expansion, plus
making alliances, wars and dealing with
one's intelligence and diplomatic corps
might overwhelm all but the haughtiest
strategy gamer. Rich in detail and scope
(although short on graphics), this is an
"everything-you-can-think-of-is-included"
type of strategy game with a fairly long
learning curve. Atari ST, Amiga ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #4.
PGA TOUR: Just when you thought
they couldn't do anything more with a
golf game, EA comes out with this
simulation that encompasses nearly
every aspect of the game in a beautifully
cinematic style. Players compete with
sixty of golfs best on three Tournament
Player's Club courses: Sawgrass, Avenel,
and West Stadium, and a fourth fantastic
course, Sterling Shores. Gee-whiz features include a 3-D contoured map of the
greens, a stat-tracking function, and
aerial fly-by views of each hole. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Electronic Zoo
3431-A Benson Avenue
Baltimore, MD 21227
TREASURE TRAP: Hundreds of leagues
below the sea lies the inundated hull of
the Esmerelda-100 rooms of bullion
bounty available to the first derring-doer
to don a diving suit. Players will have to
pluck this pile o' plenty from the devious
traps and the ocean-going inhabitants
that protect it from plundering paws. This
is an excellent visual-spatial puzzle game
for the action/strategy aficionados.
Amiga, IBM ($39.95). Circle Service #6.
Innerprise Software
128 Cockeysville Rd.
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
THE PLAGUE: This is an action game
of the sort too typical for the Amiga. The
player's lone figure runs, jumps, and
shoots his or her way through your
average monster-sorts on his or her
quest to. .. to... well, what does it really
matter? The packaging uses such adjectives as breathtaking and mind-captivating, but the best part of the game is the
"eerie," made loud to be played loud,
soundtrack. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.

Lance Haffner Games
P.O. Box 100594
Nashville, TN 37224
TKO PRO BOXING: Those who remember the Atari 8-bit Computer Title Bout
from Avalon Hill and Ringside Seat on
the Apple II and C-64/128 will have a
general idea of what TKO Pro Boxing
has to offer. Although TKO does not
even have the primitive graphics of the
earlier games, it does, however, feature intriguing strategy, ability to modify boxers
and a larger library of competitors to
choose from than the earlier games. The
computer opponent leaves something to
be desired, but the game is still worth
considering. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #8.
Live Interactive Video Entertainment
30151 Branding Iron Road
San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675
FUTURE CLASSICS COLLECTION:
While these games may not live up to
their pretentious title, they do have some-

thing to offer for action fans. This collection of five arcade/strategy allows two
players to compete head to head in a
variety of typical action settings. "Disk
Man" and "Diet Riot" offer simple maze
game action of the PacMan variety, "Lost
in Maze" is a simple dungeon exploration
game, "Blockalanche" is a 3-D spin-off of
Tetris/Block Out, and "Tankbattle" is a
90's version of "Tank" on the Atari 2600
(remember those?). The games can be
played against the computer, though the
real value is in head-to-head play. Amiga
($49.95), IBM ($39.95). Circle Service 119.
Merit Software
13635 Gamma Road
Dallas, TX 75244
OPERATION COM*BAT: A tactical armored battle unfolds before your eyes,
with elements akin to such diverse
games as "Ogre," "Modem Wars," and
"Cytron Masters." Playable by modem or
against the computer, this abstract wargame offers interesting features like supply limitations, unit differentiations, and air

Taking a Peek

power. On the down side, enemy units
are no weaker defensively when flanked
or ambushed, and the road/bridge networks are kind of cheesy. Still, this compares about the same as the current
selection of modemable wargames out
there right now. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #10.
Miles Computing, Inc.
5115 Douglas Fir Road, Suite I
Calabasas, CA 91302
QUESTMASTER: Originally published
in 1987 as Dondra, this graphic adventure is making an encore appearance
under a new title and with a new publisher. Set in the land of Dondra, adventurers
work through puzzles of moderate difficulty on their quest to find the Crystal Prism
of Heheutotol to rid the universe of the
evil Colnar. The graphics are cute and
the storyline as silly as they come,
though the split screen graphic/adventure is out of vogue and the parser a bit
behind the times. Apple ($34.95), Apple
IIGS ($39.95), C64 $($34.95), IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
Mindscape, Inc.
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
THE GLOBAL DILEMMA: GUNS OR
BUTTER: Chris Crawford ("Balance of
Power," "Balance of the Planet") tries to
strike another balance with "Guns or Butter," but this time it's war! The player
micromanages a textbook planned
socialist economy (the kind that doesn't
work in real life, but makes a playable
game laboratory) through the trials of
world conquest. The essence of the
game is getting every worker in the state
allocated just right to the various production sectors. The key lesson (it seems
that every Chris Crawford game has a
key lesson): economies of scale in
production. IBM, Macintosh ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.
Psygnosis Ltd.
South Harrington Buildings
Sefton Street, Liverpool L3 4BQ
England
ANARCHY: This game is naught but a
souped up Defender (remember that old
arcade hit?). The game is from England,
with the rules (in four languages, no less)
using such words as "blighters" and "tut,
tut." Atari ST. Circle Reader Service #14.
Paragon Software
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
THE PUNISHER: The dark world of Marvel Comics' Punisher is brought to life in
an action/adventure that combines a

three-quarter view adventure universe
(very similar to that used in MegaTraveller) and several action sequences.
The player takes part in 50 missions—ridding Manhattan of crime—and raising
enough money to buy information leading to the Kingpin. IBM. Circle Reader
Service #13.
Sierra On-Line, Inc.
P.O. Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614
HOYLE'S BOOK OF GAMES VOLUME
II, SOLITAIRE: Twenty-eight (count 'em)
solitaire card games, some you've heard
of (like pyramid), some you haven't and
some which are completely unique to
this game. It doesn't offer the graphics or
competitive play of volume I, but it's still
a fairly solid product. All the game rules
are on-screen for ease of learning. IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
Spectrum HoloByte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER: Based on
the novel by Stephen Coonts, "Flight"
puts the player in the role of a Vietnam
Navy pilot on a mission in either an A-6
Intruder or an F-4 Phantom. Emphasizing
the team flying approach of interacting
with one's wingman and base, two computers can link up and join in the action
(playing the same side). Facing SAMs
and flak on the ground, and MiG 17's,
19's and 21's in the air, players perform
a series of varied missions which can be

linked into a campaign game. Also, the
player may take the role of Air Group
commander, designing missions, selecting targets, etc. IBM ($59.95, includes
the novel). Circle Reader Service #16.
Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc.
2105 Bascom Ave. #380
Campbell, CA 95008
HARPOON SCENARIO EDITOR: This
program allows individuals to both
modify existing "Harpoon" scenarios and
create their own original ones. The 40page manual gives considerable insight
to the technical ins and outs of "Harpoon" programming. Now the skies (and
seas) are the limit. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #17.
Villa Crespo Software
PO BOX 1818
Highland Park, IL 60035
EDWARD 0. THORP'S REAL BLACKJACK: From the man who invented the
original blackjack card-counting system
which is emulated by everyone today,
and from the company that brought you
"Amarillo Slim's Real Poker" comes a
serious—almost course level—study of the
game of twenty-one. The extremely
simple interface presents fast play and
detailed statistical information to enrich
the player's card-playing skills. Teaching
basic strategy, card counting and money
management techniques, this game is
designed specifically to improve your
take at the tables. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #18.

Editorial

No Soft Soap About New And
Improved Computer Games

F

rank

Gruber, a pulp writer in both
the mystery and western genres
during the '30s and '40s, once
wrote that there were only seven types of
Western story. He listed these as:
Union Pacific (building the railroad,
telegraph and/or stagecoach lines),
Ranch Story (rustling and range war intrigue), Empire (essentially the Ranch
Story, but on a grand scale), Revenge
(going to great lengths to satisfy a quest
for vengeance), Last Stand (cavalry versus Indians), Outlaw (Jesse James, Billy
the Kid) and Marshal (dedicated lawman).
Gruber did not say that it was bad that
the genre had these formulaic elements/plots. Rather, he indicated that the
good writers took simple elements and
clothed them with enough flesh and feeling to get readers to "believe" in the characters and events.
Recently, a respected designer was
lamenting the current state of adventure
game design. He was particularly "put
off' by the rigorous demand for new and
tougher puzzles. So he went on to say
that there were absolutely no new puzzles because Scott Adams had already
designed them all in his early series of
text adventures. All present puzzles, this
designer suggested, were simply variations on Scott Adams' themes.
From our "lofty" perspective (far above
the trenches where designers, programmers, artists, musicians and producers
labor), it seems like there is some
validity to the charge. Computer game
designers have always considered themselves to be storytellers using the
medium of stored and transmitted data,
rather than puzzle creators. There has always been something of an expectation
that the interactivity which stored data
enabled the user/reader/player to play
with a story made our medium superior
to other artistic media.
Now, there is something of a frustration
among the designers. When games are
not perceived to have enough puzzles or

to be "tough enough," they are often not
considered good games. Yet, the designers point to extremely successful games
that have little story, less characterization
and minimal motivation (except for solving the puzzles and finishing the game).
They insist that computer games will
never be a medium which can inspire
and enthrall the masses. They note that
the mystery religion of DOS and its inner
circles of parser handling stand between
the "average Joe" and their stories. They
lament that film offers better graphics
and note that it is often the quality of the
graphics rather than the quality of the
game play that sells a game on today's
market. They note that CDs offer better
sound quality and suggest that the current price of a computer game as
equivalent to 3-5 audio CDs is too great
a disparity in a consumer-driven market.
What is the problem with the adventure
game market? First of all, there are
some who would say that there is no
problem whatsoever. They would note
that the addition of quality graphics and
sound board support has revitalized the
market. They would observe that the parsers are improving and adventure game
designers are attempting to find new interfaces that do not stand between the story
and the gamer. Yet, even these
apologists for the current state of the adventure game will grudgingly admit that
the quest to make MS-DOS machines, in
particular, do what they were not
designed to do (support quality graphics
and sound) has increased the ante on
computer game development. It often
takes between a low estimate of
$125,000 and a high estimate of
$350,000 to develop a "state of the art"
adventure game. This has to be
recouped in the product's price. So we
have $50 to $80 games on the market.
How can computer games become a
mass-market item when the price of the
games themselves are so much higher
than other forms of entertainment, not to
mention the fact that the "platform" to
play the games on is so expensive.

Such observations are causing some to
give up on the computer game market itself. They have declared the industry
dead and are preparing to move on to
other things. They cite Swords of
Twilight and Loom as examples of a consumer resistance to games which break
the standard formulae of computer
games, noting that neither product has
been a mega-hit. They have stated that
we will never be able to use the art of
computer game design to make the impact on society as a whole that many of
us have dreamed about over the last
decade.
Some companies have become somewhat more cynical in their approach to at
least one of these issues—the cost of the
product. The reality of commercialization
is looming over our heads. One company was publishing a sports game and
decided to have a scoreboard with paid
advertising on it. Another company
planned to give prominent billing to a
soft drink company on the title screen of
a new computer game.
We have three basic thoughts on these
issues. First, we think that even if Scott
Adams did all the puzzles that there is
room for creative growth in characterization, social relevance, philosophical
consideration and presentation within the
genre. Good design teams will still
produce fascinating games. Second, we
are very much afraid that paid advertising in computer games will not benefit
the consumers. Like those horrendous
ads at the movie theaters where the exhibitors will simply take the money and
run without reducing the admission at
the gate or videocassettes which force
one to fast-forward past five or six
minutes of ads prior to the feature, we
are afraid this would only be an intrusion
and not something for the player's
benefit. Finally, and most importantly, if
we didn't believe that computer games offered positive benefits, we wouldn't take
the time to cover them. We'd find other
jobs.

