March 1991

Number 80

Features
Access' Hot Links

10

Coming Attractions in Computer Games

19
24
27

Emperors Beware in EA's Imperium/Hosea Battles

Good Nukes, Tonight!

30

Part 2 of a Command HQ Replay / Alan Emrich

Great Exploitations

40

Data East's Full Metal Planet / Roger White

Breeding Grounds of the Proud Dragon Lord 48
Cinemaware's Strategy Import / Alan L. Greenberg

The Buzz on Magic Fly

62

Name that Tomb

63

Nevada Smith and the Pharaoh's Tomb/Michael Lasky

Origin's New Role-Playing Series / Dennis Owens

Caveat Imperator

56

Electronic Arts' Space Shoot-'Em-Up/Alan L. Greenberg

First Observations on the Consumer Electronics Show

Taming The Savage Empire

Fly Me to Barsoom
Paragon Software's Space 1889 / Todd Threadgill

A Visually Captivating Golf Program / H.E. Dille

Departments
Taking A Peek
Conversions Received
The Rumor Bag
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Scorpion's Tale (Spellcasting 101)
Scorpion's View (King's Quest V)
Reader Input Device
Editorial

6
8
16
32
33
44
50
60
64

Taking a Peek

Abracadata
P.O. Box 2440
Eugene, OR 97402
DESIGN YOUR OWN RAILROAD: This
product brings the age-old hobby of model
railroading to the Apple II computer.
Layouts can be designed in any of the
more popular scales (Z, N, HO, S, G, and
0), complete with scenery, switches, overpasses, tunnels, etc. Locomotives can then
be run, with cars coupled to them or uncoupled to deadhead, as players haul
freight and collect revenue. ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.
Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA
ARCADE FEVER: Two disks and two
games in one package. These twin "twitch
and flex" exercises include "Stormlord," a
fantasy hero versus all corners, and
"Onslaught," a large game (10 world maps
with 256 locations) with considerable depth
for an arcade game. Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
DRAGON LORD: This strategy game puts
one to three players (on the same computer) in the role of raising, rather than slaying, dragons. With limited resources,
players must make optimal use of time and
money in an attempt to find the three
pieces of the magic talisman. An exhaus-

tive magic system is also included, which
will challenge even the most hard-core fantasy game player. Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
($49.95). Circle Service #3.
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
POWERMONGER: As previewed in the
January, 1991 issue of Computer Gaming
World magazine. Amiga, Atari ST ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #4.
Electronic Zoo
Baltimore, MD
DARK SPYRE: A fine, elaborate role-playing game in which the single hero takes on
the challenges of the Dark Spyre. Whether
the hero is right- or left-handed makes a difference; there are detailed weapons (including ranged weapons), armor, magic, etc.
The game uses a split-screen, overhead 3-D
display which keeps the whole game right
at the player's fingertips. IBM ($49.95) A
separate clue book ($9.95) and, more interestingly, game editor ($19.95) are also available. Circle Reader Service #5.
FTL
P.O. Box 710490
San Diego, CA 92171
CHAOS STRIKES BACK: A scenario for
the popular "Dungeon Master" game, billed
as "Expansion Set #1." Not only is the

scenario more challenging, but new features include editors for hero pictures,
names and titles, as well as a hint oracle for
those who need it. For those who need
even more help, a separate "Chaos" Clue
Book is available ($15.00). Amiga. Circle
Reader Service #6.
Innerprise
128 Cockeysville Road
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
FINAL ORBIT: Garbage... the final frontier.
So much has been dumped on the Moon
that hostile life forms have evolved from it
and threaten the Earth. As a member of
Earth's elite sanitation corps, the player
(and a friend, for two can play at the same
computer) must maneuver through mazes
zapping "loonies" at every turn in this arcade game. IBM. Circle Reader Service #7.
Interplay
Santa Ana, CA
THE LORD OF THE RINGS VOLUME 1:
As previewed in the September, 1990 issue
of Computer Gaming world. IBM ($54.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.
Sega of America
573 Forbes Boulevard
S. San Francisco, CA 94080
CRACK DOWN: The cyborgs have gone
berserk, so the player's character, as well

Taking a Peek

as a buddy's (two can play at the same
computer) get to race through the mazes
taking out these "half-cans" in an attempt
to preserve "pure, biological life." C-64
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
Simulations Canada

Nova Scotia, Canada
FLEET MED: Though devoid of graphics
like all SimCan wargames, these titles offer
some of the most detailed number-crunching of all. Fleet Med emphasizes pre-mission planning and true "fog of war" during
operations between Italy and Britain during
1940-42. Simulated radio communication
between ships is the key to player decisionmaking. IBM ($60.00). Circle Reader Service #10.
MAIN BATTLE TANK NORTH GERMANY:
Maneuver tactical units of modern armor
through such missions as advance to contact, Soviet spearhead, British isolated
defense, German counterattack, etc. Issuing
orders and keeping a cool head as reports
come in are the key to command in this
game. IBM ($60.00). Circle Reader Service
1111.
Sir-Tech

Ogdensburg, NY
FREAKIN' FUNKY FUZZBALLS: This arcade game provides an engrossing mix of
reflex exercising and making the right
(read: strategic) maneuvers across the
board in an attempt to evade and destroy
the computer's relentless opposition. For
one or two players at the same computer.
With two players, the second player hunts
down the first who plays the Fuzzball. IBM
($44.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
Three-Sixty

Campbell, CA
DAS BOOT: Complete with book (and a
discount coupon for the movie), this WWII
German U-Boat simulator offers the complete gamut of missions across all of the
watery theaters in and near the Atlantic.
Combining arcade sequences and strategic
elements, the player mans AA guns and
deck guns, maneuvers through mine fields,
avoids depth charge attacks and conducts
torpedo runs (there is even sub-versus-sub
combat). 256-color VGA graphics. This one
is grand in scope. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #13.
Ubi Soft

511 Sir Francis Drake Blvd., Suite C
Greenbrae, CA 94904
B.A.T.: As a futuristic secret agent from
"B.A.T." (Bureau of Astral Troubleshooters), the player must save Terrapolis. In this
adventure game, one visits over 1,000 locations and flies in a 3-D flight-simulator
space ship. Imported from France, the surreal style is something to see. C-64
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #14.

WONDERLAND: With a "something for
everyone" interface, "Wonderland" offers a
text (with graphics) adventure full of the
sort of bizarre logic for which the Lewis Carroll story is famous. As Alice, there are no

shortages of puzzles to solve, and fascinating sights to see. Using multiple windows
for information displays, the story is no cartoon, but for serious(?) adventure gamers.
IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
Wesson International

500 S. Capital of Texas Hwy
Bldg. 5, Suite 200
Austin. TX 78746
MOONBASE: LUNAR COLONY
SIMULATOR: This "SimLuna" game has put
NASA on a mission to establish an
economically viable base on the moon.
There is only ten years and a limited NASA
budget to work with, but this SimCity style
engine works well with the economic model
presented for play. More of a game and
less of a "toy model" than SimCity, Moonbase has the player making some tough

tough decisions throughout the 10-year
span of time it covers. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service t 16.

Conversions Received
A-10 Tank Killer (Dynamix) Amiga
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess
(Data East) IBM
Conquests of Camelot (Sierra) ST
Deluxe Paint (EA) ST
Drakkhen (Data East) IBM
Full Count (Lance Haffner) IBM
It Came from...Desert (Cinemaware) IBM
The Manhole (Activision) IBM
MicroLeague Football (MicroLeague) C64
Star Control (Accolade) Amiga
Thunder Strike (Live Studios) IBM
TV Sports Basketball (Cinemaware) IBM

Review

"golfer image requires 72
frames of video to
animate through the three
basic strokes). The remaining selections include a
system setup menu, practice options (both driving
range and chipping/putting area), file management areas and a chance
to play. Players
can save their
preferences in
terms of difficulty level, tees to
be used and
which thirteen
clubs out of the
twenty available
will be carried.
The level of difficulty selected
has a major impact on how forgiving the program is for slices
and hooks and
the degree that
wind impacts
one's shots.
Lower levels simplify ball control but minimize the maximum distances one can hit the ball. The beginner level is extremely easy and
should be considered for children only.

Worlds Apart: Access' Links
The Successor to World Class Leader Board
by H.E. Dille
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

L

Links
IBM
(w/ VGA, Hard Drive, 640K)
1-8
$59.95
Vance Cook, Kevin Homer,
and Roger Carver
Access Software
Bountiful, Utah

inks is a new golf game that

revolutionizes graphic standards. Graphic detail is the
name of the game. For example,
in recreating Torrey Pines South
(the course that comes with the
game), the design team at Access
used over five hundred ground
and aerial photographs, as well as
videotape, to create their model.
These were digitized and compiled
into a 256-color, 320 x 200 resolution, three-dimensional environment. The end result is a display of near photographic quality that is
so detailed that one truly feels like he is on the course. Players are
able to witness a portion of how this effect is achieved each time the
screen updates. First, the terrain model is sculpted using a vector
graphics routine that creates a three-dimensional wire-frame
topographic representation. Second, the area is colored, shadowed
and highlighted to enhance the undulating feel of the terrain. Finally,
digitized renditions of the actual vegetation, tee markers, ball
washers, cart paths and background are overlaid for the full effect.
The combined environment makes it easy for players to temporarily
suspend reality and become immersed in the course. In this respect,
Links is unequaled by other golf simulators currently on the market.

Lessons From The Pro
Before hitting the Links, however, there are a few things players
must know. As impressive as the graphics and sound algorithms are,
they are still quite complex and time-consuming to execute. The program is capable of using extended or expanded memory to speed
these functions considerably, but many players may lack that luxury.
As such, Access has also made it possible to speed play by either
limiting/eliminating sounds, or altering the level of detail (Min, Med,
Max) for each distance (Near, Med, Far). The need to do either is
regrettable, but losing sound is much less painful than going to minimum graphic detail.
The greatest strength of Links is superior graphics. As such,
owners of 12-Mhz machines or below should consider the following
before making a decision to purchase. This reviewer evaluated Links
on a 25-Mhz 80386, 1 MB RAM, ATI VGA Wonder card, Ad Lib
sound board, and still found that screen updates between shots required 8-14 seconds, depending on the variety of terrain contour.
This time lag, and the exponentially higher one for less capable
machines, may seem excessive to the reader. Rest assured, however,
that upon viewing the ensuing graphical presentation, one will consider it worth the wait.

Teeing Off
When booting the game, players will note that the main selection
screen is slightly different than the picture in the manual. The
demonstration mode, high score card and female "golfer" options
were deleted at the last minute due to memory restrictions (Each

The course selection screen must also be visited prior to play, even
though Torrey Pines is currently the only available course. Access assures us that additional courses like the one in Bountiful, Utah
(home of Access) and the infamous Firestone Country Club course
(Akron, Ohio) should be out by the time this issue hits the stands.

In The Fairway
In addition to great graphics, Links offers some special features
which allow players to customize the program. In addition to the
basic shots (draw, straight, fade, chip and putt), players may set up
two other special swings which may be used with any clubs of the
player's choice. For example, one will probably want to design a
swing for a "pitch and run" shot. Also, if one plays like this reviewer
(i.e. adventurously journeying into the scenic beauty of nature where
no golfer has gone before), a low line-drive shot may be designed.
This shot seeks to keep the ball less than two feet off the ground,
thereby avoiding the vegetation which keeps entangling one's club
on the backswing, and impart sufficient velocity to plow a furrow
from the point of impact to the near horizon (hopefully in the general
direction of the pin). These effects and others may be achieved
through using the Swing Setup Panel to modify the swing plane,
stance, ball position and club face.
The remainder of the Swing Panel serves as both an information display and control interface. The display is designed to be as unobtrusive as possible while providing players with all that they need:
hole number, course, par, yardage, club selected, wind direction and
speed, scores for all players in the round and which player is up. The
control portion of the panel may be manipulated with either keyboard, joystick or mouse. Players may call up an overhead view of
the hole, with their position clearly marked, observe the lie of the ball
via a close up inset window, or rotate the first person perspective
(useful when stuck behind trees or other obstacles). Additionally, one
may select which of the six swing types will be used, modify the
game options without re-booting and control penalty drops (strict
PGA rules are enforced). The best new feature is the ability to step
away from the ball and take a few practice swings prior to addressing the shot.
Actual shot control is handled similarly to all of the other golf
simulations on the market. The major difference is that, instead of a

Review

bar, the swing indicator is shaped like the letter "C," with a vertical
line intersecting the top and bottom at the center. The top mark indicates the maximum safe power without overswing, while the lower
mark indicates the proper wrist "snap" to impart. Also, the swing indicator changes for both chipping and putting to allow for slower,
more deliberate shot placement.
Players may select an aiming point for their shots by "clicking" on
any area of the main screen at any distance. Doing so places a red
and white striped bar at that point, indicating the direction of aim
(not the point of impact) and a readout gives the range to the bar.
This feature is also useful for easily determining the range to the
edge of the fairway landing area from the tee, the distance to a critically placed sand trap or any number of other things that may affect
one's club selection.
After each shot, players are given the option of continuing, taking a
penalty drop if necessary, or (bless them for this inclusion) taking a
"mulligan." Mulligans allow one to hit a new ball from the same spot
without affecting one's score, but the number of mulligans taken is
recorded on the score card (which may be printed out at the end of
a round).
Once on the green, Links stands out from the competition again.
Most simulations on the market use either generic pancake greens
with a single slope indicator or multi-faceted greens that may only be
analyzed by overlaying a white or yellow putting grid. The latter
creates more realistic putts, but does so at a corresponding loss of
scenic realism. The greens in Links, due to the detail of their shadowing and highlighting (with every rise and depression taken from the
actual grade drawings), can often be "read" with the naked eye! It is
still possible to use a grid overlay, but the grid is as inconspicuous
as possible because it is only a slightly lighter shade of green than
the background.

Penalty Strokes
In spite of the matters Links handles brilliantly, the current version
does not contain a number of the options to which players may have
become accustomed. It lacks both computer opponents and allowances for skins, match, best ball and tournament play. Also, despite the
fact that the digitized comments are clear and emotional (like an emphatic-sounding "Get there" when one has just under hit and the computer "knows" it will be inches short of the hole), this reviewer found
that the wildlife sounds and background music were "tinny" and annoying. It appears as if Access simply ported their RealSound
process (great for those equipped with internal speakers only)
through the AdLib board instead of taking direct advantage of the
board's capabilities. Finally, there are a couple of areas where the
graphics are clearly not up to par (pun intended) with the rest of the
program. Specifically, the close detail for sand traps and water
hazards is insufficient. The former lack those raised lips on the leading edge which golfers love/hate/love/hate...well, that's the nature of
the game. The latter appear as flat blue blobs that simply seem out
of context with their surroundings. Players who are unhappy with any
of these minor shortcomings, or have other suggestions on how the
product can be improved for future releases, may contact Access
directly. The company is keeping a running tab and is quite responsive to user comments, a number of which are already being incorporated into the next upgrade.

The 19th Hole
One thing is readily apparent to even the most casual observer:
Links is one of the first of a new generation. It and all of its descendents will be around for some time to come. Computer duffers and 16bit pros alike have to raise a glass to Access's worthy successor to
World Class Leader Board. They are definitely worlds apart.

Industry News

O

kay, so it makes
people nervous
for a guy with a
Middle Eastern name to
wear a bag over his
head during an international flight. My credentials were in order and I
had as much right as
anyone to spend 24
hours in a combination
jet lag/wait state. Of
course, Microprose officials find themselves in
an excited "wait state"
over Sid Meier's next
project, Civilization. As
my plane kept getting
"bumped" for innumerable military
aircraft to take
precedence, I checked
my notes. The goal of
the game is to start a town and build it to
the level of a full civilization. One will allegedly compete against five computermanaged opponents (more than 50% of
the design effort is expected to go into
the artificial opponents) in exploring a
square grid map (as in Empire), making
trades, signing peace treaties, offering
tribute and, probably, going to war. The
scope of the game goes from 3,000 B.C.
to the present day.
Finally, I arrived at BIA (Bahrain International Airport). Bahrain, a
255-square-mile nation adjacent to Saudi Arabia, is
(in spite of the current state of affairs),
one of the resort areas of the gulf. However, they aren't used to having "Rumor
Bag" guys around and I found myself
faced with a difficult task. In order to
enter the country, I had to prove that I
was financially viable and not likely to
end up as a drain on the local economy.
This, of course, is not an easy task for a
writer! So, after a three-hour detention in

The Rumor Bag
by Hamor Bar-Salaam Al-Petha
Dateline Jan. 8,1991 — Manama, Bahrain
customs in which I had to
show a TRW Credentials
printout of my credit and
bribed them with an unconfirmed rumor that a game
based on FASA's BattleTech universe would probably appear on the 16-bit Nintendo before the end of the
year, I was finally allowed to
enter the "Pearl of the Gulf."
The customs agents did
want to know whether the
game would be more like
MechWarrior or BattleTech:
The Crescent Hawks' Revenge, however, but all I could do was admit that I
hadn't found out, but was betting on the
former because of the new Nintendo's
great screen-handling characteristics.

with not only the two Secret Mission
Disks (one currently on the market as
this is written and the other due as this
issue goes on sale), but Wing Commander II: Vengeance of the Kilrathi is
a late Spring release in which the technology and action is put to work in telling a
story. I told my interpreter that the ferocious felines in the game, known as the
Kilrathi, have developed a stealth technology and are insidiously using cloaking
devices to sneak by the "good guys."
They even manage to blow up the
"Tiger's Claw" before the game really
gets off the ground. I told him that Ellen
Guon, former scriptwriter for the G.I. Joe
and JEM animated cartoon series for
television (and co-author of the novel,
Knight of Ghosts and Shadows) has
written an amazing script for the game.

I managed to meet the interpreter I had
contracted for; acquire a rental car; and
head for downtown Manama in traffic
that, atypically for Bahrain, seemed like
rush hour in Tokyo. Speaking of Tokyo, I
passed the "Pearl Monument" and remembered what the guidebook had said
about Bahrain being one of the world's
chief sources of pearls prior to the
Japanese introduction of cultured pearls
in the 1930s. I asked my interpreter if he
had seen the Japanese computer game
A-Train which deals with high speed,
modern Japanese rail transport. He had
not only seen the game, but he had interpreted for a Japanese software executive
only the week before. According to the
Japanese executive, Artdink, the Japanese developer of A-Train and Maxis, the
SimCity publisher, have agreed to
publish a U.S. version of the game.

My interpreter happened to be a cat fancier and rather resented the caricatures
of the Kilrathi in the game, vaguely
reminded me of the flap over the PBS
television special on cats. So, I quickly
told him that everyone can design their
own alien "bad guys" in Mindcraft's late
'91 sequel to Breach 2. It is to be called
Mercenaries. Unlike the earlier games,
however, every character is handled individually with current statistics and history saved after each mission. Now,
players can be concerned with everyone
in the squad and not just the SL (squad
leader).

I drove into downtown Manama and
checked into the Gulf Hotel, the poshest
five-star establishment in the region. After
all, rumor guys have to travel first class. I
was relieved to see that, in spite of all the
uniforms around, a siege mentality had
not developed. I made an off-hand
remark to this effect and my interpreter
surprised me with a probing question.
"What do you know of Mindcraft's upcoming The Siege?" Apparently, that
Japanese executive knew something of
the American market, as well. I told my
interpreter that the game is expected to
be real-time combat which reflects both
conquering and defending castles. Typical to Mindcraft, there will be fantasy elements in the game because one's
enemies in the game will be monsters
with various strengths and weaknesses.
Doesn't one always characterize one's
enemies as non-human, though? The
Wing Commander series will continue,

I told the interpreter it was time to go to
work, so we left my bags, hopped into
the car and drove past the Mind Sulman
pier. Noting the aggregation of warships,
I stopped and set to work. I tried to enter
the immediate area, only to find out that
the BDF (Bahrain Defense Force) looked
with disfavor upon my bag-encapsulated
visage. I told him I wanted to see what experienced naval officers thought of the
new Mediterranean Battle Set for Harpoon. He didn't seem convinced when I
told him that it would place less emphasis on big warships because of the
use of naval forces from smaller countries. Even when I assured him it would
have an entirely different "feel" from the
North Atlantic Battle Set because of the
inclusion of these smaller forces and vessels, he raised his automatic machine pistol and directed me to move on.
I immediately found myself on Shaikh
Isa bin Sulman Highway and "cruised"
the downtown. I briefly noted that it was
a curious blend of Eastern and Western
culture, but that was only the beginning
of my discoveries.
(To Be Continued)

Industry News

Economics, Ergonomics,
Intelligence and Innovation
Trends and Perceptions from the
Winter Consumer Electronics Show
he

arena was filled with festive partygoers, families from Missoula,
Montana, and the sound of the overture for a spectacle soon to begin. The
audience, which included movers and
shakers in the computer entertainment industry, had been prompted by jesters,
wenches and lords to raise their hands
and cheer with loud "huzzahs." The arena
darkened. A young male rode his splendid white mare, galloping around the
arena. Then, stopping suddenly, he fell to
the ground. His noble steed awaited his
certain uprising for a surprisingly long
time, but seeing that her young master
did not rise, she turned her head and ran
off seeking help. Merlin, Arthur's mage
from a more mysterious and chivalrous
time proclaimed that the young man
would dream and in that dream, he
would find the adventure and romance
he sought.

T

Thus begins King Arthur's Tournament
at the Excalibur Hotel and Casino in Las
Vegas. As developers, executives and
members of the press gathered to
celebrate both Interplay Productions' independent status as publisher and official
announcement of their Castles product
(see CGW #79), the staged spectacle
foreshadowed the crowd's impressions of
the industry.

To Sleep, Perchance to Dream
(Economics)
Even as the young man in the Excalibur dinner show feigned the deep
sleep of a possible injury and the show itself depicted his romantic dream, the
software publishers and journalists involved in the Winter CES had arrived at
the show with an impression that the
economy was going to be slow to
rebound in 1991 and that the result
would be a sleepy period of economic
belt-tightening, marked by release of only
a few products.
Mark Beaumont, a Data East vice-president, was interviewed by a syndicated
radio reporter prior to the actual start of
the show and noted that, particularly on
the cartridge-based entertainment side,
the 8-bit machines had reached a saturation point in the market where companies could expect to engage in heavy

discounting. He noted that the industry
was still selling approximately the same
number of units in the marketplace, but
the discounting had cut the profit margin
considerably. The executive was surprisingly optimistic, however, about the 16bit Nintendo product to debut in Fall,
1991 and his company's new licensing
agreement with Sega. He cautiously suggested that the new platform would, in
particular, drive sales of new games later
in the year.
Richard Kraft, president and CEO of
Matsushita Electric Corporation of
America, subsidiary of the huge
Japanese conglomerate, referred to the
economic doomsaying in the keynote address which opened the show. He compared the 1991 economic gloom with the
1981-1982 pessimism. The latter had suggested that there was no way that the
consumer electronics industry could
hope to equal the records set in the previous decade. Instead, consumer
electronics grew at a nominal average
growth rate of 12% during the decade
while the national average was a nominal
average growth of 7%. He suggested that
one way to succeed in a short-term
downturn and experience the benefits of
long-term growth is to have an intensified
focus on high quality. CGW already sees
this emphasis on quality product beginning to "tone up" an unsettled industry.
Although some journalists lamented the
lack of trend-setting products displayed
at the show, leading one to believe that
there might no longer be sufficient research and development budgets to create "cutting edge" titles, the overall im-

pression of the show was of incremental
improvement in both design and technology. As usual, the mix of announced and
unannounced products at WCES gave up
its yield of innovative and potentially
electrifying products. There is still plenty
of "romance and adventure" in the entertainment software business for everyone.

I Feel Comfortable with That
(Ergonomics)
Not only do the game designs expected
to be seen in 1991 reflect an emphasis
on the player's individual preferences,
but the hardware peripherals which will
be introduced in 1991 reflect this attention to the gamer, as well. Hardware companies are seeking ergonomic solutions
to insure the gamer's comfort. Spectra
Video is launching two space-opera style
joysticks, designed with hand-held comfort in mind. Like the Wico Ergostick
before them, they are designed to fit comfortably in a player's hand. Flight
simulator enthusiasts will be more interested, however, in the Psygnosisdesigned, Spectra-marketed Combat
Flight Controller. This stick, due to be officially launched at Summer's CES,
enables programmers to designate buttons as "functions." In this way, one button could represent a plane's cannons,
another its rockets, and yet others target
selection and fire buttons.
Even the Sega Game Gear, the handheld color portable game machine,
demonstrates concern for the player's
comfort. The Game Gear is a compact
unit (approximately 8" x 5" x 2"),
rounded ergonomically so that one does
not have to grip squared corners and
hard edges over long periods of time. In
addition, the company suggests that the
software designed for the system (it is incompatible with the Genesis and Master
systems) be customized to make the action easier to see on the smaller screen.
Beyond pure gaming applications,
Logitech announced a line of ergonomic
pointing devices, called the MouseMan.
The new models were designed by Frog
Design with software testing using BioMechanics Corporation of America,
Inc.'s Human CADD program. The program allows designers to engineer

Industry News

human factors on-screen and, essentially,
test prototypes before they are built. The
series also includes left-handed mice and
mice for larger hands as part of the new
series. A Macintosh version of the MouseMan series is expected to be released in
April.
One very impressive addition to the line
is a cordless mouse which can be used
without direct line of sight. The MouseMan Cordless allows one to connect a
low-frequency (100-150 kHz) radio
receiver to either the bus or serial port.
Then, the MouseMan Cordless transmits
to the receiver on one of eight possible
channels. Since the receiver has a short
cord and the transmitter has a six foot effective range, one can effectively use the
cordless mouse up to approximately
eleven feet from the monitor. This has
several implications for gaming (ability to
sit across the room and play a game on
a large monitor, not having to sit so
close to a standard monitor, getting
more people comfortably in front of the
monitor, etc.), all of them good. The
MouseMan Cordless is expected to be
on-sale by February and has a suggested
retail price of $199. It is possible that the
cordless mouse is derived from research
and development on the 3-D mouse that
the company has not officially announced, but is expected to be a
metaphor for the expensive "datagloves"
used with some prohibitively expensive
government and commercial applications. According to one Logitech executive, cordless peripherals will be very important to the future of computing.

They'll See what I Tell Them
to See (Editing)
One of the most fascinating trends in
1991 will be the use of multiple camera
angles with ability to edit the footage
gathered thereby together into a
coherent whole, whether it imitates broad
cast or film media.
Such features are expected to particularly illuminate the sports and simulation

lite, wing man, missile, target, up top and
ground views, as well as the traditional
front, right and rear views, when creating
the save file. The "up top" perspective solves a perennial problem with combat
flight simulators. Pilots keep their eyes
on the other plane during a dogfight.
Lacking this ability, computer pilots have
not really been able to track their enemy
in a proper metaphor.

genre during 1991 and into early 1992.
Already seen in the innovative VCR feature (the "Look, Honey" replay feature,
not to be confused with the VCR-style
game controls used in many of
Dynamix's products) to be found in
Dynamix's Red Baron product (see
CGW #75) and Spectrum HoloByte's
Stunt Driver, several products will use a
similar feature in whole or in part.
Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 will
continue the tradition by allowing players
to save a tactical replay of their mission
to disk. It allows a "realistic" military
debriefing and is expected to allow
players to choose from chase plane, satel-

Activision's Death or Glory, being
developed by veteran British developer
Vektor Graphics, will not only feature
76 years of air combat (allowing pilots to
fly
Fokker triplanes, Spitfires, F-86s, F16s and more) and twelve missions in
six historical geographical areas (World
Wars I & II, Korea, Vietnam, Falklands
and Syria), but will offer a movie editor
feature that will allow the simulator's
pilots to edit several flights together into
a "film" file that he/she can pass along to
a friend.
Origin's mega-hit Wing Commander
has already begun to spawn add-on
products (see "The Rumor Bag" in this
issue), but Wing Commander II will add
a VCR-style editor that will allow players
to "tape" their missions and edit them
together into a visual account of their
prowess.
On the sports front, Bethesda
Softworks and Mirage Graphics,
creators of Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2
and Earl Weaver Baseball respectively,
are working on a college basketball
simulation with a three-dimensional
perspective and ability to use different
camera angles to select instant replays.
To some degree, this has already appeared in Electronic Arts's Indianapolis 500: The Simulation (which
foreshadowed this phenomenon by allowing players to choose viewpoints for instant replay, but did not allow one to
save the "footage"), and the tradition will
continue in Mario Andretti's Racing
Challenge game. Due in late 1991, the
new racing simulation from EA will offer
six camera angles for instant replay (as
well as a "campaign game" where the
player tries to find sponsors and win
races from the sprints at J. C.
Agajanian's Ascot Park through Formula
I on a lifelike Detroit track), but no opportunity to save the replay files.
Konami's Bill Elliott's NASCAR Challenge offers multiple angles, including
the ability to view the crash from any
other car involved in the collision. The
game uses scaling bit-mapped graphics
(similar to the technique used in Wing
Commander) and allows players to race
on eight different NASCAR tracks.
In much the same way, Earl Weaver
Baseball II (Spring '91) will allow
gamers to view its full-size players in
replays from several television angles,

Industry News

but not to save the footage. Also, Bethesda Softworks is working with Mirage
Graphics (developers of EWB) on a Fall
1991 college basketball product that will
allow multiple camera angles for the instant replays, as well.
One of the most fascinating uses of instant replay editing in sports simulations,
however, is Broderbund's new line of
games developed in conjunction with Distinctive Software, Inc. of Vancouver.
They are publishing the first two sports
games in a series that will enable one to
save and edit "footage" of sporting
events in such a way as to simulate the
control board of a television studio or
remote broadcast van. Sports Simulated
Boxing (late Spring) and Sports Simulated Tennis will not only feature a great
replay feature, but the series breaks new
technological ground. The games display
polygon-filled digitized interpretations of
filmed footage. This enables the movements of the on-screen characters to be
extremely realistic, even though the
"human" aspects look rather abstract.
The games allow customized competitors
using some simple "editor" features to
create both the appearance and
capabilities of the fighters.

Solitary Intelligence (Intelligence Routines)
A major improvement in artificial opponents can be found in Earl Weaver
Baseball II. Working with the famous Baltimore Oriole manager, the designers
developed a sixty-question quiz which serves to determine the managerial style of
the artificial opponent. That way, even if
one cannot manage every game on the
schedule, "Earl," the computer manager,
should be able to handle the game according to one's personal preferences.
Artificial "intelligence" serves another
function in Champions' handling of nonplayer characters. The relationships between the player's superhero and the
NPCs is entirely based on prior actions
and attitudes which have been displayed
by the hero toward the rest of the citizenry. There are algorithms throughout the
code to enable the entire game to be
"event driven," based on what has happened earlier. Player characters will even
interact with NPCs using a real-time system that offers visual feedback as to how
one is using his/her powers, skills and attitude.
Another set of "intelligence routines" is
utilized for yet another purpose in Wing

Commander II. Chris Roberts, designer
of the game, suggests that this be called
dynamic interaction. The game adjusts to
the individual player, providing better
balance than in the flagship of the series.
Like Microprose's Civilization (see "The
Rumor Bag"), the company's Darklands
product will probably require more time
in creating "intelligence routines" than
any other section of the game. The fantasy role-playing experience will use custom code for more non-combat activities
than any previous game in the genre.
This code will analyze a character's attributes, previous action, skills, and more
in order to determine the success or
failure of a given activity. It may bring an
incredible new sense of realism to the
idea of fantasy role-playing.

The More the Merrier (Multiplayer Games)
The cartridge game industry seems to
be pushing designers into multi-player
capabilities. Even though Sega has backed off their plans for a 1200-baud TeleGenesis modem, they have made the
Game Gear compatible for head-to-head
play using a direct connect cable
NEC has already introduced
(Gear-to).
the Turbo Tap, a connector which allows

Industry News

up to five people to play at the same console in many of their games. TV Sports:
Football already uses this technology
and the rest of the "TV Sports" line, including the up-and-coming TV Sports:
Hockey and TV Sports: Baseball. These
titles should be available in the Fall of
1991. Both games will feature both
league and exhibition play. As for the
hockey game, it uses the most realistic,
almost life-size approach to face-offs that
we have yet seen in a hockey game and
offers a computer opponent that will
have at least 45 different offensive plays
in its playbook. 1991's releases will bring
the number of NEC games which work
with multiple players (from 2-5) to a total
of 12 titles.
In addition, NEC's Ken Wirt (Vice President for Home Entertainment) states that
the company is developing a modem in
their Japanese research division. Their
desire is to create a potential not just for
facilitating TurboGrafx 16 to TurboGrafx
16 competition, but even TurboGrafx 16
to IBM PC capability. It is still in the research stage, however, and specific
details on technology or launch date are
still subject to change.
On the personal computer front,
Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 is con
nectable for modem-to-modem, direct
connect and network play. Falcon 3.0
has been delayed until at least April of
1991 so that the company can support a
sound board which will allow directional
sound cues.
SSI talked briefly about their multi-

player Advanced Dungeons &
on-line game to be unveiled
Dragons™
on Quantum's America Online service
by late spring or early summer. Since the
program uses a graphic interface which
looks visually like the games in the gold
box series, the front end of the game system will require that it debut as PC
specific. Entitled NeverWinter Nights,
the adventure will take place in TSR's
Forgotten Realms world and will offer
true multi-player gaming.
In person-to-person competitions that
use the same keyboard or multiple joysticks/mice, players will experience sports
games like the ones mentioned earlier
from Broderbund and Ubisoft's Pro
Tennis Tour II. The latter has responded
to criticisms that Pro Tennis Tour was
too difficult and introduced a "junior"
level. Up to four players can alternate in
the simulated "tours" generated by the
computer.
Two games which can be played at the
same keyboard deserve special note.

Just as Jones in the Fast Lane attempted to draw non-computer gamers
into the arena, Lexi-Cross from Interplay and Lemmings from Psygnosis
seem to intrigue players of both sexes. In
the latter, the cute little animations are
combined with logic puzzles and realtime strategy. In Lexi-Cross, designer
Peter Oliphant (whatever happens to
those child television stars?) has introduced a word game with elements of
Wheel of Fortune, Concentration and
Battleship. The setting is a futuristic
game show with a cyborg MC and the
lovely "Robanna" to turn the tiles.

Multimedia Message
In terms of personal computer games,
multimedia (use of digitized video input)
is being experimented with on many different levels. Even without being stored
on CD-ROM (the medium of choice for
most multimedia products), many games
are importing digitized static images as
well as digitized film footage in their
products. Like Rise of the Dragon,
which used brief digitized film clips,
many products offer limited experiments
with the medium. Mario Andretti's
Racing Challenge uses such a film clip
for Mario to tutor the players and
Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 uses
multimedia film clips to enhance the atmosphere.
Accolade's Conspiracy: The Deadlock
Files uses over 350 full-screen digitized
pictures to advance the plot. The rationale for using the technique was to convey the idea that the story involved real
people in real locations facing real combat on the streets of Manhattan. Alfred
Hitchcock was the inspiration for this adventure where the protagonist awakes in
a hotel bed with a dead body, and the
hysterical maid discovers the corpse
before he can dispose of it. International
espionage and conspiracy weave an
eerie sense of intrigue around the story
(February release).
Capstone's Trump Castle II uses between forty and fifty full-screen digitized
photos to set the scenes for their craps,
roulette, blackjack, baccarat and poker
games, designed for one to four players.
They are expected to use a lot of the
digitizing technique in The Taking of
Beverly Hills, a movie license sometimes described as 1991's Die Hard
Capstone promises an adventure-oriented
game, since they are moving away from
publishing heavily action-oriented games.
Access has already utilized digitized
video in many of their "interactive movie"
games and they expect to do more with
the medium. Expect an interesting announcement later in the spring, however.
Meanwhile, expect Access to join with
(Continued on page 37)

Review

dream of pteradons munching on natives, picking their
teeth with the ribs of the dead. While other dinosaurs
gather, attracted by the noise and the smell of the massacre, the various tribes argue. I have tried to warn them;
they must work together, they must resolve their differences,
but no one will listen. What does the outsider know? Let him
take his magics and his friends, the one called Schweitzer
and the other, Malone, and disappear back into the jungle
from whence he came.

I

A fine solution, I decide as the tyrannosaurs approach
Clinging to their ridiculous ideologies. Not a one of the
tribespeople is worth saving.

Terror of the
Thunder Lizards
Origin's The Savage Empire
by Dennis Owens

Except Aiela. She is beautiful and different. Intelligent. And
lost. Maybe in danger.
I lift my knife from the backpack. Heft it in my hand. Stare
at it, and sigh. I grip it tighter and plunge into the fray.
What I wouldn't give for an M-16.
The Savage Empire, by Lord British, Aaron Allston and
Stephen Beeman, is the first of what Origin promises to be a
series of CRPGs designed using the Ultima VI (or later, the latest
Ultima) engine. Released under a "Worlds of Ultima" banner, the
games will sport play similar to that in the Ultima storyline —
with continents to explore, NPCs to recruit and interrogate, beasties to combat, objects to find and puzzles to solve. The difference in the series is that none of the games' fictions will have
anything to do with Britannia. Instead, the games will feature
science fiction, horror, espionage, etc. and will be released between each new Ultima. Because each Ultima will continue to
be designed with all new graphics and game-play, each "Worlds
of Ultima" release will also change, depending on the evolution
of the Ultimas.
Thus, The Savage Empire, although sporting slightly different
graphics (as would be required by the difference in game genre)
and a few new bells and whistles, plays almost exactly like Ultima VI. This is both a blessing and, at the same time, somewhat
worrisome.
Its fiction is pulled right out of the pulp adventure magazines of
the '30s and '40s (indeed, the game's manual, called Ultimate
Adventures, resembles said magazines and includes an extensive prologue of the game). Basically, the player's character, a
rough, tough archaeologist/avatar-type, is pulled, via moonstone,
to a world where thunder lizards, natives and humanoid-types
walk the earth.
Separated from his friends, he meets friendly villagers,
not-so-friendly villagers and creatures, as well as a beautiful femme fatale (who is subsequently kidnapped). The player character
must, then, find his friends, the femme, a way back to his own
time/world and, along the way, solve the sub-quests and various
other situations which arise. Perhaps the most significant problem is one which dozens of natives (not to mention scores of
western philosophers and billions of humans) have been unable
to solve for themselves: how to get along with each other.
Luckily for the adventurer, however, the problem is a little more
localized. It seems that the various factions have been set against
each other; no one really knows why the others are enemies, but
rumors about the enemies' atrocious behaviors abound. What
does become clear (fairly early in the game), though, is that the
different tribes m st learn to disregard their differences and unite
if all are to survive.

i

Seen as a fable for the modern age — which, after all, the pulp
magazines frequently were fond of providing — the game's fiction

holds up. Much like the most recent Ultimas, to which, of
course, The Savage Empire must be compared, the game
presents a sort of morality lesson within the confines of the
gaming environment with a complexity which is unparalleled
among current games (except, perhaps, for those in Starflight
and Starflight 2).
The game's musical score, by George Sanger, is moody, evocative and uses Origin's new SoundTrax (now F/X) sequencer
(compatible with Roland, AdLib and Sound Blaster boards).
The Savage Empire also features a new technique by Origin in
which special events are framed in their own windows. Mostly
used simply to add local color and to advance the fiction of the
game, the screens are, nonetheless, impressive visually and do
enhance the sense of an active, vibrant world within the valley of
Eodon.

Review

perhaps, indicative of larger issues at work in Origin's recent
releases.

Weapon and Armor List
Relative value of armor and weapons in descending potency.
Certain Weapons
Shields
Armor
Grenade
Kotl shields
Leather
Bamboo rifle
Shields of Krukk
Bark
Fire axe
Stegosaurus shields
Cloth
Obsidian sword
Leather shields
AtI-atI
Bark shields
2-handed hammer
Axe
Bow
Spear
Throwing axe
Rock/metal hammer
Various others (which don't all seem to work so well, but in a fight, even
a stick is better than bare hands!)

Differences from the Earlier Games

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

The Savage Empire
IBM
$69.95
Stephen Beeman
and Aaron Allston
Origin
Austin, TX

Although the valley may seem
PUBLISHER:
crowded with villages, townspeople and
special locations,
it is not really
necessary to do
extensive mapping beyond the
careful notation
on the map included with the
game. Lists of
the NPCs found
in each village,
along with a few
key words from
each conversation, more than
sufficed for this
reviewer's treks
through the
wilds. Dungeons are relatively small, so players will probably
only need to map in the caves of the Myrmidex and in the maze
in the southern end of the underground city of Kotl.

As would be expected, the natives' weapons are relatively crude
(no glass swords or magic axes, alas). Well-educated (or informed) adventurers, however, might be able to find enough
odds and ends to fashion more... efficient protection. Armor is
also extremely crude, and not many types exist (see accompanying chart).
Gone, at least for this game, is the idea that anything lying
around should not be picked up and used as needed. Perhaps
this is because experienced avatar/archaeologists realize the temporal nature of ownership or perhaps, this is because necessity is
the mother of picking up any ol' thing and using it. Of course,
the most logical reason may be because the inhabitants of the
valley of Eodon do not recognize the concept of possessions
(making them susceptible to unethical outside-worlders
[dramatic jungle music here]), no honor code exists here.

All Is Not Well In The Valley
For the most part, The Savage Empire's graphics, depth of fiction, ease of play and soundtracks are all impressive and the
change from the Ultima mythos is welcome. The game does,
however, suffer from a few problems, most of them slight but,

Disturbing, first of all, is that The Savage Empire does play so
much like all the other Ultimas. Although once upon a time, Ultima stood for innovation and surprise (remember the NPC asking, "Do you know Blackthorne? No? Then, how can you judge
him?"), the games — beginning shortly after that encounter in Ultima V — seem to have devolved into copies of themselves — all
requiring that worlds be explored (often requiring zigzagging
across continents and repeated visits to towns and numerous conversations with NPCs), monsters be bashed and objects be found
(more zigzagging).
Yes, this reviewer realizes that the very fact that The Savage
Empire is based on the Ultima gameplaying system will require
a certain amount of similarity with the earlier games, but the
recent changes made in the games do not all seem for the best.
Though it is understandable that commands, for instance,
might need to be simplified for use with the mouse, what is not
quite so clear is why, when, let us say, a torch is "used," the command box does not say that it has been "ignited." Another question that has not been understood by this reviewer is why, even
though the graphics have been made more complex because of
the ability of technology to differentiate between ever finer and
finer images, objects still must be picked up, clicked on, or sifted
through, simply to determine what they are. If a bowl of grapes
is sitting on a table in a game so visually impressive and innovative, why can't one see that it is a bowl of grapes simply by looking at it with his own two eyes? This might not be true in the earlier Ultimas, but one wonders why it is not true, now.
Still another concern is the apparent movement by Ultima's
designers toward an ever simpler magic system. The Savage Empire features all of nine spells with such evocative names as
"heal," light," "charm enemy" and six, well, basically, reagents
(called "totems" and "offerings") — all of which are readily available practically anywhere. Although each village features a
shaman who, supposedly, is the only villager capable of using
such magics, it is hard to understand why, given the abundance
of magical offerings and the ease with which certain natural berries and roots can be converted into their purer, more magical
forms, each tribesman cannot simply heal himself or summon
his own animals (easy way to have rabbit stew for supper). The
need for the shaman is never fully justified or explained in the
game. Those guys must have some kind of union.
It is just such inconsistencies, such indications that the games
have not been as well thought through as the others have been,
that weaken the charm and playability of what has been such a
brilliantly designed gaming structure. Really, the only fair point of
comparison with the Ultima system is with itself. Perhaps, no
other system comes close to its length of existence, complexity,
depth of fiction and clever characterization of NPC personalities.
It is likely that no other system matches its attempts to reach
beyond the machine and gameplaying sensibilities toward the acknowledgement that something more important exists than reflex
action, monster-bashing or any of the other dozens of computergame cliches.
It is in that comparison with itself that The Savage Empire
strains. The stresses of years of success have begun to show.
Make no mistake; compared to any except its own brothers and
sisters, The Savage Empire, despite its niggling problems (which
show only because of the brilliance with which the entire line
shines), must be considered dazzling and successful. Compared
to its peers, however, the game presents what may be a disturbing view of a possible trend in the Ultima line: caricature.

Review

Megalomaniacs Welcome
Electronic Arts' Imperium
by Hosea Battles, Jr.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

T

he goals are as vast as space itself. Players attempt to: a)

rule the entire galaxy and b) live forever. Since the fiction
of the game includes the discovery and manufacture of the
anagathic (life-preserving) drug, Nostrum, this is not as impossible as it sounds. The catch is that Nostrum must be obtained
by constantly conquering and colonizing new planets. Since four
other emperors need the same drug to control their empires, the
game becomes a sophisticated amalgam of political, military and
economic concerns.
Initially, the player is inaugurated as Earth's emperor in the
year 2020 and "elected" for a 50-year term. One will have to be
sensitive to the realities involved in
reaching that magic 50% mark necessary to be re-elected, while trying to
either conquer every known planet or
simply stay alive for 1,000 game
years. If one loses his/her re-election
bid, dies of old age or is overthrown
during a coup-d'etat, the game is
over. The latter is a particularly nasty
way to lose, since the program rubs
the loss in with a vivid graphic portraying one's bloody head hanging from
the hands of the victorious successor.
Strangely enough, especially for
games developed on a 16-bit machine,
all of lmperium's graphics (except for
the map screen) are in black and
white. The map screen provides a rotating galaxy view in color. Other displays are limited to windows showing
still shots of characters' faces,
planetary perspectives and views of
space combat. Fortunately, the game
offers enough depth of play (the 68page manual is not for "show") to partially overcome its graphic limitations,

Imperium
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
Atari ST
$49.95
Matthew Stibbs
and Nick Wilson
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

even on graphically i ntense machines like the Atari ST or Amiga.

Cosmic Control (Game Mechanics)
Political, military and economic functions are all interwoven in
Imperium. As would be expected, one administrator cannot rule
the galaxy alone. It takes subordinates. One must pay, promote
and protect one's subordinates (whether military or civilian) in
order to insure their loyalty. The emperor does have an "ace in
the hole," however, since he/she controls the life-protracting drug
Nostrum. Access to the drug can be used as an incentive for
loyalty and denial of access as a punishment for disloyalty. This
method may seem cruel, but it is certainly effective.
In addition to handling one's own subadministrators, the player's character
is forced to negotiate with the four
computer-controlled empires in matters of trade, military alliances and, of
course, war. To make matters as "interesting" as possible, the computer opponents are as devious as human opponents and will not hesitate to break
a military or trade alliance whenever it
is to their advantage. Surprise attacks
are not uncommon and human
emperors will need to watch their
backs just as though they were playing
Machiavelli or Diplomacy with
human opponents. One consolation is
that they will turn on each other, as
well.
Economic considerations are rather
straightforward. Players make
decisions with regard to trading twenty
different commodities and subsidizing
the planetary economies from the Imperial Treasury. The latter enables a

Review

planet to increase its technology level, generate planetary defenses or rebuild its infrastructure. Reconstruction is often necessary
after certain random events, such as crop failures, meteor impacts and xenomorph invasions (in addition to those from other
empires), occur.
Although colonization is also straightforward in Imperium, this
is not revealed until deep into the manual. All players need to
know is that planets are colonized by dropping troops onto an
empty planet. This may seem intuitive to some players since one
simply drops troops onto inhabited planets in order to try to conquer those planets. In the case of a previously inhabited planet,
the fleets (space navy) will attack both the planetary defenses
and bombard the planet in order to soften it up. Then, combat between the garrison and the attackers must be resolved. Note that
success will require an overwhelming force of attackers, since
the chances are that the computer will try to retake the planet if
there is an insufficient number of survivors to garrison the planet
effectively.

Inferior Technology (Problems)
The ST version of the game has a bug related to the sound.
First, the only sound that one hears is digitized piano music at
the opening screen and whenever there are message screens.
However, should one be playing the game with the sound toggled on, the game will freeze up on various message screens.
There is no problem if the player toggles the sound option off,
however.
In all the versions, there is a strange phenomenon with regard

to loyalty. Characters within the game are rated for their loyalty
with regard to the emperor. However, one can even become "disloyal" to oneself. In fact, this reviewer even managed to become
ruler of the galaxy with a disloyal and incompetent main character. So, the anomaly doesn't really affect play. It just looks
strange.

Superior Strategy
The quickest way to learn the game is to allow the computercontrolled subordinates to handle all of the economic and political decision-making responsibilities for about the first ten years
of game play. If one watches what the computer is doing and
emulates those activities effectively throughout the rest of the
game, one should have a reasonably profitable reign.
Ultimately, however, one must totally annihilate the enemy.
This is best accomplished by locating the enemy's home planet
and invading it with an overwhelming force. Once the home
planet is conquered, all the enemy's planets become one's own
and enemy fleets will be automatically converted into resources
for the "good" empire.

Analysis
Although the production values of Imperium are not what
would be expected in an American game, it offers excellent
gameplay. No two games are alike and the computer functions
as a reasonably intelligent and unpredictable opponent. Due to
its strategic complexity and depth of play, it is certain to give
any strategy gamer plenty of hours of enjoyment.

Replay

Good Nukes, Tonight
Part Two of a Command HQ Replay
By Alan Emrich
Caracas "Red" Player: Alan Emrich
Belgrade "Blue" Player: Dennis Lytton

T

he following is the conclusion of a

Command HQ replay begun in CGW
#79. To update: When World War IV
broke out in 2023, blue forces had
prepared for a lightning war by building
tanks and airplanes with which to make
quick strikes into the Middle East and
red's ally, Russia. With blue successful
up to this point, red launched a nuclear
strike in desperation, targeted against
overpowering blue tank forces in northern Russia. The political consequences to
red were vast, but red stuck by its plan
to conquer the United States and commence operations in the Pacific.

Turns 61-142, Opportunities Lost
With the sudden shift in the balance of
power, everything depended upon
Belgrade's swiftness in seizing the opportunities created by the new neutral powers
and defecting red forces. Blue began by
scraping together the remainder of its forces in Russia, and pushing on to
Novosibirsk in central Siberia (where, ironically, nothing had changed). Unfortunately
for blue, the red hordes of Caracas were
still waiting there, only now in strength.
Meanwhile, the state of the "Red Empire
of the Americas" had reached crisis proportions for top planners in Caracas, leading
into a "reconquest" campaign. Swiftly, the
two defecting subs in the Atlantic were
hunted down by red's three remaining loyal
submarines (by turn 86), replaying a scene
straight out of Hunt for Red October. By
turn 70, red forces were hitting the beaches
of Japan and keeping Siberia from turning
"blue."
During these crucial twenty turns after the
first use of a nuclear strike (turns 60-80),
the war began to turn. Blue let go the oppor
tunity to support the "Indian Civil War"
caused by one of the two infantry units stationed in Bombay defecting. With the impressive blue forces sitting in the Persian
Gulf and Middle East, intervention was not
dispatched until after red had already resecured India. Instead, Belgrade slowly mobilized a striking force around turn 86 which
would not complete the subjugation of India
until turn 129. The cost in time was high
and the brief window of opportunity in the
subcontinent slammed down on blue's slowmoving fingers.
By now, red's "Atlantic Wall" of sub-

marines was shattered. Blue could have
raided almost anywhere along the western
hemisphere's eastern seaboard with impunity, but the invasion never came. Not
even a sneak raid. (Again, red's plans and
prepared defenses went out the window,
but blue did not seize upon this opportunity. Given the time to recover, red
regained its balance and continued to
build up offensive forces.)
Red was using this gift of precious time
granted by blue's inactivity to forge the
"Hawaiian Hammer," a strike force designed
to head through the Pacific, across the Indian Ocean, up the Red Sea, across the
Mediterranean and on to Yugoslavia. By
turn 110, the force consisted of three tank
armies, one infantry army, two cruisers and
a submarine, but a new carrier (built in
Saigon) would link up at the first objective,
Sydney.
Ironically, on turn 124, red sent out its Atlantic wolfpack from Boston to Iceland just
as, on turn 127, blue mobilized a fleet in
the North Atlantic and launched an attack
on Norway. The race was on for control of
the North Sea while blue was finishing off
resistance in India. By turn 129, India had
fallen and the blue navy was then dispatched to south-east Asia.

Turns 143-208, The Tide
Turns
Without warning, the "Hawaiian Hammer"
fell. Since Sydney was ungarrisoned, a lone
armor unit took the city, keeping the size of
the red force a virtual secret. (Sydney's capture could easily be rationalized by blue as
another nuisance "sneak raid.") Aware of
this, Caracas sent the task force into the Indian ocean by travelling south of Australia,
rather than through the more exposed northern waters, in order to preserve the secret.
The next stop was to be Diego Garcia (a
small, but crucial, base located in the
central Indian Ocean).
By turn 148 in the North Sea, the red
wolfpack was waiting to blood the blue
navy off Iceland and Norway. By turn 157,
it had devoured that blue navy. Immediately, Belgrade launched the war's second
nuclear attack on the concentrated elements of the red submarine force. Yet the
consequences of this second nuke of the
war were minimal (two red submarines
were destroyed, France defected from blue
to neutrality and a pivotal blue tank in the

Middle East switched allegiance to red on
the spot), such that by turn 160, blue's Norwegian reconquest campaign was completely called off.
The rogue red tank which appeared in
Saudi Arabia after the nuclear attack began
to overrun oilfields, one by one. Belgrade
dispatched three tank armies from India to
the desert. This left the "jewel of the English
crown" vulnerable, just as the Hawaiian
Hammer was beginning to approach. Although blue did recall the fleet from
Southeast Asia back to the Persian Gulf, it
remained to be seen whether it would arrive
on time to shatter the Hawaiian Hammer.
On turn 183, an ungarrisoned Diego Garcia fell in an instant. So the red hammer
lost no time in pushing on into India. With
red's Middle Eastern tank army neutralized
on this turn, however, blue forces could
have been freed for India's defense. Yet
they failed to move quickly enough to do
so.
Red won yet another naval battle on turn
188. This victory, southwest of Bombay,
cleared the way for the red hammer to
strike another decisive blow. Although a
rogue blue sub played sniper and managed
to kill a tank unit being transported, red
sank the sub. Next, in keeping with red's
strategy of "starting more fires than the
other guy can put out" (i.e., beginning
more local offensives than the opponent
can deal with), red launched an attack on
China from Japan during turn 200. This
diversion was quickly smothered in blue velvet, however, when a blue fleet turned back
the red invaders.
By turn 208, though, India was flattened
by the red hammer. Red forces rested and
repaired in Bombay, gradually regaining
their strength and being dispersed to new
locations. This dispersal of units was necessary because of the blue satellite surveillance. Caracas knew that if too many units
were seen concentrated together in Bombay, the red forces could expect to experience another true blue nuke. Concentration of forces is good for battle, but the
worst thing possible for nuclear defense.

Turns 209-355, Closing The
Ring
Initiative lapsed by both sides until turn
225 when the red navy left the Indian
ocean to commence bombarding the blue
armies of the Middle East. Twenty turns
later, another red invasion of China was
launched from Japan, but this time with
naval support. Red was not only victorious
at sea, but had converted China, appropriately enough, into a crimson palette
within twenty turns. Then the remaining
units from the Chinese offensive were instantly ordered to join their Hawaiian Hammer, resting in Bombay.
Before the Middle East erupted, Caracas
initiated a meltdown in central Siberia. The
red army in Novosibirsk began marching
(Continued on page 35)

-"" "'

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 60

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Replay

Good Nukes...

Epilogue
The red forces of Caracas planned for and
succeeded in conducting a long war of attrition and slow maneuvering. Belgrade's blue
blitzkrieg was blunted on the steppes of Russia and suffered lethargy in the Middle East
and India. It was a long war, but in the end
it was a test of skills and wills. To the victor, goes the spoils.

(Continued from page 30)
toward Moscow on turn 270. Two blue tank
units managed to slow the red lava flow in
the Ural mountains, but not for long.
Sensing the threat from the east, Belgrade
began to quickly mobilize forces in western
Russia. On turn 275, both sides launched
sneak raids against each other in northern
Russia, blue against Leningrad, red against
Gorky.
At the same time, the red hammer began
to steam towards the oilfields of the Middle
East. By turn 285, Oman fell. Caracas
decided to open new fronts by committing
the western hemisphere's defensive garrisons to an attack on Spain. The sail
across the Atlantic ocean would be long,
but worth the trip to threaten Belgrade from
its western compass point. By turn 300,
Saudi Arabia had been secured and, on
turn 324, Madrid, Spain, fell to the red garrisons from the west.
Finally, on turn 327, a nuclear attack on
the red navies in the Persian Gulf came out
of the "blue." Again, France defected, but
that was the only consequence of this
desperate nuclear attack from a crumbling
empire. Still, with red armies advancing
from Spain, the defection of France at this

Strategic Tips in Review for
Command HQ

particular time was ill fortune indeed for
blue's western defenses. On turn 335, red
launched a three-pronged offensive on
Belgrade from Spain, the Middle East and
Russia. On turn 336, France and Kuwait
fell. Red forces from the north in Iceland
and Norway launched a fourth prong to the
Belgrade campaign from the north, besieging the enemy capital from every point on
the compass. By turn 351 Iraq fell, and
then Hamburg. On turn 355, blue finally
conceded defeat.

1. Keep garrisons around isolated areas.
Not only do they help discourage and
defeat nuisance military "sneak raids," as illustrated in this replay, but they also
prevent political sneak raids. A "political
sneak raid" is when one player has at least
30 billion to spend, he goes in a "buys" a
one-city area twice (once to turn it neutral,
and once to woo it to his side), then buys
an infantry unit to immediately garrison it
from attacks. The possibilities have to be
imagined for the true creative uses of this
type of sneak attack to work, although it is
very expensive.
2. Use submarines to secure naval
"flanks." They should be in a stationary
"ring" around the waterways to be
protected. Since they are virtually invisible

Replay

until they attack, they can sit and wait for
warships to go by while the transports sail
behind, begging for destruction. It takes a
nervy player, however, to show the restraint
in not closing the ring on the warships and
waiting for the transports.

able to "wield," then that's how the job will
get done best.
7. Defend with infantry. Attack with tanks
and planes. This sounds sensible enough,
but it is amazing how many times one sees
tanks and planes on garrison duty or infantry leading the charge. The naval
counterpart to this point is equally valid.
Carriers are for attacking, subs for defending, and cruisers can perform either duty
equally well.

3. Don't drop the first nuke. If you have to
drop it to stop an enemy ground offensive
in your once allied territory, you'll practically end the game (especially if there is urban
destruction involved). The safest nukes are
dropped at sea, where expensive carriers
(with planes) can be dispatched relatively
cheaply.
4. Gaining air superiority is cheaper in the
beginning of war than trying to seize it later
on. This is because a force with several air
units can keep bombing an airbase or the
units near it, calling the defending plane(s)
into the air in response. These defending
planes then become "unavailable" and highly vulnerable to being shot down. A person
with lots of available airplanes can play the
odds of destroying an enemy thusly.
5. Keep checking to see what the opponent can see. Then, use surprise to obtain victories. The "equals" key is the "key
to victory." By knowing what one's opponent doesn't (particularly about your
troop dispositions), one can readily turn
that knowledge into a ready advantage.
Speaking of "intelligence," never forget that

8. Never forget the true value of armor
over infantry. Many people make the mistake of not launching offensives with any
armor, because having "twice as much" infantry is their preference. Armor, however,
has incredible advantages on offense, such
as:
it is quicker and cheaper to destroy an
enemy satellite than for him to replace it!
6. Strike forces win wars, so wage war offensively. Even when conducting a "defensive" campaign, a player must judiciously
use reserves to counterattack and stabilize
the situation. The only way to win a game
of Command HQ is to capture the enemy's
capital. Striking at it, at some point, is the
only way to do this. If one can build up
enough of a reserve so that a "club" is avail-

• moving twice as fast as infantry and
making it less likely that the defender will
be able to reinforce;
• infiltrating behind infantry in order to get
flanking shots while enemy units are
facing the wrong way (and no longer
damaging the flanking armor units);
• repairing faster than infantry;
• retreating faster and surviving better than
other front line units; and
• hitting harder than other combat units in
a land assault.

Industry News

Economics...
(Continued from page 22)
Britannica and at least two other computer game publishers in releasing CDROM versions identical to their popular
games. Why would consumers want CDROM games with little or nothing added
to the original program? They would not
have to install to the hard disk, storage
space would be minimal and documentation could either be on-disk for printing
or digitized with voice-over tutorials and,
later, "hot key" help sequences.
Cinemaware will release Enemy
Within in early summer, a true interactive movie using digitized video, an
original musical score and a professionally crafted script to tell the story. Instead
of having an on-screen character to
portray the player's alter-ego, the other
characters in the story talk directly to the
front of the screen. This perspective
creates a suspended disbelief that reinforces the idea that the on-screen personas
are talking to the player. In accordance
with Cinemaware tradition, action sequences are still required in order to complete the story successfully.
Meanwhile, Sierra continues to work

on multimedia versions of their successful graphic adventures, including King's
Quest V and Space Quest IV. These
games will feature additional speech and
animation compared to the floppy disk
versions. Also, they will each contain a
different language on the CD, whether
Japanese, Italian, Spanish or German.
Psygnosis unveiled Dawnscape, a
work in progress for the NEC CD-ROM
player and Commodore's CDTV. Some
of this product has the look of a claymation-style movie, but the company is
using ray-tracing, three-dimensional
modeling and fractal-generated graphics
to give a hot special effects feel at 30
frames per second. The game is still 18
months to two years away.
ICOM is nearing completion of Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective, an in
teractive strategy game which uses
digitized video to tell the story. It is due
in late first quarter for NEC's TurboGrafx
16.

Commodore is still citing CDTV as
coming RSN (real soon now) and unveiled good news to Amiga 500 owners,
as well. Whereas the price point for
CDTV is still expected to be circa $1,000,
Amiga 500 owners can purchase a

CDTV adaptor for around $700 by midyear. Besides being able to play CDTV
and CD+G compact discs, the players
are expected to play the announced CD
+ MIDI standard that allows users to accompany recording artists by keyboard
or microphone and to play many of the
Macintosh-based multimedia products
like The Magic Flute. Meanwhile, TV
Sports: Football, Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf and Battlechess all are nearing completion in CDTV-compatible form.
If the Battlechess product on CDTV has
the same kinds of animations and sound
cues (the music changes depending on
one's position in the game and you can
get a voice-plus-animation tutorial on
elementary chess), it will be extremely
popular.
CD-ROM on the Sega Genesis is still at
least one year away. Al Nilson, director
of marketing, insists that Sega never officially announced a CD-ROM product, but
noted that the Japanese R & D department was working on it. He suggested
that it might appear in Japan in 1991,
but posited 1992 as the earliest possible
appearance in the U.S. Even then, he cautioned that the drive will have to cost
under $400 and offer plenty of good
games before it will come to market.

Industry News

The Time is Now (Real-Time
Features)
Another trend in computer games relates to the use of real-time action and
resolution in several different genres.
Several games under development are attempting to experiment with different
types of combat. In Mindcraft's The
Magic Candle II (due in mid-to-late
Second Quarter), players choose a
leader from the player characters in the
adventuring party. Each character has its
own leadership style and orders will be
given by the artificial intelligence routines
of the player characters. In addition, new
features like Loyalty and Bravery (which
are constantly re-rated based on previous
actions) play a very important role in this
game. No reflex action is required in the
combats; one's success is based on character management. Also, the company
plans to officially preview Siege, a realtime strategy game based on conquering
and defending medieval castles, at Summer CES. The enemies are different
kinds of fantasy creatures.
Hero Productions is currently working
on the Champions computer game
series. Originally announced by Miles
Computing in June, 1990, the license

has reverted to Steve Peterson. The action in this game will be real-time and,
like the combat in The Magic Candle II,
will not require "twitch and flex" gyrations. The "targeting" of enemies and
basic tactical commands will be handled
as in a simulation, but one's success or
failure in the game will ultimately depend
on wise use of the player character's (i.e.
superhero's) attributes and skills.
Darklands, hopefully the first in a trio
of fantasy role-playing games with an historical slant from Microprose, will also
use real-time combat which can be interrupted by a key press. Then, players can
select commands from a menu or enter
commands directly from the keyboard.
The main difference between this realtime combat and that in Pirates! or
Sword of the Samurai is that attributes
determine the results of combat, not
"twitch and flex" action sequences.
Simulators have utilized the "real-time"
idea for years, but Psygnosis is adding a
new wrinkle in Armourgeddon. This
three-dimensional combat simulation will
allow players to build the weapon systems/delivery system of their choice and
simultaneously fight a tank versus a

plane head-to-head or against the computer opponent.
Another game with real-time resolution
is Virgin Mastertronic's Space Shuttle
(developed by Vektor Graphics). Although simulations are "real-time" by
definition, this incredibly detailed simulation does everything from launch check
to landing in real-time. Fortunately, the
program allows players to pause the realtime analog from time to time so that
they can take some time to explore the
detailed environment (complete with accurate physics and correct placement of
the constellations) or advance time in
such a way they don't have to spend
three or four literal days in space to complete a mission. It looks like a tremendous learning experience.

The Magic of Merlin
Fireworks popped and dry ice "smoke"
filled the arena. King Arthur's Tournament was reaching a climax. CGW's
report on the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show, however, is just beginning. Next month, a genre-by-genre look
at some of the most exciting games expected to appear in 1991.

Review

F

The Tides of Ambition
Data East's Full Metal Planet
by Roger White

ull

Metal Planet places the
player in the role of commander of an interplanetary
mining freighter. The freighter is
orbiting a planet rich with ore
nodes, but three competitors are
preparing to land at the same
time. To further complicate matters, the planet is unstable and suffers from rapidly changing tides.
These rapid changes can swamp
one's ground craft or ground the
freighter's boats as they go about
the business of collecting ore
nodes. Such events are not usually fatal, but they are a tremendous inconvenience. The other
hazard is that the other three
freighter captains/competitors feel
that everyone else's equipment is
as eligible for harvesting as the
ore nodes themselves. They may
opt to kill or capture another
ship's equipment with their tanks
and assault boats unless, of
course, that particular freighter's
commander can use his own
tanks and assault boats to stop
them. Naturally, turn about is fair
play, however. The game consists
of 21 turns of "safe" activity, after
which the world could flood completely. It will flood after turn 25.

That's Board Gaming,
Not Bored Gaming
TITLE:
Full Metal Planet
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
REVIEWED ON: IBM
#PLAYERS:
1-4
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS:
Hitech Productions
PUBLISHER:
Data East
San Jose, CA

Full Metal Planet is a well-done
example of using a computer to
make a board game easy to play.
The graphics produce a screen
display as colorful as any game
board and the mouse-adapted interface makes moving pieces on
the screen even easier than
moving chits on a game board.
Then comes the best part: the
computer takes care of all the accounting: moves, points scored
and terrain effects.

The game is based on a board
game that has been popular in
France for many years. It was
originally programmed and published in France by Infogrames.
The graphics and user-interface of Full Metal Planet are wellhandled. IBM owners may regret the opening sound track as "performed" by the internal IBM speaker, however. That can start any
human player's teeth grinding before it turns off. It stops automatically when the copy protection code is entered. If ever there was
a reward for getting the copy protection right, this is it.
The mouse interface is useful and smooth. The implementation
is good, but it doesn't follow the Macintosh tradition of "click and
drag" that has now spread to a lot of PC-based games. It feels
(Continued on page 42, after sidebar)

Review

Tactical Hints For Ambitious Commanders
Here are some rules of thumb to help you get this planetary
mining business in hand.

squares away and take one's hard-earned prize away in an instant.

First, one should land on the edge of the map in order to engender less potential combat. It is useful to land on the water's
edge so it is possible to launch the raft and attack boats, but it
is expedient to land as near a corner as possible. This reduces
the chance of being mobbed by one's competitors.

Fourth, consider using weather hens for remote assaults.
Weather hens forecast the tides. They also build armies. One
can use them as a way to carry an assault to a competitor's territory. Move the hen near his or her freighter (build pontoons
with the weather hen or use the barge if the target is over
water). Then, start picking up ore and converting it into tanks.
One should always analyze one's opponents move potential
carefully, since it is possible to lose the weather hen trying to be
so brazen.

Second, recognize that tanks and crabs are replaceable. The
weather hen can build more tanks and crabs, so losing one or
two of them isn't too critical to the overall effort. One's weather
hen, heap tank and assault boats are irreplaceable, however.
Also, aggressive commanders should be especially careful to
conserve their assault boats and capture any possible from the
others. The center of the board is mostly water so they can
move from battle to battle quickly.
Third, remember that freighter assaults aren't difficult. If one
commander is close to a single computer-controlled competitor,
it is important to conquer the artificial opponent. The computer
doesn't put up a strong defense and once he is under the
human's control, there are both extra movement points and the
benefit of using the computer's weather hen, assuming the computer commander has not lost it. Whenever a freighter is conquered, it is wise to rebuild the turrets right away. Unless this is
accomplished, a single competitor tank can drive in from twenty

Fifth, remember to save action points for surprise moves. It is
possible to save either five or ten action points from one move
to apply to the next move. This allows one to surprise an opponent with an extra long move. Conversely, alert commanders
should watch out for what the opponents may plan to do with
an extra five or ten points.
Finally, one should not kill equipment that can be captured. If
one has saved up for a long move, it is often possible to kill one
protector of a group and then capture the other, along with
many pieces of what they were both protecting. Remember that
while it is not normally possible to move into a space covered
by two enemy fields of fire, you can do so if you're going to
destroy one of those enemies by doing so. This "move under
fire maneuver" starts as a fire option, not a move option.

Review

The Tides of Ambition
(Continued from page 40)
reversed in that the player clicks on the destination first, then on
the object that is going to that destination.
The graphics use VGA/EGA capabilities to good advantage.
The illustrations and boards use rich mix of green-yellow hues
that have an "earth tone" feel to them, but the use of a military
green may be offensive to some who prefer a lighter color palette.

That's Exploitation, Not Exploration
Full Metal Planet is a game balanced for multi-player play. The
game has a simple movement system based on action points
that are allocated among the various units and features deterministic combat resolution like chess and Diplomacy (no dice
rolling). This economy of movement and simplicity in fighting
lets the players devote a lot of time and attention to interplayer
activities — negotiating and scheming. Full Metal Planet also addresses the problem of slow movers by enforcing move time
limits. The game can be played solo and
will be enjoyable for a person that likes
chess-like games where there are pieces to
move, sufficient time is provided to think
about a move and a good move can't be
"ruined" by a bad dice roll. The computer
player isn't strong, but solo games can be
made more challenging by playing a speed
game with a short move time limit. The
moves in Full Metal Planet are not handled in secrecy, nor are they handled simultaneously. This, combined with the fact
that there are only four players, means that
using the "warm seat" method of entering
moves — each player in turn sits in front of
the screen and makes his or her moves,
then gets up and lets the next player in —
isn't a problem. It does feature something
of a problem, however, in that there is no
way of taking a map away from the
screen so that players can "conference" to
discuss moves and countermoves while
they're not at the console. This reviewer
found himself tempted to get a copy of the
board game, just to use it as a conference
map.
Those who are concerned about copy
protection will find nothing extraordinary in
the game's look-up-a-logo-in-the-manual
method of copy protection. However, the
protection does allow a network installation
that some will find both welcome and
surprising. It works fine on a NetWare network and can be run from a high-lettered
drive (a letter beyond E:) in a deeplynested subdirectory without problems. However, the installation routine makes it
easier to install it on a local hard drive and
then copy the subdirectory to a network
drive rather than installing directly to the
network. The program uses a lot of RAM
so it's sensitive to how many drivers and
TSR's (terminate-and-stay-resident
programs such as Sidekick) are loaded.
Most important to note, however, is that
the program is not very informative when it
has problems. Rather, it just locks up after
the "play game" command is issued.
Full Metal Planet offers a viable choice
for gamers looking for a multi-player
strategy game on the computer, a challenging game which can require from a short
to medium amount of time to complete
and a game that does not follow tried and
true formulas of game design.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tate
Scorpia Enrolls in

Spellcasting 101

As Told by Scorpia

W

ell, here we are with spring already
peeking around the corner. Sigh.
They just don't seem to make
winters as long as they used to. Either that,
or there's some dastardly magic at work.
And speaking of magic, arcane doings are
afoot elsewhere, too....
Spellcasting 101 marks the return of
Steve Meretzky to the adventure game
scene. Similar to Steve's previous Leather
Goddesses of Phobos, Spellcasting has a
fairly suggestive theme. However, where
LGOP was more of a spoof and the sex
mostly nonexistent, S101 is a bit more
daring. Only a bit, though; don't expect
reams of pornographic prose, because
there isn't any. Just some clever writing,
and pictures of women who are (ahem) extremely healthy. For those who prefer to dis
pense with such shenanigans, however,
there is also a "nice" setting with no sex at
all.
The interface was described in the Sneak
Preview featured in CGW #76, as were the
rest of the game mechanics, so we'll get
right to the story. Anyway, what we have
here is another "nerd makes good, kinda
sorta" tale, featuring Ernie Eaglebeak, wizard "wannabe." Ernie has problems. Actually, he has one main problem, a rather nasty
and vicious step-father. This obnoxious
specimen is about to railroad our boy into
an unpleasant apprenticeship, calculated to
break his back if not his spirit. Ernie better
leave home fast, before it's too late.
Besides, home is nothing more than a
dreary chamber with straw for a bed and an
unspeakable potty room. Saying goodbye
to that shouldn't be hard. At least, not if
Ernie finds the way out to the alley quickly
enough.
So here's Ernie in the alley, fragrant
enough to knock a crow off a carcass at
fifty paces. Fortunately, there's a toolshed
only a step away, and Ernie knows where
the gardener hides the key. Too bad Minnie
the Interfering Neighbor happens by at just
that moment to plant her big foot on it.
Things couldn't possibly get worse.
Then again, maybe they could, because
stepdaddy is by the alley gate chatting with
a girl that Ernie's had his eye on for awhile.
Who knows when either or both of them
might take a look in the wrong direction?
This is no time for gentlemanly manners.
Ernie needs that key and desperate
measures are necessary.
Whew! He got away just in time. Now it's
off to the university for fun, frolic, parties,
and perhaps even something of an education. After Ernie gets past registration

(which requires the application form that
comes in the game box), he's pretty much
at liberty to do what he wants for awhile.
Wandering around the campus and
making a small map (even though the
game has a sort of automapping, nothing's
marked on it) is a useful way to pass some
time. Picking up anything along the way
that isn't nailed down also helps. Ernie
might even want to listen in on a lecture or
two. Whatever, the one thing he really must
do is drop in on both frat parties that night.
Hey, ya never know who he might
meet...maybe even a girl!
A girl like Gretchen Snowbunny, Pr instance. No, Ernie doesn't quite get to make
it with her, but there will be other opportunities later on for such experiences (heh).
However, Gretchen will provide our hero
with a way to enter the Snowbunny home,
although Ernie has to take matters into his
own hands, so to speak.
The next morning, Ernie is up bright and
early and snooping around everywhere he
can. If he hasn't figured out where to use
the SKONN spell, here's a hint: there's
more than one kind of bust. Also, the trap
door in the lecture room should not be overlooked.
After a pleasant day of exploration (and
grabbing everything that isn't nailed down),
Ernie can enjoy dinner with Professor Tickingclock and his wife. He might as well
enjoy it, as this will be the last bit of leisure
he has for some time to come.
Thursday marks the big change. It starts
off like any other day, but then Ernie's
mom shows up, babbling incoherently.
Before Ernie can figure out what's happening, he's knocked out. When he wakes up,
the entire campus is deserted. Something is
definitely wrong here.
On the other hand, the empty college
does present several opportunities, one of
which is snarfing Tickingclock's special
surfboard. If you have to travel, that's the
only way to get around. After he gets that
(and a few extra spells), it's time to bid a
fond farewell to Sorcerer University and
head out into the world...or at least to the Island of Lost Souls.
The Island of Lost Souls, pop. 80, has a
problem. All the residents have been magically transformed into homonymic (look it
up!) objects. Ernie has to set things right
and bring back all eighty inhabitants.
That's a bit much (eighty puns!), but
there's no way around it. This is one time
you might want to bring in your friends and
neighbors to help out.

After
all that
work, Ernie receives a key (big wow), and
heads off for an even worse place: The Island Where Time Runs Backward. It's difficult to explain this one. Especially since
Ernie somehow changes into someone
resembling Goldilocks when he arrives.
That's not the bad part, though.
What's calculated to give anyone
headaches is figuring out what was already
done and then doing it, one move later.
Does that make sense? I didn't think so.
This is even worse than running into yourself in the mines of Sorcerer (which, come
to think of it, was also written by Meretzky).
Anyway, you must save often during this
part of the game. There is an absolutely
rigid sequence here, and one wrong move
at any time will bring Ernie to a nasty end.
We don't want that to happen, so be careful
and pay close attention to the text.
Let me give you a little idea of what this is
like. After Ernie is transformed, he (she?) is
holding a piece of waybread. Dropping the
bread moves him (her?) south. Now trying
to move south brings Ernielocks (Goldiebeak?) to a cottage.
Moving southwest causes our hero(ine?)
to fly into the air and through the window
into the cottage. Got it now? I hope so, because the rest of the island is just like that.
Finally, Ernie gets to the end (beginning?), receives a new spell, and is free to
take off again. None too soon; all that backwards stuff was making his head spin.
What he needs is a little change of pace
(and maybe something else, hehe) and
Amazon Island is just the place for it.
Contrary to popular notion, the Amazons
are not man-haters. Indeed, they welcome
our boy with open arms (and possibly other
things) upon his arrival.
Now, Ernie, just try to get away before
you become totally exhausted, one way or
another. I hate to say it, but escape is
going to be a dragged-out procedure, so
don't overlook anything that might be useful.
All this surfing around (not to mention
other activities) can work up an appetite,
and I know the perfect place to fuel up: The
Restaurant At The End Of the Univ — err —
Ocean. Floating placidly in the water as
Ernie arrives is yet another spell box.
Tough luck, though: a shark pops up and
swallows it (the shark must have been
named Mikey). Oh well, can't win 'em all.
Anyway, Ernie came here for a meal, so he
better go inside and order while the

Game Hints

ordering's good (this restaurant is going
through its life cycle pretty rapidly).

back and demands that Ernie clean it
up...all of it. Must be Ernie's lucky day.

three X's (thereby proving the value of an
education in arithmetic).

Okay, so maybe he didn't get to eat anything; the stop still wasn't a total loss (at
least not if he got that spell box, and it
would a rotten shame if he didn't!). And
there's still a place or two left to visit. Such
as the mysterious island, one of whose coordinates doesn't appear on the surfboard dial.

Well, if he had several lifetimes, he might
manage the task. However, Ernie doesn't
have that long, and besides, he has more
important things to take care of, anyway.
Proper use of a couple of spells should do
the job, and Ernie can make tracks out of
there while the gods admire his handiwork.

However, if Ernie's gotten this far along in
the game, that ought to be no problem at
all (no, I won't spell out the answer for
you). In no time at all, hardly, Ernie arrives
at the Isle of The Gods.

All right, the preliminaries are over, and
it's time for the main event. Ernie arrives at
Blackwand Island (hey, there's nowhere
else left to go!) and admires the sea serpent with its gaping jaws. A knotty problem, but I know Ernie can handle it easily.

Look, Ernie, there's a painting on the wall;
that should bring back some fond (ha!)
memories. It should also be a blatant clue
as to what needs to be done here. Before
long, three people are each standing on an
X, all the gates are open, and Ernie and
company are running through to the final
encounter with...well, you play the game
and find out.

Interestingly enough, they live in a condo.
No one's around right now, but if Ernie
waits long enough, something's bound to
happen. Of course, it would be smart not to
be too visible; you never know how a god
might feel about finding a trespasser in his
home.
Eventually, alas, Ernie is discovered, not
once, but twice: first, by the delightful
Ocarina and then by her suspicious husband, the repellant Glockenspiel (so you
helped the lady with her crossword puzzle,
is that such a crime? Oh, you were playing
in naughty mode, eh? Hmm...).
Either way, Ernie is not annihilated on the
spot. Glock isn't that nice a god. Instead,
he drags our boy out to the trash dump in

Say, does this place look familiar? It
should: it's an exact replica of the spell
simulation that Ernie went through (we
hope!) back at good old Sorcerer U. Which
means he knows exactly what to do to get
past the humungous dragon and up into
the tower to save the lady imprisoned inside. Only this time, this being real life (of a
sort), Ernie and friend can go through the
trap door.
Well, well, what's this? A room with three
big X's on the floor, and three gates. Gee, I
wonder if...yep, stepping on an X opens
one of the doors. Counting on his fingers,
Ernie realizes that one more person is
needed, since there are two people and

Anyway, Mr. Nefarious Villain is about to
complete the awesome and dreadful
Sorcerer's Appliance, which will cause all
sorts of awesome and dreadful things to
occur (such as a premature ending to the
game!). Ernie can't let that happen, not
after getting this far along.
There isn't much time, either. Think fast,
Ernie. You'll need a novel approach, a
couple of spells, a whale of a time, and a
hot spellbook to see things through. So,
what if you end up interred? There are
worse fates (and as soon as I think of one,
I'll tell you what it is). Ah well, even if the
rewards are less than magnificent, you won,
and that's what counts (suuure).
Anyway, I see by the old invisible clock
on the wall it's that time again. Until next
time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

D

ragon-slayers of myth
and ancient times must
have had a relatively
easy occupation. After all, they
were simply required to
butcher those wonderful
beasts. Surely, a truer test of
talent and superiority must
have fallen to those who nurtured and raised the dragons
from egghood and directed
them toward their tasks. The
latter is the challenge of
Dragon Lord, a recent release
under Cinemaware's Spotlight label (reserved for
European imports).

To breed or Not to breed
Cinemaware's Dragon Lord Import
by Allen L. Greenberg

Dragon Lord presents a mixture of strategy gaming, roleplaying and economics. Three
players, any of which may be
controlled by human or computer, are engaged in a bitter
competition to locate all three
pieces of a magic talisman.
The pieces are hidden among
the cities, towns and open
fields of a large section of land.
The dragons are the fire-breathing muscle by which players
secure these properties and do
battle with their opponents.
Players take turns giving orders, casting spells, and manipulating properties. Combat is
resolved and other results revealed after all players have input
their orders (i.e. phased movement rather than real-time).

A Magic System that "Really Cooks"
The most challenging and powerful resource available to each
contender is magic. Each dragon-lord must also be a virtual
"kitchen-magician" to even begin to knowledgeably manipulate
the deluge of reagents floating around in this game. In a device
which can only be called "vege-magic," any of 30 ingredients
may be prepared to produce a variety of effects on humans or
dragons. This multi-orificed device is capable of mixing, cutting,
grinding, heating or cooling — whatever is called for in the spell's
recipe. These recipes are to be found in the game's documentation and are presented with the same clarity and simplicity as to
be found in the Dead Sea Scrolls.
To master the spells of Dragon Lord, the player must first
master a notation made up of circles, squares and triangles. It is
used to indicate a substance's properties, as well as its instructions for preparation. These symbols appear on a roadmap-sized
chart which requires careful study. The kitchen-mage must also
be aware that most substances will have more than one attribute,
so almost any spell is bound to have side effects. It is up to the
player to determine these in advance and, if necessary, compensate for them with other drugs. This system of magic may well
be one of the most extensive and exhausting spellcasting systems ever to appear in a computer RPG.
Spell ingredients may be purchased from sinister-eyed vendors
who, like the Avon lady in Tim Burton's Edward Scissorhands,
make frequent castle calls. These drawbridge-to-drawbridge
salespeople charge steep prices for their substances, however,

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:
DISTRIBUTOR:

Dragon Lord
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
Amiga
1-3
$49.95
Palace Software
Spotlight Software
Cinemaware
Thousand Oaks, CA

and dragon lords need to cling to every penny in order to keep
their incubators' furnaces burning. This is, of course, because
nested in these very incubators are dragon eggs which contain
the baby creatures necessary for the dragon lord to complete his
mission. If any of the three lords is unable to pay the fuel bills,
the furnaces will shut down and the contents of the eggs will die.
Reagents for spells are necessary because judicious spellcasting
helps the eggs to develop and often helps to breed dragons
eugenically for specific missions.
Further, dragons generally require their master's magic to keep
them healthy and fighting. Dragon attributes are measured
numerically in familiar role-playing fashion, using such terms as
"strength" and "IQ." They conquer villages by wiping out a significant portion of their populations. Some cynics may note that
the dragons actually serve as a goon squad so that the population (a dismal breed of barbarian, too dull-witted to be populating
some other, less abusive CRPG) can be given over to the player
for taxation and other torment.

The Dragons Come Home to Roast
Conquest of a village can take place in one of two ways. Normally, the program will determine the success of a dragon to subdue the village based on the dragon's statistics versus those of
the population. Modifications occur, however, because villages,
as well as dragons, are subject to the influence of spellcasting.
Players also have the option to participate in Dragon Lord's only
arcade sequence. This is a vertically-scrolling exercise where
dragonfire pours down from the joystick-controlled beast above,
while the town's defenders below do their best to bring the attacker down. The program's designers wisely decided to make this sequence optional, as many players will actually find it disruptive
to the flow of the game.

Review

Villages are not only important as a supply of money and
power, but they will eventually yield a piece of the talisman.
When this happens, a dragon lord must designate one of his
dragons to stay and sit on the piece in order to claim it. Other
pieces will be found within or in between other villages. Three
dragons belonging to one player must be sitting on the talisman
pieces for that player to win the game. Even if a village does not
uncover a missing piece, it may still produce money or magic
reagents.
Dragon Lord features only a handful of graphics but they are
beautiful. Maps and illustrations are presented with the quality of
oil paintings. The dragons and the spell-preparing apparatus are
also rendered with quite a bit of imagination. The background
music is respectably haunting and the rumbling sound effects are
realistic and in stereo.

Letting Sleeping Dragons Lie
Many will find game play painfully slow. Certainly the spells
alone, without which progress is unlikely, will require time and
careful thought before using. And, unlike the conquest of the villages, a carefully planned process, the actual search for the talisman proceeds randomly. Players must simply conquer with their
fingers crossed because there are no clues to guide them. The
flow of information is also somewhat slow and players may often
be unaware of the results of an action until the following turn.
Although slow-moving, Dragon Lord is definitely a "breed"
apart from the traditional computer RPG. It deserves, at least,
some high praise for its innovative game play. Dragon-slayers,
heroes, and other seekers of more visceral satisfaction may wish
to sit this one out. Strategists and other evil-minded intellectuals
with patience to spare may very well enjoy Dragon Lord.

OPINION

Scorpion's 'View
When Is a Sequel More Than a Sequel?
Sierra's King's Quest V

ever before through the use of the "travel"
icon. This allows Graham to walk anywhere
you click on the screen without having to
maneuver past obstacles. Instead, the onscreen character will avoid them automatically and go directly to the designated spot

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert. CGW
is pleased to be able to provide this
forum for her distinctive and, often, controversial perspective.
eep in the crystal, the clouds begin
to disperse. A ray of light burgeons
into a dazzling array of colors, surmounted by a golden crown. There is no
doubt about it: the king has returned, in a
blaze of rainbows.
Without question, King's Quest V is a
graphic tour-de-force. This is the game to
boot up when you want to show off your
VGA system. Rich in color and lavish in
detail, scene after scene unfolds in gorgeous glory, enough to brighten the most
jaded eye, including mine! I don't usually
get very excited over graphics, but these
are something special. Over twenty people
are listed under the art credits and they
should all stand up and take a bow.
One of the most outstanding features of
the graphics is how they sustain mood.
King's Quest V is, essentially, a fairy tale
and this delicate atmosphere is maintained
throughout the game, in spite of one jarring
element (more on that later). You really
have the feeling of being in some magical
realm, where anything can happen.
In spite of the detail, the animation was
very quick. Only in the most crowded
scenes was there any noticeable slowness,
and even that is acceptable. Do keep in
mind, though, that the game was reviewed
on a 386 with a fast clock; on a slower system, there is likely to be more delay.
Those who have a sound card can enjoy
the additional enhancement of excellent
music. There is a wide variety of tunes in
the game, each very well done and carefully matched to the scene. The scoring may
be the best ever in any Sierra game. It
sounded quite good on my Soundblaster
and those with Roland cards claim that it is
superb.

Unlike previous adventures, King's Quest
V features a totally non-typing interface,
vaguely reminiscent of the one in the Manhunter series. Everything is controlled via
icons from a menu bar at the top of the
screen. The cursor itself changes shape to
indicate which type of icon is active: movement (a striding figure), examination (an
eye), manipulation (a hand) and so on.
Once you get the hang of this system, it
is simple to use and eliminates a great deal
of the repetition ordinarily found in most
games of this kind. Instead of typing "look
at this" or "look at that", you need only position the "eye" on something and click the
mouse button. If there is anything special
about the object, you see a message; if not,
the icon changes briefly to a red X.
Movement is handled better here than

In a similar vein, picking up or manipulating objects is accomplished by clicking on
them with the "hand" icon. Graham does
not have to be next to the item first (unless
reaching it is part of a puzzle). This does
away with all the "you're not close enough"
silliness that has been the bane of gamers
for a long time. You won't ever see that
message here.
On the other hand, this also creates something of a drawback (just as it did in the
Manhunter games). Many of the puzzles,
which are already easy, are made more so
by simply running through the inventory
and trying everything you have. Most of the
time, you don't even need to figure out how
to use something. Instead, the program will
perform the correct actions just by "point
and click" alone.
Conversations (there are many people
and creatures to talk to) are handled in the
same fashion. You simply click the "talk"
icon on someone (or something), and the
rest is completely automatic. This is certainly a boon for those who are never sure
what to ask about, or who rapidly become
tired of running through a series of
"keywords" with everyone they meet. For
those gamers who enjoy directing everything, however, it might be a little frustrating, even though Graham's chats are always to the point.
Inventory is simple. Graham picks up
whatever he can, and never drops anything.
There is no drop command, therefore nothing can be lost. If an object has no function
in a situation, nothing happens, and the
item does not get used up. However, there
are a couple of tricky instances where an
item can be used incorrectly, so some caution is necessary. Usually, correct use of an
object is heralded by the sound of a bell

OPINION
and an increase in score. The absence of
these is often an indicator that you made a
mistake.
In a way, King's Quest V brings the series
full circle. The first two games centered on
Graham's trials in becoming king of
Coventry and finding a wife. The next two
focused on his son and daughter. Now, we
return again to Graham, a bit older, a little
grayer of hair, but still fit and trim and
ready to take on a quest, even if it isn't
quite by choice.
Out picking posies (literally) one day,
Graham returns home to find he has none:
both his castle and his family have
vanished without a trace. The only witness
to this gargantuan removal is an owl, sitting
on a nearby branch. Unfortunately, aside
from telling Graham what happened, the
bird (Cedric by name) can provide little information. However, he can transport
Graham to the wizard Crispin, who may be
able to help.
Thus begins Graham's quest to find out
the who and why of this amazing theft, as
well as how to get back his home and family again. Much of the action takes place in
and around the country of Serenia, since
Crispin is able to determine that this is the
land that holds the answers. Graham, however, must find those answers on his own.

So, off he goes to explore this strange
world. The only thing KQ V lacks is an automapping feature, so it is necessary to make
your own maps as you go along. This is
particularly important in the desert, one of
the few not-so-bright parts of the game.
I mapped out a hundred and thirty (!)
screens of this arid wasteland and have
heard it is even larger. Why so much space
was given over to something that is mostly
nothing is hard to understand, especially
since Graham can't last very long among
the sands without water. Six screens is all
he has. On the seventh, he drops dead of
dehydration.
There are oases along the way that can
sustain him, but finding them is a matter of
trial and error. All you can do is move
Graham around in different directions, restoring when he dies and hoping it won't be
too long in between before he finds some
water. This is particularly aggravating as
there are only three locations of any importance: the temple, the skeleton, and the bandit camp. Everything else is just sand and
cliffs.
Also irritating are several "time dependent" situations in the game, as well as some
"instant death gotchas" (the jarring element
I mentioned earlier). There are occasions in
the game where Graham does not have the

luxury of unlimited time to look around or
think things out. He must act very quickly
or the game will be lost.
The desert temple is one of these quick
action sequences. Graham has only a few
moves to pick up the two items he needs
and get out before the door shuts, imprisoning him forever. There is really no time to
look around at all and players may be in
for an unpleasant surprise when they see
just how little time there is to do anything
in here.
The cat and mouse scene is another.
Graham must save the mouse while it is
being chased. Otherwise, it will be killed
and the game cannot be completed. The
mouse does not appear again (after all, it's
kitty chow) and that critter is very important.
The "gotcha" instances make for intensive
hair-pulling. For example, at one point
Graham and Cedric go sailing in a boat.
They have no idea where they are going;
they have no directions and no particular
goal (at least, I never found any hints in the
game about this). It is mainly a "let's go
see what's out there" expedition and what
they keep running into much of the time is
a sea serpent.
It eats them immediately, with no chance
of escape. Ergo, there is much tedious res-

_

OPINION
toring as you try to find, by trial and error
alone, the safe path past the monster. For
both this and the desert, a map or other
direction of some kind would have been
preferable, thereby saving a lot of frustration and wasted time. Therefore, save often.
Any time you think Graham may be heading into trouble or any time you feel nervous about something, save the game. Also,
save it just on general principles now and
then, to avoid an unexpected and unpleasant surprise that may set you far back
in the game.
Cedric is sometimes an indicator of potentially dangerous situations. Any time he
refuses to enter a particular area, it is a
good idea to save before proceeding onward. Cedric may not have to go
everywhere, but Graham certainly does.
One save you should have and be careful
not to over-write is just before Graham and
Cedric enter the mountains. Beyond a certain point, there is no turning back. If
Graham is lacking any important objects,
he can't return for them, and your only
recourse is to restore the game.
As I noted previously, many of the puzzles
are not very difficult. Usually, if you are
stuck on something, it means you don't yet
have the necessary item to overcome the
obstacle. When you can't make headway in

a situation, no matter what you do, leave it
and go looking elsewhere. For instance, the
Forbidden Forest is best left alone until the
desert is completed. The tavern should be
avoided until the mouse has been saved,
and so on.
Paying close attention to the screen is important. Look at everything when you arrive
at a new location. I had a hard time with
one puzzle because I kept missing a stick
on the ground (and it is easy to miss). The
"eye" makes it easy to check for critical objects; don't neglect doing that.
Above all, be kind to (most) animals. This
is a constant theme throughout the game.
Graham has the ability to talk to them, and
doing so is crucial to success. Being nice
(most of the time) is one means of making
progress in the adventure.
A word of caution is necessary here in
regard to the end of the game. After the villain is defeated, Graham is reunited with his
family in a long, automatic sequence. For
some reason, this sequence appears to require more memory than the rest of the
game; there have been reports of the program crashing at this point. With that in
mind, you may want to remove any
memory-resident programs before entering
the end game portion (in the castle) to
avoid this difficulty.

In one sense, the irritations noted earlier
are a shame, as they mar what might other
wise have been something close to the perfect adventure. King's Quest V is not outstanding for the puzzles. Those are mostly
simple, but a game need not be a
mindbender to be good. The flaws mentioned above aside, the fusion of elements,
graphics, music, storyline, thematic concepts, interface and atmosphere make this
game stand out.
For the beginner, King's Quest V is ideal.
The interface removes much of the frustration and "learning curve" associated with
the more text-oriented adventures and the
majority of puzzles are not very hard. For
the more advanced gamer (particularly
those with VGA, fast clock speed and a
sound card), it can be a pleasant diversion.
As the crystal clouds over again, remember if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways: On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: visit the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York
NY 10028.
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

The Curious Case of
the Vicarious Victorian
Paragon's

Space 1889

by Todd Threadgill
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

I

Space 1889
IBM
559.95
Steve Suhy,
Don Wuenschell, and
FE. Lennon
PUBLISHER:
Paragon Software
DISTRIBUTOR: MicroProse Software
Hunt Valley, MD

t is 1889. Mankind, with the
help of brilliant inventors
like Thomas Edison, has discovered how to navigate the
"luminiferous ether" between
the planets. Interplanetary
travel on ether flyers has become commonplace. Contact
with several races of intelligent
beings has been established. It
is an age of adventure and enlightenment in a world that
never was.
Space 1889 presents the
player with just such a world.
Drawing from the science-fiction fantasies of such classic
authors as H.G. Wells and
Jules Verne, the creators of
Space 1889 have come up
with an irresistible premise for
role- playing adventure.

Prologue (Pre-Game
Considerations)
The software comes on unprotected disks, but when starting the game, the player must
enter a word from the excellent
manual in order to verify ownership. Unfortunately, unlike most
games with password protection, Space 1889 gives the player only
one chance to enter the correct word before being returned to DOS.
The ability to make at least one more attempt would be welcome.
The authors' emphasis on female characters is noteworthy. Players
are encouraged to include women in their parties, as some of the
careers that are available to characters are for women only. This is a
refreshing change from the usual male-only orientation of role-playing games, and the designers are to be commended.
Typical to CRPGs, the game requires a party of characters to be
formed prior to beginning the game. Also, true to the genre, the
players may either use the pre-generated characters that come with
the package or make their own. More distinctive, however, is the
ability to custom design character classes via a series of
easy-to-navigate menus. However, players who decide to create their characters and/or character classes from scratch should be forewarned:
each character features a sizeable array of skills — such as
Marksmanship, Bargaining, and Medical — that are determined by
the computer. It is easy to overlook the absence of vital skills during

the creation phase. For example, a party without medically-skilled characters will not be
able to revive unconscious
characters, and completing the
game will be extremely difficult.

The Curtain Rises
(The Game Worlds)
Once the party has been
created, game play begins.
The story begins in London. At
a gala reception for an archaeological exhibit of Egyptian artifacts, the characters
overhear a conversation regarding the as-yet-undiscovered
tomb of King Tutankhamen.
The lure of such a discovery
proves impossible for them to
resist and they join forces in
hopes of finding King Tut's
tomb themselves. This is only
the beginning of an adventure
that will eventually reward the
party with what is truly the ultimate treasure: immortality.
In the course of the game,
the party will travel to the far
corners of the earth, as well as
to other planets. The technology of the ether flyers (large
wooden ships that travel from
planet to planet) is limited in
range, and travel beyond the
asteroid belt is considered impractical. Thus, the party is unable to journey to Jupiter or
beyond (until late in the game, when the player will acquire the
necessary equipment). The inner planets, however, are packed with
settlements. The cities feature the standard complement of shops:
Gun Shops, Markets, Banks, and Taverns. Many of the towns also
have mysterious caves within their boundaries, ready for exploration.
Each planet has one ether port (where ether flyers arrive and
depart). Here, the party may purchase a new flyer or update an existing one with better armor, more powerful engines, and more deadly
weapons. Ether flyers may be constructed of regular wood or of a
gravity-defying variant known as "liftwood." Liftwood is expensive
and hard to find, since it comes from a rare species of tree that only
grows in certain mountainous regions of Mars.
As might be expected, the recent confluence of Terran and Martian
society upon the surface of Mars has not been without conflict. Different factions (most notably the Germans) are struggling to take
control of the planet's supply of liftwood. This and other shady
human plots for economic exploitation are sprinkled throughout the
game and add a dimension of realism that is missing from many
other role-playing games.

Review

To The British Go The Spoils (Combat)

Her Majesty Will Be Pleased (Pros)

As the adventure unfolds, the characters will encounter hostile parties, either on the surface of a planet or in space. The player issues
commands to the characters ("Attack the German Soldier"), and all
but one of them — who is controlled by the player in real time
carry out the commands automatically. Planetary combat is rather
confusing, and players will probably lose their characters to the computer-controlled enemies several times before getting the knack of
the combat system.

The EGA graphics are excellent. They capture the "look" of exotic
planets and alien cultures in a fashion easily imagined from the writings of Victorian Era science fiction authors. Issuing commands is a
quick and intuitive matter — everything is available from easy-to-access menus, and the keyboard, mouse, and joystick are fully supported. Unlike many CRPGs, combat is not the primary emphasis of
Space 1889. Since this aspect of the game is the most difficult and
frustrating, the authors wisely opted to emphasize exploration and
puzzle-solving.

One reason for this is that when combat mode is engaged, the
party stands in a tight group of at least two rows: front and back. In
most games of this type, this isn't a problem, but in Space 1889,
players will not attack unless they have a clear shot at the enemy.
Half of the player's characters stand around doing nothing until the
front ranks are moved out of the way, often a difficult or impossible
maneuver, depending on the layout of the battle area. This can
prove to be a major disadvantage against some of the more capable
opponents or when there is more than one enemy on the screen.
However, none of the opponents possess superhuman strength or
speed, and most can be readily defeated once the player is familiar
with the controls.
Space combat is another matter. Battles between ether flyers take
place in the atmosphere of a planet or moon. The combating ships
fly along a horizontal landscape (a la Defender) and fire shots at
each other. From this reviewer's experience, shots never miss their
targets. Space combat is entertaining when the battles are short, but
can quickly become tedious during an extended struggle. Players
can also "join" an enemy flyer, and attack from within. This mode is
similar to ground combat, and must be performed by the player at
least once in the course of the game.

We Are Not Amused (Cons)
The game does have some weaknesses. The plot lacks an identifiable objective and characters tend to stumble upon one discovery
after another without having any idea as to how all the pieces fit
together until very late in the game. Also, most of the
non-player-characters in the game speak in a mixture of English and gibberish
that appears to be an attempt at representing strange accents. For
some of the NPCs, it is an interesting touch, while with others (notably the Martians) it is just plain hard to read. Some of the information
gleaned from the NPCs is important, but it can be lost in the torrent
of nonsense characters that appears on the screen.

Epilogue
Space 1889 is an intriguing product, and ideal for those who like
adventures with a unique flavor. Players who revel in bloodshed
should look elsewhere, but garners who yearn for something different
(and don't mind having a dash of history thrown in) will find what
they're looking for in Space 1889.

Reader Input Device

Review

A Magic Fly Buzzed

When the Aliens Died
by Allen L. Greenberg

both the joystick and keyboard to enhance
the manipulations of the mouse. The tunnels also contain computerized "turn
lanes." When the pilot wishes to make a
turn into a tunnel branching right, left, up
or down, he simply moves his ship next to
the tunnel wall of the same side. As the
craft approaches the intersection, the computer takes over until the turn is completed.

R

ecently, this humble reviewer of

Amiga software was apprehended for
assaulting an MS-DOS computer. The
victim was a smug 386, possessing far too
much memory and several disk drives which
were cleverly concealed. Worst of all, it had
the audacity to be displaying Origin's best-selling outerTITLE:
SYSTEMS:
space combat simulator, Wing Commander. The
PRICE:
reviewer's seemingly mindless act of violence quickly bePUBLISHER:
comes clear and reasonable when one considers how
few successful science-fiction flight and combat
simulators there are for the Amiga. Okay, the above incident didn't really occur. Still, this reviewer is grateful that, at least,
one small step towards filling this depressing void has been taken in
the release of Electronic Arts' European import, Magic Fly.
In Magic Fly, the player pilots a ship by the same name into the in
terior of a vast asteroid. The asteroid is honeycombed with tunnels
which were once part of a mining project but are now the home of a
nasty race of aliens. The player's objectives are to: map out the tunnels, locate and shut down various centers of alien activity,
photograph the various enemy aircraft hidden away, and, finally,
blow everything up.
The player views the action from within the cockpit. Alternatively,
the player may choose to remove the interior of the cockpit from the
screen and view the action as a hood ornament rather than a pilot.
In either case, the oncoming scenery includes both vector graphics
and solid polygons. Walls curve and branch in various directions. Bar
riers, both stationary and oscillating, appear frequently and serve to
complicate navigation through the tunnels.
The cockpit screen of Magic Fly is really quite innovative. The center portion can be toggled to display either the fore or aft view from
the spaceship. Also, scattered around the center section are graphic
indicators with information concerning fuel, weapons, damage and
automatic mapping. In turn, each display on the main screen is
linked to a separate screen which may be called up at any time.
Thus, in addition to a constant presentation of the ship's damage,
the player can also access a screen which indicates the priority being
given by the ship's computer to the repair of each system. After adjusting these priorities, the player may then return to the main
screen. There are five of these "extra information" screens available.
Steering the craft is a function of both the mouse and the joystick.
It is similar to, but a considerable improvement upon, Electronic
Arts' other "fly through the tunnels" simulation, Powerdrome. The
most often heard complaint concerning that program was that the
racing vehicle was difficult, and at times impossible, to keep under
control. Magic Fly modifies this system by adding controls using

Magic Fly
Amiga , Atari ST
539.95
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Although the ultimate goal in Magic Fly
is destruction of the aliens, the emphasis
for most of the exercise is on exploration.
Fortunately, there are several aspects of
the craft which reflect this purpose. An
automatic mapping device constructs a
three-dimensional representation of the
route as the ship enters new tunnels. This map may be
examined at any time the player wishes to call it up, and
may be looked at along any axis.

Exploration also involves scrutinizing the enemy. There
are more than 30 different types of alien spacecraft buzzing within the asteroid. These range from toy-size to monstrous.
Progress in the game is noted not for destroying these (although that
is frequently what the pilot will have to do), but rather for scanning
them. When an enemy is successfully scanned, its information goes
into an on-board database. The player may then call up a detailed
readout concerning that enemy, which includes a three-dimensional
picture. This will prove useful later on, during combat.
Portions of the defunct mining operation turn out to be fuel stations
which can, in turn, serve as refueling centers for the Magic Fly.
When one of these is nearby, the pilot receives a signal and a notation of the location is made on the auto-map. These stations are important, particularly since there is only room on the ship for about
20 minutes worth of fuel. The stations are also important because
this is where the ship is repaired. Bumps and bruises which would be
very unlikely to bother an A-10 Thunderbolt can be quite damaging
to the Magic Fly!
The stations are also important because this is where the ship may
stock up on missiles and other special weapons. Although the ship
carries unlimited laser-blasts, missiles are frequently the only way of
destroying certain enemies. Each station also has exclusive distribution rights to one special weapon. Weapons often have unique applications and certain passageways will not open until they are
blasted by the correct firearm.
Finally, stations are the only places where a game may be saved in
progress. Interacting with the computer to perform this function, as
well as the other station functions, actually involves pounding a rubber ball against the wall. Who said interplanetary mining engineers
have no sense of humor?

Magic Fly is a welcome addition to the small group of science-fiction combat/flight simulators for the Amiga and Atari ST. Its greatest
strength lies in the large degree of strategy and exploration present
in the game. Graphically, the program offers enough to keep one
playing, although it is very much lacking in visual fireworks. Which,
of course, brings us back to that search for another Wing Commander.

Review

t is unusual for
CGW to review
a shareware
program, since
they are often
hard to obtain
and may be
found in so many
different versions.
Pharaoh's Tomb is
so readily available and comes
so highly recommended, however,
that we have
made an exception.

If Pharaoh's
Tomb teaches anything, it is to be
aware of one's surroundings. The
wise explorer looks
around and ahead
at each level to see
by Michael S. Lasky
what needs to be
done to master the
level and move
ahead. Players get
five "lives" to play
with and two
spears, but it is posTITLE:
Pharaoh's Tomb
IBM
SYSTEM:
sible to earn more
PRICE:
Volume 1, shareware; $10 registration
of both along the
Volumes 2,3,4: $10.00 each
$25 for all four volumes.
tortuous expediIndiana Jones
DESIGNER:
George Broussard
tion. Note that one
PUBLISHER:
Apogee
Software
had a few spears
does not have to
4206 Mayflower
thrown at him
Garland, TX 75043
eliminate all the
while he searched
obstacles which
for the lost ark.
crop up along the
Sure, he got
path in order to
caught in some
continue the jourpretty hairy booby
ney. Sometimes,
traps on his
evasion is better than elimination, so that players can save those
crusades for ancient relics, but none of them compare to the
spears for when they are really needed.
perils faced by intrepid explorer Nevada Smith in his 80-level trek
to find the well-hidden Pharaoh's Tomb.
Sometimes, players will have to direct Nevada's journey
beyond what seems an obvious distance in order to trigger the
In this lively and imaginative quartet of arcade-adventure
release of a hidden passage. Sometimes it will look like there is a
games, players assume the role of Nevada Smith with the objectrigger for a hidden passage, but it turns out not to be the type
tive of finding that lost tomb with its reportedly vast array of arof 'passage' anyone would intend to take so early in life. The
chaeological — and golden — treasures. At each succeeding,
wise player is constantly aware of the tomb environment and exmore challenging level (with some easy ones thrown in along the
plores the walls whenever possible to find the hidden points and
way), one faces nastier booby traps and rabid tomb-enslaved
eggs of life located there. Yet it is necessary to jump at precisely
monsters.
the right moment and correct angle to avoid those occasional
What makes this series so successful is the masterfully clever
booby traps.
programming and screen design, the artful exploitation of availPharaoh's Tomb is obviously a take-off on the Indiana Jones
able screen colors, and the unpredictability of each level. The
films and the actual play is highly reminiscent of the classic
games use a special animation system, FAST (Fluid Animation
Miner 2049er arcade game that was such a hit on Atari and
Software Technology), that provides flicker-free movement, even
Commodore 8-bit machines a few years back. The combination
on older and slower PCs. One can also move around via a userworks well and will provide hundreds of hours of fun.
customized keyboard interface. The space bar controls jumping,
one of the primary activities and necessary in order to escape
The programs use CGA graphics which are quite similar to
poison darts, climb the serpentine walls, and collect both points
some of the action games of a couple of years back, but they
and extra life bonuses hidden randomly in the walls.
are not without some merit. Also, those who have faster
machines will be glad to know that there is an automatic adjustPoison darts are the least of the obstacles. There is, at least,
ment to the processor speed of the IBM or compatible PC used.
some warning when the traps which launch them are triggered.
Some will be disappointed that Pharaoh's Tomb offers no
There are also moving jaws of death that rise from the floor and
mouse support and only works with the user-selected keyboard
descend from the ceiling, not to mention the ubiquitous vampire
commands. Included with the purchase of each game is a hint
bats which are ready to feast upon Nevada's carcass, or the 16sheet and a secret cheat key code to give players unlimited lives
ton weights that spring from the wall in order to crush him when
and spears. The package will also contain some free samples of
he isn't fast enough. Those crafty Egyptians didn't want anyone
other games Apogee produces.
messing in their tombs, so they left zombies behind to foil
Nevada's plans. And if that's not enough, there are platforms
Scott Miller of Apogee Software is so sure that computer
which move both vertically and horizontally, requiring expert
gamers will love the game that he offers it for free trial. The first
timing to navigate. One slip and one can fall into a pit of razorgame comes as shareware and can be found for downloading on
sharp spears. Along a number of paths are essential magic
virtually every major bulletin board and service (CompuServe,
scrolls. Find them and, usually, either booby traps will disappear
GEnie, Executive Network, for example). After sampling the first
or new exits and entrances may appear. Still, even the scrolls are
20 levels, most players find themselves "hooked." Fortunately,
unreliable. Some might cause Nevada to be entombed forever at
the low price for the entire package is just as enticing as the
that level. When that happens, the game must be saved at the
game play. "Raiders of the Lost Tomb," "Pharaoh's Curse,"
current level and then restored to begin again at the start of that
"Temple of Terror," and "Nevada's Revenge" are the four games
level.
that will follow. It's an outstanding value.

I

Share The Wealth

The Pharaoh's Tomb Shareware Series

Editorial

S

tate of the Magazine:
Some feel that in CGW #79
(p.28), Scorpia verbally "tarred
and feathered" both New World Computing and their Tunnels & Trolls product by
stating that either the company needs better playtesters or they were trying to make
a "quick buck." By couching the phrase as
an "or else" statement, we believed that
Scorpia had addressed the tension which
every software publisher experiences between an expensive playtesting process and
a timely, business-like shipping date. We
believed that the use of "or else" in the article implicitly created an either/or statement and did not specifically accuse New
World of trying to make a "quick buck." Unfortunately, several people only saw the latter portion of the statement and jumped to
the most negative conclusion.
Therefore, let us state for the record that
CGW does not believe that New World
went after the "quick buck." Note that the
beginning of the sentence says, "It looks as
though..." This is talking about a sad appearance, not a definitive fact. It does illustrate, however, the difference between a
feature article and an "opinion" piece. CGW
would not have printed such a statement in
an ordinary review, but we have granted
our columnists more latitude. Columnists
tend to have their own following who understand what their points of reference happen
to be.
Even "inanimate objects," like magazines,
experience stress due to the fact that they
are envisioned and assembled by the efforts
of human beings. Computer Gaming
World is no exception. The tripling of our
circulation, changes in production schedule,
personnel adjustments and "winds of
change" within the industry we cover have
all affected the editorial perspective of the
magazine.
In particular, the increased circulation
means that we have more "casual" garners
reading the magazine and less "grognards."
Most of the latter group should recognize
the term for Napoleonic French veterans
that comes from the verb, "to grumble."
Most of the former would question the use
of such an esoteric term.
Hence, CGW constantly faces an editorial
dilemma. That is, how do we continue to
provide coverage that meets the esoteric
and, often, erudite needs of the "grognard"
without losing the gains which we are
making in terms of reaching the
mainstream consumers? How do we meet
those needs without losing the focus of that
extra behind-the-scenes insight that the
"grognard" has come to depend upon?
For example, many readers would like for
us to publish shorter reviews with clearer

"bottom lines;" readers looking for a quick
"thumbs up" or "thumbs down" in our
evaluation of a game. Although some publications may try to cater to this desire, we
do not believe that "bottom line" reviews
are good "criticism." We believe that they
are predominantly authoritative to people
who are either lazy, frightened or submissive. They want someone else to make the
decision for them as to whether to buy or
not to buy.
At CGW, we attempt to stay away from
"bottom line" reviews (Scorpia, as a columnist and opinion writer, should be the glaring exception to this rule) because we feel
that it insults our readers. Our readers tend
to be college-educated, upscale and interested in technology. The task for critics
who serve that type of target audience is
not to patronize its readers. It is to challenge them. One does not have to agree
with Scorpia or any other columnist in
order to be stimulated by their opinion.
Hence, our reviews tend to offer not only
descriptions of game mechanics and background, but suggestions for design changes, critical analysis of the "real life" model
for the game, strategy and tactics, reflections on the game's philosophy (sometimes, citing a trend in the
designer's/developer's body of work) and a
summary stating the appropriate audience
which we believe the work can reach. If one
only peruses the final paragraphs of CGW
reviews, one gets a distorted perception of
our work. On the other hand, our opinion
columns (whether written by Scorpia, Steve
Witzel, Dennis Owens or a guest columnist)
are personal opinions which are intended
to stimulate thought rather than to be the
last word on a subject. We have no desire
to cater to a lowest common denominator
in COW. We want to offer the most incisive
coverage available.
Unfortunately, such a desire does not always translate into reality. With the increase
in editorial pages came the increased possibility of errors of fact and/or judgment. Although these are mercifully rare, they occasionally slip through. In a recent response
to a frustrated Apple IIGS owner, this editor
referred to the wrong processor, subconsciously envisioning every Apple II (including the IIGS) with a 6502 processor. Mea
culpa! We know the IIGS uses the 65816,
but the point that developers do not want
to support the IIGS remains well-taken.
We want to offer the most incisive
coverage available, but we hope our
readers will be supportive as we attempt to
transform the inevitable stress associated
with a growing, and hopefully, improving
magazine into a positive energy at the disposal of all our readers.

