I

-

Jul.-Aug. - 1983

Vol. 3 No. 4

FEATURES
SUSPENDED

10
David P. Stone

The Cryogenic Nightmare

M.U.L.E.
One of Electronic Arts' New Releases

12
Edward Curtis

BATTLE FOR NORMANDY

14
Jay Selover

Strategy and Tactics

SCORPION'S TALE

16
Scorpia

Adventure Game Hints and Tips

COSMIC BALANCE CONTEST WINNER

17

Results of the Ship Design Contest

KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT
Review

GALACTIC ADVENTURES
Review & Hints

COMPUTER GOLF!
Four Games Reviewed

BOMB ALLEY
Review

THE COMMODORE KEY
A New Column

18
Gleason & Curtis
20
David Long
29
Stanley Greenlaw
35
Richard Charles Karr
42
Wilson & Curtis

Departments
Inside the Industry
Hobby and Industry News
Taking a Peek
Tele-Gaming
Real World Gaming
Atari Arena
Name of the Game
Silicon Cerebrum
The Learning Game
Micro-Reviews
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

4
5
6
22
24
28
38
39
41
43
51
52

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other gamers around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk. PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE OR ATARI VERSION WHEN
ORDERING. $15.00

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISK
CGW's Robotwar Diskette contains the source code for the entrants to the
Second Annual CGW Robotwar Tournament (with the exception of NordenB)
including the winner, DRAGON. Also included is the winner of the First Annual
Tournament, NORDEN+. Twelve robots in all. Muse Software's ROBOTWAR"
required to use tournament disk. $12.00.

CGW BASEBALL DISK
Contains the four teams of the All Star League reported on in 3.3 (AL West All
Stars, Al East, NL West, and NL East); the six teams of the 1982 Winter League
(see 3.3), the eight teams of the Greatest Baseball Team of All Time
Tournament, and a reprint of the results of The GBTOAT tournament from
issue 2.3. SSI's Computer Baseball Apple version required to use data disk.
Apple version only. $12.00.
Send check or money order to: Computer Gaming World, Disk Order Dept.,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. California residents please add 6%
sales tax. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

It wasn't too long ago that most
of the best-seller lists published in
the software industry were dominated by game titles. This situation
has dramatically reversed itself
recently.
Other types of softwarepersonal finance, filing systems,
word processing, etc.—now
dominate the best-seller lists. What
happened to games?
Several ideas discussed by people
in the computer business as the
reasons for this change include the
following:
There are too many games, too
many rip-offs, and too many
similar-designs. Consumers are
more wary now about buying a
game sight-unseen, and instead,
wait for a review or to play a
friend's copy.
Games are too expensive. Even
though prices are dropping, it's
still too expensive to keep
collecting game after game
when you don't have the time
to play all the games you
already have.
3. Games got people into
computers, but now they want
to do more with their computer
systems. You'll always find time
to play a good computer game,
but with so much money invested in your machine, why
not have other types of software that can really help you
do things besides just kill alien
bugs?
While there are other reasons,
these three seem to be the main
ones suggested for the drop-off in
game sales.

That doesn't mean games are
dying—in fact, a few "classics"
continue to stay on the best-seller
lists month after month, joined by a
hot new title on occasion. But the
day when games made up the
majority of best-sellers may be
over.
While games may not sell like
hotcakes anymore, they're still a
very important part of the computer business. But in order to
compete, publishers are going to
have to offer really different and
challenging games at more reasonable prices. And for consumers that
can be the best news from what
may appear to be a negative
situation.
So be choosy. You really do have
influence in what types of games
are published. Your vote does
count—because you vote with your
dollars every time you buy (or don't
buy) a particular game or other
piece of software.

Readers Survey
Here's your chance to give your
feedback on the way you buy
software now. Please answer the
questions below, using the Reader
Input Device at the back of this
issue.

2.

I buy about the same number
of computer games each
month, but I'm more selective
now and don't usually buy until
I see a game.

3.

I buy fewer computer games
now, but I'll still occasionally
buy a game that I haven't seen
yet.

4. I buy fewer computer games
now, and I'm more selective
about which ones I buy.
Part II
If you checked answer #3 or #4 in
Part I above, then check the one
answer below that best describes
how you're spending money on
software now.
5.

I'm spending less money now

each month than in the past on
software, but almost all of it
goes to new games.
6.

I'm spending less money now

each month than in the past on
software, but almost all of it
goes to non-game programs.
7.

I'm spending less money now

each month than in the past on
software, but this is equally
split between games and other
software.
The results of this mini-survey will
be published in a future column.
Thanks for your participation.

Part I
Check the one answer below of
questions 1 through 4 that most
closely reflects your current
attitude about computer games.
1. I buy about the same number
of computer games each
month—even games I haven't
actually seen or played.

Responses to the readers survey on
this page should be made on the
RID card at the back of this magazine. See page 51 for instructions.

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
A televised "sin network" featuring gambling at
home may provide the impetus for the widespread
use of interactive teleshopping services such as
videotex and teletext, according to a 3 I 4-page
report released by International Resource Development Inc., an independent consulting firm based
in Norwalk, Connecticut.
"Gambling services may be the answer to get
consumers to access teletext and videotex,"
according to IRD researcher Dave Ledecky. "The
average bettor receives his betting information
from the newspaper, and then either places a bet
at the track, at an off-track betting parlor, or with
an illegal bookmaker. The use of teletext and
videotex could result in one-stop gambling" notes
Ledecky. IRD's report notes that off-track betting
parlors already use a teletext-like system to display
race results, and the Bell Operating Companies
with their instant information telephone lines for
sports and horse racing results provide a strong
indication that consumers do accept the use of
telecommunications to retrieve these services and
data.
Ledecky notes that with home betting systems,
"bets could even be placed on events occurring
within certain sporting events, rather that just on
the outcome of the event. This adds great
immediacy to the gambling. For instance, one
could place a bet as to whether a particular
baseball player is going to get a hit on his next time
at bat. Of course, all this would have to be legalized,
and that is a distinct possibility within the next few
years. People will bet on just about anything, "says
Ledecky. "They'll bet on the sunrise as long as it's
easy and convenient to do so."
IRD, in another study recently published, stated
that and important merger is developing between
simulators used for military training purposes and
videogames. The study indicates that simulators
are beginning to look more like videogames, and
videogames are beginning to look more like
rudimentary simulators. "Inevitably the two
technologies will interconnect," says Ledecky.
"Videogames will incorporate simulator principles
in order to achieve greater real world likeness, and
simulator designers will come to understand the
contribution fun makes to training, and add game
aspects to simulator training." Indeed, this is
already occurring. Perceptronics manufactures a
tank gunnery trainer, which the IRD report describes as follows: "It is a table top device with a
sight, gunner controls, and scoreboard. Scenes of
moving targets in a wide variety of environments
are played back under microcomputer control
from a laser-optical videodisc and presented in the

sight. The gunner positions a reticule on the target
and fires, with the number of hits and other
aspects of his performance recorded."
According to IRD, there have been discussions
within the simulator industry concerning the
possible placement of simulators in recreation
areas on military bases, thereby transforming (in
the minds of the users, at least) the "training" into
"entertainment." And, as Ledecky stated halfseriously, "perhaps army recruiters should visit
local videogame parlors to find the fighter pilots of
tomorrow."
SSI's August releases include: their WWI air
game, EAGLES, in which players control up to 10
planes per side. It will run on the Apple, Atari, and
C-64. BROADSIDES is coming along nicely and
should be out for the Apple in August with the
Atari version coming at a later date. The C-64 and
IBM PC versions of COMPUTER BASEBALL and
the IBM version of BATTLE FOR NORMANDY
round out the August releases.
First Star Software, Inc. announced today that
it will be marketing a number of entertainment
and educational programs based on several
Marvel characters. In its joint venture agreement
with the Marvel Entertainment Group (a division
of Cadence Industries), First Star will design and
market software featuring Marvel's famous super
heroes.
Broderbund has announced the release of a new
game for the Atari 400/800/1200, new versions of
some of their popular games for the Vic 20, and
that they were beginning to create versions of
their most popular games for the Commodore 64.
New for the Atari is Operation Whirlwind, which
put the player through a series of skirmishes and
battle actions which requires that you complete a
different set of strategic actions for each one, until
the last endgame crescendo.
New releases for the Vic 20 include three
conversions; AE, SKY BLAZER and SEAFOX. All
will come in cartridge formats and retail for
$39.95.
Broderbund's entry into the Commodore 64
market has been with the conversion of four of
their most successful games to this machine.
CHOPLIFTER!, SEAFOX, SERPENTINE, and
DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC have all been
released in versions for the C64.
Simulations Canada has announced that it
expects to have its first computer games ready for
the market by late fall. There two to four titles
included in this initial release. Those most likely to
be included are Battle of the Atlantic, the Fall of
France, 1940, North African Desert campaign, and
modern tactical naval combat. The plan is to
release them at first for the Apple II, and later to
release versions for the Atari, IBM PC, and C64.

Infocom, Inc. will introduce two new games this
summer and fall. The first, PLANETFALL, is a
game that explores the lighthearted side of science
fiction by challenging players to save a doomed
and plague-stricken planet while trying to keep a
straight face. Steven Meretzky, author of
PLANETFALL and a long-time contributor to the
Infocom game development process, elaborates:
"There are several interesting elements that make
this game unique. One of the most important is the
high level of interaction between the player and a
strong second character known as 'Floyd.' "Floyd,
an impish robot who is your constant companion
in the game, has a well-defined personality. He's
exuberant, funny, mischievous, and sometimes
unpredictable. The decision to concentrate on this
strong second character has allowed us to build
rich detail into the personality. In addition, the
packaging for PLANETFALL will be mew and
different. Inside a folder-like package players will
find such physical elements as a Stellar Patrol ID
Card, a space diary, futuristic postcards, and other
elements that complement the story," adds
Meretzky. The game is due out in mid-August and
will be on many machines.

The second release, which should appear sometime in mid-September, is ENCHANTER. The
first in a new trilogy of fantasy games that will take
players into a world of magical powers and perilous predicaments. Co-authored by Marc Blank
and Dave Lebling, the creative team that designed
and and wrote Infocom's popular ZORK underground fantasy series, Enchanter is a journey into
an environment where you use skill and logic to
overcome "Krill," the evil warlock whose everincreasing powers have shattered the peace of
your world. Blank—who in addition to designing,
writing, and programming games is Vice President
for Product Development at Infocom—comments,
"This game is written in the ZORK tradition, but
with new and different settings. In the ZORK
trilogy, the emphasis is on treasure and fighting,
while in Enchanter the focus is clearly on magic.
During your journey, you'll explore an abandoned
castle filled with strange and magical trappings.
You'll uncover spell scrolls which you must learn
to use judiciously in overcoming the many
obstacles before you. Ultimately, you'll be able to
use magic so effectively that the evil warlock will
be banished forever. Another important element
in Enchanter is the passing of game time. As the
days pass in the story, you'll eat, drink, and sleep or
you will reach a point where your powers start to
fail."

Corrections to News from last issue: ARCHON was
written by Anne Westfall, Jon Freeman, and Paul
Reiche. MURDER ON THE ZINDERNEUF was
written by Robert Leyland, Paul Reiche, and Jon
Freeman.

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere
in this issue, the following products have been
received by CGW. Some of these products will
receive more detailed attention in future
issues. Readers wishing to review any of these
games should contact CGW.
Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214

PARIS IN DANGER: A multi-level
simulation of the 1814 campaign to crush
Napoleon. On one level you move army
corps around a strategic map of France
and surrounding nations. When a battle
occurs play switches to a large scrolling
tactical map in which the corps are broken
down into divisions. A review and analysis
will appear in our next issue. Atari 48K.

TAC: TAC (short for Tactical Armor
Command) is a game of WWII armored
combat. Each side builds a combat team
from a roster of British, German, American,
or Russian tanks, assault guns and tank
destroyers. Although the documentation
does not emphasis it, the game supports
The Mockingboard sound board (see
review in CGW 3.2) which really adds a lot
to the game. TAC will be the subject of a
feature review in our next issue. Apple.

Avant-Garde Creations
P.O. Box 30160
Eugene, OR 97403
JUMP JET: An arcade type game loosely
based on the fiction of the Falklands Island
Crisis. You are a jumpjet pilot flying from a
Loyal aircraft carrier just off an enemy
held island. Your task is first to defend the
fleet and secondly to defeat the enemy by
retaking the captured island. Various
tactics must be used to destroy, in order,
enemy cruisers, submarines, kamikaze
planes, and rocket launchers. The game
plays a bit like Broderbund's Choplifter.
While the graphics are not as good as
Choplifter, the game itself has more depth
(no pun intended). Apple. $29.95.
Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
LODE RUNNER: This one wins the
"keeping the editor up late at night" award
for this issue. Well designed (which is
normal for Broderbund products). An
arcade style game that requires real
strategic planning if you are to do well.
After the first few attempts you learn
quickly than you had better study a game
level before hitting the joystick to start
your man racing up and down ladders,
drilling passageways and solving puzzles.
Review coming. Apple II. $34.95.
MATCHBOXES: Remember the TV
gameshow CONCENTRATION? Here it is
for a computer (well almost). You are
presented with a 36 box grid which, similar

to the TV game, have symbols behind each
"door" that can be paired up so as to gain
points and, in all but one variation of the
game, reveal parts of the hidden word
behind the doors. A great family or party
game. Atari. $29.95.
Datasoft Inc.
9421 Winnetka Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
ZAXXON: The official home computer
version of Sega's popular coin-op arcade
game. Outstanding graphics. Not as detailed as the coin-op version (that is to be
expected) but comes close. Atari and Apple.

Dell Publishing Co.
245 E. 45th St.
New York, NY 10017
THE OFFICIAL COMPUTER HATER'S
HANDBOOK: Written by the author of
the Preppy Joke Book and Preppy Cook
Book, TOCHH is packed with laughs.
Consider what might be found in the
section entitled "Computerholics
Anonymous—The Hell of "Devil ROM".
192 pages. $3.95.
Home Computer Software
1171 Sonora Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
FAMILY BIBLE FUN: A series of disk
programs for the Apple and Atari
400 /800 /1200 that center on Bible
knowledge. In the Know Your Bible
program you can play games that test your

knowledge of biblical characters, books,
etc. Aimed at young people. This is a good
looking set of programs for the Christian
family that wants to use their Apple or
Atari to learn more about the Bible. Master
Disk is $19.95. Individual Game disks are
$29.95 each. Some of the disks available
are Life of Christ, Pt. I and Pt.2, The
Prophets, Great Women of the Bible (11
titles in all).
Navic Software
P.O. Box 147270
North Palm Beach, FL 33408
JURY TRIAL: A game for two or more
players. The two primary players play the
roles of prosecutor and defense attorney.
Other players can be witnesses. The facts
of a crime are briefly displayed on the
monitor. The witnesses and the two
attorneys watch carefully as the information is flashed (in the case of a two
player game the lawyers are also the

witnesses). Actual game play involves the
two lawyers selecting the right questions to
ask. The prosecutor wants the truth (i.e.
correct answers). The defense wants to
coverup truth (i.e. incorrect answers). Thus
the game is one of remembering the clues
and asking the right questions to get the
kind of response (true or false). Although it
is not as polished as games from the big
companies, JT has potential not only as a
party game but as a "strategy" game for
two players. Apple. $29.95.
Penguin Software
830 4th Ave.
Geneva, IL 60134
PENSATE: When Softline put John
Besnard's unpublished PENSATE on the
cover of their May-June issue Penguin
Software told John that they wanted to
publish the game on the basis of the cover
feature. Thus we have Pensate. Weird way
to find a publisher, John. It is surprising

that the game was not published prior to
Penguin's interest as it is a good game. The
human player(s) must get a single piece
from one edge of the board to the opposite
edge avoiding the computer pieces. The
strategy is to predict far enough ahead to
avoid the computer's pieces and any other
human player's piece. It is a good game in
the classic tradition of chess. Apple. $19.95.
SPY'S DEMISE: Atari version of the
original Apple game in which you, the spy,
attempt to reach the top floor of the
Russian diplomatic mission and capture an
encoded message. Play involves crossing
each floor while avoiding the guards. Each
floor contains parts of the encoded
message. When all parts are gathered you
can crack the code and send the answer to
Penguin. If you are the first person from a
state of the USA or Canadian province, or
other country to solve the puzzle you can
win a Spy's Demise T-shirt from Penguin.
$19.95.

Rainbow Computing
9719 Reseda Blvd.
Northridge, CA 91324
BAT-STAT: Tired of doing baseball
statistics for your little league or softball
team the hard way? Now, with the help of
BAT-STAT, you can use your Apple to do
the job more quickly. BAT-STAT is a menu
driven program that will keep statistics for
a baseball team of up to 20 players. Stats
are generated for "this game" and "season"
as well as team totals. Most standard
categories are recorded (AB,runs,hits,
BA,2B,3B,HR,Sac,BB,RBI). But, for some
reason, strikeouts are not included.
Sierra On-Line Inc.
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614
APPLE CIDER SPIDER: Apple arcade
game in which you are a spider trying to
make it to the attic while avoiding the
deadly machinery in the apple cider factory
(as well as other hungry critters. A donkey
kong type game which supports the
Mockingboard sound board.
THE DARK CRYSTAL: Atari version of
the original Apple game. TDC is Hi-Res
Adventure #6 from Sierra On-Line. The
game (designed by Roberta Williams—
Time Zone) is based on the epic fantasy
film conceived by Jim Henson of the
Muppets. The game follows the movie's
plot with enough differences to make it a
challenge. As Jen, last of the Gelfling, you
must find a shard of the Great Crystal and
restore it before the Great Conjunction.
The excellent documentation includes a
four color poster. $39.95.
Soft Images
200 Route 17
Mahwah, NJ 07430
LAMP: Lamp, which is an acrostic meaning
Literature Analysis of Microcomputer
Publications, is a three part index to articles
in American and international micro-

computer journals. Indexed by author,
subjects, and review categories, LAMP
covers over 150 magazine titles (including
Computer Gaming World). Price is $69.50
per year in book form and $54.95 per year
in fiche form. Bi-monthly.
Strategic Studies Group
Ground Floor
336 Pitt St. Sydney
2000 Australia
REACH FOR THE STARS: Roger Keating
(several SSI designs) has turned his talents
to a new area with a game published by a
new company. RFTS is a strategic simulation of colonization expansion and conflict in space. Using some of the same game
design elements that work well in his
wargames, Roger has successfully put
together an enjoyable space game. Documentation is well done. Look for review
next issue. Apple. $60.00 Australian.
Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd. Bld. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043
COSMIC BALANCE II: The long awaited
CBII (The Strategic Game) is now available.
CBII is the sequel to SSI's popular The
Cosmic Balance tactical space warfare
game. CBII is an economic/exploration/
colonization/conquest game set in the far
future. Two players can choose between
five scenarios or create their own. Battles
can be fought using The Cosmic Balance
tactical game or CBII can resolve combat
for you. Review coming. Apple and Atari.
$39.95.

FIGHTER COMMAND: Another long
awaited title from SSI. Charlie Merrow and
Jack Avery (Computer Baseball) have
teamed up to produce a stunning new
game based on the Battle of Britain. The
graphics are outstanding After the

German player plans all his raids for the
day, the British player does some daily
"housekeeping". Then the program goes
into execution mode and the game is
played with the British player reacting to
the German raids. The German player can
sit smugly (or nervously) back and watch
the British effort to counter his raids.
Review coming. Apple. $39.95.
NORTH ATLANTIC '86: Using the
Guadalcanal system with improvements
NA86 deals with a hypothetical SovietNATO confrontation in the near future.
Along with the 232-turn campaign game
there are two mini games. Review coming.
Apple. $59.95.
Swearingen Software
6312 W. Little York #197
Houston, TX 77088
PICK THAT TUNE: Pick That Tune is, as
the name implies, a game in which players
try to guess popular tunes by listen to bits
of each song. There are 16 different game
variations which 1 to 10 people can play.
Drawing from a base of 100 songs (you
choose the catagory—pop,country,children,TV) players bit the number of notes
that they think they will need to be able to
correctly identify the current tune. An
expansion disk with 100 more songs is
available. Apple $29.95.
Top Notch Productions
1201 Montana Ave., Suite 5
Santa Monica, CA 90403
POLLYWOG: A lo-res game in which you
are a school of twelve pollywogs trying to
grow into adult frogs. Barriers to adulthood are creepies, killer fish, barrier reefs.
The ultimate goal is to keep any blue
pollywogs alive so that he may grow up to
be a prince. While the graphics are lo-res,
the color and very nicely done sound make
this game rather artistic. There are 64
levels of play. Apple. $29.95.

Commercial Data Systems Ltd.
730 Eastview Ave.
Regina, Sask. Canada S4N 0A2
BUGSPREE: Bugspree is a Centipede
clone. The game involves firing an automatic cannon against an invasion of bugs,
mushrooms and spiders. The game makes
excellent use of the Vic 20 graphics and
sound capabilities, but advances very little
over the original arcade game. $29.95, Vic
20.
ROAD TOAD: RT is a familiar looking
version of the Frogger variety. The
graphics utilize a very fluid animation and
the sound is nice. $29.95, Vic 20.
WITCH WAY: WW is a new interpretation
of Donkey Kong. The game includes nine
floor levels and four screen patterns. Each
screen pattern offers a new objective and
challenge. The use of a timer and bonus
points also adds to the challenge. $29.95,
Vic 20 with 8K expander.
Human Engineered Software
71 Park Lane
Brisbane, California 94005
GRIDRUNNER: This game begins with
the look and feel of Centipede. It is a faster
and more challenging game, however. The
patterned Y zapper with its destructive
plasma beam is more difficult to avoid
than the spider in Centipede. Memorizing
the patterns of the Y zapper and alien
bombs will enable the player to maneuver
his ship more effectively and attain higher
scores. The sound effects for this game are
excellent. $39.95 Vic 20.
SHAMUS: This is the licensed version of
Synapse Software's well-known game. It is
a fast moving game with excellent graphics
and smooth animation. For a detailed
description of the game, see CGW 2.6, p. 20.
The simplest description of the game would
be that it seems a cross between Bezerk
and an adventure game. The player is an
interplanetary detective attempting to

overcome Robo-Droids and Snap-Jumpers
in order to find the dreaded Shadow and
terminate him. $39.95, Vic 20.
Sierra On-Line Inc.
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, California 93614
FLIP-N-MATCH: FNM is a Concentrationtype game. It contains both a two-player
and solitaire version for adults and a twoplayer and solitaire version for children.
The adult version has more possible
matches than the standard Concentration
game board and the shapes are similar
enough that one must pay close attention
in order to do his/her best. The solitaire
version is relatively easy at skill level 0, but
has five other levels to challenge the player
as he/she improves. Vic-20.
ULTIMA: ESCAPE FROM MT. DRASH:
ULTIMA is an intriguing adventure game
because of its unique graphics and
marvelous musical score (The WellTempered Commodore?). The screen
offers three different views. The left-hand
corner of the screen offers a three
dimensional maze, the right-hand corner

of the screen offers an overhead view of
the maze, and the lower portion of the
screen offers a tactical combat view. Each
adventurer starts with three spells and a
weapon and tries to make his way out of
the dungeon of Mt. Drash. There are 15
levels to the mountain dungeon and the
difficulty factor escalates rapidly. Vic 20
with 8K expander.

The Code Works
P.O. Box 550
Goleta, California 93116
VIXEL: This is a cassette magazine with
three ready-to-run programs in each issue.
Volume One contains two arcade games
(FIRE and RACE) and an electronic
sketchpad (DRAW). FIRE is an arcade
game where the player operates a helicopter with water bombs and attempts to
successfully put out a fire in a high-rise
building before the time is up. RACE is a
game where the player races with the
computer's car. DRAW is a computerized
"Etch-A-Sketch" with the ability for you to
save y our drawings to tape. $12.95, Vic 20.

SUSPENDED: Review
David P. Stone
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Suspended
Adventure
Many (Atari
reviewed)
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR:
Michael Berlyn
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Infocom
Cambridge, MA
Suspended is the latest in an
unbroken chain of outstanding
adventures from Infocom. It's
premise is ingenious and intriguing.
In a cryogenic state, deep within
the bowels of the planet Contra,
your sleeping mind monitors the
filtering computers that maintain a
balance of the planet's food,
transportation, and weather
systems. Contra's population
depends on these systems. Your
conscious mind is the failsafe
system. You are to be awakened
only if there is an emergency. There
is, of course, an emergency.
After awakening your task is to
direct the actions of six robots to
repair and reset the filtering
computers so you can get back to
sleep. Sound like fun? Get ready for
some long and sleepless nights
because if you don't fix them in a
hurry, humans from the surface
will show up with your replacement
clone to pull your plug. The result:
high tech death.
Each robot has a name, a set of
special skills, and its own personality. The personalities seem to
grow on you. As the game
progresses, the robots turn from
talented pawns into trusty friends.
Each robot has a primary skill
plus some degree of mobility and
grasping extensions. IRIS sees
(when she's working). WALDO
manipulates objects and moves by

sonar. SENSA senses. She can
detect vibrations, photon
emissions, and ionic discharges.
AUDA hears. She's particularly
good at eaves-dropping. WHIZ is
the brains of the outfit. He's your
link to the complex's computer
memory banks. Finally, there's
POET. He speaks in cryptic clauses
that accurately describe his
environment — if you can just
figure out what he's referring to.
Also, he has a special diagnostic
sensor that works when you direct
him to touch something. All in all,
they are quite a crew (with only a
hint of sexism in their roles).
Both cryogenics and robots are
enjoying a certain popularity
nowadays, so the themes of
Suspended are well timed. Of
course, the idea of robots has been
around for a long time. Ones with
personalities were first rocketed to

popularity in Isaac Asimov's
science fiction classic I, Robot. That
work tapped, and perhaps exploited, man's fear of technology
and his ultimate inability to control
his destiny.
The robots in Suspended are not
from the same world as Asimov's,
but they are not from the other side
of the universe either. They serve
you faithfully within their
limitations and have no delusion of
power or superiority. However,
throughout the adventure you are
very much aware that you have no
hands but their hands ("extensions"), no senses but their senses.
You may find this frustrating when
you want a robot with "dainty
extensions" to grasp, or a robot
with no visual scanner to see.
You can talk to the robots
individually or as a group. You can
even have two of them team up to
perform a single task that neither
could do alone. A few handy

abbreviated commands are
available: ARL (all robots, report
your locations) and ARR (all robots,
report). These two commands are
especially useful when you are still
exploring and have temporarily lost
track of which robot is where.
Another feature that makes this
game a cut above other adventure
games is you don't have to type in
every move. For example, you can
send a robot from one side of the
complex to the other by simply
telling him to go there. Meanwhile,
you can have other robots perform
other tasks. Another time/typing
saver is the "FOLLOW" command;
just tell one robot to FOLLOW
another one and he will do so as
long as it is physically possible.
These two features help make the
game very playable.

There are several phases to
learning and enjoying Suspended.
First, there's exploring and testing
to discover all the individual
maneuvers necessary to fix the
filtering computers and complete
the game. Next, there's putting all
the pieces together to make sure
they fit. Then comes the honing
process —developing the critical
path that minimizes your total
number of moves.
Having fixed the filtering
computers in the least number of
moves that you believe to be
possible, the adventure is still not
over. No need to file Suspended on
the shelf with all those other dusty
adventures. You are now ready for
the next phases: playing the
advanced, harder, and expert levels.
Things happen quicker on these
levels, but the basic scenario is the
same. One level beyond all these is
impossible. It is just that.
If you've experienced Zork,
Deadline, or Starcross, you already
know about the quality of
Infocom's parser (the part of the
game's program that interprets
your input and responds
accordingly). It's the best on the
market. The program accepts
complete, complex sentences, not

just two-word input. As with earlier
Infocom adventures, Suspended
recognizes over 600 words; and,
more importantly, it responds
intelligently to most user input. So,
there is seldom a need to test
combinations of verbs and subjects
to hit upon the exact words that the
game designer had in mind.
As everyone who has read their
ads knows, Infocom doesn't do
graphics. Instead, their parser and
their prose tell the story. However,
the quality of the prose in
Suspended is different than in other
Infocom games. The prose in
Suspended is mostly reports and
replies from the robots. While there
is little purple (in the prose), each
robot has a particular way of saying
things that contributes to establishing its character, revealing its
personality, and developing an
enjoyable atmosphere for the
game.
True to form, Infocom has
maintained their tradition of
producing the high quality
documentation. The game includes
a plastic molded mask of a
cryogenic sleeper — sure to spook
small children and entertain all
others (and, by the way, of no use in
completing the game); a full-color,
two-fold map board of the underground complex with six vinyl
markers — one for each robot; and,
a well written instruction booklet.
Besides containing necessary
background information and
procedures for playing the game,

the booklet is cleverly written,
slightly wordy, and filled with wry
understatements about your
cryogenic predicament. As a total
package, the documentation for
Suspended leaves no gaps and does
more than enough to establish the
mood for the game.
One task of the adventure writer
is to provide just enough clues, in
the instruction booklet and in the
game itself, for you to be able to
figure things out. Too many clues
and the answers are given away.
"Hint" systems allow the writer to
be skimpier with the clues since
they allow you to move forward
even if you do get stuck. Suspended
incorporates one of the cleverest
hint systems you are likely to see. It
is totally integrated into the story
line.
Hints are dispensed via the
underground complex's Central
Library Core (CLC). The CLC is a
master computer that has three
areas from which WHIZ can access
historical, technical, or advisory
information about objects that the
robots find. A fourth area of the
CLC provides an index to the other
three. So, for example, after telling
WHIZ to plug in at the Index, you
can command him to ask about an
object (e.g., "WHIZ, ASK ABOUT
PANEL.") If information on a
"panel" is available, the Index will
list which of the other three areas
contain the information so you can
send WHIZ there to access it.

Continued on p.46

SYSTEM:
Atari 800
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 to 4
PRICE:
$40.00
DESIGNER: Ozark Softscape
PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts
San Mateo. CA

Some time in the future, on a
planet far far away, four beings are
left to develop the planet with only
the so-called help of temperamental
M.U.L.E.s (Multiple Use Labor
Elements). An interactive game for
four players (the computer being
able to play up to three of them),
M.U.L.E. is a thoughtfully designed
and quick playing game which
contains the finer aspects of an oil
exploration game, an auction
game, a real estate game and bits
of others which, as stated on the
inside of the jacket, "...died so that
M.U.L.E. might live." A design of
Ozark Softscape (Dan Bunten, Bill
Bunten, Jim Rushing, and Alan
Watson), this is a game which pits
you not only against each other,
but the colony as a whole is also
judged at the end of game for
overall success.
A definite bonus with M.U.L.E. is
it's packaging (as it is also with the
other products recently released)
by Electronic Arts. The jacket,
beyond the humor that it uses, is

well executed in both artistic design
and in the information that it
contains.
The M.U.L.E. Player's Guide is
another example of a well designed
adjunct to the actual program.
Each of the three levels of play
(Beginner, Standard, and Tournament) are given their own section
of the guide which includes the
basic rules or additional rules for
that level and tips which can help
quite a bit. The guide also includes
a page of answers to the most
common questions asked by the
beginning players, the two basic
laws of production for the basic
commodities used in the game,
and the strategies and opinions of
the infamous "gang of four" (Dan
Bunten, et al.).
As suggested in the Player's
Guide, the novice player should
jump directly into playing the
Beginner level game after only a
cursory reading of the rules. The
game itself is its own best tutor.
When, after a game or two, a player
wants to know just what he has
been doing, the guide is still there
to be read and now he can hopefully appreciate its explanations.
Each turn is made up of several
sections during which different
things must be accomplished. The
first part of each turn is the "Land
Grant" phase. Each player is given
the opportunity to select one plot
of land from the five by nine grid
which makes up the colony. The
players choose their land based
upon what they what to produce
and where their other land is located (as these factors will effect
the plots production).

The player will then, in the
development phase, decide which
of the commodities is best to
develop in regards to the previous
turns supply and perhaps his personal shortage. On his part of this
phase, the player goes to the town
corral (the town is located in the
center of the map), buys a M.U.L.E.,
and outfits it to produce which ever
commodity is desired. The player
then leads the temperamental
creature to his newly acquired plot
and sets him up for production by
centering himself over the hut
which appears in each undeveloped plot of land. This phase is
ended either by the player's time
running out or by his getting back
to the town and entering the pub
(which will gain him an amount of
money from gambling based upon
the amount of time which he has
left).
After the last player has developed any land that he has had
time to develop, the established
M.U.L.E.s produce the commodity
for which they were outfitted. All
production completed, the game
then goes to the "auction phase". It
is during this phase that any player
with an excess in any given commodity has the opportunity to sell
his excess to either a player with a
shortage, or to the town store. The
price received depends upon the
supply and the last price paid for
the given commodity. The turn
ends with a display which shows
each player's relative worth and the
value of the colony as a whole.
The Beginner's level of play
introduces the player to the three
basic commodities produced on

Irata (the planet on which all of this
is taking place) and the basic
economic rules which determine
the level of their production. Each
of the commodities (Food, Energy,
and Smithore) has a definite use in
developing the colony and each
player's land. The players also learn
that the production of the commodities varies due to the type of
land on which it is being produced.
Food, which is needed to give the
player a full time allotment with
which to develop his plots of land
(each player gets one lot per turn),
grows best in the river valley which
runs down the center of the map.
Energy, which is needed for production of the other two commodities, is best produced in the
flatlands. And Smithore, which is
needed for the continued production of M.U.L.E.s, is produced best
in the mountains.
There are two "Laws of Economics" which, as mentioned above,
rule the degree of production on a
player's land. The first, Economies
of Scale, states that the larger an
operation is, the more efficient it is
in producing a given commodity.
You will, therefore, gain one extra
unit of production on each plot of
land which is adjacent to another
of your lots which is producing the
same thing. If, for example, two of
your adjacent lots were both producing energy and both had base
production of three units per turn,
then their actual production, due to
the Economies of Scale, would be
four units per turn.
The other "Law" is the Learning
Curve Theory of Production. This
theory states that every time you
double the number of units that
you have ever produced, your
production costs go down 20% due
to improvements in production
methods. In M.U.L.E. this is translated into your getting one extra
unit of production on each plot for
every three plots producing a
specific commodity,. no matter
where it is located. Using the last
example, if that player were to add
one more plot of land anywhere on
the map, each plot would have their

production increased by one. And,
unlike the Economies of Scale
which can only increase a plot's
production by one, the Learning
Theory of Production will increase
your production by one for every
three plots producing the same
thing.
The Standard Game introduces
the players to two new features
which can have dramatic effects on
the outcome of the game. Land is
the key to the changes in the
Standard Game. Immediately after
the Land Grant phase, there is a
chance that the colony authorities
will auction off up to six extra plots
of land (on the average, only one
lot is auctioned). Getting extra lots
early in the game can mean a jump
on getting production bonuses that
will put you into an early lead and,
in turn, make you that much better
off when other lots are auctioned
off. The other change in land rules
is in the ability to sell land that is
not needed (to get money for other
more useful land) or just to get
money with which to feed yourself.
The buying of land in both the town
organized sales and in the player
sales are handled in the same
auction format as is the trading of
commodities in the auction section
of the game. The only difference
between the two types of land
auctions is that the seller has the
right to refuse to sell at any time up
to the close of the auction if he is
not satisfied with any aspect of the
sale.
It is during the Tournament
Game that the final commodity is
introduced into the game. Crystite,
the fourth commodity, is distributed without regard to terrain,
with the exception that it can not be
mined in the river valley. It is also
the only commodity whose price is
not dependent upon supply and
demand, as all of it is shipped off
planet and has no local use (the
price of crystite randomly varies
within set parameters). As the relative worth of a plot of land for
Crystite production can not be
known from land features, a new
office is opened in the town: the

assay office. Players can check the
base production of any plot of land
by taking a sample of soil to the
assay office for a report (which, of
course, uses up some of the players
precious time).
The last thing added in the
Tournament Game is the powerful
ability for players to Collude.
During any auction, two players
may choose to collude in order to
sell to one another while preventing
another player from getting a
needed commodity. Collusion also
works during private land auctions
by allowing only a chosen player to
bid for the land in question.
While these descriptions of
M.U.L.E. have been far from
complete, they do capture the
basics of a game which has very
few aspects which one might wish
to alter. The first point which came
to question was the lack of a "save
game" option. While even the
Tournament Game is only twelve
turns long and takes less than two
hours, it is still aggravating to have
to kill an almost completed game
for lack of time. It would also have
been an improvement if the robot
players could have been a bit
brighter. They become rather
predictable after a time and it
becomes relatively easy to take
advantage of them. The greatest
complaint that could be found in a
game which is so enjoyable is that
it is just too short. To increase the
length of the game and keep its
dynamics of play would, unfortunately, necessitate a major revision
and expansion of the game. It is a
task which we will just have to wait
for with great expectations.
M.U.L.E. is a fascinating and very
enjoyable game which comes to its
best point with four human players.
The interaction and demands on
creating a development strategy
which can not only change from
game to game, but from turn to
turn, makes this a game which will
continue to be played long after
others are put aside to collect dust.

Battle For Normandy:
Strategy and Tactics
Jay Selover

TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Wargame
Apple, Atari
400/800,TRS-80
FORMAT:
Disk or Tape
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations
Mountain View, CA
Battle For Normandy (BFN) is
SSI's simulation of D-Day and the
build-up of the Allied beachhead in
Normandy. While it is a thoroughly
enjoyable game and provides nailbiting suspense, it falls a notch
short as a historical simulation. The
game recreates the period from
June 6 to June 28, 1944 in two-day
turns, with units representing
brigades, regiments, or divisions.
The map covers Normandy from
about Coutances (in the southwest),
to Cherbourg (in the northwest), to
Cabourg (in the east). Victory
points are accumulated throughout the game for eliminating enemy
combat points (with a bonus when
a unit is destroyed). Also, the Allies
gain victory points for units which
penetrate inland while the Germans
receive points for units which are
able to hang on near the beaches.
Allied units can acquire further
points each turn by occupying (with
no Germans adjacent) the three
major cities of Cherbourg, Caen,
and St. Lo (significant bonuses are
awarded for possession of these
cities at the end of the game).
The strong points of the game as
a simulation are the realistic,
attritional approach to combat in
Normandy and the emphasis on

the limitations of supply and crossChannel transport. As a game, BFN
gets gold stars for ease of play,
speed of execution, play balance,
number of game options, and a
generally competent solitaire play
(at least against conventional Allied
attacks).
Strategy
The weakest points in the BFN
design are best exposed in discussing optimal Allied strategy.
Historically, the main Allied
objectives during the first 22 days
of the Normandy campaign were
threefold. First, to establish a
secure landing zone by linking all
five landing beaches as quickly as
possible. Second, to capture the
vital port of Cherbourg by first
cutting across the Cotentin peninsula from Utah beach to isolate
the city and then to drive north.
Third, to capture Caen, an important rail hub just southeast of
the British beaches (there is still
some question whether the importance of Caen was not more to
distract German armored reserves
away from the Cotentin peninsula
and the defense of Cherbourg).
Significantly, this is precisely the
order in which these objectives
were accomplished; the five landing
beaches were linked by June 11,
Cherbourg was taken on June 27,
and Caen was not wrested from the
Germans until about July 21.
In playing BFN, the objective of
linking the beaches can be all but
ignored. The British beaches are so
close together that the initial

landings will consolidate them, and
Omaha beach is easily linked-up by
the elimination of one German
regiment by Turn Three. Utah
beach, though, can stand as an
island through most of the game.
The area between Utah and Omaha
beaches is important only in so far
as the coastal belt should be cleared
of Germans as quickly as possible,
but I have often failed to link the
two American beaches until June
26 (the next to last turn) and still
won the game. So much for the
most important historical objective!
The capture of Cherbourg also
receives significantly non-historical
treatment. It is time consuming,
wasteful of units, and ultimately
foolish to attempt the historical
maneuver of driving east from
Utah beach to cut off the city before
assaulting it. Rather than drive due
east through bocage against strong
German units (bocage multiplies
defense factors by 2.5 in combat), it
is much more efficient to head
north along the eastern side of the
peninsula and then west across the
northern shore to Cherbourg. This
skirts most of the bocage and
Continued on p.46

c

c

t
r

r

t

A New Column...

As told by Scorpia

Ah, I see you made it! That's right,
just step inside and close the door;
it's pretty chilly out there. No,
nothing I can do about that; outside,
it's always foggy November
twilight. Comes with the territory,
you might say. But we have a
remedy for that: pull a chair up to
the crackling fire, and I'll have Fred
pour out a tall one for you (don't
worry about Fred; he's only
half-grue and really quite civilized).
Err...no, we don't carry Diet Pepsi,
you'll have to settle for something
else. How about some dwarvish
beer, straight from those little old
brewers in Colossal Cave?
Good! I'm sure you'll enjoy it!
Now that you're all settled in, tell
me about your plans. What
adventure did you have in mind?
Ah, heading off for Tibet and the
Serpent's Star, eh? I've made that
little expedition myself, and I'll be
glad to give you some advice about
it.

SERPENT'S STAR
First, you'll find it helpful to know
a little about Buddhism. There are

some riddles in the game that are
based on a knowledge of that
religion, and if you aren't familiar
with some of the concepts, you will
have a very tough time indeed!
Also, keep in mind that not everything in this game is of significance
or has a bearing on winning. For
example, you can bypass the first
monastery entirely and still complete this adventure. Whether or
not the game was designed that
way is a mystery, but the fact
remains that you needn't visit the
Yerpa monastery. Because of this,
you will find it isn't necessary to
buy everything the merchant has
for sale. In fact, besides the very
obvious horse, you need only purchase three items. Just be logical in
your choices; there are no hidden
traps here.
What to do at the inn should be
apparent; you certainly have
enough money. Only one of the
men is really important; if the one
you're talking to doesn't soon
produce something of value, go to
the other man. Then just sack out
for the night. The wolf is another
problem. You have two choices
here: kill it or go around it. He can
be killed, but the timing is important, so it's best to save the
game before leaving the inn: you
may not manage it the first time
(mean, those wolves!). Going
around the wolf requires some
careful mapping, but will save you
the frustrations involved in trying
to kill it.
The monk on the mountain road
is also important; he has something
you need, so take your time here
and don't move on until you get the
item from him. You won't get a
second chance: if you leave and
come back, he'll be gone. So, check
your inventory carefully, and consider what he might want. You will
also have to say the right thing, and
that might be a bit tricky. However,
there aren't too many topics you'd
want to talk about, so it shouldn't
take too long to come up with the
proper phrase.

Ah yes, the avalanche! Well, I'm
afraid there's no way around this
time; you'll just have to dash past it.
It takes good timing and VERY
careful observance to get through,
but you can do it. However, since it
might take you more than one try,
it's a good idea to save the game
before leaving the ice cave.
Now, at last, you've made it to the
fabled monastery that holds the
Serpent's Star! You just have to
find it, and that won't be easy. The
first thing to do is search all rooms
THOROUGHLY! Read descriptions
carefully, and act accordingly. One
thing you can ignore is the armor;
you're too big to wear it and it isn't
useful for anything, anyway. Also:
there is a little trap in one of the
rooms, so be careful what you open
up!
Once you've been everywhere
else, you should be ready to tackle
the silver door. Of course, you must
get rid of the guardian demons
first, but if you have visited all the
rooms, you know what to do here
(if not, go back and try the rooms
again until something happens).
Once you've taken care of the
demons, you will be able to open
the silver door. At this point, you
should have four gems. If you don't,
I suggest you search around carefully for the missing one...you will
certainly need it later on! Now, just
make your way through the rooms,
past the exercise yard, and into the
building with the old monk. Now
here's where it starts to get mean.
The monk will ask you three questions, and you had better know the
answers the first time. This is when
a familiarity with Buddhism will
help (but if you're really stuck and
the library is closed, the answers to
all riddles are included at the end of
the column).
Once past the monk, you will find
yourself in the bane of every adventure game, the maze. You will
have to map this one extremely
carefully, as you can become conContinued on p.50

COSMIC BALANCE SHIP DESIGN
CONTEST RESULTS

Twenty-five entries fought it out
in the CGW Cosmic Balance Ship
Design Tournament. When all the
phasers were silenced, all the
plasma torpedoes spent, and all the
fighter squadrons destroyed, David
Cheng of San Clemente, CA was the
hands-down winner. David's tech-6
dreadnought, Avenger, was the
only ship that had a positive
composite score. He averaged +143
points against the three judges. The
next closest design was Baldur by
Michael C. Powell of Baltimore, MD
who had a composite score against
the judges of -16. From there the
scores went from -27 to -250.
Avenger was, according to the
judges, a "good combat ship for
close in fighting". It's score against
Paul Murray's Mongoose was +156.
It's score against Keith Brors'
MKVP6 was +24. And against
Russell Sipe's Blaze, Avenger scored
+250 (Blaze was blown out of
space). As Russell is the publisher
of CGW, David's subscription was
immediately canceled (just kidding
David!). Paul Murray is the designer
of both The Cosmic Balance and
Cosmic Balance II. Keith Brors did
game development on Cosmic
Balance II.
Avenger's design concentrated
on forward firing weapons and
speed. The ship would accelerate at
high speed towards a target while
firing forward, and constantly
keeping it's nose pointed at the
enemy. The forward shields were
of maximum strength. This,
combined with an armor rating of
50, made the ship ideally suited for
straight forward infighting.
Nearly all entries were composed
of a single tech-6 dreadnought. A
few entries chose a lower tech level
so as to have two dreadnoughts
and still remain within the
tournament guidelines. The entries
can be classified into one of three

types of ships: transporters;
battleships; motherships (i.e.
aircraft carriers).
Transporter ships had large
numbers of marines on board that
would beam through a downed
shield and board an enemy ship.
These ships had the potential of
scoring well, as captured ships
counted for double victory points.
The highest finishing transporter
ship was Michael Livanos' Ajax.6
which gathered +16 and 0 from
Paul and Keith's ships (both were
battleship types), but fell to Russ'
fighters (from his aircraft carrier
BLAZE) due to weak rear shielding
(those little fighters fly around like
a pack of wasps). His score was
good enough for seventh place.
Battleships, which were the most
common design, concentrated on
direct fire weapons such as phasers
and photon torpedoes. They were
designed to close-in or to circle an
enemy pummeling him with
(hopefully) withering fire. Avenger,
our tournament winner was of this
type.

Motherships, are very similar in
nature to WWII aircraft carriers,
with the majority of space in the
ship dedicated to fighter bays. This
design can be murder on any ship
with less than a 25 shield strength
in any arc. James Reisman of
Southampton, NY used TWO
motherships Aegean and Bosporus
as his entry and placed third. James
was able to have two motherships
by reducing his tech to level one.
This made the ships weaker
individually but allowed him to
launch six fighter groups (as
opposed to the maximum of four in
a single ship design of tech level
six).
Congratulations to David Cheng
and Avenger, winner of CGW's
COSMIC BALANCE SHIP DESIGN
CONTEST. David will receive an
SSI game of his choice. Our thanks
to all the entrants. If you would like
to get the ships in our contest,
including Avenger and the three
judges ships, see the announcement
of CGW's COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DISK in this issue.

COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Now available from CGW —
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK. This disk contains
over 20 ships to be used in
playing SSI's THE COSMIC
BALANCE. Included are
Avenger (winner of the CGW
Ship Design Contest), Blaze,
Mongoose, MKVP6 (the judges
ships from the contest), as well
as most ships of the other
contestants.
These ships are ideal
opponents for those of you that
cannot find enough local

"talent". Many are worthy of
study in your attempt to
develop the best ship around.
To order send $15.00 to:
COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD!
CB Disk Offer
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566
Please specify Apple or Atari.
This is not a complete game.
The Cosmic Balance is needed
to use this disk.
Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

Knights of the Desert:
Review
John Gleason and Ed Curtis

The Game
Knights of
the Desert
Wargame
TYPE:
SYSTEM: Apple, Atari,
TRS-80
FORMAT: Diskette or Tape
#PLAYERS:1 or 2
AUTHOR: Tactical Design
Group
$39.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: SSI

NAME:

Historical Overview
From the beginning of the North
African campaign in 1940,
Lieutenant General Richard N.
O'Connor and Theater Commander
Sir Archibald Wavell had performed brilliantly in all but
destroying a numerically superior
Italian force. By February 1941, all
that was left of the Italian Army in
North Africa, originally of 250,000+
men, were a few badly demoralized

divisions near Tripoli:
The final blow, however, was
spared the Italians due to an order
from Winston Churchill, which
detached the cream of O'Connor's
forces for the ill-fated defence of
Greece. This decision was made
not knowing that on 12 February,
the day before the announced
transfer decision, Erwin Rommel
and the first units of what was to
become the Afrika Korps had
landed in Tripoli.

Knights of the Desert(KD) is a
multi-scenario simulation of the
fight for the section of desert
between El Agheila and Alexandria.
This area, unremarkable in its own
right, served as the battle ground
on which one of the most able of
the German armor commanders
and a series of less able British
commanders were to wage a seesaw campaign for North Africa,
and ultimately the entire
Mediterranean Theater. The critical
features of this campaign (supply,
replacements, troop morale, and
extreme mobility) are captured in
both their effects upon the tactical
situation of any given turn and
upon the overall feel of the game,
as the situation shifts from turn to
turn.
The game begins with a game set
up section during which the
player(s) may specify: if they are
beginning a new game or continuing a saved game; the difficulty
Continued on p.47

GALA CTIC ADVENTURES:
REVIEW & HINTS:

David Long

Galactic Adventures (GA) is SSI's
sequel to their outstanding game of
individual combat in the 28th century Galactic Gladiators (GG). GA
is a science fiction role playing
game where you, as one of the
seven regular species introduced in
GG, progress towards the title of
Independent Adventurer. Along the
exciting and dangerous road to
that ultimate honor, you'll probably
create at least one clone, recruit
and train companions, and scour
the galaxy for treasures left by a
long dead civilization.
Characters have the same basic
makeup as did those in GG; (see the
review in CGW — Sept-Oct 1982)
with the addition of leadership
ability, sensitivity, and advanced
skills. These include piloting,
engineering and gunnery ability,
(very necessary if you plan to
journey in your own spaceship) as
well as a wide variety of other skills.
Weapons and armor are pretty
much the same as GG, with the
addition of "special" phasors and
armor. Special phasors can fire five
times before reloading, and special
armor offers the protection of
heavy armor without encumbering
your speed or agility.
Your adventurers will also acquire
(through purchase or by robbing
defeated enemies) tools and special
weapons (such as the matter beam,

Galactic Adventures
Role-Playing/
Tactical Combat
Apple II,IIe,III,
System:
Atari 400/800
(Winter 1983)
1 or 2
#Players:
Tom Reamy
Author:
$39.95
Price:
Publisher: Strategic
Simulations
Mountain View, CA
Name:
Type:

heat ray gun, robot scrambler and
missile imploder) to enable them to
survive and earn cash (Frilbees are
the interstellar currency of the 28th
century).
As introduced in GG, each regular species has its own home
planet. And, to complicate your life,
some planets have outlawed certain types of weapons. Earth, for
example, allows no gemstones (a
type of futuristic grenade), so be
sure to sell off all your gemstones
before heading for Terra, or the
customs service will confiscate
them from you.
It costs to feed and house you
and your associates, so be sure to
keep a cash reserve or they'll desert
you (taking whatever weapons and
assorted goodies they happen to
have on them). Naturally, all but
your clones and the special species

whom you have purchased will
expect to be paid on a daily basis
and, the better they get, the more
they'll want to be paid (sounds like
our modern day athletes, doesn't
it?). If you can't pay, it's adios,
amigo!!
Each planetary system has four
areas for your enjoyment (Visitor's
Area, Streets, Guild Area, and Space
Port). First is the Visitor's Area,
where you can shop for tools at the
market, make purchases at the
weapons' center, or visit the clone
master. I'd strongly suggest that
your first item of business be to
make two clones of your original
adventurer. This allows you to have
two unpaid yet loyal followers and
to expand your fighting and job
skills.
Next area of importance is the
Streets, where you can improve

your originally meager fighting and
job skills and can meet and recruit
additional members for your band.
In the streets you can Attack, Offer
to sell something, try to get the
beings you meet to Join you, Talk
to them about buying something,
or attempt to Bypass if they look
too tough for you to fight and you
think they may be hostile. Attacking
is one sure way to get the action
going and try to improve yourself,
but there is always a chance that
you'll be .fined for disturbing the
peace (half your cash), so be careful
of attacking when you're financially well off. Offering is a good
way to build your cash, but unfortunately, no one is interested in
buying anything except special
weapons or the fabled K-devices
which you can only find on an
adventure.
Talking will often result in your
being offered a goodie of some
sort, either a special weapon or a
member of a special species, but
these things, like everything worth

having in life, cost money. There is
also the chance that your Talking
will result in the other guys
Attacking you, so I'd recommend
you not try to carry on any intelligent conversations with Berserk
Robots or Asteroid Miners. They
are very easily annoyed.

The other possible result of
Talking in the streets is being
offered one of the fourteen different types of jobs. Your ability to
successfully perform a job is
dependent upon your skill rating at
that type of job, and to a varying
degree on luck and intelligence.
You cannot even attempt many

jobs unless you have the proper
tools. Once qualified, you have two
options in attempting to successfully complete your assignment.
The first is to play the Job Skills
Game, best known in its more
common form as Mastermind.
You'll be given a random configuration of four members of the
seven regular species. You must

determine, through logical analysis,
which species are in which slots
before your allotted guesses run
out. You'll get more guesses if your
skill rating is higher than the job
difficulty level (to a maximum of
ten) and fewer guesses if the
difficulty level is higher than your
skill rating (to a minimum of one
guess!).
If you don't feel like dealing with
this option, you can opt for an
abstract resolution where your
chances of success are calculated
by the artificial intelligence and
your success or failure is immediately announced. I found that in
crucial situations on adventures,
where my skill rating was about the
same as or a little worse than the
job difficulty, I usually chose to
play the game. Most other times, I
preferred to take my chances with
the abstract resolution and get on
with playing Galactic Adventures
rather than a guessing game.
Continued on p.48

TELE-GAMING

discussions with callers. Many
others, however, are devoted
primarily to game playing and, for
the cost of a local or long distance
telephone call, your modem
becomes a passport to adventure.
To qualify as a "gaming BBS," a
system should offer at least one
of the following features: 1) an
ongoing fantasy role-playing game
(FRPG); 2) a message board that is
used by callers to give and receive
computer game-playing hints; 3)
computer games that are playable
online; or 4) computer games that
are available for downloading by
callers.

Patricia Fitzgibbons

For a day and a night, the winds
and rains have pounded unceasingly. Yet, you struggle onward —
sure in your heart that the ancient
scroll you seek will soon be yours.
In the mists ahead, the shadowy
outline of the evil druids keep rises
up before your tired eyes like some
abominable netherworld creature.
You glance at your companions
and smile as if to say, 'Be brave! At
least we have each other!" They
nod, determination shining in their
faces. Unsheathing your broadsword, you approach the castle,
willing, come what may, to meet
your destiny.
You log off the system and gaze
at the monitor, wondering what
perils your mischievous dungeonmaster will present the next time
you sign on to your favorite BBS.
Although relatively new to the
computer gaming world, telegaming via private bulletin board
systems (BBSs) is becoming
increasingly popular. Most of the
hundreds of BBSs throughout the
country are owned and operated
by individuals who want to share
information about hardware and
software, exchange programs, post
advertisements and items of local
interest, or enter into wide-ranging

In this issue, I'll be listing some
BBSs which provide FRPGs and/or
gaming hints. Next time, we'll focus
on boards that supply computer
games for online playing and/or
downloading.
A few important caveats should
be noted before you explore this
facet of tele-gaming. First, most of
these BBSs are privately run,
single-line systems; so, busy signals
are not uncommon (especially
during the evening hours). Also,
from time to time, a terrific BBS
will seem to simply vanish; this may
be due to the System Operator
("SysOp") deciding to use his or her
machine for other purposes.
Finally, although most BBSs are
free, some SysOps charge nominal
fees for usage.

You don't need to be an expert at
FRPGs to join a message board
Although many BBSs offer
advanced games, novices are
usually welcome. One young lady,
whose BBS "handle" is "St. Alia of
the Knife", recounts her delight
upon discovering fantasy gameplaying BBSs: "Such fun! I just had
to be a part of it! Now, I guess I
spend about one to one-and- a-half
hours per night in typing and
reading messages. I'm currently
involved in six games!" Another
committed player is "Elrond
Halfelven", a seventeen year old
high school student who has strong
opinions about the kind of bulletin
board games he likes:"The most

important criteria for a good game
on a BBS are the same as for live
games — you must have a good DM
and good players; people who are
willing to truly role-play. Also, in an
online game, players should call in
at least every other day".
Once you've sampled the fare on
a few BBSs, you'll soon find which
systems are most to your taste.
Even if you don't wish to join an
FRPG, you can participate in
gaming discussions and exchange
adventure gaming hints with other
callers. Here are brief descriptions
of four of my favorite boards,
followed by a list of eighteen others
which are well worth a visit.

Magnetic Fantasies—(213) 3885198: Which extra-ordinary,
marvelous, and outlandish BBS is
run by two humans, three elves,
and a very nasty dwarf named "Sir
Twitt?" MagFan, of course. Located
in Los Angeles and established in
1980, MagFan is the "granddaddy"
of gaming BBSs. There are several
FRPGs in progress on the board for
players of all levels. Adventure
game hints can be exchanged by
leaving requests on the public
board and receiving replies through
private, electronic mail. Whether a
caller decides to join a party of
adventurers or merely to follow its
exploits by reading the board, an
enjoyable time is guaranteed.

White Pegasus—(214) 680-9322:
Deep in the heart of Texas, a
mythological beast thrives. It is
nurtured by a SysOp named
Shalanna who oversees five FRPGs
and a "continue-the-story" fantasy
book written by callers. Games in
progress include two novice D&DTM
games, one advanced D&DTM game,
a science fiction game, and a
wargame.

The Sanctuary—(201) 891-9567:
If a bulletin board system could be
compared to a small village, The
Sanctuary in New Jersey is a
burgeoning metropolis. This BBS
has forty-one separate boards to
choose from, as well as ongoing

Continued on p.50

REAL
WORLD
GAMING

This review process should include "unbiased
observers" who will view your product as it exists
rather than how you intended it to look. Play testers
who were not part of the initial design will respond to
your game like consumers who purchase it. Thus, you
need to select your play testers with your audience in
mind. If you are writing a wargame for wargamers,
then you don't need people unfamiliar with these types
of games as testers. However, if you are hoping for a
broader market, then you must choose testers with a
wide variety of backgrounds. Personally, I prefer a
large and diverse group of testers for any game I write
even if I know it will be targeted for a certain audience.
The variety of views gives me a handle on how my
product will be perceived.
Always include a few people who are interested in
your game but have never touched a computer! These
people will be your future audience and you must
make allowances for them. There is no reason for
someone to be "computer literate" to play a computer
game. Games that assume that everyone knows to hit
"return" at the end of a line are placing unnecessary
obstacles in front of the "uninitiated". So, if you want to
find out how totally novice computer users respond,
you have to include them in your play testers group.

by Dan Bunten of Ozark Softscape
This is the last installment in this series on the design of
simulation games. The previous topics were:
System Definition
Data Collection
Model Development
Programming (Game Design)
This time we will look at Play Testing. This is the
"feed-back loop" in the process of creating a game.
During this phase you take your design out of the closet
and let it face the harsh light of player scrutiny. More
often than not, you will at this point, discover that there
are holes in your game that require you to repeat some
of the previous steps. This can be much like the process
of writing in which you revise your first draft to more
clearly communicate your thoughts. All good writers
re-draft their material repeatedly until they are satisfied with the way their ideas come across. They are
"testing" their writing to see if it captures the images
they meant to convey to the reader. During this testing,
writers correct their spelling and grammar, but the
main thrust is to examine content. Similarly, Play
Testing must include more than fixing bugs in the
program. The designer must look critically at the way
the game plays. You must examine your game to see
that it faithfully reflects the insight that drove you to
create it.

The best place to find such a diverse group is in a
thriving computer club or user group. Such organizations will normally include people from the hardcore
hobbyists and hackers to the first time computer
owners who have only played arcade games. A good
way to get started with a group is to offer anyone that
would like it a free copy of your game in return for
their suggestions.
After you have recruited your play testers you need
to use them to your benefit. In some cases the program
is not really firmed up yet and you will have to "walk
them through" a demo while you explain what you
intend to add. Then you can let them respond to what
you showed them. However, it is almost always better
to let them "hassle" with the game themselves to see
what things seem to strike them. It just depends on how
complete your game is before you start testing. I prefer
to show a few testers (who have been helpful in the
past) new ideas as early as possible. But, I wait before
showing it to most testers till I have a good working
program that they can actually play. Then when the
product is almost complete, I find the non-computer
types to test it.

In your relationships with testers, you have to work
hard sometimes not to defend your game. Don't
answer a suggestion with, "I thought about doing what
you described but I decided it wouldn't work." A
response like that will simply dry up the well of user

input. Instead just ask more questions and occasionally
say "That's a good idea, I'll see if I can fit it in." This may
sound obvious to anyone with a little experience in
human relations, but you would be surprised at how
hard it is to do when you've already spent six months
nurturing your game and someone starts "nit-picking"
about the graphics.

Even worse than the detractors are the testers that
don't say anything. They are from the old school that
believe if you can't say something nice then don't say
anything at all. You have to "pump them" for their
reactions or be satisfied with reading their body
language as they play the game. So be thankful for the
straight-forward types who tell you that they didn't like
the game because it was too complicated. They are
giving you information that will help you to make
decisions.
Now that you have the testers' comments what do
you do with them? I generally just wait for something
to coalesce. It's obvious you can't please everyone. It
isn't unusual to have conflicts where one person thinks
something is too hard while another thinks it's too easy.
Wait till a consensus forms even if it is only in your
mind. Then I begin to make changes. Often someone
will suggest something that I thoroughly agree with but
don't believe can be done. However, while I sit and stew
about it, I may discover a way to do it. Also, there are
those times when you're better off leaving well enough
alone.

I'm not sure how you can distinguish between good
or bad advice. For myself, if I have a group of 30 testers
(of whom 10 are active and helpful) and I hear a certain
comment twice I consider it significant and if I hear it
more than three times I call it an overwhelming
consensus. This is because, in a big game, people don't
normally notice the same things unless they stick out
like a sore thumb. Finally, you can't ever be a good
game designer if you aren't able to trash your "good
idea" that didn't work.
Most of the previous suggestions for play testing
would apply to any type of game design. However,
simulation games provoke a certain type of user feedback because you are trying to recreate an intrinsically
complex real-world situation in a game format. The
battle you have been waging with yourself between
realism and playability comes to a dramatic head
during play testing. There are some people who enjoy
the detailed accuracy of a simulation and demand
absolute authenticity. There are other people who
consider anything more complex than "Pac-Man" as
pedantic and boring. Fortunately, the vast majority of
people fall between these extremes. Nevertheless, there

are still trade-offs to be made. My own method of
design is to make the initial model as realistic as
possible. Then to begin cutting it down until I have
something considered playable by the target audience.
The pieces cut out are not actually removed from the
model, but are simply made more abstract. This way
the game can stay fairly realistic except that some
parts of the "system" are running on automatic. The
greatest accomplishment is when the elements you
have replaced with abstractions can leave the player
with a feeling of "depth" in your game. At that point
you've gained rather than lost realism.
Aside from the conflict of realism versus playability,
there are other things that surface during play testing a
simulation game. Pure math would dictate that you
should not adjust the data collected to make your
model fit your biases. You should just let the numbers
stand on their own. However, there are times when you
must revise "reality" to fit people's perceptions and
preferences. For instance, in "Cartels & Cutthroats" (a
business simulation I wrote in 1981), I had a realistic
representation of how research and development
expenditures affected a company's product sales.
However, during the play testing it was apparent that
most people believed that R & D should affect sales
much more dramatically. I therefore adjusted the
model until it "felt" right. This tendency for people to
amplify cause and effect relationships has to be
reflected in your model. In fact, it is almost certain that
people respond better to a model with somewhat
exaggerated effects than "true realism". This parallels
the kind of artistic license that cartoonists use to make
their characters more attractive. Caricatures must be
overstated to be successful. It can be a little unsettling
to have to "corrupt" your model to suit game player's
tastes, but it actually improves the "apparent realism"
of your game.

Finally, be prepared during play testing (more so
than any other phase of game development) for
unpredictable swings in your mental outlook. There
will be times that you will wonder how you could have
worked so hard for a game that isn't even fun! And then
other times you will be convinced that your game is the
greatest thing since paved roads! Play testers will build
up your ego until you feel like a minor god sometimes,
and take hammers to your feet of clay at other times.
But remember, you chose to write a game and you'll
just have to bear with the bad and hope for the good!
Dan Bunten is the author of COMPUTER QUARTERBACK, CARTELS & CUTTHROATS, and CYTRON
MASTERS all available from Strategic Simulations. He
is now a member of the Ozark Softscape group that
wrote M.U.L.E. (a family game for the computer)
available from Electronic Arts.

,

ATARI ARENA
Allen Doum

THE ZEAL OF THE CONVERT
PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SET
(PCS) looks like a convert. It's hi-res
graphics are in white, purple, green
and black.
PCS sounds like a convert.
"Beeps" and "boops" are heard in
great number. True, it does sound
somewhat like a pinball machine. It
also sounds like an Apple.
Don't misunderstand me, I think
PCS is a great program. For a list of
its' considerable strengths and
minor weaknesses, see last issues
review by John Besnard. What John
says about the Apple version is all
true about the Atari version. That is

the problem.
The situation is this. It is easier to
convert a hi-res, machine language
program from Apple to Atari than
to write a new program. Both
machines use versions of the same
microprocessor, Apple hi-res
graphics are easy to simulate in
graphic mode 8, and the Atari is
capable of producing all the sounds
that the standard Apple can. The
programmer or publisher can,
therefore, convert his game and
increase his market by only rewriting some of the routines. The
main logic of the program does not
need to be changed. Same
microprocessor.

Graphics provide a slight problem. Apple hi-res graphics use
black and white as "primary"
colors, with purple, green, blue and
orange produced by taking advantage of the limitations of the
picture tube. This is called artifacting. But the Atari only produces
green and purple when black and
white are the "primary" colors —
the blue and orange are often lost
in a converted program. (Machines
equipped with the older CTIA
interface chip reverse this. Blue
and orange are displayed with
green and purple lost). Of course,
black and white aren't the only
primary colors and mode 8 is not
the only graphics mode available
on Atari. some converted games
take advantage of this to produce
more color, but some do not.
Some converted games upgrade
the sound, too. Often louder and
slightly better versions of the same
sound. But rarely the music that is
becoming standard on the games
written directly for Atari machines.
PCS has, in fact, more than the
usual share of upgrades. The
moving "Icons" that the player uses
to manipulate the game use player/
missile graphics. And, you may use
the button on a second joystick (to
take the place of the second button
on most Apple joysticks) when
using the flippers.
That second joystick button
illustrates how even a small hardware difference between computers can effect the play of a
game.
In the game CHOPLIFTER,
another Apple-Atari convert, the
player uses a helicopter to rescue
prisoners while fighting enemy
tanks, jets, and aerial mines.
(CHOPLIFTER was reviewed in
CGW vol. 2 no. 4) While the joysticks maneuvers the helicopter in
both games, the Apple version uses
one button to turn the chopper, the
other fire the weapon; in the Atari
version, the same button is used for
both, a short tap firing the weapon
with longer taps turning the chopper. This means that the player will

mistakenly turn instead of firing at
times, and it is not always convenient to line up another shot.
Moreover, the program has to time
how long the button is pressed to
determine what the player is trying
to do, making the controls sluggish.
In short, CHOPLIFTER is not as
good a game on the Atari as it was
on the Apple and the difference is
that extra joystick button.
What is happening here? Programs losing color when being
converted to a machine with more
colors? Losing controls when converted to a machine that supports
more controllers? Why? Because
they're converts, that's why. A
converted game all too often will
reflect the limitations of both
systems, and the strengths of
neither.
That is the point of all this. People
buy games not only for how good a
game it is, but also how good a
program it is. Choplifter was
popular on the Apple partly because of the amount of animation
and the scrolling landscape. Such
things are not often seen on an
Apple monitor. On Atari, it's simply
not as impressive. (PCS is still
impressive, I keep wishing that
there was a true Atari version.)
(Some of the companies producing games for the Atari are now
converting those games for the
Commodore, TI, and IBM. In this
context it is definitely more blessed
to give than to receive.)
If it's not converts, it's clones.
With some of the games available
for more than one computer it's
hard to tell who is converting what,
since the games become available
at the same time for more than one
computer. Two games from
Adventure International illustrate
an additional problem. SEA
DRAGON is a "Scramble" type
game. The player maneuvers his
ship, in this case a submarine,
through a constantly scrolling playfield filled with obstacles to destroy
or avoid, in this case mines, depth
charges, and the walls of narrow
passages. Instead of a fuel supply,
there is a diminishing supply of air,
and the player must surface to

Continued on p.45

COMPUTER GOLF!
Stanley Greenlaw

What golf ball are you using for today's match? A
Top Flite #4? A Titleist #3? How about an Apple #2, an
Atari #8 or even an IBM #1? Here are four microcomputer golf games that can challenge you on those
nights when you have the "golf bug" or on that
weekend when your regular match is rained out. Three
of the games run on the Apple. The fourth runs on the
Atari 400/800 and the IBM PC. All games can be played
by one to four players.

FORE!
SYSTEM:
Apple
FORMAT:
Diskette
#PLAYERS: 1-4
AUTHOR:
Jeffrey A. Johnson
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: EPYX
Mountain View, CA

FORE! is the only low-res entry of the games
evaluated (for some unknown reason we called it hires in Taking a peek—Nov.-Dec.82). The game includes
a driving range (for practice), a "public" 18 hole course
and a "championship" 18 hole course. Typical of the
designations, the public course is shorter and easier
than the championship layout.
The lo-res screen presents one or two holes at a time.
Screen colors indicate fairway, light rough, heavy

rough, trees, water, sand traps, the green and the
always popular "out of bounds". The computer does
not keep a running total of strokes (as it does in the
other games). A scorepad and pencil are provided
however. The rulebook is adequate, providing the
necessary information to play, as well as giving a
description of the three common team play methods—
stroke, best ball, and dutch. But there is little additional
detail. For example: it would have been nice to know
what process the computer goes through to determine
if a putt is "in" or not. There is no speed to set and
aiming a putt simply involves putting the on-screen
cursor over the hole. Apparently only a random
number generator has anything to say about whether a
particular putt is "in" or not.

Game play involves moving the cursor to that part of
the fairway or green that you are aiming at; keying in
the club you wish to use; setting the strength of the
swing: then hitting return. The main skill involved in
the game is selecting the correct club and swing
strength for your shot. The shot will fall more or less in
the area in which you aim. Wind direction, which only
changes after the first nine, can affect the flight of the
ball. There is no save feature.

CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF
Apple II
SYSTEM:
Diskette
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS: 1-4
Blair Hadfield
AUTHOR:
$24.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Hayden Software
Lowell,MA

Actual play involves selecting club, swing strength
and compass direction of shot (by keying in the
compass heading). The skills required are the ability to
select the right club and swing and the ability to figure
out the correct angle. One hole at a time appears on the
screen. Sand traps are often so small in the hi-res
rendering that they sometimes blend in with the lines
that make up the outline of the green. When you reach
the green a blow-up appears and you putt out by
selecting club head speed and angle of putt.
The unique element of this game is that it shows both
an overhead view (as the other 3 games do) and a side
view. The side view adds a degree of interest as you
watch your ball fly into the air, down the fairway, and
bounce to its stopping point. Unfortunately the game
does not capitalize on this feature. Trees (which are
lacking in CG) seem like a natural obstacle that would
have given the side view some real meaning in the
game. Lofting a nine iron over a tree and onto the green
would have been so enjoyable. Additionally, the
program excludes the possibility of hitting your ball
across a dogleg. With the side view it is tempting to loft
a shot over a bend in the fairway, (going over the
out-of-bounds markers) and back into "fair territory."
Forget it. As soon as the program detects that your ball
is over out-of-bounds territory you are counted as outof-bounds, no matter how high your ball is nor the fact
that the landing area would have been inbounds.

The computer maintains a scorecard for each player.
The rules can be read in the manual or on the screen. A
club selection chart can also be found in both places.
Nine woods (that's right!), nine irons, two wedges, and a
putter make up your twenty-one club arsenal.

GOLF CHALLENGE

SYSTEM:

Atari (Tape)
IBM PC (Disk)
#PLAYERS: 1-4
AUTHOR: Harold Schwab
PRICE:
$24.95
PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA

video cartridge game rather than a serious simulation
of the game of golf.
The key to success in GC is in lining your character
up properly so that when you stroke the ball it will
travel in the intended direction. Your player has an
"I-beam" shaped body which with a little practice can
be used to set up the angle of your shots. For example
to hit a ball directly downwards (on the screen) you
would line up the golfer so that the ball is to his left and
directly in line with the upper cross member of the
"I-beam". When you reach the green, it is enlarged so
that you may putt out using the same techniques used
on the fairway shots. The graphics of GC are the best
of the games reviewed here. While less a serious
simulation than the game which follows, GC has a
charm all it's own as a video-style golf game.
Unlike the other games in which you key in data on
your shot, Golf Challenge is strictly a joystick oriented
game. You move your player to the ball, positioning
him for the best angle then use the joystick and
firebutton to swing your club and strike the ball. The
longer your backswing the farther your shot. Although
the mechanics are more arcade oriented than the other
games, you must still plan your shot strategically so as
to avoid the rough, trees, sandtraps, water, and out-ofbounds. Playing this game reminds one more of a good

HI-RES COMPUTER GOLF 2

SYSTEM:
Apple
#PLAYERS: 1-4
AUTHOR:
Stuart Aronoff
PUBLISHER: Avant-Garde
Creations
Eugene, OR

There is no doubt that this is the best golf simulation
on the market. Any serious student of the game of golf
will find in this game the mental challenges that he
faces in the real thing as well as the need for practice to
develop a "good swing" which is essential to the actual
game.

HRCG2 is an improved version of Avant-Garde's HIRES COMPUTER GOLF game that was originally
released in November 1981. The second edition carries
the label "Pro-Courses Series". It contains a two sided
disk. One side is the "master diskette" which contains
the actual program as well as the Demonstration,
Practice Hole and 18-hole Beginner's Course. The
other side is the "Pro-Courses Diskette" which contains
three pro courses. The idea is that, if the market
demands, other courses could be marketed in the
future.
The documentation is excellent. In addition to the
rulebook which is quite detailed, there is a
demonstration program that walks you through the
game step by step. OTHER GAME MANUFACTURERS
SHOULD TAKE NOTE. This demonstration feature is
the best tutorial this writer has ever seen in a computer
game (and some of us can use tutorials on the more
complex games)!
There are two ways in which you can play HRCG2.
You can use the standard method in which after
selecting your club/swing-strength/aim, you use the
keyboard to guide the arc of your swing (see
illustration). The other method is to use the auto-swing

more screens are needed to display the hole. At first
this may be an irritation since you will commonly have
to hit a ball located on one screen toward a landing
area on the other screen. However you will get used to
this quickly and the greater detail in the fairway layout
due to the larger scale more than makes up for this
minor inconvenience. The problem is minimized by the
fact that most shots from one screen to another are
shots not going directly for the green (i.e. tee shots on a
par 4). Screens are easily flipped with simple
keystrokes.
The game includes a scorecard processor with which
you can make a hardcopy of your round, and save up
to 20 games on disk. But the most exciting added
feature is the Tournament play Option. Using this
option it is possible to play a tournament of HRCG2
with other people through the mail. Computer Gaming
World is sponsoring the nation's first HRCG2 tournament. See details following this article.
For the golfer, HRCG2 is the closest thing to actually
being out on the course. It is our hope that HRCG2 sells
well enough to justify the release of future Pro-Series
Course diskettes.

CGW GOLF
TOURNAMENT

Using Avant-Garde's Hi-res Computer Golf 2 we
will be hosting the first annual(?) CGW
COMPUTER GOLF TOURNAMENT. Those that
wish to play in this 54 hole competition will need a
copy of HRCG2. (Note that the original HRCG will
not work for the tournament. Players must have
the "2" version). The winner of the tournament
will receive a wall trophy.
feature in which you get a perfect computer generated
swing every time. This feature is a nice addition to
HRCG2. Now players who have not the time to learn
and practice the timed swing can still enjoy a round of
golf more or less on equal ground with experienced
players. However, the real enthusiast will opt for the
regular timed-swing feature. This makes golf the true
challenge it is in real life. Mistimed swings can cause
you to hook, slice, hit fat or top the ball. The best aim
and strategy is worthless if all you can do is top the ball
or slice it into the lake. In this normal play mode
HRCG2 is a game that requires a good deal of practice to
master.
The fairways in HRCG2 are larger in scale than those
of the other games which means that often two or

How to enter:
1) Put your full name and address with your
request to be entered into the CGW Golf Tourney
on a post card.
2) Send card to: COMPUTER GAMING WORLD;
GOLF TOURNEY; P.O. BOX 4566; Anaheim, CA
92803-4566.
3) Postcard must be postmarked no later than
September 1, 1983.
4) Entrants will receive, after that date, tournament information and a special codeword
required to play.

BOMB ALLEY:
A Review
And Analysis
Richard Charles Karr
Strategic Simulation's Bomb
Alley, a recent release, is a direct
descendent of the Guadalcanal
Campaign (GC) game system and
program. Based upon the naval/air
campaign in the Central
Mediterranean in mid-1942, it
recreates the historically difficult
problem of supply by the Axis and
British. Designed by Gary Grigsby,
with game development by Joel
Billings, it shares many of the
features and pitfalls of the
Guadalcanal Campaign system.
About The Game
Bomb Alley is a grand tactical
(Operational)-level game concerning itself with control of the
Mediterranean and North Africa in
1942. As such, players control
individual ships (from DML, DMS,
DE, and SS on up) which are
formed into task forces, individual

NAME:
Bomb Alley
TYPE:
Wargame
SYSTEM:
Apple
FORMAT: Disk
AUTHOR:
Gary Grigsby
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
PRICE:
$59.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations

planes (Spitfire, Beaufort,
Swordfish, Boston, Do17, SM79,
JU87, JU88, JU52, and Me109)
which base out of locations on the
map and fly missions, and the
abstracted ground unit strength of
the Malta garrison, the Tobruk
garrison, the Eighth Army, the
Afrika Korps, and numerous
reinforcements and replacements.
The game includes an 18-page
rulebook, floppy disk, and a 4 color
map back-printed with appendixed

gaming tables. Access to the
program is by way of a "userfriendly" sequence of play: Axis
task force adjustment and
movement; British task force
adjustment and movement; British
air operations; Axis air operations;
combat resolution; and save game
option. The above is repeated for
nighttime turns without air
operations.
During the task force adjustment
phase, ships may be formed into

task forces, be combined or divided
between existing task forces,
loaded, or just looked at. The status
of air and ground forces can also
be checked. During the task force
movement phase, existing task
forces are moved and docked.
During the air operations phase,
aircraft based at map locations can
search, perform combat air patrol
(CAP), launch strikes, or transfer.
During the combat resolution
phase, the effects of all of the above
become apparent, as ground units
attack, air strikes are resolved,
surface and submarine naval
combat is resolved, and ships are
repaired.
The actual mechanics of play are
almost exactly the same as in GC
with a few minor exceptions: two
transfers are allowed per AM turn;
motor torpedo boats (PT boats to
Americans) can form their own
surface combat task force, called
"MT"; and evacuation missions are
possible. The one-player option pits
the Axis human player against the

British computer, and two-player
options are always possible. There
are three scenarios to be selected
from: Campaign (June 11 - August
31, 1942); Pedestal (August 10 August 15,1942); and Crete (May 20
- May 31, 1941). As in Guadalcanal,
four levels of difficulty are offered.
The Game As Game

In GC, one side is holding an
advanced forward base against the
tender ministrations of the other
side. In BA, both sides are holding
forward areas subject to interdiction by air and naval forces of
the opposition. Conventional
merchant shipping in BA has a
rough life on both sides, with the
majority of ship sinkings in victory
points due to losses in merchant
shipping. As the Axis player comes
to the realization that Malta must
be suppressed or taken, extremely
high losses in aircraft occur on
both sides.
While the ultimate objective of
an Axis offensive is Alexandria

(worth 1000 points to the Axis and
500 points to the British), Malta
remains the key to that objective.
Three basic strategic options exist
for the Axis player (in solo or twoplayer situations): ignore Malta,
reinforce the Afrika Korps with
everything, and try to blow past the
Qattara Depression into Alexandria;
suppress Malta with heavy air
bombardment and then reinforce
in North Africa; or suppress Malta
real hard and then take it by
combined amphibious/air attack.
The British strategic options are
largely dictated by Axis actions, the
holding and reinforcement of Malta
being foremost.
Tactically, the Campaign Game
will have a great deal of submarine
and MTB activity, with incessant
air activity in the waters around
Malta. Both sides are very closely
matched, and losses of all types will
be high. With time and sheer
ruthlessness, the Axis player will be
able to take Malta by combined
air/naval attack, although

Guadalcanal Campaign is understandable, as P40's were committed
late in the campaign and often
resembled the essential characteristics of F4F's, but the
Mediterranean Theater is a
completely different story.
Historically, each side had the most
modern and deadly aviation
hardware available flying next to
hopelessly inefficient archaic junk.

Alexandria will almost always be
out of reach.
The Pedestal Scenario represents
the major all-out reinforcement
and re-supply effort of the British
to keep Malta from falling. It is only
a five-day scenario, and can be
played in about three or four hours.
Victory points will be based largely
upon ship losses, and the destruction or survival of the four
British carriers usually will decide
the game.
The Crete Scenario concerns
itself exclusively with the air/
amphibious invasion of western
Crete. The British have overwhelming naval superiority, the
Axis has overwhelming air
superiority, and victory is
conditional upon who holds Crete
and ship losses. The Crete Scenario
is a twelve-day game, and will take
6-8 hours.
If players are used to the idea of
20-35 minute turns for two-player
or 10-15 minute turns for oneplayer, Bomb Alley is an exciting
and enjoyable "gamer's game",
which is evenly matched, playable,
and clearly written.

The Reviewer's Gripes
This reviewer feels that the basic
scope and flow of Bomb Alley has a
great deal going for it, namely
playability, clearly written rules,

and an approximately correct net
historical result. For the average
gamer, this is usually quite
adequate. This reviewer, however,
is very picky about the myriad
aircraft designs used in the North
African-Mediterranean Theater
but not included, as well as the
tendency for British ship speeds to
be rounded up and Italian ship
speeds to be rounded down.
Endurance of individual ships
should be a function of vessel
bunker and store capacity, and
should not be a set fixed maximum.
Naval gunfire should be a function
of size and rate of fire, not "main
gun", "secondary gun", or "AA gun."
The Italian Air Force (Regina
Aeronautica) was actually not that
bad, although in the scale of things
it was too small for what it had to
face in '42 and '43. The Italian Navy
(Regina Marina) after the Taranto
raid had a very mixed bag of ships.
Some were as bad as the worst
British World War One relics, most
were very average, and a few were
truly outstanding.
This reviewer realizes that it is
difficult to accurately describe the
performance characteristics of all
of the strange odd-ball combinations of aircraft that floated
through the Mediterranean in '40
-'43, but where are the Blenheims,
CR32's, CR42's, and Hurricanes?
The use of slightly abstracted air in

Wargames in the computer format should crunch through all of
the dull, lengthy, necessary mindboggling detail that "monster
games" attempt to present. Built
into the program of a game should
be the equivalent of determining
shell penetration vs. armor, antiaircraft fire vs. level of bombing
attack, effective vessel operating
range vs. station-keeping, and turnaround of "down" aircraft vs. the
mechanical competence of ground
crews and availability of parts.
While these individual examples
are themselves unimportant, the
interface of combat should represent all of the nasty and technical
"dirt" that the best historical
research has to offer, instead of
several percentage-based combat
results tables. In short, this reviewer
is hopelessly greedy for detail of
the like presented in (the late
lamented) SPI's Campaigns For
North Africa (as one example) as
opposed to the moderate-level of
complexity titles that make for
familiar wargaming soup.

Conclusions
For straight-forward playability
and excellent rules preparation,
Bomb Alley is an enjoyable and
entertaining game of the Mediterranean during its most critical
moments in 1941 and 1942. It offers
moderately serious wargamers the
opportunity to sink their teeth into
something more advanced than
arcade entertainment or very
simple wargaming. In one-player
or two-player format, Bomb Alley
offers accessible "user-friendly"
play of an exciting and difficult
theater, with many tactical
surprises and reverses in store.

mine) how we think about things
and, consequently, how we act. As
an instance, let's choose a subject
near and dear to all our hearts:
game design.
WHO ARE THOSE GUYS?
On the pages of every consumer
electronics publication, we read
articles about, interviews with,
advice from, and instructions on
becoming "game designers."

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

Probably 95% of those "game
designers" cited (or quoted) aren't.
They are basically and essentially
something else entirely, and the
confusion about what they are and
what they are doing — a confusion
shared by magazine writers,
industry executives, game players,
and often, by the "designers"
themselves — has had a profoundly
negative effect on computer
gaming.
What or who are "game
designers?" Especially, what are
videogame or computer-game
designers?

Jon Freeman
What's in a name?
No less a writer than the Bard of
Avon once wrote, "That which we
call a rose/ By any other name
would smell as sweet." He was,
however, being consciously ironic
(a fact often forgotten nowadays),
since it was indeed their names
—signfyingtheir val(ndfeuding)
family affiliations that doomed
poor Romeo and Juliet. (Admittedly, their impetuosity didn't
help much, either.)
Clearly, names are important.
Good titles help sell games, books,
movies, and a zillion other products. This month's topic is not,
however, about titles (at least in
that narrow sense), but something
more general and more important.
Names — what we call things —
influence (some might say deter-

The obvious answer — those who
design computer games — simply
begs the question of what, exactly,
is computer-game design.
With board games, "we all know"
the answer. The designer of board
games is the one who conceives the
idea of the game and works out the
rules. The layout of the board, the
number and kinds of pieces,
strength, movement, money, dice,
cards, whatever: all these things
clearly fall within the designer's
purview. Others may draw the final
version of the board, paint the
cover, mold the pieces, print the
money, and so on — but the artists,
graphic artists, typesetters, etc. are
not game designers. "Everybody
knows that", and for a change
"everybody" is right.
The case of computer games is
more complicated. There may be

five different disciplines involved
in the "design" of a computer game:
game design and development,
program design and execution,
graphics design, sound effects and
music, and the writing of the
documentation. (The manual may
contain information essential to
playing the game well or at all;
witness MURDER ON THE
ZINDERNEUF or any of Epyx's
pre-1982 games). Obviously, text
adventures typically involve only
the first two, and most videogames
lack significant documentation, but
more involved computer games
like those just mentioned (or
ARCHON or M.U.L.E.) involve all
five.
One magazine defined "game
design" as taking the concept of the
game, the rules, the graphics, and
the sound effects, and coding it into
the computer so that the game will
run. It's an amazing definition,
because it's 100% wrong. That is
programming, clearly, not game
designing. Game design for a computer game is, in fact, exactly the
same sort of stuff as it is in a board,
card, or role-playing game: deter
mining and defining in detail
matters of game structure, aim,
goal, subject, theme, layout, and so
forth — who does what to whom,
and what the result is.
Even in the (not uncommon) case
in which a videogame is primarily
the work of a single person, there
are real problems with calling that
person a "game designer." First is
the problem of logical semantics: it
is not reasonable to identify
someone by what that person does
an insignificant portion of the time.
We don't call the executive producer of Magnum, P.I. an "actor"
because in one episode he had a
cameo appearance as a sleazy hotel
manager. Carrying my suitcase into
a hotel doesn't make me a porter,
and dictating a business letter
doesn't justify calling an executive
a "writer."
Continued on p.45

can make the board itself less
complex (thus placing limits on the
game). Or he can make the board
appear to be less complex through
use of heuristic information.
"Heuristic" is a term derived
from the Greek verb eurisko,
meaning "to find or discover"
(hence Archimedes' exclamation
"Eureka!" — "I've found it!").
Heuristic information, then, helps
the program to find whatever it's
looking for. It usually does this by
providing some measure of how
likely a particular choice will lead
to the desired end. The program
can then use this information to
concentrate on the most likely
choices.

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster

HEURISTIC SEARCH
PART I
A programmer facing certain
game problems can often solve
them by "brute force" or
exhaustive means. In other
words, he can set up the
program to try all possible
combinations and then pick the
best. For example, suppose he
needs to move a piece from one
location to another by the
shortest route. If the board is
simple enough, some sort of direct
calculation will probably suffice to
find the path. A more complex
board may require that all possible
paths be traced and the shortest
one selected. But as the board's
complexity grows, the program
requires more resources (time and
memory). At some point the costs
become unacceptable, and the
programmer has two options. He

When you think about it, the use
of heuristic information represents
an attempt to imitate our own
thought processes. We usually
don't examine all possible choices.
Instead, we quickly narrow our
options to a few and then examine
those in more detail. If none of
these are acceptable, then we have
to expand back out to the options
we initially ignored until we finally
pick the one we feel is best.
In a like manner, the program
can use heuristic information to
cut down on the work it has to do.
The information allows the program to concentrate on those
choices that look best instead of
considering all possible options.
Whether or not the program
performs better defines how
"good" the information is. A lot of
time, then, is spent in defining and
testing different heuristics and
combinations of heuristics. An
example will help to illustrate this
process.
AN EXAMPLE
Let's return to our example —
moving a piece on a board —for a
look at how we might use heuristics. Figure 1 a shows our piece in
the lower right corner of a hex grid.
Our goal is the circle near the
center of the map. Let's give the
program the following capabilities
(for starters):

(1) It knows what hex it's starting
in.
(2) It knows if it has reached the
goal hex.
(3) It can find all hexes adjacent to
a given hex.
(4) It can tell if a given hex has
already been used in a path it's
tracing (to avoid duplication).
A pure brute force approach
would be to trace all possible paths,
then pick the shortest (or one of the
shortest — there are quite a few
paths that qualify). We would have
to trace quite a few paths (anyone
care to calculate exactly how
many?), ranging in length from 6 to
around 143 (the theoretical
maximum). Lots of time, lots of
memory.
One heuristic technique leaps
immediately to mind: reject any
path once its length is greater than
the shortest path found to date. We
still have the logistical problem of
saving all the paths tried so far (to
avoid duplication), but now we
have to save much less of them and
can actually throw portions of
them away as shorter paths are
found.
A much more powerful piece of
heuristic information is a distance
function which, given two hexes,
returns the distance of the shortest
possible path between them. Such
a function is possible if some
consistent numbering system is
used (like those found on most
wargame maps). Our search
becomes directed, and we now use
this algorithm:
Continued on p.49

"You are standing at the end of a
road before a small brick building.
Around you is a forest. A small
stream flows out of the building
and down a gully"
Sound familiar? It's the start of
the original Adventure game, of
course. Do you remember how you
felt the first time you played
Adventure or and adventure-type
game? I can; in fact, I remember it
better than my first kiss.

learning
game
Bob Proctor

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Dragon's Keep
TYPE:
Adventure
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Diskette
BACKUP:
None
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Sierra On-line
Coarsegold, CA.
NAME:

Snooper
Troops II
TYPE:
Detective
Adventure
SYSTEM:
Apple II (48K)
or IBM
FORMAT:
Diskette
BACKUP:
None
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$44.95
PUBLISHER: Spinnaker
Software
Cambridge, MA

Adventure games are absorbing;
you get very involved in the story,
almost as if you were a participant.
Involvement equals motivation.
You want to rescue that princess or
find that last treasure so much you
can taste it! You become so dedicated to the task that you're willing
to steal food or kill an occasional
troll in order to reach your goal.
Why, you'd even learn something
new if you needed the information
to solve a puzzle!
So why isn't this format used
more for educational games? Sure,
there've been a few attempts: there
was a game called OREGON TRAIL
where you tried to lead a wagon
train safely west. It was simple, but
a step in the right direction. Then
there's TIME ZONE, which does
contain a lot of history in an
incidental way. But most of the
games available today have a
fantasy theme, with the major
categories being music, science
fiction, and mystery.
Why hasn't anyone done a game
that teaches you how to survive a
plane crash in the wilderness? After

all, OUTDOOR SURVIVAL has
been very popular board game for
years. Or why hasn't somebody
used a space adventure format to
teach the basics of physics? Or
maybe you get left behind by your
tour group in a foreign land and
must learn to "speak" the language
in order to ask for food, shelter and
help?
I don't mean to suggest that
topics like these are more entertaining than swords and sorcery, or
solving murder mysteries, but
wouldn't you rather play an
adventure game than read a text
book? We don't have to make a
choice between entertainment and
education, we can have BOTH.
There is, at least, one area where
these ideas are being put into actual
use — adventure games for children. This month we have two
examples of this sub-genre. The
first is Dragon's Keep (DK),
originally published by Sunnyside
Software but now being marketed
by Sierra On-line. The second is
Snooper Troops II (ST2), by
Spinnaker Software.
DK is designed especially for
second-graders. How do you do
that? Well, first you restrict yourself to words that a seven-year old
would know, then you make the
decision making process easier by
providing a list of choices at each
step of the game. Finally, since
second-graders may not be fabulous
typists, you make it so the whole
game can be played with only the
return key and the space bar.
The theme of DK is that a
Continued on p.49

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

Greetings, and welcome to a new
column for Computer Gaming
World — The Commodore Key. If
you haven't already guessed, this
column will be dedicated to the
investigation of those games and
game related software for the
Commodore 64 and Vic 20. Our
title was, after much deliberation,
chosen from a host of suggestions.
While all had some feature in their
factor, and some had the nautical
connection found in may
Commodore columns (Listing to
Port for example), we decided on
this title as we hope that our
column will truly become your
key to enjoying your Commodore
computer.
C-64 - Edward Curtis
This installment of the
Commodore 64 section of the Key
will, unfortunately, contain very
little. At the date of our typesetting,
a sea of Vic-20 games had arrived,
but very few submissions for the
C-64. It is not my intention to spend
time reviewing translations of well
known games that have no substantial difference in their C-64
versions. This policy rules out the
vast majority of those now on the
market, but this situation will soon

be remedied, as a tidal wave of C-64
programs are about to hit the
market.
Typical of minor variations that
in most cases will not find their way
into the Key, are those done on two
games by Avalon-Hill — Nuclear
War and Telengard. The play of
these games is exactly as it is in
their counter parts for other
machines. Their only claim to
individuality lies in the improved
use of graphics (much improved in
the case of Telengard) most often
accomplished with sprites. The
sudden creation, for example, of
differing creatures and treasures
in Telengard, while a simple
change, does add significantly to
the enjoyability of the game. All that
we C-64 owners can ask for, is that
future translations at least equal
this level of sophistication.
Vic 20 - Dr. Johnny L. Wilson
Even in the early version of
Sword Of Fargoal, this is an exciting
and intriguing adventure game.
The graphics are beautifully
crafted from the detailed stones of
the dungeons rune-like titles and
clever monsters, to the game utility
that allows the player to select the
background color through which
he/she wishes to journey. The
documentation is complete and
extremely helpful. It includes a
detailed description of each magic
spell to be found, strategy suggestions from the playtesters that
actually help, and a ready-reference card with a summary of
commands. Add to these features
the fact that a player must successfully traverse at least 29 different dungeon levels (15 down
and 14 to return) to find the sword
and you realize how many hours of
challenging fun are involved in this
game.
Early purchasers discovered two
major problems. One concerned a
with/for instruction in line 12 and
the other involved a bad subscript
error in line 262. (This is supposed
to be corrected in the later version.)
If you have an earlier version and
don't know what to do when a
glitch occurs, simply break the
program and type either GOTO 2
or GOTO 3. Either of these commands will take you back to the
beginning of the level you are
currently exploring.

Armed with that information, the
adventure will run relatively
smooth. The story line is simple.
The Protectorate Sword has been
stolen and without its benevolent
magic, your land is vulnerable to
attack from the pernicious minions
of evil and their sinister spells. Your
mission, since you are divinely
ordained by the digital deity of
your choice, is to explore the 15-20
dungeon levels necessary to find
the Protectorate Sword and then
make your escape in 2000 seconds
(33 minutes) of real time. You
explore each level, using your joystick to manipulate your character
step by step through a darkened
maze. Each step illuminates a little
more of the maze and you eventually wind up with a fully mapped
dungeon level on your screen. The
screen takes the vantage point as
though a camera were positioned
above the character's head. As you
traverse each level, you will encounter hostile monsters, bags of
gold, temples, and checkerboards.
The monsters cannot be negotiated
with, only fought or avoided. The
gold is only useful as a sacrifice to
be offered in the temple. In return,
you are rewarded with experience
points. The checkerboards can
mean: 1) magic spells, 2) traps, or 3)
maps of later levels of the dungeon.
Explore these last, so that you can
avoid having to face a monster
immediately after being devastated
by a trap.
All in all, even with the program
glitch, I enjoy the game. My worst
moment came, however, when I
was killed by a fire drake and still
had 4 healing potions in my inventory. This, in spite of the statement on page 15 of the manual that
"When your hit points fall below 0,
a Healing Potion will be taken
automatically', frustrated me
greatly. I know not to wait on that
feature at the lower levels, now.
Remember, if the program does
something like this to you, you can
always break the program and
follow the procedure outlined
above and get a fresh start on that
level.
Once it outlives the reputation of
the earlier version, Sword of
Fargoal should be a perennial
favorite among Vic users. EPYX,
Sunnyvale, CA. 94086 $29.95 (16K
Expander req.)

MOVIE MICRO REVIEW
"WARGAMES"
"Is this a game or is it real?" the
panicked protagonist queries the
Department of Defense's master
computer in MGM/UA's new movie
"Wargames." "What's the
difference?" comes the frightening
reply..."Wargames" is plausible
enough to intrigue and terrifying
enough to excite. Unlike many
"pot-boilers" which simply build to
a holocaust or pyrotechnic excellence or a denouement of
moralistic salvation, "Wargames"
makes one think, as well as feel, all
along the way.
The plot line centers around a
high school student whose whole
life revolves around digitized
circuitry. He is an underachiever in
all areas except electronic
endeavors. He is an opportunist
who uses his one area of expertise
to smooth out difficulties in the rest
of his life. His amoral attitudes and
electronic excellence lead him to
defraud himself and his school (by
changing grades and records), the
telephone company, and by intent,
a computer software corporation.
By chance, he interfaces with a topsecret government computer
instead of the one he intends to
"break" into and "enter" data upon.
His ingenuity and seemingly
natural bent toward computer
larceny enables him to circumvent
the security system and set a
potential nuclear war in motion.
You'll have to see the movie to find
out if it can be stopped.
There are several unanswered
questions implicit in the film. The
first is, "How secure is computer
security?" The implied answer is
the same as R.A. Heinlein's in
Friday, "...electronic records aren't

really records..." (p. 5). The very
ease of change and correction that
makes computers desirable to use
makes them vulnerable. If one can
find the legitimate password or the
illegitimate "back door," electronic
records can make anyone an expert
forger.
Second, the film seems to ask,
"What purpose does data collection
and real life simulation fulfil?" This
is the necessary corollary to the
protagonist's query above. If the
purpose is simply to win at any cost,
the simulation is of doubtful value.
If the purpose is to learn from both
correct and incorrect hypothesis,
then the simulation is of immense
value. The implied answer in the
film is that we must be careful
about what use and intent we have
in collecting data and constructing
computer models. David, the film's
protagonist wants to play to win,
but has to learn to play to learn.
Like many wargamers, he learns
futility of war through his
experience.
Lastly, one cannot ignore the
ethical question, "Is the capability
of accomplishing something equivalent to the license to do it?" David
seems to think so. He is perfectly
willing to change grades, steal
games, and charge others for phone
time. We admire his ingenuity, but
cannot condone his actions. The
Air Force general seems to think so.
He is willing to destroy millions of
lives in order to "win" the war. I
hope the film's message is a
resounding "NO!" to the question. It
was to me.
Computer hobbyists of all kinds
will benefit from viewing
"Wargames." We may not all be
able to afford the sophisticated
Televideo equipment used in the
film, but we all have to answer the
three questions to our and society's
satisfaction.
Dr. Johnny L. Wilson

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Wizplus
Utility Program
Apple II Plus
48K of Memory
FORMAT:
Single disk
AUTHOR:
Thomas Conner
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Datamost
Chatsworth, CA
91311
"WIZPLUS" (WP) is a menu
driven utility program designed to
modify the characters and the
playing environment which have
made the game of WIZARDRY
addictive to many enthusiastic
garners around the country. WP
has options to allow the modification of all the attributes
associated with the individual
game character. In addition
equipment which would normally
be won through intrepid adventures need only be chosen from a
shopping list using an option called
"BOLTACS SWINDLE".
WIZPLUS impacts play in the
first two WIZARDRY scenarios
allowing the player to bypass the
careful game design which allows
progress through adventuring. WP
also has excellent documentation
which is well written and illustrated. This program covers all
facets of modifying your favorite
character. Using this utility, it is

possible to recover "out" characters, one of the most frustrating
disasters which can happen while
playing Wizardry. Hit points may
be recovered, ability scores, age,
gold, or experience points modified.
WP will also change your favorite
characters experience level, name,
password, race, status, possible hit
points, class, alignment, and finally,
deftly add both Priest and Mage
spells without benefit of ordination.
There is also an option called the
WizPlus Madi Special, which makes
the characters status ok (even if
deleted), lowers the age, sets the
adventuring status to IN and finally
sets the possible number of spells
which may be cast to nine. Other
options on the menu allow the
display of your characters attributes, recovery of characters from
Wizardry's version 1.0 backup, or
the movement of characters
between scenarios without deleting
them from the previous scenario.
[Note: Backups should be made
before using WizPlus, as on three
occasions while writing a character
back to the scenario the program
malfunctioned and the characters
were permanently lost.]
The author of WizPlus indicates
abuse of his program will destroy
the careful balance which the
authors of Wizardry have designed
into their games. A serious problem
also exists with the use of this
program, as once a character has
been modified, it will not be
possible to transfer the "Spirit of
the Ancestor" into the third
scenario "The LEGACY of
LLYLGAMYN". As a result of
improvements in the new scenario
increasing the playing speed,
characters which have been
modified will not transfer. Thus,
those gamers which have enjoyed
the first two games should be
aware that the use of WizPlus
destroys characters for further
play in this exciting series. WizPlus
should be used with great caution
or the spirit of adventuring will be
diluted and, more importantly, you

will not be able to continue with
this exciting series.
Bob Reams
Ed. note - Sir-tech tells us that if
your Wizardry program has been
modified by WizPlus the warranty
on your Wizardry disk will no
longer be honored.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Clipper
Simulation
Atari 400/800/1200
Basic Joystick
FORMAT:
Disk (32K)/Cassette
(24K)
# PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR: John Bayes
PUBLISHER: Program Design,
Inc.
Greenwich, CT.
Grab your charts, lads, it's time
to sail your Atari's from New York
to San Francisco via the perilous
Cape Horn passage. In this sailing
simulation you are asked to Captain
an 1850's Clipper ship to fame and
fortune. PDI has included a cassette
for voice narration, but the cassette
is not necessary to play the game.
After my third voyage I got tired of
listening to the sea chanties and
optioned the program to ignore the
cassette. After booting the game
you go through a setup phase in
which you must choose your ship
size, amount of cargo, number of
crew, and amount of provisions. As
the object of the game is to sail to
San Francisco with a large cargo
which can be sold at a vast profit,
the larger the ship you sail the
better your potential for high
scores. However, the larger ships
require more crew, and more

provisions. It's also a good idea to
hire more crew than necessary as
many unforeseen events will trim
your crew to the bare minimum
during the voyage. Finally, when
selecting provisions allow enough
for a long voyage, as running out of
supplies can lead to mutiny and
quick defeat.
The game is played from a
graphics display of a clipper ship's
bridge. The display contains
information on wind speed and
direction, ships heading and
direction, and percent of sail
currently set. The joystick is used
to alter course or percent of sail
and to change the displays from
bridge to ship's log to map and back
to bridge. The ships log gives much
valuable information including the
ships current position in latitude
and longitude, number of days out
of New York, provisions left, and
status of the crew. The map display
shows the position of your ship in
relation to North, Central, and
South America. You sail the ship by
altering your course to take
maximum advantage of the wind
direction. As you sail, many hazards
will be encountered; such as
mutiny, illness, storms, rogue
waves, and submerged reefs.
The game plays well but I found
the constant shifts in wind to be a
bit frustrating. The instruction
book is very helpful and gives many
hints on how to play this game. It
also includes a little historical
background on Clipper ships and a
playing aid to help novice sailors
keep their Clipper on course.
Mark Bausman

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

ATARI (Con)
replenish it.
That is, you have to get air in the
Atari version. In the Apple version
you don't. You also get a supply of
"smart bombs", missing in the Atari
version. In the Apple version the
whole thing takes place in a large
cave, and there is a "radar screen"
that displays the players progress.
In the Atari version you have to
remember how far you've gone.
NAME (Con)
The typical "videogame designer" may spend close to 75% of
the time on program design and
coding, perhaps 15% on graphics
design, less than 10% on sound, and
whatever's left (not much) on
actual game design (and none at all
on documentation — but that's
another story). If the game is a
home version of a coin-op or just a
rip-off of someone else's game, no
game design is performed; it was all
done by someone else, beforehand.
Therefore, most "videogame
designers" are more properly
termed "program designers" or
"game programmers."

CAUSE AND EFFECT
Even if logic and language don't
move you, there are a number of
practical consequences of this
misnomer — and they're all bad.
The mildest, perhaps, is that
many programmers get "delusions
of grandeur" and think that they

In other words, even though
these games have the same name,
come in the same packaging, from
the same publisher, they are not
the same game. They are similar,
but not any more than any other
two "Scramble" games.
The same thing happens in
STRATOS, for Atari and TRS-80. In
both, the player defends a city from
aliens with laser cannon and a force
field. In the Atari version the player
also gets a repair ship for the force

field. The TRS-80 owner is on his
own.
The upshot of all of this is that
when somebody says (or writes)
that he has a great game for his
computer, it doesn't mean that it's a
great game for your computer.
Besides the differences in graphics,
sound, and controllers between the
two machines, there is the possibility that it's not even the same
game. Caveat emptor, and what
else is new?
❑

really are game designers. This is
rarely true. (Dan Bunten, Chris
Crawford, and Robert Leyland
have talent in both areas, but they
don't have a lot of company.) I am
not denigrating programming,
which is obviously essential to a
computer game. Good program
design is as much an art (and
potentially as creative an art), as
game design. Games "designed" by
programmers tend to be simple
and unoriginal; games "programmed" by designers are almost
inevitably overweight and clumsy.
If you can describe the "game
design" in twenty-five words or
less, it was done by a programmer;
if a 48K game has primitive
graphics and takes twenty minutes
for the computer to make a move,
you can bet it was programmed by
the game designer.

designer and one a programmer —
is not at all "obvious" if you've been
led to believe there's only a single
task involved.
If program design is called "game
design," then real game design has
no name, no significance, and no
attention. It is, at best, an afterthought, more often slavish imitation, at worst a blatent rip-off. Why
not? If credit for "game design" is
given only to program design, who
cares where the "game" comes
from originally? If the act of
conceptualizing and creating a
game and the act of cleverly ripping
someone off are given the same
name (i.e. "game design"), the two
acts will be granted equal respect.
Shakespeare and your local check
forger get equal billing, and a
programmer can get praised for
creating (!) "the best PAC-MANtype game."
What's in a name?
When the name of the game is
"game design," plenty.
Ed. Note: Jon is the co-author of
Murder on The Zinderneuf and
Archon.

The obvious "answer" to the
problem of two disciplines requiring two different talents and
ways of thinking — a collaboration
between two people, one a game

NORMANDY (Con)
avoids the strongest German
defenders. The historical plan was
designed to cut Cherbourg off from
reinforcement, but in the game,
isolation is not necessary (indeed,
being isolated appears to have no
effect on the pocketed defenders).
In every game that I've played, the
computer sends one and only one
reinforcing division (the 77th) to
aid Cherbourg, regardless of what
the Allies are doing. In order to
capture Cherbourg before the end
of the game, earmark three infantry
divisions and one armor division
for the assault and send them
breaking due north from Utah
beach as quickly as possible.

Tactics
So, how does one win at the game
of BFN? You should: 1) take
Cherbourg (!), 2) clear all Germans
from the coastal zone, and 3) take
either St. Lo or at least one hex of
Caen. In doing this, bear the
following in mind:
1) A stockpile of "general supply"
points (about 600) should be accumulated before June 18, when
three turns occur with high
probability of a storm (this stockpile is in excess of points used each
turn). 2) Don't waste combat points
on useless, low-odds attacks. 3) Get
the four armored divisions into
action as quickly as possible,
keeping them on the front line and
infiltrate with them as often as
possible. Their fatigue levels will
suffer, but their presence can break
up the German defense. 4) On the
rare occasion when a German unit
attacks, consider retreating the
defending Allied unit. German units
always advance into a vacated hex
and you can often sucker them into
a trap or lure them away from an
important position by falling back
before the slightest attack.
However, whether or not historical tactics lead to victory need
not bother you when you sit down
at the monitor; BFN is a challenging
game. I'm just glad that Eisenhower
didn't use it to rehearse for the real
thing.

❑

SUSPENDED (con)
Obviously, this information
gathering process is time consuming, and when you get to the
stage of putting the pieces together
to complete the adventure, there
will be no need to send WHIZ to the
CLC. Also, the game can be
successfully completed without
accessing the CLC at all. So, if you
are a die-hard adventurer who
thinks hints are for sissies, don't
plug WHIZ into the CLC. But, be
prepared to see the shadow of your
replacement clone more than just a
few times.
One can't help but wonder, "What
if Infocom hadn't provided the map
of the complex? What if they hadn't
provided an integrated hint system?
...would the game still be playable?"
The answer is "yes" — however, it
would have been not only a
different game, but a different type
of game, more like the early-style
adventure where all you knew was
that you were to explore, collect
treasure, and perhaps, escape.
If you are an adventurer who is
looking for a treasure-based
adventure, and take special delight
in exploring and mapping each
room for yourself, or discovering if
there even is a next room, then that
aspect of Suspended will not excite
you.
About strategies. You will want
to develop your own strategy for
mastering the game; however,
when you first get started, forget
about fixing the filtering computers, that'll come later. First, get
to know your robots. Explore each
robot's capabilities and limitations.
Take them all to the same room
and compare their reports. Like the
well-worn tale of the blind men and
the elephant, the robots will each
give you their unique, but
incomplete, perspective.
As the robots find objects, things
that need to be done will become
apparent. Soon, you'll be on your
way to putting together the pieces
to complete the adventure. You'll

discover that there is more than
one way to complete the adventure.
Without revealing what they are,
let's just say that your friend's lives
are in your hands.
As you command one robot to go
here, another to go there, the game
becomes like running a very, very
complex football play. Each player
must be in a certain place at a
certain time for the play to work.
Also similarly, there's more than
one way to make a touchdown.
The same disasters strike at the
same time every time the standard
game is played. Note when these
occur, and consider strategies to
get certain things done before they
occur. One thing that does change
is something called the "reset code".
When you find out what it is, be
sure to write it down — it's different
each game. You'll also discover
how each of the planet's systems
can be monitored and manually
controlled from within the underground complex. Bringing the
systems under control is essential
to minimize surface-side deaths
until you replace the proper cables
and bring the filtering computers
back into balance.
Finally, fear and terror are
underlying themes of the game.
However, don't let an unfounded
fear that the game is too complex
keep you away from it. True, at
first, Suspended may seem
unwieldy, perhaps overwhelming
...all that documentation, ...six
robots to control at once, ...what do
I know about fixing computers,
anyway?
Let your fears be calmed, the
game is very playable, even
replayable, once you understand
the premise. The robots are easy to
control, once you get to know them.
And, you don't have to know anything about fixing real computers.
So, get out the documentation, a
pencil and plenty of paper, and
boot-up the disk — people are dying
and you're half asleep! — people
are dying and you need to wake up!
0

KNIGHTS (Con)
levels for the Axis and the Allied
commanders (expert, historical,
intermediate, or novice); whether
the game is solitaire or with two
players; which scenario is being
played; whether initiative is
historical or random; and whether
or not to include in the Axis force
pool two optional depot units. The
players are given the further option
of setting the specific levels of both
Axis and Allied combat points, air
points, replacements, and reinforcements to values other than
those automatically set by the
computer (based upon the difficulty
levels already determined for the
two players). The level of Axis
supply and the amount of time in
the "display delay loop" may also
be set at this time.
Having completed the set-up, the
game now begins. The game itself
is broken into four segments and
the segments into phases, during
each of which specific actions and
reactions may take place. In the
first segment, mobilization, players
receive new units and supplies at
their home bases, allocate supplies
and replacement points to specific
units, expend supply for maintenance, eliminate units with
insufficient supply, and determine
which player has initiative for the
that turn. The player determined to
have initiative has the option of
moving his units first or being able
to respond to the other players
move by moving second.
During the second two segments,
the first and second player
segments, both players receive
operational points for their units
(which are expended to a varying
degree during the two phases when
the unit performs any action), and
the phasing player begins his
movement. If, during the phasing
players movement, he should move
adjacent to an enemy unit, then the
non-phasing player may be eligible
for limited reaction (no more than
half of a unit's operational points
may be expended in limited
reactions). After the phasing player

has moved all of the units which he
desired to move and all limited
reactions are completed, then units
resupplied (if in supplied status)
and depot units of the phasing
player may move. When the
phasing player has finished trying
to catch up to his combat units with
his depots, the enemy player is
given the opportunity for a limited
reaction which is followed by a
repeating of the process in all
manners, excepting that only the
phasing player's units receive
operational points for the second
half of his turn.
The last segment, appropriately
named the finalization segment, is
when the victory points for the turn
are determined and the level of
victory assigned (if the last turn).
The players receive victory points
for causing casualties in enemy
units, occupying towns, points for
the distance which units are from
their base, and automatic loss if a
player's home base was in enemy
hands at the end of the turn. As the
last part of this segment, the players
are given the option of saving the
game.

Combat
The most complex and important aspect of this game is that of
combat. To initiate combat, a unit
must expend both supply and
operational points dependent upon
its type and nationality. The combat
is also affected by a large number
of other factors. Lack of supply will
half the defender's defensive
strength (if below 50 supply points).
The terrain and level of fortification
also plays a large roll in determining the final combat odds. Each
type of terrain has an intrinsic
modifier to the defenders combat
strength which may be increased
through digging-in (building
fortifications) up to the point where
it triples the defender's defense.
Air points may also be used by
both the attacker and the defender.
For the defender, each air point
increases his total value for defense
by 15%. For the attacker, this
multiple is 20% per air point.

The final modifier to the combat
odds are those caused by
supporting units not themselves in
the combat. The attacker adds 300
combat points per hex adjacent to
the defender which is occupied by
other of his units. The attacker also
adds 100 combat points per nonparticipating units in his own hex.
The attacker then subtracts 200
points for every enemy unit stacked
in the target hex but not the subject
of the attack and for every one in a
hex adjacent to the defenders hex.

After the final combat odds have
been calculated by the computer, it
will then modify the losses for both
sides based upon these odds and
two other factors—the attacker's
chosen battle intensity and the risk
factors chosen by both sides. The
attacker's battle intensity is determined, on a scale from 1 to 9,
which modifies not only the relative
number of losses on both sides, but
also the amount of supplies
expended by the attacker on that
battle. The sum of the risk factors
chosen by the attacker and
defender, again on a scale of 1 to 9,
determines the variability of the
combat losses. With all of the
modifying factors, it is obvious that
this system would only be playable
on a computer.

Comments and Conclusions
KD effectively demonstrates
that the old problem of playability
vs. realism can be largely
eliminated by the use of thoughtful
design and programming. The
game captures the feel of the war
in North Africa, is relatively easy to
play, and yet contains accurate
details of the units involved
combined with a reasonably
accurate method of calculating the
effects of combat. When these
features are combined with the
many other features of the game
which could not, in the limited
scope of this article, be covered, it
becomes obvious to any gamer of
long standing that KD is another
solid step towards the ideal
computer wargame.

GALACTIC (Con)
Once you have accumulated
enough cash (250,000 Frilbees) and
have improved your flying skills to
at least 8 or 9, I'd recommend
buying a spaceship. You can then
earn money much faster by flying
cargo and passengers around the
galaxy than you can in the streets.
Incidentally, you may also run into
some Gorsai pirates (who make
great companions if you can defeat
them) or find that your passengers
may make a hijack attempt requiring a battle to be fought. One
change from GG is that Gorsai
don't change sides in the middle of
a battle. So, once you can manage
to recruit a couple of them, you'll
have them along for awhile.
When you think you're ready, try
applying to one of the Guilds for an
adventure. You'll find that the
Space Patrol, the Agency, the
Adventurers Guild, or the Sensitive's Guild to be more than happy
to send you out on a challenging
and highly exciting adventure. One
strong word of caution, however.
Be sure to save your team on a disc
before heading out on one of these,
so that when you are ignominiously
wiped out, you won't have to start
over completely from scratch.
Combat, whether in the streets or
on an adventure, is done with the
same system as GG. The computer,
however, is a tougher opponent
than it used to be, and you'll often
find a battle costing the lives of one
or more of your very cherished
companions. It is, therefore, very
easy to understand why the single
most highly prized treasure in all
the galaxy is the K-Reanimator - a
device which can bring the dead
back to life. Your ability to use this
magnificent, device is dependent
on both sensitivity and luck, and if
it fails, it will be ruined, so it's nice
to carry as many of these as you
can find.
As in many of SSI's games, you
are offered the chance to create
your own scenarios. This means
that once you have successfully
explored all the adventures given

on the game disc or even before,
you can create your own. The
process of creating your own
adventures is infinitely variable
and, since you can tie one adventure on to another, you can keep
going for a long, long time.
HINTS
Clone yourself immediately.
You'll need all the help you can get
as soon as possible. Try to avoid
recruiting and training the weaker
species. It's very frustrating to have
nurtured a Cygnian all the way up
to Level 15 in advanced skills and
18 or 19 in weapons skills, only to
find that he's killed in the first
round of combat. I found my
greatest success when starting out
with a Wodanite. Speed and dexterity are reasonably high, as are
strength and endurance. Furthermore, they're able to use phasor
rifles, which are deadlier than
phasors, and can wear heavy or
special armor. Zorcons and
Dulbians are strong and have great
endurance, but are so slow and
have such lousy agility that they
often never get into the battle at all.
As soon as possible, find and
defeat a band of Gorsai, getting
some of them to join you as they
are deadly fighters; fast, agile, and
very strong. Remember that you
can have no more fighters than you
have leadership, so that one of your
current associates may have to be
fired in order to make room for the
Gorsai. This may be heart rending,
but when you see how good the
Gorsai are, you'll be glad that you
did.
In the early stages, concentrate
your skill-building on your original
adventurer and the two clones.
You'll lose many of the others along
the way, and there's no reason to
invest hard earned frilbees in
building skills for those who may
very well fall by the wayside.
Once you've got a group of seven
or eight, consider trying one of the
easier adventures (remember to
save your team before leaving on
your voyage!). Only on adventures

or in battles fought over hijacks or
cargo can you increase your
leadership.
As soon as possible, get hold of a
missile imploder. This one weapon
will remove all guided weapons
from the board in one fell swoop.
The corollary to this is "don't
develop a strong guided missile
weapons user of your own." The
missile imploder is not selective
and will eliminate your gemstones
and gapers as well as the enemies.
Don't forget at RNA tabs can only
be used to increase your skills to
level 15, and that jobs completed in
the streets can only boost your skill
to level 10.
When you do go on an adventure,
it's a good idea to make a map of
the various adventure segments to
help you get out. In at least one
case, I spent nearly three weeks
trying to find an exit from an
adventure. I fought some forty
battles and lost two very valuable
fellow adventurers after my three
K-Reanimators failed. I did finally
get out, but only after making a
map (which I should have done
from the beginning).
One last option which gives a
nice touch is to change from oneplayer to two-player mode in the
middle of a combat. This allows
you to have a friend join in the
game if he or she happens to drop
by while you're fighting a battle.
CONCLUSION
SSI has done a superb job on this
sequel to GG. Most role playing
games have a rather abstract
combat resolution sequence. GA
has a complete game within a game
for combat resolution, along with
as complicated a series of adventures as you could want. If you
enjoyed Galactic Gladiators,
Galactic Adventures is an absolute
must. If you never saw GG, then
treat yourself to a great game
system and role playing fantasy,
and go out and get this one. I got my
copy the first week it was available,
and I still haven't completed all the
adventures that it offers.

SILICON (Con)
(1) Find the six hexes circling our
present location.
(2) Eliminate any hex already in
our current path or which we
cannot otherwise move
through.
(3) Of those remaining, pick the
one closest to our goal. In case
of a tie, use some arbitrary
tie-breaker.
(4) Move to the hex selected.
(5) If we are in the goal hex, stop;
otherwise, go to (1).
On an unobstructed map, we will
immediately trace a minimal path
to the goal hex. Figure lb shows
one such path. Here, we broke ties
by picking the right-hand hex.
Other paths would have been
traced had we been using other tiebreakers (left-hand, alternating,
random). In all, I count 14 different
minimal paths from the starting
hex to the goal hex.
As mentioned, this is a very
simple case. In fact, with one hex
numbering system I know of, the
LEARNING (Con)
naughty dragon is keeping 16 nice
animals prisoner in and around his
(her?) house. Did somebody say
house? Yes, this dragon lives in an
average sort of two-level white
house. Well, it does have an
elevator, but apart from that it's
average. Young children definitely
relate better to exploring a house
than they do a cave or dungeon and
they seem to find the mixture of
familiar and fantastical very
amusing.
The object is to search for the 16
animals and free them. Occasionally, the dragon will appear,
breathing colorful dragonfire. It
doesn't attack, but it prevents you
from releasing any animals while it
is present.
DK is very well done and will help
develop reading skills and
deuctivrasonghldeic
grade or below. It is highly
recommended. The same people
have done TROLL'S TALE which

coordinates of the hexes in a
minimal path can be directly
computed by a simple algorithm. In
such a case, we could get by (at
least for path-tracing purposes)
without the distance function at all.
But Figure la represents a very
simple case. Let's consider
something more complex.
Figure 2 adds three hexes near
the goal with peaks in them. The
peaks represent mountains, and
our path cannot pass through any
of these hexes. Our initial algorithm
will still work, but we are no longer
guaranteed of finding a minimal
path. In fact, Figure 2 shows the

has also been released by Sierra
On-line.
The second game this month is
ST2, second in a series by Spinnaker Software. ST2 is for older
children, 10 years and up. The
object is to solve a mystery by
proving all of the suspects — save
one! — are innocent. In this case,
somebody has stolen a performing
dolphin from the local aquarium.
The evidence comes in the form
of clues, which must be referred to
by number when making accusations. The clues come rapidly but
are mostly worthless, but it is
necessary to write them down since
you can't tell which are important
at the time. Here is the problem
number one; the clues are only on
the screen for about 15 seconds
and there is no way to pause the
game. Even I can't write fast
enough to copy them down. You
can always "find" the clue again —
they're never lost — but this may
take some time and effort.

path that would be traced if we
tried the same approach as we did
on Figure 1 (right-handed tie
breaking). It has a length of 9, while
the shortest path possible is only 7
hexes long.
How do we make our program
"smart" enough to find the shortest
path? One solution is to find all
"minimal" paths (i.e., all paths that
can be generated by our algorithm)
and then pick the shortest one.
How do we do that? We shift from
a depth-first to a breath-first
approach. What does that mean?
Tune in next issue and find out.

Several other aspects try your
patience as well. You can question
the suspects in their homes, but
only one question per visit, please!
Since there are 3 possible questions
you can ask, you must make 3 trips
to each suspect. There are also 3
clues inside each house, but again
you can only get one at a time. This
takes quite a while since the
suspects are often home and if you
get caught snooping you are sent
back to headquarters to cool your
heels for a bit. Even 10-year-olds
get tired of this.

This game would be much more
fun if the pace were faster. As it is, it
takes days to complete and you
lose track of what leads you were
following, what you were doing,
even what facts you know. It may
teach the value of keeping wellorganized notes, but it doesn't do
quite as well teaching deductive
reasoning. It's too bad because it
could have been very, very good.

TELE-GAMING (Cont.)
FRPGs. The Sanctuary is a
beautifully designed, captivating
system. You'll find it difficult to
sign off once you've entered its
main gates.
Sunrise Omega-80—(415)
452-0350: Perhaps the most
detailed and articulate FRPG I've
seen on any BBS is run by a
Chaosium (FRP and board game
manufacturer) play-tester, Karl
Mauer, on San Francisco's Sunrise
board. Riddles and puns abound in
this game — the gamemaster and
players have created a perfect
fantasy world. Make yourself
comfortable in the "Gamers'
Corner," and share the fun!
Other Notables:
California.
Access One
(213) 537-3378
The Apple Board (213) 944-5455
BBGS
(213) 699-0775
IF PMS
(714) 772-8868
The Interface
(213) 477-4605
Softworx
(213) 473-2754

Scorpia (Cont.)
fused quite easily. There are two
rooms in here that you must visit;
the one with the door is the one you
should come to last. There are also
two items to be found in the maze,
but you only need one of them
(hint: when you reach the room
with the door, you should have six
stones). By the way, this maze also
has a little trap in it: make a right at
the tsampa.
Ok, you're almost there! Open
the door (a little experimentation
should do it), and you will be in a
room with a pool....and a jade claw
sticking up from the pool holding
the Serpent's Star (if you DON'T
see that, you haven't done something: go back into the maze until
you find the other room). But don't
try to get it yet! First, make a little
music. Aha! The dragon appears....
and he won't think very much of
you, either. He's got a couple of
riddles for you, too...and again, you
will only have one chance to answer

them. But once you do, the
Serpent's Star is yours! Of course,
there' still the little matter of getting
out of the monastery, but the Star
will help you there, if you know
what to do with it (read the room
description very carefully). After
that, you can come back here, hoist
a few, and brag about your success!
Now, while you're pondering that,
I'll just make the rounds and see
what the regulars need.....

Haphazard Hints: ZORK II—
Don't waste time on the rose, flask
and grue repellent; they aren't
useful at all. DARK CRYSTAL—
The same can be said for the sling
and the pouch, you don't need
them. ULYSSES—You need the
gold coin to get the map, but not
from the shopkeeper. WIZARD &
THE PRINCESS—There are two
ways to get to the treehouse; the
easy way is the wrong one.
MYSTERY FUN HOUSE—The

Florida.
The Lynx
(305) 772-1076
The Oracle
(305) 475-9062
St. Pete BBS
(813) 866-9945
Illinois:
Warlock's Castle (618) 345-6638
New Jersey:
Dry Dock BBS
(201) 992-2565
TrashCom BBS
(201) 226-0341
New York:
Adventure to
Atlantis
(914) 359-1517
Texas:
Beach Game
(904) 932-8271
System
Eclectric System (214) 239-5842
(214) 840-8294
Griffin's Lair
The Mines of Moria (713) 871-8577
(214) 960-7654
Teledunjon III
There are many more great BBSs
around the country, of course, but
this list is a fine starting point. In my
next column, we'll investigate other
types of tele-gaming BBSs — those
which offer real-time, online games
and/or computer games for
downloading. Until then, light a
torch, nock an arrow, and embark,
ever so cautiously, on your message
board quest.
fortune-telling machine is really
broken, but it's the sign that's
important. Think about it.
And now, the hints to Serpent's
Star in slip code:
Monk's riddles:
1) ESBHPO
2) ZJO BOE ZBOH
3) NBO
Dragon's riddles:
1) SBJOCPX
2) OJSWBOB
Well, looks like it's closing time,
folks. See you next issue, when the
feature adventure will be: Zork III
(I'm going backwards just to be
perverse). In the meantime, if you
need help with an adventure game,
there are three ways you can reach
me: 1) Send a self-addressed,
stamped envelope to: Scorpia 1319
Second Ave, Suite 540 NY,NY
10021; 2) On the Source: ST1030; 3)
On Compuserve, Go GAM-310, or
EMAIL 70001,1263.
Happy adventuring!

RID #8
There were 212 R.I.D.s turned in
by press time for this issue. The
breakdown of users was: Apple
(5396); Atari (4396); Others (4%).
Newly rated games and updated
games are listed with bold type in
the table on page 52.
GAME RATING
The table on page 52 includes
games evaluated by our readers.
For a game to be included in this
listing it must first have been
offered for rating in our regular
RID rating system. Games offered
for evaluation are those covered in
the magazine and/or those having
a good sales record during the time
of evaluation. Once offered for
evaluation, the game must have
been evaluated by a sufficient
number of readers to be included
in the results. Any game not
evaluated by at least 10% of the
respondents was not included in
the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider
such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?);
LIFE (does the game wear well?)

R.I.D. #9 (Use card provided)
Use boxes #1 and #2 to record
reader survey answers from
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY. See page
4 for instructions.
On this page a number of games
and articles are listed for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate
these games and articles. Use the
guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game
which you have not played enough
to have formed an opinion.

Please rate articles on the basis
of the article itself, not your opinion
of the game being reviewed. Enter
a zero for any article that does not
interest you.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 51 for details on the Reader Input Device

