December 1991 Number 89

Taking a Peek

Apogee Software Productions
Garland, TX
(800) 852-5659
DUKE NUKEM and PAGANITZU: A
dynamic arcade duo with a couple of
"pluses," Apogee Software has a fine
knack for bringing IBM-bound computer
garners a taste of what they're missing
with a SEGA Genesis. Duke Nukem, for
instance, uses over a meg of EGA/VGA
graphics and a fast frame rate that
makes motion very smooth indeed.
Paganitzu takes hero Alabama Smith
(Hmmm...) through the lost ark, er, Aztec pyramid (yeah, that's right) where as
many as 130 animated objects might be
on the screen at once. Both games are
the first of shareware trilogies and each
offers on-line hints and instructions. IBM
($15.00 each). Circle Reader Service #1.
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA
PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL: Originally
published on the Macintosh, this is a fan-

tastic pure strategy football game.
Players can design a team from scratch,
using both a "Team Draft" function that
allows each player to be customized and
a "Chalkboard" utility that lets plays be
designed from the ground up. It has a
convenient, icon-driven interface to help
players design their personalized team
playbooks and artificial intelligence
routines with situational awareness. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Capstone
Miami, FL
HOME ALONE: Cut from the classic 2dimensional multi-level scrolling arcade
game mold, here is what licensing a hit
movie can do for a computer game. Of
the same ilk as Disney's Arachnophobia, our hero must run, jump and
set traps which will reduce the points of
the two bumbling burglars as they chase
him through the latter half of the game.
While some nice digitized pictures are included in the "must watch every time"

Taking a Peek

opening credits, the game quickly becomes repetitive. Billed as "family entertainment without the family," it's not exactly long on entertainment, either. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
Eagle Graphics Company
Ellicott City, MD
(800) 253-8712
SKI-ULATOR: Clearly, designer Dan
Meyer must be a combination rocket
scientist/computer programmer/skier.
Ski-ulator, with its simulation feel, factors in gravity, wind resistance, friction,
etc. and allows players to race the clock
and simulate real skiing skills. Tucks, halftucks, flying through the air, helicopters
and more all add to the "rush" that
makes skiing the popular sport it is
today. Using EGA-level graphics, the
three courses are challenging enough to
leave any hot dogger laid up in a cast.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Epyx
Redwood City, CA
CHIP'S CHALLENGE: Proving that a
game doesn't have to be too fancy to be
good, Chip's Challenge is a straightforward puzzle-solving game. Packed with
amusing graphics and a gross of unique
timed one-player tiered puzzles, the
player must collect the microchips
needed to reach the next level. Of
course, keys, magnets, shields, etc. must
be collected along the way to reach
these chips, while monsters and barriers
keep things hectic. This is the type of
puzzle game that has a unique appeal to
those for whom puzzle games are not
their usual cup of tea. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #5.
Hyacinth
Norcross, GA
FLY THE GRAND CANYON: This
simulatoresque software allows its user to
take a "flying tour" of the Grand Canyon
through a line-drawn 3-D virtual world.
With the lines drawn in different colors,
players will have to don those famous
red-and-green 3-D glasses of yesteryear
as they travel through an actual
topographical map of this famous national park. Almost requiring a high-speed
computer, this is a '90s version of the
old Victorian Era "stereoscope" (i.e.,
something interesting to look at, but not
really something to "play"). IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service 1/6.
Imagisoft, Inc.
Albuquerque, NM
(505) 242-1998
CHINESE CHECKERS: This beautiful
EGA/VGA piece of shareware faithfully

recreates the game of Chinese Checkers.
For 0-6 players, each slot can be played
by either a human or computer player or
left vacant. The canny Al plays an intelligent game and on-line rules and move
hints are available. You know, Imagisoft
would probably sell a zillion of this little
gem if they had a licensing hook like
"Bruce Lee Chinese Checkers." Well
worth a look. IBM ($14.95). Circle
Reader Service //7.
Infogrames
London, England
7 COLORS: Something else from overseas, here is a pure strategy game complete with "7 colors." A board consisting
of diamonds must be conquered from a
player's corner by selecting the most
promising color to absorb. The first one
to get over 50% of the board takes the
game. Opponents cannot select each
other's colors, and a clock is running
throughout, forcing players to make
hasty moves. Well, at least the AdLib

sound support is relaxing! The patented
"Nocopi Security Paper" used in the
copy protection is something of a marvel, too, in that it can only be read when
the light shines from behind it. IBM.
Circle Reader Service #8.
Micro Sports, Inc.
Hixson, TN
NFL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL: An update of the older version, this football has
that magic "NFL license" and is known
for its completeness. With 140 teams
from 1987 to the present included (with
the actual player names, stats and
uniforms to match), players may also
draft their own "fantasy" teams as well.
Stat compiling runs in over 200
categories per team, the game also features stacks of plays, weather conditions,
scouting reports and more. Play is supported by the USA Today Sports Center
league (via modem) for those who like
true national competition. IBM ($79.95).
Circle Reader Service 1/9.

Taking a Peek

New World Computing
Hollywood, CA
MIGHT & MAGIC III: After the long (but
diverting) installation, one quickly discovers that New World Computing's
penchant for big role-playing adventures
will be taken to new heights. A state-ofthe-art sequel to the two previous Might
& Magic games, number three includes
full VGA graphics and sound support, a
point-and-click interface, auto-mapping
galore, icon-based information displays,
parties of eight and much more. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
Quantum Quality Productions, Inc.
Flemington, NJ
THE PERFECT GENERAL: As
previewed in issue #86, The Perfect
General is a hex-grid, tactical level,
abstract WWII-era wargame with modem
play features. IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service N 11.
THE LOST ADMIRAL: As previewed in
issue #87, The Lost Admiral is an
abstract naval game in the best Empire
tradition. An extremely challenging computer opponent and a plethora of
scenarios and campaign games greatly
enhance this "deep" strategy game. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
ReadySoft, Inc.
Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada
(416) 731-4175
WRATH OF THE DEMON: Another exercise in arcade action and wrist reflexes,
Wrath of the Demon sports a fantasy
storyline to go with this one. With virtually no instructions necessary (and an
equal amount provided), players will
quickly find themselves jumping, hitting,
crouching, rolling and doing other neat
tricks developed over countless quarters'
worth of experience from hanging around
the video arcades. IBM. Circle Reader Service #13.
Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
BATTLE TANK—KURSK TO BERLIN:
Every wargame has some sort of "you
are there" perspective. In the SimCan
Battle Tank series, you are the corps
commander/radio operator, this time on
the Russian Front from 1943-45. The
player(s) listen to radio reports from their
units, assessing their status and issuing
them new orders. One's tank companies,
infantry companies and artillery batteries
check in, updating humans with "messages from the front." With no sounds or
graphics, this purely mental exercise requires a bit more imagination than other

wargames of its ilk. IBM ($60.00). Circle
Reader Service #14.

Three-Sixty
Campbell, CA

PACIFIC STORM—THE SOLOMONS
CAMPAIGN: From the menu masters at
Simulations Canada, this easy-to-play
string of complex calculations recreates
the WWII land, air and sea battles around
Guadalcanal. As in their Malta Storm,
players can get involved in as much
detail as they want, leaving the rest for
the "staff" (computer AI) to work out.
Many options may be toggled for "what
ifs" and a laminated cardstock map and
grease pencils are included so that
players "create their own" graphics. All in
all, an absorbing exercise in combat
report reading. IBM ($60.00). Circle
Reader Service #15.

MEGAFORTRESS: This simulation of
an advanced B-52 puts the player not
only in the pilot's seat, but also the copilot's, navigator's, early warning and offensive weapons stations! Managing so
much is made easy by the
point-and-click interface in the guise of control
panels which go a long way toward
suspending player disbelief. Missions including training, Desert Storm and Flight
of the Old Dog (based on the book).
Akin to Harpoon in that the strategy element often supersedes the simulation element, while the learning curve is not
short, Megafortress is so compelling to
play that the complexity is quite
bearable. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #17.

Tanager Software Productions
San Leandro, CA
(415) 430-0900
C.Y.P.H.E.R.—OPERATION WILDLIFE:
Sort of a "Cardinal of the Wilderness"
game, this first product from Tanager
Software puts players in the shoes of a
C.Y.P.H.E.R. (Courageous Young Partners
in Hush-hush Electronic Radiotelegraphy)
agent, out to complete missions through
a city streets and wildlife park. With a
touch of "Where in the Heck is Carmine
ElSegundo," the game includes a built-in
FunCyclopedia with all of the information
required to successfully complete every
mission. Edutainment for older (9+ year
old) kids, or a diversion for adults,
everyone will learn a lot more about
mammals playing this game. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service 1116.

Virgin Games
Irvine, CA 92714
CORPORATION: The biggest corporation in the future world has bioengineered a monster out of Aliens, and
the government needs a covert operative
to find out if this is all true. A player can
purchase specific weapons and train for
certain skills before entering the maze of
the corporation's security systems in
search of the embryo from the genetic
laboratory. This combination role-playing
/ action game presents a wide array of
items and puzzles which must all be encountered before a successful conclusion
can be reached. IBM ($49.99). Circle
Reader Service #18.

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
by Jeffrey Eisner

V

isiting Epcot Center with all of its
impressive international pavilions is
the next best thing to attending a
World's Fair. The good news for me was
that I was here on business. I walked up
to the VIP window with my bag on my
head and told them I was the rumor guy.
They didn't buy it. "Anybody can put a
bag over his head," they complained. I
figured I'd tell them a rumor and prove
that I was who I said I was, so I told
them that Westwood Associates was
working on a new role-playing game for
Virgin Games that uses a first-person
perspective a la Dungeon Master or Eye
of the Beholder. The name of the game
is Tyrandhia. "Anybody can tell us a
rumor," responded the fellow in charge
of the VIP window.

I thought to myself, "What would convince a corporate loyalist from Disney
that I was legitimate?" Well, I'd heard of
the famous Katzenberg memo. Maybe a
memo from a large corporation would
do. I showed them a memo I'd lifted off a
Prodigy staffer that talked about a new
game they're offering on-line in 1992. It's
called The Next President and it lets
players all around the country take on
the role of local campaign managers for
the candidate of their choice. The memo
was pretty elaborate. It noted how there

would be an on-going poll based on input
from all the players involved. In that way,
the game would be dynamic and players
would have a chance to direct their candidate as to what issues to emphasize,
where to make appearances and what
kind of appearances to make, etc.
The Disney guy bought my story and
gave me a press pass that was good for
the rest of the afternoon. I figured that
would be sufficient time to check out the
international pavilions. It would be a
quick trip around the globe for the rumor
guy, something like the player would experience in QQP's upcoming Solitaire's
Journey: 1998. That's the working title
for a game that fits 104 different solitaire
games together into a quest that sends
the player all over the world. It even includes some interesting trivia questions. I
told them it sounded like Where in the
Cards is Carmen Sandiego?, but they
didn't think that was any funnier than
some of my readers think this column is.
I had no sooner reached the Norwegian
pavilion than I became mesmerized by a
familiar walk. Now, I would never reveal
exactly which beautiful public relations
professional was entering the pavilion
ahead of me, but you can be sure I was
right behind her as she boarded one of
the Viking ships which take visitors
through the exhibit. She teased me by
pretending not to notice me. Then she
whispered, "I hear Virgin is working on a
Norse game." I neither confirmed nor
denied her suggestion. "It is supposed to
be a quest game in the style of The Immortal," she continued, just as we were
interrupted by the audio-animatronic
visage of a Norse god sending us (at
least in the ride) back in time. "I've heard
that players have to find Thor's hammer,
Odin's crystal and the like. It's supposed
to be called Heimdall."
I thanked her for the information and
asked her if she'd heard that Ubisoft
had signed Jimmy Connor as a celebrity
license for their Pro Tennis Tour 2
game. She hadn't, but wasn't actually
surprised. Our Viking ship reached the
apex of the ride and we were immediately thrown forward into a log flumetype waterfall. As we settled into the pool

at the bottom of the incline, she said that
she felt like she had just been thrown
from a catapult.
That reminded me that QQP is planning to publish a medieval-style strategy
game called Castles & Catapults. The
chess-like game will support one to three
players, feature large maps and be
modem capable.
She seemed genuinely interested, but
as we disembarked from the Viking ship,
she told me that what she really wanted
to know was what Dynamix happened
to be doing. "After all," she fluttered her
eyelids seductively, "they didn't hire
John Cutter to make coffee in the morning." You cannot possibly imagine how
tempted I was to break down and tell her
everything I know about the fact that
Dynamix is planning to start publishing
role-playing games and sports games.
My male ego desperately wanted to impress her with the name of the science
fiction writer that the company was
negotiating with in order to place their
first role-playing game in "his" universe. I
wanted to tell her how the suspension of
disbelief with regard to the game world
would be enhanced by the way they were
using their 3-Space technology. I thought
about what Dynamix President Jeff Tunnell would do to me if I told an employee
from a rival company. "Maybe," I suggested, "we could go see Captain EO. I
could tell you about a cyberpunk game.
You see, Trilobyte is working on a
project for Virgin called Cybernet. It's
going to be a CD-ROM game based on
cyber reality."
Her eyes sparkled, her teeth gleamed
and I knew the temptation had passed.
We went to see the 3-D cyberfunk movie
and I could still hang onto my secret (at
least, that is, until press time).

Review

Field of (Weird) Dreams
Electronic Arts' Earl Weaver Baseball II
by Win Rogers

ome cultural
landmarks still
survive.
Nobody, for instance,
has yet done
Paradise Lost in rap,
Citizen Kane still
awaits colorization
and Chartres
Cathedral has not
been covered with aluminum
siding.

TITLE:

Earl Weaver Baseball II

Earl Weaver Baseball, however, was not so lucky.
Electronic Arts has put up
garish triple-decker grandstands
behind the Green Monster at Fenway and along Waveland
Avenue behind Wrigley. They
uprooted Connie Mack and John
McGraw, those canny old Founding Fathers, and switched leagues on them. They turned the 1927
Yankees into a team of hitless patsies. Perhaps worst of all, now the
natural rhythms of the game have been drained away and one is
forced to play herky-jerky, funhouse-mirror baseball. This was worth
waiting all summer for?
Playing Earl Weaver Baseball II is a field-of-nightmares experience.
It is like something cooked up by Gilbert and Sullivan's Mikado, who
wanted the punishment to fit the crime and the billiard sharp to be
forced to play
"On a cloth untrue,
With a twisted cue,
And elliptical billiard balls."
What was the computer baseball lover's crime to deserve this
punishment? Where was the "Earl" of Baltimore while this desecration was being carried out?

The original 1987 Earl Weaver Baseball is a classic that richly
deserves its reputation as the best sports simulation ever put on
a computer. It went far beyond previous computer baseball
games in uniting arcade action with a sophisticated statistical
simulation. Its reverence for baseball's past was evident in its
statistical recreations of all-star players back to the turn of the
century and in its restorations of hallowed, long-destroyed
baseball fields for them to play on. Within the limitations of its
CGA environment, it had great richness of detail and conveyed
the rhythmic flow of the game. No previous computer game had
come close to capturing the graceful ballet as a throw comes in
to the cutoff man with runners advancing on the basepaths.
The original game treated its users, as well as the very game of
baseball itself, with respect. It gave users many choices in configuring the game for play and did not force an either/or choice between
arcade and manage-only modes. A father and son could play
baseball enjoyably together by letting the old man play an easier arcade mode or letting him simply manage. The program offered excellent utilities for compiling statistics and printing out their results.
Earl Weaver's involvement in the project was no mere celebrity endorsement, either, since his feisty personality, obsession with statistics and tactical flair permeated the game. "Earl" was the computer
manager one played against and the little figure who came out to
kick dirt on the umpire's shoes on a disputed play. One could always "Ask Earl" when in doubt about a strategy. Watching "Earl"
choose and arrange the starting lineup after the opposing team had

Review

announced its starting pitcher always provided a short, incisive seminar on baseball tactics.

player statistics, making the process of adding new players and
teams much less mysterious and frustrating than it was previously.

It was certainly time for a new version of EWB. The 1989 upgrade
(Version 1.5) added some welcome enhancements such as support
for faster computers and a partial implementation of 16-color EGA
support. But Version 1.5 remained limited by its CGA beginnings.
While home and visiting uniform colors could be distinguished in the
batter/pitcher closeup window, all players were dressed alike on the
basepaths. Annoying bugs in the program made it impossible to call
hit-and-run plays against the computer and made "Earl" occasionally
forget his bullpen and keep his pinch hitter in the game to pitch.
One longed to see how the game of baseball might look and sound
in a simulation that took full advantage of today's faster processing
speeds, VGA cards and sound boards. More sophisticated algorithms
in the ballpark modification utility would make it possible to construct more accurate renditions of eccentrically configured parks like
the Los Angeles Coliseum or Toronto's Exhibition Stadium.

The Commissioner's Disk utilities for replaying simulated seasons
have also seen improvement. The program will not only provide
standings, league leaders and individual player statistics from
replayed seasons, but will also show individual game results, box
scores and team-versus-opponents breakdowns. (There may be a
bug in this routine, however, since an attempt to interrupt a season
partway through the replay froze the program and damaged this
reviewer's hard disk directory structure.) There are now two modes
of fast-stat replay, so the player has the option of playing simulated
games on the basis of their statistics alone or of factoring in the
physical characteristics of the playing fields as well.

Pre-release publicity heightened anticipation about the improvements in Version II. To be sure, there are some improvements in
EWB II, all relating to the statistical underpinnings of the game.
Player statistics can be downloaded over modem from the STATS
On-Line Services and transferred to the game, thus making it much
easier to use current player performance data. Additionally, player
statistics can be exported to and imported from Lotus spreadsheets.
This feature greatly facilitates data entry and statistical analysis,
though no key is provided to indicate the order of the data elements
in the spreadsheet. The inclusion of a team representing the Negro
Leagues of the pre-Jackie Robinson era is a wonderful symbolic gesture true to the spirit of the original EWB. Rosters are now big
enough to allow a team to carry a virtually unlimited reserve list, and
there is also a separate file for free agents. Finally, the game now
automatically assigns default rating points when one is entering

The most interesting addition to the statistical simulation is the
capability, available on the Commissioner's Disk, to simulate the
managerial style of various managers of the past and present, and
even program in one's own managerial tendencies for the computer
to utilize in computer-managed games. This utility must be taken
with a grain of salt, however, since it abstracts managerial tendencies
from the context of a roster of particular players. It will not work to
give a manager who loves to steal to a team that doesn't have the
speedsters. The program names Earl Weaver as manager of the
American League 1961-75 team but deliberately doesn't provide access to his manager profile, though it would be fun to analyze it. It
doesn't provide names of the managers of the 1990 teams,
presumably to avoid licensing costs, so one has to translate "St.
Louis 1" into Whitey Herzog and "St. Louis 2" into Joe Torre.
EWB II also retains the openness and flexibility that characterized
the original. One still has free choice of such elements as ballpark,
designated hitter status and degree of difficulty of the
play-and-manage mode, and one has more control than before over how the
simulation will handle pitching staffs, player injuries and the like.

Review

With all its new, sophisticated statistical tools this would be a
wonderful game—if only we didn't have to look at it. The visuals of
the game are completely new and very unpleasant. Instead of
greater differentiation between ballparks, there is less than in Version
1.5. Cancerous growths of looming grandstands have strangled all of
the historic parks, overwhelming their graceful scale and blurring the
differences among them. Stands are always packed with a faceless
mass drenched in the color of the home team's uniforms. There is
no way to avoid looking at these monstrosities even by playing faststat recreations, since they are the ever-present background to all
menus and are there while fast-stat simulations are being run. Putting
the menus on top of these garish backgrounds makes them harder
to read and means that many more menus are needed than in Version 1.5. There is no relief in turning to the roster screens, for they,
too, sport show-off color that draws attention to itself and detracts
from readability. At least it is possible to turn off the elevator music....
For planning late-inning bullpen strategies, Version 1.5 had a wonderful screen showing lineups, bullpens and benches of both teams
at the same time. This information is no longer available on a single
screen in EWB II, and neither can one see two 25-man rosters on the
screen at once while making trades, as was possible in Version 1.5.
The action of the game is even worse—an interesting experiment in
showing complex animated action that is just not ready for commercial release. The action is mapped on an abstract grid that can be
viewed from any angle on the field or in the stands. The computer
"director" chooses the sequence of
camera angles that best captures the unfolding action, sometimes following the
ball, sometimes a runner advancing
toward the next base. The director mode
can also be turned off to let the player
choose a preferred camera angle.
With the director mode on, the action
is fragmented by the constant stopping
and starting with new camera angles.
The animation is far from smooth and
continuous. Rather, it is jerky and full of
annoying freeze frames. Most of the
camera angles have far too great a
depth of field for the screen's resolution,
so figures in the distance tend to be displayed as little bouncing blobs of color,
resembling Smurfs playing volleyball. A
further distraction is that credit lines for
the software designers can apparently
pop up on the screen at any moment(!).
One would hope to be able to relieve this problem by "locking" a
camera angle on to "choose a seat in the grandstand" and watch the
game without the constant visual assaults. Unfortunately, even the
"locked camera" mode is far too busy. It belies its name by switching to a behind-the-plate view for every pitch and showing other
camera angles as well. The commands to remove sections of the outfield stands, part of the menu for changing camera angles, looked
promising as a way of correcting the game's inaccurate version of
Fenway Park. However, the "remove stands" command removed the
wall as well as the stands behind, leaving nothing but empty space.
The "locked camera" feature can also strain the limits of one's
hardware, and one may be forced to tinker a bit to avoid ending up
with large areas of blank space or the playing field covered by the
crowd pattern instead of by grass.
The batter is large, digitized and impressively realistic. However, the
aura of realism is shattered since players at different distances from
the camera, and even at the same distance, inhabit seemingly different universes. The catcher coming out from behind the plate to
field a bunt is only half to two-thirds the size of the batter next to
him. Players are shrunk, stretched, squeezed and distorted into odd
shapes faster than Alice was in Wonderland as the camera follows
them across the field. The EGA mode is less detailed but also mercifully less ambitious which means that some may prefer it to VGA.
The program stores the color of each player's skin, but the difference
is only visible in VGA.

These complex animated effects also exact a cost. To get the features of the original EWB one now has to pay a lot more. Because of
the space demands of the animations, many of the capabilities of Ver
sion 1.5 are no longer in the basic game but have been moved to
the Commissioner's Disk. Without the Commissioner's Disk one cannot add, trade or clone players, make up new teams—even move a
player from the active roster to the reserve list. The only printing option left in the basic game is the capability to print a box score at the
end of a game. A roster including starting lineup can be saved to a
disk file but it cannot be printed out from within EWB II. A detailed
comparison of features is found in the accompanying "Playoff
Matchups" chart.
I he stripped-down basic game feels like the prototype for a 16-bit,
hand-held machine game, with the more serious elements of the
game moved off to the Commissioner's Disk. It is disappointing that
a product that made such outstanding use of the computer in the
past has denied its heritage in this way.
Most disappointing of all is the feeling that nobody was minding the
store while these changes were being implemented. Too many
details have been botched that people who care about baseball
would have gotten right. The dominant American League and National League managers of the first part of the twentieth century, each indelibly associated with his league's traditions, were Connie Mack and
John McGraw. EWB II sets one's teeth on edge by giving each the
other's league to manage. Didn't anybody notice? The great Yankee
manager of the 1931-45 period was Joe
McCarthy, and of the 1946-60 period
was Casey Stengel. EWB II gives each
the other's era to manage. Didn't
anybody notice? As if running out of inspiration, the game gives Leo Durocher
teams in two different eras to manage
and gives Charlie Grimm to the Negro
Leagues as manager, instead of a black
manager whose style would have been
quite different from any white manager's
of the era.
The game provides a utility to convert
previous player disks to EWB II format.
There were disastrous results when this
utility was tested on the "All Time
Baseball" disk released by Electronic
Arts last year. The converted batters
proved so weak that a game between
the 1927 Yankees and the 1946 Red
Sox—two powerful hitting aggregations,
the Red Sox with their usual problematic
pitching staff—was scoreless until a run scored as the result of an
error in the 45th inning. Because of an apparent bug in the conversion program, none of the great historic teams on this disk has any
scoring punch. Again, nobody seems to have noticed until this was
brought to their attention by this beleaguered reviewer.
See the accompanying "Playoff Matchups" chart for a more
detailed comparison of features. Fans of EWB should not upgrade to
EWB 11 before seeing the graphics on the new version. They may
want to stick with Version 1.5, though Electronic Arts is unlikely to
support it with new player disks and bug extermination unless hit
with a protest as noisy as the one that brought back Classic Coke.
Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball, reviewed in CGW #88 and included on the chart, is a strong competitor to EWB II. It bears a
close family resemblance to EWB II on the statistical side and offers
VGA graphics that are much more pleasing to the eye. It consumes
a large amount of hard disk space and its basic game package does
not offer as many playing options as the complete EWB II system. It
is not known how much its promised Fantasy Manager utility disk
will improve things.
We are told that V.I.P. participants at the All-Star Game (press and
baseball executives) were very positively impressed with the game.
Perhaps we (like many baseball fans) are too enamored with the
past to see the elegance of Earl Weaver Baseball 11's system. We
leave it to the vox populi to make the final decision (sort of like letting the fans vote on the All-Star line-ups).

Sneak Preview

Sneak Previews are not designed
to be reviews. They are feature articles based on "works in progress"
which CGW's editors have deemed
worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the
"final word" on a product, since we
expect to publish appropriate review
coverage when the game is completely finished. Sneak Previews are
designed to inform our readers
about upcoming games and
generate excitement about the "state
of the art" of computer game design
in general.
nterplay's goal, in Star Trek: The
25th Anniversary Game (Star Trek)
is to help round out the five-year mission that was never concluded in the
three-year run of the television series.
The original concept for the game was to
enable the player to experience an entire
"season" of adventures which were to be
designed, essentially, as television
episodes.

I

Starfleet Command Performance
As of this writing, the game will contain
about one-third of a season's worth of
television-style episodes (nine) and the
player will experience the episodes by
guiding the familiar landing party of Kirk,
Spock, McCoy and the ever-expendable
"red shirt" through the stories. Each
"episode" contains anywhere from four
locations (in the simplest scenario) to 12
locations in order to unfold a given
storyline. Hence, from the time one
beams down to a planet to encounter the
puzzles, banter and fiction that drives the
game, Star Trek feels right.
Exploring the "final frontier" involves a
universe of trade-offs, however. One
begins with instant familiarity with the
main characters and their setting, but
that very strength brings with it a "parallel universe" of script approval, Trekkie
expectations and character limitations.
Veteran game designer and novelist
Michael Stackpole wrote the original fifteen scripts for the game, but the film
studio rejected some of the detailed references to shows in the television series because they felt that certain TV episodes
were of lesser quality and untrue to the
basic universe. Stackpole had known
that he would have to be careful with
details and characterizations in the Star
Trek universe, but must have figured that
his experience in writing Battletech

novels would put him in good stead for
developing plots for existing universes.
What he could not have expected was
for the film studio to decide against plot
elements derived from episodes which
were already part of the Star Trek
legend. Eventually, Liz Danforth came in
to craft new "episodes" (i.e. mini-quests)
to take the place of those which
Paramount was unable to approve.

She Canna' Take Inna More
That was not the only "trade-off" to be
experienced in designing for the Star
Trek universe. The design team found
themselves confronted with a problem related to starship combat. In the television
series, conflict was limited to a couple of
orders to the crew on the bridge, a few
photon torpedo runs and the actors
throwing themselves around the bridge
to simulate the Enterprise taking hits.
This was effective enough for television
in the '60s, but it wasn't very entertaining
as a game.

So, the design team elected to have the
Enterprise cavorting like a "fighter" in
dogfights at sub-light speeds. These action sequences are somewhat reminiscent of Wing Commander and should
be fairly entertaining to those who enjoy
arcade-style sequences, but we can already hear the howls from "Trekkie"
purists who, like Scottie, will imagine the
stress required for a starship to handle
like that and will cry, "Captain, she
canna' take inna more!"
The action sequences themselves serve
an admirable purpose in providing tension and drama between "episodes" and
they allow the programmers to show off
the impressive planetary graphics they
have designed, but one wonders if the
design decision will not alienate some
members of the target audience. Fortunately, the artistic presentation of the
rotating planets already looks better than
most of the Class M planets orbited by
the television version of the Enterprise.

Sneak Preview

Interplay's Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary Game
by Johnny L. Wilson
niversary Game. There are warning signals when the player is
being too irresponsible. After all,
losing the "red shirt" will not exactly endear the good captain to
Starfleet Command and it is a
warning to the player that he/she
may not be approaching a conflict in the right manner (i.e. the
"red shirt" will always die before
Kirk is endangered). None who
watched the original television
series ever really believed that
Kirk would die. In the game, however, we will have to be more careful as the death of Kirk (as the
player's alter ego) ends the game.

It Is Only Logical, Captain

"I'm Just a Country Doctor"
Another trade-off in the design is in the
non-typing interface. The very intuitive,
non-intrusive and effective interface pops
up when one clicks on an on-screen character. A humanoid outline is depicted on
a window which covers a portion of the
selected on-screen character and one
simply clicks on the humanoid's hand to
"touch" something, its foot to "go" somewhere, a globe it is holding to "use" an
item (or, as Captain Kirk, to "command"
someone), its eyes to "examine" anything and its mouth to "say" something.
In fact, the command interface is so unobtrusive that many will ask, "What's the
trade-off?" The trade-off can be seen in
the fact that the game is icon- and puzzledriven while the series it is based on was
largely dialogue driven. The design team
has been sensitive to the dialogue-driven
nature of the universe, however, and has
managed to fill the data files with classic
lines like: "Dammit, Jim, I'm a doctor,
not a miracle worker!" and "He's dead,
Jim." Some plots will have to be solved
by making menu-driven dialogue choices

in sensitive diplomatic negotiations, just
as one would expect on TV.
Indeed, the goal of the game is not to
hack and slash one's way across the star
map. Rather, the emphasis is on thinking
one's way out of difficult situations rather
than shooting one's way out of them.
If one is successful in resolving the conflicts arising during this "fourth season,"
the game gives the player a certain number of skill points. These points can be
cashed in and used to purchase better
skills for party members. These skills, in
turn, may determine how successful the
player will be in future "episodes."

He's Dead, Jim
One very courageous design decision
was allowing the possibility for Captain
Kirk to die. Most publishers do not like to
put their protagonists at risk and most
gamers will not be expecting it to be any
more possible for Captain Kirk to die
than it would be for Luke Skywalker to
die. It just isn't done in film and television.
Fortunately, Captain Kirk is not handled
capriciously in Star Trek: The 25th An-

The "episodes" themselves have
a very nice variety. In one episode, there is a religious community that seems to be seeing
demons behind every bush. In
another, a group of pirates have
hijacked a tug. Romulan diplomacy serves as the focal point of
another episode and Harry Mudd
returns in yet another. We were
fascinated by the neo-Aztec religion which crops up in two episodes and the return of Kirk's corbomite gambit as something more than
a bluff in yet another. The pirates have to
be handled something like the "gangster"
world in "A Piece of the Action" in an
episode near the end. The final epi-sode
is still awaiting that necessary script approval from Paramount. Suffice it to say
that the final confrontation of the adventure should be something very special.

Enterprise, Report
Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary
Game is, at once, more successful and
more potentially controversial than any
of the previous Star Trek computer
games. Although the stories and characterizations capture the heart of the series
with a zest as yet unseen in a computer
game, the Star Trek universe has engendered such a devout band of purists
that one wonders how they will react to
the trade-offs necessitated in this new
design. Nevertheless, one impression
seems clear—Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary Game offers both a visual and
verbal richness that should seem like
warp speed compared to earlier Star
Trek products.

Behind the Screens

"Let There Be Barton Creek!"
The Creation of a Links Course Disk
by Russell Sipe

s

these words are being written,
the PGA is gearing up for the prestigious PGA Tour Championship,
in which the top 30 money winners, plus
all tourney winners of the year, compete
for the largest purse in golf ($2 million).
This writer is looking forward to the tournament because he has played the
course on which it is to be held many
times: Pinehurst #2 in Pinehurst, North
Carolina. This stately course is considered by pros and course designers
alike as being among the very best courses in the world.

A

The truth is that this writer has never
physically been to North Carolina. All
those rounds of golf at Pinehurst #2 were
played on Access Software's Links,
using their latest course disk (which just
happens to be Pinehurst #2). The
detailed courses, rendered in full VGA
graphics by the Links design team, are
easily the best products on the market in
terms of giving you the feel that you are
really "there." CGW was impressed
enough with the results that we gave
Links our coveted Action Game of the
Year award in 1991.
Recently CGW was invited by Access
Software to observe the creation of an upcoming "course disk," Barton Creek
Country Club in Austin, Texas. Barton
Creek has two championship courses.
The Fazio Course (designed by
renowned course designer Tom Fazio) is
the site of the Senior PGA Liberty Mutual
Legends of Golf Tournament. Beautiful,
but treacherous, it will make a great
Links course. Also at Barton Creek is the
Ben Crenshaw course, designed by Ben

Behind the Screens

Crenshaw and Bill Coore. Access
Software is going to digitize both courses. The Fazio course will be released as
a regular course available through their
normal distribution. The Crenshaw
course will likely be a bonus course offered at a low price to Links owners who
send in their warranty cards.
The Crenshaw course reflects Ben
Crenshaw's philosophy that a golf course
should stress strategy. The fairways are
wide and the greens are big. That is not
to say that the course is easy. To score
well on the Crenshaw course, you must
plan each shot well. A mediocre to
average drive on some holes may leave
you in the fairway, but 100 yards further
from the pin than a strategically executed drive. Unlike the Fazio Course,
there are many ways to approach each
hole. This is the style of golf preferred by
European pros.
The Fazio course, on the other hand, follows a different philosophy. Some call it
the "fly it in" style. Fairways are narrower. Hazards force players to hit accurate drives. Greens are well guarded,
often requiring the player to "fly" the ball
into the green rather than running shots
up onto the green (see the photo of the
16th green for a perfect example).
There are four basic inputs the Links
team uses to design each course:
topographical maps, aerial photographs
of each hole, videotape of each hole shot
from the player's perspective, and still
photos of a wide variety of objects and
shapes on the course. These various sources of information are used by the team
to design each course on their
proprietary Course Architect software.
The Course Architect includes a CADstyle program used to create the grid
and place objects. This program allows
them to input the rough topographical
data to get their starting grid, modify the
grid based on the various photographic
records, and position all manner of objects around the course. The Course Architect includes a bit-map editor with
which trees, buildings, and other objects
can be created and sized. As of this writing, there is a chance that Access may
make available a commercial version of
the course editor. We hope they decide
to do so. If you'd like to see a Links
course editor, we suggest you write them
a letter.
The design of a Links course can be
summarized in four steps.
Step 1: Information from the
topographical maps is input into the
Course Architect. This creates a "rough

edit" course. (Unfortunately, topographical maps of golf courses vary in their
availability and detail). Each "grid" point
on the computer map is assigned an
elevation.
Step 2: A helicopter flies the length of
the course and an aerial survey of each
hole is created. The aerials are used to
document an accurate top-down view.
(Actually, they fly somewhat to the side
of the hole so as to get some sense of
height from the terrain.) The team tries
to arrange the aerial work in the late afternoon so as to have shadows (which give
additional topographical information). At
the computer, they view the photos and
modify the grid to fit the aerials. Shapes
of greens, bunkers and tee boxes are all
conformed to the aerials. Such things as
the exact course of cart paths and locations of structures are confirmed.
Step 3: They videotape the entire
course from ground level. They use the
tape (still frames) to view every angle
and slope on the course (perspective
views), then modify the grid accordingly.
On-course objects are more accurately
positioned, based on information in the
video. The team uses an S-VHS system,
which allows them to view crisp, clear
still frames for course editing purposes.
Step 4: Still photos of the course are
taken. Typically, Access will take some
600 still shots for each course. The still
photos concentrate on objects (trees, oncourse items such as ball washers, buildings on the course or in the panorama,
etc.). Every type of tree encountered on
the course is digitized. (Often, several examples of the same tree type are
digitized, giving the team a selection to
choose from when placing individual
trees on the course.) The Course Architect allows the team to size the trees
and, in turn, accomplishes two purposes:
providing a sense of depth or (depending
upon location of the tree in question) allowing one digitized tree to be perceived
by the player as different (i.e. non-identical) trees.
The background panoramas are
created from a series of cells which "surround" the database. Depending on your
location on the course and the direction
you are facing, the program calls up the
appropriate cells that form the backdrop
of the view. Barton Creek will contain a
number of luxury homes on the hillsides
beyond the course boundaries. These
homes will be digitized, set into the background cells and scaled. The closer you
are to an object in the background cell,
the larger that object will appear.

Behind the Screens

There are currently five courses available for play with Links: Torrey Pines
(which comes with the program);
Pinehurst, Bay Hill, Firestone, and Bountiful. With the exception of Bountiful, each
of these courses has been the site of a
major tournament. One thing the Access
folks look for in their course selection is
variety. There is a wide range of golf architecture in the five current courses.
This quest for variety will continue with future disks.
The two most requested courses from
Links customers are Augusta National
and Pebble Beach. To date, no one has
obtained the rights to do Augusta in a
computer golf game. Accolade did Augusta for their Mean 18 game but got in
some hot water over it. As a matter of
clarification, it should be noted that due
to the detailed nature of Links disks, the
design team must actually go to the
course and do their detailed photography. This, of course, involves working
closely with course management. Access
is attempting to gain permission from
both Augusta and Pebble Beach to do a

course disk, but management at the two
courses has not yet responded positively
Upcoming courses that have agreed to
become part of the Links course disk
library are Dorado Beach, FL; Mauna
Kea, HI; and Harbor Town, SC (Hilton
Head). Access Software is in various
stages of discussion with some half
dozen other courses as well.
Zeke McCabe (there is a name straight
out of a Zane Gray novel) and John Bervan are the two principal men respon-

sible for the course disks. Zeke is a
professional photographer and a passionate fan of golf. Not only does he
shoot the stills and the aerials for the
course disks, he is responsible for course
acquisition and plays the heck out of
each course disk to make sure it plays
like the real course. In that capacity he
goes to dozens of exclusive country
clubs, where he enjoys the hospitality of
the club and numerous rounds of golf, at
no cost to himself. (It's a dirty job, but
someone has to do it.) John shoots the
video, plays the courses with Zeke (just
so Zeke doesn't think he is the only one
making a sacrifice for the company), and
works intensely with the Course Architect
software, along with Mark MacArthur,
Mark Carver, Chris Carver, Jim Slade,
and Bruce Carver. Typically, Zeke and
John will spend up to a week at the
course gathering the photographs and
playing the course. It takes about three
months for the Links team to produce a
course disk.
Well, it's time to get back out on the
course.... [Sound of swing] Whack!...
Thunk!... "It looks like I hit a tree, Jim."

Review

Microprose's Gunship 2000
by Bryan A. Walker
TITLE:
SYSTEM:

Gunship 2000
PC (80286 10 MHz or higher recommended)
VGA, Ad-Lib, Roland cards supported
640k required
COPY PROTECTION:Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$69.95
DESIGNERS:
James M. Day,
Darrell Dennies, and
Detmar Peterke
PUBLISHER:
Microprose Software
Hunt Valley, Maryland

The author has been an avid computer
gamer since the introduction of the TRS80. He is currently stationed in Germany
as an AH-64 Apache pilot for the U.S.
Army and saw action in Operation Desert Storm. Views expressed in this article
are those of the author and do not reflect
official policy or position of the Department of the Army,
Department of Defense or the United States government.

H

ot on the heels of the stunning success America's attack

helicopters enjoyed in Desert Storm, Microprose has
released Gunship 2000, touting it as the most realistic
helicopter simulator game ever. Improving on the original Gun-

ship, Gunship 2000 adds VGA
graphics with Ad-Lib and Roland
sound support. The player can fly AH6G, OH-58D, AH-1W, UH-60, AH-64,
AH-66, and Longbow Apache helicopters. Taking realism a step further, the
player can command a flight of up to
five helicopters of three different types
simultaneously, each equipped with
the latest weapons. Single-ship, multiship, and campaign missions are now
available, whether over Europe or the
Persian Gulf.

If Pigs Could Fly (Critical
Remarks)
Now, the truth is that an AH-64 can perform hair-raising
maneuvers in reality, but flies like an overloaded Huey in Gunship 2000. In this game, helicopters fly like pigs—plain and
simple. The player will be lucky to coax a 60-degree bank from
the game's helicopters without crashing. When nosed over into a
dive, the choppers accelerate much faster than they should, but
if a computer pilot should attempt a "cyclic climb," the
airspeed bleeds off so fast this reviewer expected to hear
screeching rubber. This inaccuracy is aggravated by the
game's control system. The tail rotor pedals have been incorporated into the joystick, which helps. Unfortunately, the "+"
and "-" keys control the collective. Players may find this arrangement difficult. With the frequent requirement for rapid collective applications, it is unfortunate that the designers did
not incorporate a mouse or second joystick option into the
controls. The adjustable Auto Pilot and Auto Hover features,
while not perfect, will be lifesavers to beginning players.
In addition, the graphics are good, but don't challenge
today's "state of the art." Still, terrain features are realistic
and very functional, such that hugging the ground and weaving through valleys pays off with visual enjoyment and aircraft survivability. Unfortunately, the terrain models of the two
different regions are distinguishable only by brown ground
and palm trees, with the billowing dust clouds helicopters
faced in the Gulf conspicuously absent. Also, while occasional ship-borne missions may provide an interesting
change of pace, seasoned players may find the aircraft
models to be chunky and uninspired. This reviewer also felt
that marauding Mi-24s resembled flying piggy banks.
While there is plenty of chrome with the ten optional
"camera" views of the action (available during missions), the
lack of visible ground texture is a significant hindrance in
judging altitude without using the HUD. The ground looks the
same at 50 feet or 250 feet. This discrepancy, combined with
the collective control arrangement mentioned earlier, can
make fighting at very low altitudes tough. The least realistic
effect involves the "night mission" graphics, which are simply
subdued renditions of the daytime versions. This is a far cry
from the infra-red and image-intensified environment that is
to be found in actual night helicopter operations.

Review

This reviewer found himself annoyed by the lack of individuality
which the game's helicopters suffer. Gunship 2000 gives the
player the capabilities of "showroom" models that aren't really in
service. For instance, the AH-1W lacks a FLIR targeting system
and night-attack capability; production Apaches can't fire TOW
missiles and Army Blackhawks would require extensive modifications in order to fire Hellfire missiles autonomously. Note that
aerodynamic performance between the different helicopters is indistinguishable, since the only differences between helicopters in
the game are a few different usable weapons and ordnance
loads. Hence, much of the diversity of helicopter warfare is lost.
The avionics packages presented in the game are also too
generic. Moving-map displays, while present in no real production bird, do make game play much easier. In reality, the APR-39
is simply a radar-warning receiver. The game's APR-39 acts more
like a 360-degree scanner, showing all sorts of targets. This isn't
realistic, but does improve situational awareness. The unique
Mast Mounted Sight of the OH-58D is the only aircraft-unique feature reproduced in the game.
Further, while airstrikes and fire support are advertised, this
reviewer never encountered them, even after completing over
100 missions. Microprose representatives stated that these features are present, but random. While encounters with enemy helicopters aren't
uncommon, combat against jets is realistically rare.
The campaign game allows the player
to lead four other pilots in a multi-mission foray in either Europe or the Persian Gulf. This feature could have been
a strong point, but the mission sequence
lacks any true continuity. A successful
mission pushes the red on the briefing
map back. A failed mission results in
the red creeping forward. The bad guys
are anonymous, and the "big picture" is
never fully painted. The camaraderie of
men at war is barely addressed.
A final quibble can be made with the
soundtrack. While the major sound cards are supported, the effects presented are sub-standard. The throaty stutter of the
Apache's 30mm cannon and supersonic tear of a rocket salvo
are sorely missed. The insipid "thip-thip-thip" used to simulate
the main rotors hardly does justice to the visceral din that a
3000+ horsepower helicopter actually produces. Fortunately, however, except for the horrid opening score, the musical fanfares
are well-rendered.

Passing Inspection (Positive Strokes)
The wide selection of weapons is a strong point. While the flight
times and trajectories of the missiles are generic, their ranges
and effects are consistent with unclassified data. Fire-and-forget
weapons such as the MMW Hellfire and Maverick are simulated
well. Unfortunately, the single-minded targeting system used in
the game prevents the laser-guided weapons from being used to
best effect.
Perhaps the most interesting portion of the game concerns
multi-ship missions where different helicopters can be employed
in meeting the requirements of various situations. For example, a
Search-and-Rescue mission requires a Blackhawk, where an allout attack might call for Apaches. In addition, it is possible to
divide one's five birds into a "heavy" team and "light" team. Perhaps the player could choose to fly a Longbow Apache escorting

Blackhawks on a troop extraction mission, while two Comanches
simultaneously destroy a mobile Scud site. The latter presents
the player an especially vivid perception of what it means to
send men off to possible death as the computer provides a
cinematic sequence where the player watches the "other" team
fly off into the horizon on a mission. The only disappointment
here is that a mission editor is not included with the game, an unfortunate omission.
It seems almost redundant to compliment a Microprose simulation on the manual, but the documentation to Gunship 2000 is
no exception to the fine tradition. Novice players, in particular,
will appreciate the well-illustrated manual with its helpful explanations of rotary-wing aerodynamics and tactics, as well as its informative historical section.

Fire and Forget (Gameplay)
The pre-flight option screens are colorful and present an impressive number of options. Players not only opt for single ship or
multi-ship missions, but they get a chance to configure the
helicopter's weapons and fuel status for maximum effectiveness,
as well. They can also adjust the difficulty setting of features including Flight Realism, Visibility, Terrain Avoidance, Enemy
Troop Quality and CP/G (Copilot/Gunner) responsibilities.
One of the most interesting player-adjustable features, the CP/G can be instructed to independently employ the
weapons and countermeasures (the
most realistic option), just the countermeasures, or simply call out targets.
The easiest possible settings are recommended for the first several missions.
Realistic tactics, relying on hovering
fire from behind terrain masking, are
very effective, but very difficult to
employ in this game. If the player can't
precisely hover while allowing the CPG
to fire the weapons, the enemy air
defense will settle the argument. The requirement for precision is frustrated by
the constant and unrealistic toggling of the radar and IR jammers
the player must perform. The Longbow Apache, with the ability
to carry 16 "fire-and-forget" MMW Hellfire missiles, is the game's
best choice for these tactics.
Finally, at the end of a mission, the Replay Screen appears.
This "VCR" function allows the player to view previous missions
from any of the helicopter's vantage point. The views are limited
to the player's own cockpit, or a 360-degree exterior view of a
selected helicopter. Some viewpoint manipulation can produce
very dramatic scenes. The mission can be entered at any point
in the tape, but the altered tape can't be saved. While functional,
the Replay is not nearly as polished as those of Red Baron or
Chuck Yeager's Air Combat.

Performance Evaluation
Gunship 2000 has some thorns. Each strength is counterbalanced by a weakness and the steep learning curve will
frustrate those spoiled by the commonplace "boot and shoot"
simulator games. Players who will enjoy this game most are the
ones with patience, sure hands, and a true passion for destruction. While the exhilaration of tree-skimming helicopter combat
can't be reproduced on any PC, the designers have succeeded in
creating the best helicopter simulator game currently available,
thorns included.

Review

At the Trading Deadline
Franchise Football League: Fantasy Football
by Wyatt Lee and J.D. Lambright
or all the disgruntled fans who have ever
TITLE:
heard the news of a trade and exclaimed,
SYSTEM:
"An imbecile could be a better general
PRICE:
manager than that moron!" and every fan who
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:
has wanted an excuse to pore over those Monday
morning box scores with the dedication of a forensic accountant, there is a new software program
designed especially for them. For everyone who
has tried to be commissioner for a fantasy league, but got
bogged down with all that record-keeping, Franchise Football
League: Fantasy Football (FFL) is a program that has arrived
at the right time. FFL is a database for setting up, managing and
running one's own fantasy football league.

F

Opening Kickoff
To start, one must decide how many teams (from one to sixteen) will be in the league. If there are more potential owners
than this, it may be necessary to have some of the teams coowned or to set up more than one league (in different directories,
of course). Since "fantasy" teams are usually an amalgam of the
best players from numerous teams and not equivalent to actual
NFL teams, most fantasy league owners select customized
names for their teams.
Then, prior to starting the draft, the team owners must make
some important decisions about the league structure. The league
can be set to the default parameters for scoring or one can input
a customized scoring system. The default is well-structured and
easily understandable, so those who are running a league for the
first time will probably want to stick with it. Next, one must
decide on how many players to draft. Each team will need four
quarterbacks, six running backs, six wide receivers, two tight
ends, two kickers, two special teams players, two linebackers
and two defensive backs.
If, however, the team owners are made up of more casual fans,
the process may be simplified (and the draft made more efficient) by allowing owners to substitute the whole defense from
one NFL team rather than taking the time to draft individual
defensive players. The default is for 28 players, but leagues who
opt to draft the whole defense of one team can streamline this to
22 players on each roster. One must be careful if the league opts
for the latter option, however. This will mean that the scoring for
one's special teams, as well as the scoring by the defense, is included in the choice of the defensive team.
Further, as in any other kind of fantasy, boardgame or computer game sports league, league rules for draft deadlines, trading, waivers and roster deadlines should all be adopted before
the draft. This will avoid much frustration if the league is not only
to survive its first season, but continue for several seasons of
NFL action.

Franchise Football League:
Fantasy Football
IBM
$34.95
Space Tech Enterprises
Space Tech Enterprises
P.O. Box 9805
McLean, VA

central location where there is no computer, it can
still be accomplished without a computer and the
results entered at a later time.

Drafting is very simple. All players available
during the 1990 season are on the data disk.
These may be printed out so that all owners have
a reference copy for cross-checking. If a desired
player did not play during the 1990 season, there is an option for
adding players.
After the draft, the hard part is inputting the data for the scoring system each week. Never fear, there are four options for acquiring data, each with its corresponding price. One may receive
the necessary statistics by fax, Federal Express, modem or the
local sports page. The fax runs $6.95/week for the 17 weeks of
the season. Federal Express is $13.95/week but comes on disk
and can be transferred directly into the stat files. Modem access
is $3.95/week and also can be transferred directly into the stat
files. Purchasing the local or national sports paper varies depend
ing on one's choice.
Scoring is based, of course, on the performances of one's starting roster players for that week. A run of 0-9 yards nets 6 points,
while a run of 40+ yards gains 12 points (using the default
parameters). All players who score and were started receive
points. These points are added with other player points to determine which fantasy franchise won for that week. Naturally, points
are cumulative over the course of the season.
Weekly reports, which can be generated as hard copy or simply
viewed on-screen, include weekly standings, starting player
roster, non-starter roster, players on the injured reserve/waiver
list, starting team worksheets, franchise rosters, available players
remaining in the pool, graphs of weekly standings and graphs of
season standing.

Personal Fouls
The primary drawback to the program is that it tends to put
overweighted emphasis on the quarterbacks and the kickers.
Quarterbacks score twelve points for a one-yard run, while a running back must run 40+ yards to score the same number of
points. There are no negative points. If a quarterback is sacked
in the endzone, the defensive team is awarded 12 points. The
quarterback is not penalized! In addition, the quarterback
receives points for almost all scoring plays in which he is involved.
Kickers receive points for PATs and field goals. For a 40- to 49yard field goal, the kicker receives five points. For a 50+ yard
field goal he receives ten points. With the expertise of kickers
nowadays, a 40+ yard field goal is commonplace and 50+ yarders happen almost weekly.

First and Ten

Touchdown

After setting the date for the draft, deciding on the league scoring system and all the other required decisions, the league is
ready to commence. If the owners can meet where the commissioner has access to a computer during the course of the draft,
the program will greatly facilitate the administration of the draft.
It can be set to administer straight drafts, alternating drafts or
reverse number drafts. If the draft should need to be held at a

In spite of the weight given to quarterbacks and kickers,
Franchise Football League: Fantasy Football has just about
everything one could want in a fantasy football league program.
It facilitates the massive amount of bookkeeping required to
keep a league going and will allow many more football fans to
enjoy the weekly performances of their favorite players, even if
their favorite learn goes down in defeat.

Survey

From ABCs and 123s to Global
Ecology and Microchips
A Survey of Educational Software

T

here is a virtual world of learning

by Caitlin Ackelson
DOS
ages 3-7
$39.95

tools available to students with access to a personal computer. In this
way, the children of CGW readers are extremely fortunate to have such great
potential resources within their reach. As
a part of our continuing coverage of
educational software packages, the following is a survey of educational games
received in the last few months.
These products are listed in subject
group order by the game's title, manufacturer, machines on which it can be
played, recommended age range, suggested retail price and a brief description.
Evaluations are based on educational
value, entertainment value, ease of play
(which includes set-up time and learning
curve), imaginative scope and this
reviewer's unabashed personal bias.

Letters, Reading, Language
Reader Rabbit 2
The Learning Company
DOS
ages 5-8
$59.95
This is an entertaining language game
with sophisticated, attractive graphics
and a keyboard interface that allows
players to practice such concepts as
vowel sounds, rhyming, compound
words and alphabetical order. There are
lots of cute, fluff-tailed animals accompanying the player and dancing happily
to the peppy, computerized soundtrack.
Adult help may be needed at first to help
read the on-screen instructions.
Grammar Examiner
Britannica Software
DOS, Apple II, Commodore 64
ages 11-14
$29.95
In what could be called "SimCopyEditor," players practice grammar,
proofreading, punctuation and capitalization skills as reporters for the Grammar
Examiner newspaper. A storyline about
the player's progressing career (from
novice reporter to editor-in-chief) accompanies an excellent exercise in English
grammar and composition. A must for
young, aspiring journalists everywhere.

Beautiful graphics punctuate this beginner-level program that lets kids do just
what the title indicates—learn about letters. The Berenstain Bears skate through
a lush forest setting and introduce such
topics as letter identification, upper and
lower case letters and alphabetical order.
Known for their humor, the Berenstain
Bears are an excellent conduit for this
kind of exercise and make a fine contribution to the "A is for apple" tradition.

The Milliken StoryTeller
Milliken
DOS, Apple II
ages 3-8
$49.95
In a program designed to help develop
reading comprehension skills, a digitized
human voice (which supports all major
sound cards plus the internal speaker)
tells such stories as Little Red Riding
Hood, The Ugly Duckling and Henny
Penny, with the option of having each
word underlined as it is spoken, to help
players read along. Selected screens can
also be printed, with a package of four
crayons (red, yellow, blue and green) included in the box for players' coloring
pleasure.
Marvin the Moose
Milliken
DOS
ages 3-8
$49.95
This package does The Milliken StoryTeller one better by including not only
stories read aloud to assist with reading
comprehension, but also by delving into
relationships between characters and approaching concepts in social skills.
Players can also write their own stories
via an icon interface and print out and
color scenes from the game. Sweettempered characters and charming
graphics create the prevalent atmosphere.
The Berenstain Bears Learn About
Letters
Britannica Software

Joshua's Reading Machine
Compu-Teach
DOS, Apple II, IIgs, Macintosh
ages 4-6
$49.95
Joshua Giraffe guides players through
selections from children's literature, such
as Mother Goose rhymes, songs like
"The Farmer in the Dell" and Aesop's
Fables, as they practice spelling and
beginner-level reading. Easy to learn, the
program consists of nine different games.
Exercises like Picture Dictionary help
players learn to associate an on-screen
picture with its corresponding word.
Joshua's Tinker Tales
Compu-Teach
DOS, Apple II, IIgs, Macintosh
ages 5-7
$49.95
An interactive program, Tales allows
players a chance to direct the characters
in a story, then observe the consequences of their decisions. This "What should
happen next?" feature allows players to
make predictions about their expected
outcomes and see the results of their
choices. Allowing players to choose
where the stories will go each step of the
way, it serves as an engrossing and entertaining approach to reading comprehension skills.

Compound Subjects
Cotton I ales
Mindplay
DOS, Apple, Macintosh
ages 4-8
$49.99

Survey

It's never too soon to learn word
processing and this program proves it.
By allowing very young players to use
the interactive picture menus, it simplifies
creative writing and beginning desktop
publishing concepts. For players who are
just learning to read and write, this program provides an opportunity to express
themselves with both words and pictures
on a computer.
Easy Street
Mindplay
DOS, Apple IIgs
ages 4-8
$49.99
Players take a shopping trip down Easy
Street while learning and practicing
counting, mnemonic and problem-solving
skills. While following a shopping list and
staying within an allotted budget, players
use classification, labeling and matching
skills to shop and purchase. This awardwinning program has been recently updated with MCGA/VGA graphics, new
characters and colorful backgrounds to
make for an even more entertaining
game.

cises. Two completely distinct skill levels
are available in each subject for a broad
range of coverage. Each concept is approached from many different angles.
For example, one exercise has the player
first select a letter and see a corresponding animation; then the player views a
graphic and must type in the first letter
of the picture viewed; finally, an onscreen image appears and hangmanstyle blanks can be typed in to spell out
the word in question. Graphics and
sound are somewhat limited, but concepts are addressed very thoroughly and
thoughtfully.
Headline Harry and the Great Paper
Race
Davidson
DOS
ages 10+
$59.95
The player starts out as a cub reporter
for the U.S. Daily Star and works his or
her way up to star reporter by doing re-

Eco-Saurus
First Byte
DOS
ages 4-9
$39.95
This interactive game fills basic reading
lessons with adventure, dinosaurs and information about the Earth's ecology. The
player leads Zug the Megasaurus on a
mission to clean up the environment by
gathering garbage, conserving resources
and recycling. With its point-and-click exploration interface, the game is simple to
play and informative in addition to being
noble in its purpose.
Stepping Stones
Compu-Teach
DOS, Apple II, Macintosh
ages 2-7
$49.95
A true plethora of material is included
in these reading, math and language exer-

Math Maze
Britannica Software
DOS, Apple II, Commodore 64
ages 6-10
$29.95
A colorful maze game exposes players
to addition, subtraction, multiplication or
division with graded levels of difficulty.
For instance, a given game can be
played with a choice of sums up to 10,
sums up to 20 or mental math. Then, to
progress through the maze, the player
must solve the math problems as he or
she encounters them. With a variety of
mazes and skill levels, arcade-style action
may actually fool kids into thinking
they're not learning math.
What's My Angle: Geometry
Davidson
DOS
ages 14+
$49.95

My First Computer Book
Workman Publishing
DOS, Apple II
ages 4-7
$17.95
Bialosky Bear leads kids through bits,
bytes and all the basics in this charming
introduction to computer literacy, which
also includes a floppy disk called My
First Software. Practical and easy to use,
this software package and accompanying text provide an engrossing, point-andclick journey through the world of computers. Adults be warned: there's a lot to
learn here for computer novices of any
age.

from one to nine—the program will guide
him or her along through the rest. Excellent for very young players, the program
allows plenty of time to figure things out
and is very forgiving of incorrect
answers, with a chirpy little voice admonishing the player to "Try again!" and
"Don't give up!"

search, conducting interviews and filing
news stories from a variety of locales
throughout the United States. News is
based on U.S. political and cultural history circa 1950 to 1990. Players utilize
fact-finding and resource-gathering skills
while being exposed to a broad spectrum
of facts from U.S. history. Funny, imaginative and extremely engaging, this
program is a newsworthy "scoop" in
educational software.

Easy as 1 2 3
The Berenstain Bears Learn About
Counting
Britannica Software
DOS
ages 4-7
$24.95
The cuddly Berenstain Bears make
another appearance to help players practice counting, number comparison,
simple addition and subtraction as well
as measuring height and weight. All the
player needs to know are the numbers

Here is the program that answers the
question that goes through the mind of
every high school geometry student at
one time or another: "Will I ever use this
stuff in real life?" Five different activities
address basic concepts
and—yes—real-world applications of geometry. It even includes GeoGolf, a miniature golf game
that emphasizes the importance of
angles. This software could be of tremendous value as a supplement for a student
currently studying geometry in school.
The Math Zone
Milliken
DOS
ages 4-10
$49.95
This basic introduction to counting, addition and subtraction is made more appealing by its cast of colorful characters
and various game themes such as cartoon, space, transportation and adventure. Worksheets with increasing skill
level math problems can be generated
both on-screen and through print outs.
Scores can be charted to monitor a
player's progress over time. The package
comes with a handy help manual for addition and subtraction problems.
New Math Blaster Plus
Davidson
DOS, Macintosh
ages 6-12
$49.95 (DOS), $59.95 (Macintosh)
This package features four different

Survey

games that help the player learn and
practice addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, fractions, decimals and percents. As Blasternaut (with his little robot
pal, Spot), the player is challenged in
each game by math problems from a
choice of six different skill levels. Arcadestyle fun, the game also touts a pro-environment twist: Blasternaut loves to
recycle space trash.

GeoQuiz
PC Globe
DOS, Apple IIgs
ages 8+
$49.95
A colorful approach to world geography, this game exposes the player to a
travelogue of information about the
countries visited, including a display of
each country's flag, languages spoken
and national currency. In the "Name it,"
"Recognize it" and "Locate it" games, the
player is quizzed on and can become
more familiar with the countries of the
world. Perhaps the best trivia "on Earth."

GeoGames
Swamp Gas
Inline Design
Macintosh
ages 6+
$49.95
The UFO-driving title character of this
game navigates its flying saucer over the
United States and in doing so teaches
the player lessons in U.S. geography.
Major topics covered include states, state
capitals, major cities and landmarks. The
game includes quests to find specific locations and multiple choice questions
about places visited. Humor and "alien"
arcade action makes the subject matter
all the more palatable to young tastes.
GeoPuzzle USA

PC Globe
Apple IIgs
ages 8+
$39.95

Crosscountry USA
Didatech Software
DOS, Apple II
ages 9-15
$49.00

Can't find Georgia on a map of the
U.S.? Here's help. This program provides
for the entertaining learning of U.S. geography at novice, average and expert skill
levels. Through maps and text, players
learn about state location, population,
state nickname, state trivia, fun facts and
more. Then, each brightly colored state
can be separated, mixed up and put
back in its proper place, puzzle-style.

This award-winning geography simulation exposes players to map reading and
basic U.S. geography. As a truck driver
making deliveries across the country, the
player covers 180 cities and a wide
variety of terrain. As when planning any
long-distance trip, the player must decide
when to refuel, when to stop for food and
rest, what is the most efficient route from

Survey

point A to point B, etc. It made this
reviewer wish she were on Route 66,
heading for Memphis.

Britannica Software
DOS
ages 3-10
$39.95

Paint, Print and Color

Players can choose from among 23 indoor and outdoor background scenes
such as the Berenstain Bears' house,
Grampa's barnyard and the spooky cave.
The point-and-click interface can be used
to fill designs with colors from the palette
and place "clip art"-like pictures within
the scene. Dialogue can even be added
in word balloons. Clever animations accompany the clip art "stickers" to add to
the amusement.

My Paint
Saddleback Graphics
DOS, Apple IIgs, Amiga
ages 3-9
$49.95
This program features 28 drawings for
kids to color in a choice of 12 bright
colors, using a mouse or keyboard. With
varied brush sizes or a "paint fill" icon,
pictures of animals, space aliens,
dinosaurs and more can be colored onscreen. Each picture also has its own
digitized sound effect. Drawings can be
saved and printed. Two add-on disks are
also now available, one featuring the alphabet and the other teaching phonics.
The Jetsons & The Flintstones Print
Kit
Gremlins 2 Print Kit
Beetlejuice Print Kit
Hi Tech Expressions
DOS, Apple, Commodore 64
ages 7+
$14.95 each

Players can create and print their own
posters, banners, invitations, greeting
cards and personalized stationery as well
as masks and puppets with this simple,
easy-to-use print kit. With a choice of
typeface, type size, borders and graphics,
players may get their first taste of
desktop publishing with some of their
favorite cartoon and movie characters.
Think of these as "Saturday Morning
Print Shop" software packages.
The Berenstain Bears Fun with
Colors

Smart Kids
It is a happy result of the modern age
that anyone old enough to crawl to the
computer keyboard can be exposed to a
seemingly limitless supply of information,
entertainment and imagination. With a
minimum amount of help from Mom and
Dad, mere mortal children of the '90s
have the potential to become TechnoKids.

Review

I

f truth is stranger than fiction, then reality should be more
fun than fantasy. That's why Microprose has elected to
take their "Hall of Fame" classic F-19 Stealth Fighter and
update it as F-117A Nighthawk.

More Than a New Coat of Paint
The F-117A's success in the Persian Gulf War has moved it
from the obscurity of Lockheed's Skunk Works and into the
Pentagon's spotlight of major high-tech weapon systems.
MPS Labs has incorporated plenty of information, recently
revealed to the public, into the game, as well as reworking
other components in the simulation model in order to create
an exciting aviation experience.
On the outside, the changes to the F-117A are obvious. The
smooth, graceful curves of the F-19 have been replaced with
the ungainly, angular facets of the actual plane. On the inside
the game has undergone some major, but subtle, changes.
The damage control screen that used to show an outline of
the aircraft with indicators pointing to damaged areas has
been replaced by a bank of warning lights that conform to
military standards. The cluttered look of the HUD, as it appeared five years ago, has been replaced with the multi-function HUD found on aircraft with state-of-the-art avionics. Pilots
can now choose NAV, AIR and GND modes which can be
used to fly to a waypoint, line up approaching aircraft or act
as a bombsight during a strike mission.
Improvements made to the game, other than updating the
aircraft, include improved graphics and some spectacular
animations. Shading helps distinguish terrain features and
ground objects include more detail. While the resolution is
lacking, F-117A Stealth Fighter's realism is on a par with
flight simulators distributed with high-powered workstations.

Good Night,
Sweet Hawk
Microprose's Nighthawk:
F-117A Stealth Fighter 2.0
by Dana L. Cadman
Nighthawk 1-117A Stealth Fighter 2.0
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
IBM
# PLAYERS:
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$79.95
DESIGNERS:
MPS Labs
PUBLISHER:
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD

As for the animations, the opening sequence is impressive
and proves that not all of the best directors are in Hollywood.
MPS Labs has designed key presses to skip over those parts
of the program, but doing so during the first few times one
plays the game would be like cutting all the space sequences
from Star Wars.

Not Just a Shoot 'em Up
Along with the missions found in the original F-19 Stealth
Fighter, Microprose has added two missions from F-15 Strike
Eagle and three missions from the near future. If the Persian
Gulf and Central Europe aren't enough fun, pilots can fly
over the Communist-controlled regions of Vietnam (1994),
Cuba (1995) and North Korea (1997). The targets in all the
scenarios are what one would expect to find in each region
for that time period. The type of aircraft, ground radars and
anti-aircraft missiles used by each country are consistent with
those listed in the current directories published by Jane's
Defense.
Flying against the enemy doesn't necessarily mean lots of
destruction, however, since pilots can choose from groundstrike and air-to-air missions during periods of Cold War,
Limited War and Conventional War (no sense in playing a
Nuclear War). The level of tension will determine whether missions will be dropping bombs on a target, collecting reconnaissance data or dropping off secret equipment. While not
as exhilarating as a dogfight, trying to photograph a chemical
factory from 400 feet at 320 knots has excitement all its own.
To help pilots with their mission, the game includes two
stealth fighters, the original "F-19" and the Lockheed F-117A.

Review

The "F-19" has twice as many weapon bays as the Lockheed
and carries a 20 mm Vulcan gatling cannon for aerial combat.

ing to accidentally lower the landing gear during a bombing run
instead of opening the weapons bay door.

This might seem to make it a superior choice, but it is not as
"stealthy" as the Lockheed aircraft. Against Third World nations
the "F-19" is an excellent aircraft, but for flying over Central
Europe or North Korea (i.e. with radar operators and pilots who
know what they're doing), the Lockheed is the better choice. It is
better to travel light and unseen than become someone else's target practice.

The same problem occurs during landings, but is compounded
by two-key combinations, such as shift and minus to cut the engine power. Simplifying the key combinations, or assigning the
functions to larger (i.e. easier to locate) keys would be a big improvement.

The aerial combat and bombing runs will be enough to provide
fun for any actionphile, but for those who want to enjoy the strategy of the game, the manual has over 150 pages of information
on how the F-117A evolved, which radars to avoid (and how),
tips on landing (read this section carefully!), what to expect in
the different regions of conflict and which weapons are most effective against which type of target. Armed with this information,
a pilot can make a better choice of weapons and increase the
chance of destroying a target, as well as find tips on steering a
course to that target that will minimize the chance of detection
and increase the odds of getting to the target in one piece.

What's Not to Like?
With an updated version of multiple award-winning games
(some of those awards presented by COW), what could there be
not to like? Buttons. There are too many of them. The design
team has modeled every flight control available and, during tense
situations, it is too easy to press the wrong key. It is very annoy-

Some of the controls could be more consistent. While one key
might rotate through various functions on some displays, it takes
several keys to change the information on other displays. It will
take practice to remember which is which.
Landings are the one instance where Microprose could have
relaxed the hard edge of reality. The F-117A was designed for
stealth first, aerodynamics second. This plane is hard to fly and,
during a landing, the plane will experience wind buffeting and
ground effect, making a difficult operation even trickier. The
beginning pilot should blow off the first few missions and just
practice touch-downs before trying to keep a regular character
on the scoreboard.

In Summary
Despite the key layout and tricky landings, F-117A is a great
simulation. Microprose has again created a game that is engrossing, challenging and educational. The quality of work shows in
the informative manual, the attention to detail in all of the
graphics and the design inherent in the well-considered scenarios.
Fliaht suit and helmet not included.

Review

No Objection To Authentic Courtroom Drama

TITLE:
Objection!
IBM
SYSTEM:
COPY PROTECTION:None
PRICE:
$89.95 (Professional Version)
$49.95 (Consumer Version)
DESIGNER:
Ashley S. Lipson
PUBLISHER:
TransMedia, Inc.
27404 Drake Road, Suite 200
Farmington Hills, MI 48331
(313) 553-9100

TransMedia's Objection!
by Jasper Sylvester

T

he

readers will please rise. The critical court of appeals of Computer Gaming World is now in session, the honorable Jasper
Sylvester presiding. Readers may now be seated. Prosecution
may now examine the first witness.

Prosecution: Will the consumer version of the game
be as difficult to win as the
professional version?

Prosecution: Would you state the name of the program for the
benefit of the court?

Defense: Your honor,
learned counsel's query assumes unestablished facts.
We have not ascertained
whether the consumer version of the game plays differently or not.
Thus far, we are only certain that the consumer version does not
come with the high-quality notebook of The Rules of Evidence for
Witness Testimony ($54.95). We have also not determined that the
game is difficult to win.

Reviewer: Objection!
Judge: On what grounds, counselor?
Reviewer: Excuse me, your honor, but the defense attorney didn't
say anything. The name of the game is Objection! and it is intended
to sharpen a trial lawyer's skill at evidentiary law. The on-screen attorney asks questions of various witnesses and the defense attorney/player must either object or declare a question to be "proper" as
soon as possible.
Prosecution: The fact is, you don't have the faintest idea how to

review a game of this sort, do you?
Defense: Objection, your honor, counsel is being argumentative.
Judge: Sustained. Counsel will rephrase the question.
Reviewer: If I may explain, your honor, the defense attor-

ney/player must type a one-letter code to determine whether he/she
is allowing a question to stand as proper or to object on the basis of
the rules of evidence. For example, the defense attorney/player
would have pressed the "A" key in order to object to the
prosecution's last question as being "Argumentative."
Judge: Counsel may proceed.
Prosecution: What, then, can you tell us about the PRODIGY
review of Objection! that was published in the CGW section of the
Computer Club?
Defense: Objection! Counsel is violating the best evidence rule.
Judge: Sustained! Counsel may continue.
Prosecution: Your honor, the people would like to submit the
PRODIGY review as evidence. We believe it is necessary to include
what the review stated about the game's real-time factor, in which
players have to move fast in order to strike a key and, hence, score
maximum points.
Judge: So ordered!
Prosecution: Wouldn't you agree that real-time games demonstrate more about a player's coordination than his/her logical
prowess?
Reviewer: Not in this case, I ...
Defense: Objection! Counsel is calling for a conclusion on the part
of the witness.
Judge: Objection sustained. Counsel is instructed to proceed more
carefully according to accepted evidentiary rules.
Prosecution: What is the game's real-time factor?
Reviewer: As soon as a question is printed on the screen, a timer
begins to run and points start to click off the maximum possible
score. The sooner the defense attorney/player strikes the correct
key, the higher the score he/she nets. This is to simulate the fact
that the longer an actual trial lawyer allows an improper question or
answer to stand, the more likely it is to make an impression upon a
jury. Of course, it also means that those who are fast readers will
have a significant advantage in the game.

Judge: Objection is sustained.
Prosecution: Is the current version difficult?
Reviewer: It certainly is. Defense attorneys must be alert to every
question and one cannot even reboot and start the case over again—
the program uses different questions each time the trial is initiated.
Prosecution: So, what do your friends at CGW think about the pro-

gram?
Defense: Your honor, please, counselor is calling for hearsay.
Prosecution: Your honor, we know that the gamers at CGW occasionally play these games at the office. I would like to appeal to
"New York Life Insurance Co. v. Harrington" and "City of Dallas v.
Donovan" to suggest that the witness' observation of emotional expressions on a player's face or "excited utterances" would constitute
a hearsay exception.
Judge: Objection overruled. Witness will answer the question.
Reviewer: I observed Dr. Wilson intently staring at the monitor,
muttering to himself and sighing with relief as he advanced to the
next witness in the game's trial proceeding.
Prosecution: Has Dr. Wilson ever designed a computer game?
Defense: Objection! Question is immaterial.
Judge: Sustained!
Prosecution: Isn't it true that you find yourself glued to the
monitor whenever you boot the game?
Defense: Objection!
Judge: Sustained, the bench is well aware that prosecution is lead-

ing the witness. May I suggest that the witness summarize his feelings about the game in his own words.
Reviewer: Well, in addition to the rules of evidence violated in this
article, the game teaches about the inadmissibility of answers to multiple questions, calls to reveal privileged information, use of questions too similar to questions asked previously, requests for answers
which require speculation on the part of the witness and use of questions which are too vague. The graphics are not particularly well
done, but once that timer starts running, no one notices the graphics.
Judge: The court has reached a verdict. We find the program worthy of recommendation to trial lawyers who need to sharpen their
evidentiary skills or refresh their memories on the rules of evidence.
We further find the program to be of significant interest to those who
are interested in the legal profession as either a potential career or as
an avocation (rabble rousers, habitual litigants and L.A. Law viewers). In addition, we find the program suitable for those who want a
challenge that is cerebral, realistic and intense. Case dismissed.

Review

Fat Odds From Slim
A Real "Player's Choice"
by Alan Emrich

f one recalls the opening to the popular
Amarillo Slim Dealers Choice
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
Tom Cruise movie Risky Business, a
IBM
# PLAYERS:
0-1
table full of high school lads were sitPRICE:
$49.95
ting around a poker table. Emulating
COPY PROTECT: Non-repro paper look-up
PUBLISHER:
Villa Crespo Software
adults, the dealer announced: "All right,
Highland Park, IL
here's the game: 5-card draw with a spit,
anaconda, with a high-low split. Pass two
to the right, one to the left; deuces, aces and one-eyed faces are
wild; guts to open." Anyone who can follow all that is probably
these seven games can be played high only, high-low split, low
aware that this type of wild poker variant so popular in
only and/or high spade split. That's a total of 28 poker game
America's basements and dining rooms on Friday and Saturday
variants, which gives Amarillo Slim Dealer's Choice the widest
nights is not easy to find in a computer software version of the
variety of computer poker games available to date.
game. In fact, most computer poker programs have conBut what about the poker "house rules?" Is "sandbagging"
centrated on "pure" versions of a single type of game, such as
(check and raise) allowed? It's up to the player! Toggles are injust video poker or just 5-card draw. So much for "the way
cluded so that many common rules of poker can be defined by
America plays."
the player, including what constitutes a low hand in lowball (is a
Enter Amarillo Slim Dealer's Choice from computer gambling
"wheel" of A-2-3-4-5 the lowest hand, or does that count as a
game publisher Villa Crespo software. Originally designed as
straight?), jacks or better versus "guts" to open a game of 5-card
Vegas Johnny's Dealer's Choice and released in 1989 from
draw, and so on. In other words, by adjusting all the switches,
Top Score Software, Villa Crespo acquired the rights to this explay can be suited (forgive the pun) to one's own refined taste in
cellent but obscure computer poker program and proceeded to
poker games. For the poker connoisseur, variety is the spice of
give it "The Crespo Touch." Finding a good game and making it
playing Dealer's Choice.
better, John Comeau has added some delightful enhancements
and created the first true "player's choice" in poker games with
Deal Me In
Dealer's Choice.
Among a player's other pre-game choices are the number of
players at the table (up to a full table of eight players), initial
Scouting a Good Table
stake, the minimum bet, maximum bet, ante, blind bets, etc.
Players begin by "designing" the kind of table they want to play
Other players at the table are selected from three lists separated
at. This feature consists of using the easy point-and-click mouse
by skill level. The competition can range from casual to fierce, as
interface (or "arrows and enter" command keys) to select from a
a player desires.
long laundry list of menu options for the poker enthusiast. Those
Once all the pre-game decisions are made (and saved for fuwho do not care to "shop" for the combination of poker rules
ture play—which can be a real time saver), a player is ready to
and variants that suits them best will be given a default set of
click on the "Deal" button and start the action. The deal passes
table games consisting of "high only: 5-card draw, 7-card stud
to the left each hand, and computer players will deal a randomly
and hold 'em."
selected game from a list of those selected during set-up as ones
Dealer's Choice comes with seven basic varieties of poker
the player desires to play this session. The cards, when dealt, are
which players can opt for. They include 5-card stud, 6-card stud,
quite readable (and a toggle arranges them either by value or by
7-card stud, 5-card draw, Mexican (which is like 6-card stud "roll
the order in which they were dealt), with a player's "down cards"
your own"), hold 'em and forty-four (in which each player gets a
shown in a pinkish tint. At the end of the hand, a player has the
hand of four cards and four common cards are played). Each of
option of "peeking" at all the down cards on the table, too.

I

Review

Play flows quickly and reminders of others' actions remain on
the screen until the human player has made his or her own
decision (notes such as "fold," "call" with a red chip and "raise"
with a blue chip indicating the amount of the raise serve as these
reminders). A human player is under no time constraints, and
can study the table at leisure.

Table Talk
Not only does the action move right along, but virtually any
sound card that supports speech (Sound Blaster, Covox, etc.)
will add voices to the game. Male and female voices will announce their actions ("raise," "check," "fold," etc.) as well as
print them on the screen. Somehow, the audio portion of a computer game always seems to add a third dimension to it, even a
computer poker game!
Still, that's not all that's being said around the table. The player
can always ask for some advice from renowned poker master
Amarillo Slim himself. Whenever a player gets in a thorny situation, Slim is full of advice, written in his plain-speaking, downhome manner. Slim will advise whether folding, calling or raising
is the right thing to do, and explain why, so that the player
might carry the lesson forward and become a better poker
player. For those who enjoy playing poker, but feel that an occasional professional bit of advice wouldn't hurt their play,
Amarillo Slim Dealer's Choice is the software package to get.
For beginners, Slim's advice can even be permanently toggled
"on" before the game commences, so it's always like having a
poker angel on the ear.

Knowing the Odds
Of course, real gamblers want to know the odds. Two kinds of
calculations are available for the serious student of poker. During
a hand, among the options available is an "odds" screen which
shows the player's current hand, the odds of improving it to
various levels (such as 3.75-1 of two pair, 60-1 of a full house,
etc.). Another important set of odds is also presented, the "pot
odds." These are the odds of the risk of one's next bet versus the
odds of winning the showdown. In other words, the larger the pot
and the smaller the bet required, the more it's worth the risk of
drawing the next card against long odds of improving one's hand.
Between deals, players can call up the statistical information
about what games have been played, how many of which hands
were seen in the showdown, and the percentage of times they've
won the pot. For example, a player could call up the 7-card stud
menu, and for each of its four variants see the number of times a
3-of-a-kind was at the showdown to win the pot, and what percentage of the time it won the pot. This is designed to give players
an appreciation for what is usually required to win at poker. For
reference, the median winning hand is two pair, jacks up. Playing
at "smaller tables" (fewer players) means that weaker hands can
win more often, while "larger tables" usually require better hands
to win.

Cashing In
There's no doubt that Villa Crespo is the leading computer gambling game publisher. Fortunately for computer gamblers, they
did not quit with their Amarillo Slim's Real Poker: 5-Card Stud.
When a better program came along, they seized upon it and improved it. Amarillo Slim Dealer's Choice is a great leap for
poker enthusiasts. With the most opponents, most options and
best gameplay, Amarillo Slim Dealer's Choice wins the pot,
hands down!

Review

by Charles A. Smith

TITLE:
Rules of Engagement
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECTION:None
PRICE:
$59.95
DEVELOPER:
Omnitrend Software
PUBLISHER:
Mindcraft
Torrance, CA

ules

of Engagement is a new game of tactical starship combat from Omnitrend, creators of Breach
2. Instead of leading a combat squad, Rules of
Engagement allows one to assume control of a flagship
and command other captains in the fleet. Success
depends on making the proper tactical decisions for one's
task force and remaining poised under the pressure of combat.
The player must be a leader, a manager and a strategist, but not
a joystick cadet out of a Star Wars movie. No seat-of-the-pants
flying will work for this game. Instead, players conduct all operations through a ship's unique Command and Control Systems Interface (CCSI) [Ed: See the designer's notes on this interface
in CGW #84, p.64] and the mastery of the CCSI is the key to
success in both gameplay and suspension of disbelief.

R

Perhaps the best news, however, is that with Omnitrend's new
Interlocking Game System (IGS), one does not have to be satisfied with resolving battles using Rules of Engagement. This is because Rules can be linked with Breach 2 for man-to-man combat by boarding parties or commando raids on outposts, adding
an element of realism which has been heretofore unknown in
space combat games.

First Looks
Rules of Engagement comes on four low-density 5 1/4" disks.
The game is easily installed to a hard disk, since graphic files are

normally stored in compressed format, but can be decompressed
to speed the game along (if one elects to trade about 2.5
megabytes of hard disk space in exchange for game speed). In
addition, the heavy-duty manual will assist the reader in everything from interfacing with the game through becoming immersed in the fiction, improving one's tactics and creating customized missions.
Speaking of customization, players can not only participate in
the basic twenty missions included with the game, but can
design their own by creating outposts and starships. Forces are
then placed in a system composed of planets, asteroid belts,
waypoints, and one or two suns. Then, it is merely a matter of establishing the victory conditions and the battle can begin.

The Interface
Each of the major panels in the CCSI (Data Retrieval, Navigation, Communications, Tactical) consists of several distinct parts.
Action buttons are magenta and information buttons are blue. All
other information on the panel is explanatory only. For example,
when referring to the Navigation Panel, one can go to any other

Review

The alien creation utility is a good example of this teamwork.
Remember the childhood picture books that allowed children to
mix and match various body parts in order to construct outlandish creatures? That is Omnitrend's approach in its alien character generator. In addition to creating more than 700,000 physical
combinations for one's enemies, a player also determines a personality profile that the program uses to determine how that race
will behave in a given mission.
Second, one needs to consider whether the game will encourage players to suspend disbelief or not. Does it make sense,
given the world it models? Here, there must be a qualified "Yes"
to Rules of Engagement. Both the bad guys and one's own
FWAF captains behave consistently within their personalities.
There might quibbles about the details: planet mass does not affect starship velocity, there are no economic constraints when
one constructs a fleet and outposts do not have offensive
capabilities (originally having been built during peacetime) nor
can they be destroyed. Hopefully, the scope of this game covers
so much ground (or space) in its presentation of starship combat
that most players will forgive the design team for these limitations.
major panel; save or quit the game; accelerate or decelerate time
(never slower than real-time, however); select what to view in the
star system (or even what to view from another starship); probe
and intercept a planet, starship, outpost or sun; or assume
manual control over navigation of the flagship. Note, however,
that only one's personal flagship is under direct control, since the
other starships in the fleet are led by captains under the player's
"command" (if the computer subordinates choose to listen and
follow orders, that is).
On the Data Retrieval Panel is access to fleet statistics and information about the mission, the various captains in the fleet and
the UDP (United Democratic Planets). Damage control operations are accomplished by assigning different percentages of the
crew to repair each ship's system.
The Communications Panel allows one to send and receive orders to any Federated Worlds (FW) or UDP starships. All commands (for example, capture enemy ship, proceed to waypoint,
patrol outposts) are selected from a menu, and information
about anything that might interfere with communication (like
electromagnetic interference) is also provided.
The Tactical Panel is the most complicated (it's life or death
here). From here, players carry out all combat and defense activities, including ship-to-ship combat, docking with friendly outposts and boarding enemy starships/outposts. Included are a targeting scope and lock-on button, fire control and weaponry settings, a combat map with ship's position and range to target,
selections for tactical maneuvers, defensive system readings and
a self-destruct control.

Computer Read-Out
This reviewer looks for three characteristics in games of this
type. First, is it attractive? This involves whether the game is
pleasing, not only to the eye and ear, but to the mind as well. It
also determines if all the elements (graphics, sound, game play)
fit together properly or is it fragmented, as though created by
committee.
For this reviewer, Rules of Engagement is elegant. There are
no gee-whiz 256-color images. Instead, graphic designer Maurice
Molyneaux and programmer Thomas Carbone opted for austerity
and functionality to transform one's machine into a computer
with deadly potential fitting snugly into the game's fiction.

Finally, one must consider whether the game is entrancing or
not. Will it make players forget that they are sitting in a room in
front of a computer; that bills are gathering dust on top of the
refrigerator; that the clock reads 2:30 AM and that they have to
get up at 6:30 to go to work? If one likes the idea of starship
management, there is magic in Rules of Engagement. For a
short while, players will take command of a starship's powerful
computer. When the balloon goes up (or down or around or
whatever it does in space) and the alarms go off, it's nail-biting
time.
Version 1.0 of Rules of Engagement had a bug that caused
computers to lock up on some missions. Omnitrend promises
to resolve these problems in version 1.2. Since the company has
had a good reputation for supporting Breach 2, one can hope
that problems of this kind will be resolved as soon as possible.

Tactical Briefing
The following suggestions are intended to complement those already found in the manual. First, except in the initial scenarios,
one should never play at "Beginner" level. Knowing exactly
where the enemy is at the beginning of the game, as one does
when playing at the lowest level, greatly reduces the replay value
of the mission when one is ready to move up in difficulty.
Second, since destroyed systems can never be repaired,
players should make "escaping" a top priority whenever any systems fall below 50% effectiveness. It is especially important to
safeguard the ship's drives.
Third, fire long-distance missiles first and consider the closing
speed of enemy ships. Missile range increases when moving at
maximum speed and firing straight ahead. One should also turn
on the beam missile defense when firing missiles.
Fourth, after playing a mission a few times, it is possible to
make it more difficult or easier by re-assembling it. One can
change the number of friendly and enemy ships or assign a different enemy race to the battle. Whenever re-assembling a mission, it is a good idea to vary the strength of enemy starships by
editing their damage levels either up (to make the mission more
difficult) or down (to make the mission easier). Once these levels
are set, they cannot be repaired to any greater percentage during
the game.

Buying Guide

cade-garne style) in the context of a
major land campaign. As the player
plans and wins aerial sorties, the lines of
earthbound troops move forward or backward as an indication of the effect which
the air war is having on the ground campaign. For variety, there are several different types of arcade sequences involved with different skills required for
success.
Conan the Cimmerian (IBM, $49.99) is
action/adventure in the European tradition. That is, players manipulate Robert
E. Howard's free-swinging mercenary
through real-time, horizontal scrolling
combat via joystick or keyboard. The
twist in Virgin Games' Conan the Cimmerian is that the freebooter's attributes
for stamina, swing (the rating for freeswinging default combat), thrust (specialized sword combat), chop (vicious sword
combat), defense, stealth and damage actually improve as a result of the
mercenary's experience. There is even a
role-playing command for "Bribery" that
one would not expect to find in a pure action game.

lthough

the outside temperature
was approximately 100 degrees,
CGWs editorial department
looked like it was under a wintry
avalanche of styrofoam by the time all
the Christmas products for this survey
were unpacked. As has been the tradition
with the Christmas Buying Guide, most
of the products covered should be on the
shelves by the time this issue hits the
stands and some will, once again, miss
Christmas because of the unforeseen
problems often associated with publishing computer software. Also, according
to CGW tradition, the purpose of this article is to underscore some of what we
see as potentially exciting products for
computer gaming Christmas presents.
Since, of course, we have not seen all of
these games in their final form, mention
in the buying guide does not equal a
complete recommendation. It is to be
hoped that our readers will circle the interesting titles and pass the article along to
their personal Santa, Father Christmas,
sugar daddy, parents, spouse or significant other.

A

ABC Wide World of Sports Boxing
from Data East (IBM, $49.95) vividly
presents the spectacle of boxing in a
colorful combination of action sequences, role-playing decisions and career
management. The boxers are digitized
representations of actual fighters and
players can create custom fighters whom
they manage through realistic careers
(moving upward to their prime and onward through their decline or retirement).
Unlike most boxing games, players have
a reason to make money as they purchase training equipment and/or hire
managers and trainers to improve their
skills.
Ancient Art of War in the Skies
(AAWS)is the third game in
Broderbund's "Ancient" series (which
seems to be getting more modern all the
time). AAWS (IBM, $44.95) features
World War I air combat (presented in ar-

The Godfather (Amiga, IBM, $49.95) is
the first of two games from U.S. Gold
that are to be based on the film series.
The Godfather, which will be available at
Christmas, seems like a typical horizontalscrolling beat-'em-up and shoot 'em-up
game. One major difference between The
Godfather and many other games in its
genre is that players will have to have
the on-screen character actually "draw"
his gun from his pocket in order to shoot
and the computer actually, wonder of
wonders, keeps track of ammunition expended. The game also contains a few
discoveries and hidden features to keep
matters interesting. Players will try to find
hidden doors and a variety of objects to
enable them to move onward into other
portions of the game.
Hare Raising Havoc (IBM, $49.95$69.95 with sound source) from Walt
Disney Software could feasibly be
labeled as an interactive cartoon. Players
solve physical logic puzzles in order to
set up an animated sequence and speed
Roger Rabbit on his way. The plot is
simple. Roger is supposed to be baby-sitting Baby Herman while Mommy is
away, but (there's always a "but") the
baby sneaks out while Mommy is giving
orders to Roger and the luckless rabbit is
accidentally locked in the house. The object of the game is to get Roger out of
each individual room of the house and
on to rescue Baby Herman before
Mommy gets home, the director yells
"Cut!" and Roger finds himself in trouble.

Buying Guide

PGA Tour® Golf—Limited Edition
(IBM, $69.95) is a special holiday package of Electronic Arts' PGA-licensed
golf product. In addition to the basic
game, the special holiday edition contains a new course disk and a videotape
entitled "The History of the PGA Tour®."
Aficionados of the game point to the
number of decision points during each
hole and the quality opposition of the
computer opponents (modeled after
some of the tour's finest professional golfers).
Walt Disney Software's The Rocketeer (IBM, $49.95, with Sound Source,
$69.95) continues the adventures of the
pulp comic hero which began in the film.
The game (described more fully in CGW
#88 p. 56) advances the story via a
series of action sequences connected by
splash screens reminiscent of graphic
novels.
As described in CGW #88 p. 30, Wing
Commander II (IBM, $79.95, with Voice
Module, $99.95) is the sequel to CGWs
1991 Game of the Year. The sequel showcases many "high-end" features and adds
much to a space battle flight simulator
with cinematic sequences. The
soundtrack has been enhanced, voices
have been added (with the Voice Module
plus a Sound Blaster card), a VCR-like
replay feature is now included and the
"cinematography" is much broader and
more lively in VGA than its predecessor.
Players will enjoy the other new high-tech
features included in this, the latest current game redefining the term "gee whiz."

One of the most fascinating aspects of
the game is the fact that the player really
feels like he/she is directing the action.
Another is that each successful solution
presents an entertaining animation to
reward the player.
Lemmings, the fascinating action/puzzle game from Psygnosis (Amiga, IBM,
$49.99), just recently shipped on the IBM
PC. Judging from the reader response
received after its initial Amiga release,
this should be a very hot title for
Christmas. As the cartoon lemmings of
the game's title try to migrate from one
side of the computer screen to another, it
becomes the player's job to assign lemmings as blockers, climbers, floaters, diggers, miners, bashers and/or bridgebuilders in order to keep the cute little
creatures from committing cartoon "harikari."

Dynamix's The Adventures of Willy
Beamish (IBM, $59.95) is both a challenging adventure game and a fascinating entertainment (see CGW #84 p. 50
and CGW #86 p. 10). Sometimes billed
as an interactive cartoon, The Adventures of Willy Beamish combines traditional animation techniques with the
latest technological wizardry in order to
capture the free-spirited nature of
childhood as it struggles with the seeming oppression of adult authority. Though
Willy has his share of tough puzzles to
solve, the game does not have the feel of
moving from puzzle to puzzle. Its texture
is more like solving the puzzle so that the
next free-running animation can unveil
more of the comical, but stereotypically
true-to-life, story.
Conquest of the Longbow: The Adventures of Robin Hood (IBM, $59.95) is
Sierra's sequel to Conquests of

Camelot. Although the game does not
look anything like its predecessor, it does
bear the type of attention to intricate
detail that Christy Marx is known for with
regard to the way she handles familiar
legends. What she did for the Arthurian
legend in the first game, she accomplishes for Robin Hood by assimilating the original ballads, original maps of
Nottingham (circa 1193), Druidic lore
and the historical information concerning
King Richard's capture in Austria (as he
returned from the Third Crusade) into the
plot for the new game. In addition,
Sierra's new technology allows for more
lifelike characterization (through rotoscoping live actors and re-rendering them on
the computer), and the higher VGA definition and expanded color palette makes
for a more vivid presentation. Those who
have no desire to go through the preliminary motifs of matching quarterstaffs
against Little John (or recruiting the
other "merry men") and want to get right
to the rescues, schemes, battles, magic
and romance should appreciate Christy's
approach to the game's design.
Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis (IBM, $59.95) is the first Indiana
Jones game from Lucasfilm that is not
based on a feature film. It is the largest
graphic adventure that Lucasfilm has
yet produced, due largely to the fact that
it is three games in one. There is no
marketing hype whatsoever in that claim.
Players with a bent toward action games
will end up playing a very different style
adventure than players who like classic
puzzle-solving or those who try to talk
their way out of sticky situations with a
typical Indy-esque comment. The standard Lucasfilm interface has metamorphosed into one with an icon-based inventory and is the first Lucasfilm product to
use rotoscoping as a technique for enhancing character animation.
Leisure Suit Larry V from Sierra (IBM,
$59.95) was described in CGW #88 p.
94. The latest entry in Larry's (and
Patti's) quest for sophomoric sex features the company's new parserless interface and enough new puzzles to keep
traditional adventure fans entertained for
hours.
Accolade's Les Manley in Lost in L.A.
(IBM, $59.95) is veteran game designer
Steve Cartwright's latest venture into the
field of sensuous satire. In this elaborately digitized presentation, Cartwright
satirizes the entertainment capital of the
world as he pokes fun at gossip, conspiracy and mystery buffs. The plot is
vintage murder, kidnapping and
mayhem, but there is enough

7

I

r

Buying Guide

cheesecake and sexual innuendo to keep
Cartwright off the Supreme Court for life.
Add the new "point and click" interface
in place of the awkward parser used in
Les Manley's initial appearance (Search
for the King) and one has a game that
should have (pardon the sexist pun)
"broad" appeal.
Martian Memorandum (IBM, $59.95)
is the latest interactive movie from Access Software. A sequel to the
company's critically acclaimed Mean
Streets adventure, Martian Memorandum is billed as a multimedia product be
cause of its use of full motion video sequences and digitized speech
(synchronized to the animation so that it
does not look like a poorly dubbed
foreign film). The game comes complete
with an on-line help feature and intuitive
interface as interplanetary detective Tex
Murphy finds himself in the midst of
another caper.
LeChuck's Revenge: Secret of
Monkey Island II (IBM, $59.95) is the
first Lucasfilm graphic adventure to be
rendered completely in marker and
gouache prior to being scanned onto the

computer. In addition to being the sequel
to one of the most humorous (and nonsexist) adventures ever released on a personal computer, LeChuck's Revenge offers a stunning environment to explore
and plenty of witty repartee.
Police Quest 3 is another new Sierra
game (IBM, $59.95) which uses rotoscoped figures and a parserless interface
to continue a successful series. Like all
Police Quests, the latest adventure is
built from some of the actual experiences
of Jim Walls and some of his fellow officers. One of the most impressive facts
in the game is that players absolutely
must use correct police procedures in
order to succeed at the game. Add to
this winning formula the improved
graphics already mentioned and a
soundtrack written by Miami Vice composer Jan Hammer and Police Quest 3
seems certain to "arrest" the attention of
experienced and novice adventure
gamers alike.

From Interplay Productions,
developers of the original Bard's Tale
series, comes the Bard's Tale Construction Set. This creative tool allows players
to design their own computer role-playing games using the familiar interface
popularized by The Bard's Tale. While, in
the past, there have been numerous construction kits for creating one's own text
adventures and there have even been
wargame and arcade game construction
sets, this is the most powerful tool yet for
designing professional-looking CRPGs.
Corporation (IBM, $49.99) has been
called "Dungeon Master in space." To
be sure, the Virgin Games' action/adven
ture offers the same first-person perspective as the fantasy CRPG, but features
some interesting lighting effects, robots
that "roll" from place to place instead of
gliding and extremely smooth animation.
Players assume the role of an interplanetary agent and attempt to stop the
"ultimate killing machine" which the evil
solar-system-wide "corporation" is
reputed to be building.
Elvira II: The Jaws of Cerberus (IBM,
$69.95) is Accolade's sequel to CGWs
Role-Playing Game of the Year. The
familiar first-person perspective (as in
Dungeon Master and Eye of the Beholder) is present in the game, but the
humor associated with the hostess of horror, the sheer size of the game (4,000
locations) and the clever magical (alchemical) system blend together with an

Buying Guide

easy-to-use interface, eerie soundtrack
and some horrific animation to create a
CRPG of monstrous proportion.
Mindcraft's The Magic Candle II: The
Four and Forty (IBM, $59.95) was
originally described in CGW #84 p. 16.
The product has been completely
redrawn in VGA graphics since the sneak
preview, however, and is expected to be
ready for Christmas. Filled with miniquests; an entire sub-routine for personnel management of player and nonplayer characters (we call it a game
within a game); automapping; a notepad
feature that keeps track of clues and
character data and a fascinating story,
The Magic Candle II: The Four and
Forty looks like it will offer an even
brighter flame than its ancestor (The
Magic Candle, CGWs Role-Playing
Game of the Year in 1989).
Might & Magic III: Isles of Terra (IBM,
$69.95) features atmospheric sound
(sound cues which offer hints on
proximity, strength of blows, power of
magical spells and effect of telling
blows), exciting graphics, a user interface
that will not cause players to go blind

reading the numbers and even a "Help
me, Mr. Wizard" button that allows
players to get out of trouble whenever
they have gotten into trouble they cannot
handle (at the cost of a character level).
It originally looked as if Might and
Magic III would be the ultimate "hack
and slash" game of the Christmas
season, but early returns from our
reviewers indicate that it has the best
story and most attention to characterization yet to appear in a Might and
Magic product.
The Two Towers (IBM, $59.95) is the
second release in Interplay's The Lord
of the Rings series of role-playing
games. Many garners disliked the
"empty" feeling which the pacing of the
first volume offered, so The Two Towers
will feature "cliffhangers" and "cutaways"
to give the story both a better narrative
feel (regularly reminding the players as
to what they are trying to accomplish in
the game) and keeping the action
moving. The first volume in the series offered plenty for garners to do, but the
time lapse between encounters was discouraging for many. Now, garners should

Buying Guide

be able to discover all the role-playing
jewels the designers intended for them
The final saga in SSI's first Advanced
Dungeons & Dragons trilogy will draw
to a close in Pools of Darkness (IBM,
$59.95). Scorpia describes this game on
page 94 of this issue.
Ultima VII: The Black Gate (IBM,
$79.95) breathes new life into the Ultima
series. The fictional and philosophical underpinning of the story (coming to grips

with authentic evil), as well as the technological innovations inherent in the new
system, will make this one of the most
memorable Ultimas. See CGW #87 p.
40 for more information.

not concentrate on fancy maneuvers with
the plane, but places crew members at
realistic combat stations of a modified,
ultra-high-tech B-52. Based on the Dale
Brown bestseller Flight of the Old Dog,
Megafortress is a complex, detailed
simulation that should appeal to players
who are looking for a new challenge in
modern air combat.

F-117A Nighthawk: Stealth Fighter
2.0 (IBM, $79.95) is more than an update. Microprose's latest flight simulation offers a new flight model, more missions and more advanced graphics than
its predecessor, F-19 Stealth Fighter.
For more information, see the feature article on page 46 of this issue.

Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe (IBM,
$69.95) was reviewed on page 120 of
CGW #88. The latest product from Larry
Holland is more of a simulation than the
two aerial combat games which
preceded it and the mission builder
provides for computer game longevity by
increasing the potential for variety according to the gamer's personal taste.

Gunship 2000 (IBM, $69.95) is another
Microprose release which offers significant improvement over its predecessor. Now, computer pilots can participate
in multiple-ship missions and more realistically prosecute the assigned combat
missions. See the feature article on page
34 of this issue for further information.
As previewed in CGW #81 p. 16, ThreeSixty's Megafortress (IBM, $49.95) is a
flight simulation with a difference. It does

Armada 2525 (IBM, $49.95) is another
fine entry into the strategic space conquest genre of games long dominated by
Reach for the Stars. With the support of
a trilogy of articles in CGW (#87 p.100),
(Continued on page 78)

-

-

Buying Guide

mechanics and an elegant playing structure well supported by a diversity of
strategic elements to be mastered.

(Con tinued from page 72)

Armada puts a special emphasis on technology and R&D in addition to empirebuilding. For 0-6 players (with multiple
humans playing at the same machine
only), Interstel's latest features clean

Interplay's first expansion disk for
Castles, Castles Campaign Disk #1
(IBM, $29.95) features several welcome
changes. The economics are more
sophisticated, in that players must
choose which commodities to invest in
and the seasons have an even more
devastating effect upon one's serfs and
lords than they did in the original game.
For the first time, female monarchs can
have an image of themselves that is not
male and there are even more
dialogues/situations to which the player's
monarch can react.
Six thousand years of history is
fashioned into an absorbing exercise in
game play when veteran game designer
Sid Meier publishes Civilization (IBM,
$69.95) under the Microprose label.
Civilization, as previewed on page 86 of
this issue, is a clear successor to Sid's
earlier hit Railroad Tycoon. It has a "god
game" feel to it, since one raises one's
tribe of people through city building, technological development (from the wheel

to superconductors), diplomacy, trade,
revolutions and war. Anyone who took to
trains because of Railroad Tycoon is
sure to "dig" history while playing
Civilization.
Perhaps one could call the next game
"QQP at sea," but its actual name is The
Lost Admiral (IBM, $59.95). As
previewed last issue, this naval strategy
game is very like the classic Empire in
feel and addictiveness. With set
scenarios, campaign games and random
map features, Lost Admiral really shines
with its computer opponent's playing
ability. Players will have their hands more
than full at levels three and four of the
eleven levels of computer competence.
This product has an elegant system
placed in a compelling game which is
well worth a few salvoes.
NFL Football is a brilliantly executed
football strategy game from Micro
Sports (IBM, $79.95). The game is so incredibly detailed that one can get a playby-play printout which names the ball carriers, tacklers or would-be receivers and
delineates the result. The game is a
dream for computer coaches and statis-

Buying Guide

strategy game (CGWs Strategy Game of
the Year in 1989) on ancient China. Although garners who like fast-paced action may not like it, the necessities of
building one's economic base, engaging
in diplomatic posturing (marriages and
treaties in particular), rewarding one's
subordinate leaders, spying on neighboring provinces and resolving battles by
means of simple, boardgame-style
hexagon-map conquest offer plenty of
satisfaction for careful, dedicated strategy
garners. The new version offers improved
graphics, AdLib sound support, tougher
artificial opponents and the potential for
"magic" through the random discovery
of mystic artifacts.
Tony La Russa Ultimate Baseball
($59.95) from Strategic Simulations,
Inc. may well be the heir apparent to the
best all-around computer baseball game.
It offers plenty of statistical features, impressive graphics, and some refinements
to traditional arcade play. See the feature
article in CGW 888 p. 104 for more
details.

tics freaks. For those who want to play in
a computer league, but cannot get
together with enough football fans to
keep one going, the game even offers a
modem feature that is supported on the
USA Today Sports Network on-line service.
Those who wish to have football
strategy without being tied to NFL statistics will want to check out Playmaker
Football from Broderbund (IBM, Macintosh, $49.95). The game allows would-be
coaches to build teams and playbooks
from the ground up, using dozens of
statistics and one of the most advanced
Al systems we have ever seen implemented in a computer strategy game.
The animation is extremely smooth, as
well, and the program even allows those
who want to try their hand at influencing
the on-field action to intervene via a deus
ex (mouse)ina.
Romance of the Three Kingdoms II is
an update of Koei's award-winning

Spectrum HoloByte's Wordtris (IBM,
$44.95; see the article on page 102 of
this issue for more
details) combines
the intensity of
the best-selling action game Tetris
with the mental
agility required to
solve crosswords,
score well at
Scrabble and use
letters multiple
times in Upwords.

Battle Isle
(Amiga, IBM,
$49.95) is
Ubisoft's answer
to a gamer's
desire for a "beer
and pretzels" wargame. The game
is described on
page 84 of this
issue and is one
of the few
releases to be published initially for
the Amiga during
the current
holiday season.

Finally, a strategic Napoleonic wargame is coming out for the personal computer. Oddly, though, it's not an
American design or even a European
one. L'Empereur (IBM, $59.95) has that
hint of samurai flavor found in all of
Koei's strategy and wargames. Using a
point-to-point movement system (instead
of their tried-and-true area movement system), the leaders, production and combat all have the same feel as other
games from this publisher. More exhaustive trade and diplomacy rules open up
new possibilities and, while the history
section in the documentation is a far cry
from Chandler, at least such noteworthy
personalities as Fouché are included in
the game.
Rightly billed as "the wargame for the
rest of us," Patton Strikes Back (IBM,
Macintosh $59.95) from Broderbund
takes players to The Battle of the Bulge
during the winter of 1944. Using a simple
point, click and play interface, units are
maneuvered over the particularly attractive map as graphic icons. The iconbased troop disposition is as easy to interpret as the game is engaging. The
game's simple rules are clearly explained

I

Buying Guide

and one can even access "mini movies"
(that teach the history of the battle)
during the course of play. Patton Strikes
Back is not only an enjoyable battle of
wits, but also a fascinating lesson in history from award-winning game designer
Chris Crawford.
The Perfect General from QQP (IBM,
$59.95) is a classic hex boardgame,
translated and enhanced for computer
play. An abstract tactical WWII game of
tanks, infantry, artillery, etc., the players
maneuver around pleasing VGA maps
through a variety of very challenging and
well tested scenarios. With full modem
capabilities and sound support, The Perfect General is a cozy, comfortable wargame with enough splash and panache
to turn initial interest into years of replay
value.
V Is For Victory: Battle Set #1: Utah
Beach is the first in a series of wargames
to be released by Three-Sixty Pacific
on the Macintosh format ($59.95). This
series of computer wargames really
builds off of the 30+ years of board wargaming history and synthesizes the best
of classic board wargames with state-of-

the-art computer wargaming features including a look and feel for the map and
units that could please even the most
jaded wargaming palette. If there is
paper wargamer on your Christmas list
who has always "pooh-poohed" computer wargames, this one should change
his or her mind.
SSI (IBM, Amiga $59.95) has just unveiled the sequel to perhaps the most
"diehard" wargame ever programmed for
personal computers, Second Front.
Western Front, from designer Gary
Grigsby, takes the players through WWII
from Berlin to Bordeaux and London to
Naples through the last year of the war.
Hitler's "Festung Europa" is much easier
to assault thanks to the new mouse interface and the increased levels of player
control for production and aerial campaigns. Not for the casual wargamer,
Western Front is a must for serious students of military history.

F-22 Interceptor from Electronic Arts
(Sega Genesis, $49.95) proves that the

Buying Guide

game until a receiver is located (and
then pass the ball). Thus far, it is the
easiest football game in which to complete a long pass. In addition, the game
features an interface for kicking and punting that will remind players of Jack Nicklaus Ultimate Golf and require just as
much skill.
NHL Hockey (Sega Genesis) was
covered in CGW #86 p. 102 and was the
first sports game on a dedicated game
machine platform that CGW's staff
thought should be converted to a multipurpose computer. The only things this
great statistics-based action game is miss
ing are the ability to have league play,
customize teams and print out statistics.
Phantasy Star III: Generations of
Doom (Sega Genesis, $79.95) is one of
the reasons that CRPGers are beginning
to purchase the Genesis. Sega's popular role-playing adventures offer plot and
discovery as well as "hack and slash."
The game features more "action" feel
than most diehard computer gamers will
want, but has more depth than many
traditional computer games with weak
plots and limited role-playing elements.

new generation of game machine is
equipped to handle a true simulation with
polygon-filled graphics. The game simulates aerial combat action for the Advanced Tactical Fighter design which
was not accepted, as well as offering missions with a production model F/A-18
Hornet. F-22 Interceptor is a big game
that features plenty of value.
John Madden Football (Super Nintendo, no price set by Nintendo as of this
printing; Sega, $49.95) is another
Electronic Arts sports game that has
made the successful transition from diskbased computer platform to dedicated
game machine. The interface is simpler
than the original computer-based command structure and the action flows
more smoothly as a result. The animation is considerably better than the
original Apple version and it still offers
excellent options for strategy players.
Mike Ditka Ultimate Football (Sega
Genesis, $49.95, IBM, $54.95) is
Accolade's answer to other action-based
football games. The interface is reminiscent of other games, but the game features the digitized voice of veteran
referee Jim Tunney (familiar to all
television sports viewers) and a passing
mode that enables players to "freeze" the

Toejam & Earl is another Sega title
(Sega Genesis, $59.95). While it is not
the standard CGW gamer's fare, it is a
wild and whimsical game that is more innovative than plenty of the traditional
computer games that we examine in the
course of a year. By veteran computer
game designer Greg Johnson (Starflight
and Caveman Ugh-lympics), the game
features action, exploration, discovery
and a modicum of strategy. While it is
not the most cerebral of games covered
in the survey, it is certainly one that is
very entertaining.

So, those who call themselves computer gamers had better watch out and
better not pout, because the software publisher "Santa"s are coming to town with
an even larger assortment of Christmas
toys for all of us "good" (well, maybe,
not quite so good) "little" (well, maybe
not so little) "girls and boys" (after all,
we're all "children" at heart during the
holidays).

Sneak Preview

An Ocean, an Island and a War
UBI Soft's Battle Isle
by Allen L. Greenberg

n the minds of strategy garners, somewhere between their imaginary
favorites Continents of Conquest and
Sea-periority would come a land of war
and maneuver: a place like Battle Isle.
The goal of Battle Isle is standard
military fare—either to eliminate all of the
opposing player's fighting units or to capture his headquarters. The combatants
may be either two players against each
other or one player against the computer. The setting is one of a series of increasingly complex islands through
which a player progresses each time a
victory is scored. The islands range in
size, beginning with one so minute that it
might have once belonged to the
celebrated Gilligan and continuing up
toward one which most resembles
Europe. The victory occurs when a
player is given a positive enough performance rating to earn a password to the
next scenario (island). The lines are
drawn and the battle begins....

I

Hardware Wars
Battle Isle contains a huge variety of
automated combat vehicles which range
in size from a simple tank to a
monstrous floating fortress. These
machines are scattered throughout the
playing area as the scenario opens, with
the greatest concentration near each
side's headquarters. Major roadways leading toward that building are also wellprotected, although non-paved terrain
causes no problem for most of the land
vehicles. In the more advanced
scenarios, flotillas of all sizes punctuate
the waterways and groups of aircraft also
stand ready for takeoff. There is apparently no way for the player to initially position these units himself; thus, customizing the scenario does not appear to be
an option. Not all types of weaponry,

buildings or features are available on
every island, either, adding a bit mystery
to the game.
In addition to one's headquarters,
various depots and factories also occupy
the island. Only factories are able to
produce new combatants, while other
buildings are used to store and repair existing units. Depots may be built by a special non-combatant vehicle known as Merlin. The energy required to accomplish
all these tasks is provided by a natural
element called alindium, which is found
in outcroppings scattered over the terrain. The stuff is brought into headquarters by a transport vehicle called a
Provider, which is also capable of some
limited combat. Buildings, including headquarters, may only be captured by the
game's one humanoid participant, a
robot "Demon." When this happens, a
clever piece of animation depicts the
robot breaking in the front door. Demons
may also hitch a ride in the Provider
alongside the alindium.

Heavy Metal Inventory
Several tanks are available, the lightest
being the FAV (Fast Attack Vehicle)
Buster, which is most effective from a distance. Scorpion, Gladiator and Crusader
are increasingly heavy tanks, each built
for nastier battles (although the latter suffers from reduced mobility). Three
mobile artillery units, Angel, Blitz and
Sphinx, provide protection at varying distances and generally require some time
before they can be put into operation.
Mosquito is Battle Isle's only air-to-air
fighter and is particularly vulnerable from
ground attack. Against ground targets,
the Raven is used, whose cannon, missiles and bombs can blast open armor
like an airborne can opener. Giant is the

airborne transport vehicle, which can
carry up to seven of even the largest
tanks. This monstrous flying luggagerack is also capable of taking off and
landing without the use of an airstrip!
The game's only helicopter is Firebird,
which is armed with cannon fire, air-to-surface missiles and FFARs (Folding-Fin
Aerial Rockets). It's less maneuverable
than the Mosquito but is also better
protected.

Fleets o' Strength
In the water, the hovercraft Invader is
used to initiate ground assaults. The Buccaneer is a mine-sweeping boat which is
also capable of deploying the explosive
devices, including those which are former
possessions of the enemy. The mines, or
Bricks, can be used to block port entrances in a short time. Bricks are also found
blocking access routes on land.
Also on the water is the very fast and
very accurate Marauder hydrofoil, the
heavily armored Amazon transport boat
and the completely invisible, torpedo-carrying Barracuda. Adding strength to the
fleet is the Pegasus, an aircraft carrier
which is capable of transporting and
repairing up to seven aircraft at one time.
Easily the most intimidating force in the
water, however, is the Fortress. This
giant platform is not only capable of
destroying anything within a wide range
with frighteningly little effort, but it is also
self-repairing and probably carries a 6century/50,000-world warranty
(whichever disappears into eternity first).

Map Relief
Battle Isle unfolds on a highly detailed
relief map that depicts the topography in
keen, almost three-dimensional detail. A
sharp-witted ballistics decorator, in an-

Sneak Preview

ticipation of the mayhem destined to
take place there, has carved the traditional wargaming hexagonal pattern directly
into this realistic landscape. The many
types of combat vehicles, ships and
aircraft are unique in appearance and
highly stylized.
The screen is divided into two halves,
each of which is under the control of one
player. Using the joystick, each player
may scroll his half of the screen to
whichever portion of the island he is interested in observing or to which he is
giving orders. Unfortunately, any "secret"
information will not remain so for the
player who simply watches his
opponent's side of the screen.

The Look and Feel of
Mayhem
Players input their orders simultaneously. While one player gives instructions for
movement, the other gives orders to attack. When, by mutual consent, the last
order has been entered, a tap of the
space bar ends the turn. At turn's end,
one half of the screen displays each pair
of enemies which have been ordered into

combat. The other half of the screen
shows an animated sequence in which
the opposing forces roll into formation
and fire away at each other. The number
of vehicles (or the lack thereof) which appear during this animation reflects how
much damage each unit has accumulated. The results of this combat are, for
the most part, consistent from trial to
trial, although some small variation in the
number of vehicles left standing does
occur.
All orders are given using the joystick.
Pressing the fire button gives the player
access to a number of specialized icons.
During both attack and movement
phases, selecting one of these icons
causes all hexagons that represent valid
targets of a particular unit to become
highlighted until the player makes his
selection. Another icon will cause the
player's screen to zoom out over the entire playing area and display all units
which have not yet received orders.
Similarly, players may instantly receive information about their own or an enemy
unit, as well as the occupants of carriers
and buildings.

My Kingdom for a Mouse
Inexplicably, Ubisoft will not support a
mouse interface in Battle Isle. This is
odd in that not only is the mouse a
much less clumsy tool than a joystick for
selecting icons and indicating choices on
a map, but it is also by far the most
popular input device for the Amiga, the
initial computer for which Battle Isle is
being written. Without the use of their
favorite rodent, many players of both the
IBM and Amiga versions may be unhappy with the game.
Battle Isle's greatest appeals, however,
include its vivid graphic display and,
once one gets over the casualty of the
mouse, its easy, rapid-fire input of commands. For relatively uncomplicated war,
strategy and devastation, it may turn out
to be a very attractive package. Perhaps
not hard enough for "hardcore wargamers" due to its abstractions and joystick interface, but certainly entertaining
to more relaxed strategy garners who enjoyed Herzog Zwei or The Lost Admiral
and, as a result, might want to open a
bag of chips and a soda, then head for
the bunker.

Sneak Preview

A Preview of Sid Meier's Civilization
by Alan Emrich

W

hile Rome wasn't built in a day,
the decline and fall of the
Roman Empire only takes a
good day's worth of play in this latest offering from Microprose. As an evolutionary step from Railroad Tycoon, Sid
Meier's new game progresses from his fertile mind to the "fertile crescent" in
Civilization, another one of those "compulsive-addictive" games that one can
easily stay up until 4:00 AM playing and
ends up thinking about constantly when
not playing.

pottery (and building a granary), the
food box is only half emptied each time
the population increases.
Resources (symbolized by shields)
equal a city's production output. In order
to "buy" a city improvement (such as a
temple, military unit or even a wonder of
the world), a commitment must be made
in resources. The city's resource box continues to fill until the unit is actually purchased. Spending money can hasten the
purchase of items, but since for each
shield still required to build an item two
coins must be spent, the savings in time
could ruin one's economy if this form of
"emergency production" is used too
often.

Sid Earth
In the beginning, Sid Meier (with Bruce
Shelley) creates the Earth. Right away,
players are thrown into the game with its
opening menus. Players can play on the
actual Earth, a randomly generated
planet with Earth's "specs," or set their
own parameters for a habitable word orbiting an G-type star. These "custom"
planets are particularly enjoyable, for
while every planet is the same size (in
terms of the number of map squares
horizontally and vertically), the amount
which is land versus ocean can be adjusted, as can the overall climate,
temperature and the planet's age. (The
younger the planet, the more dense its
terrain features will be—i.e., large jungles
or deserts as opposed to nearby diverse
terrain in surrounding areas.)
The computer spends a bit of time
generating the world and filling it with
various logical and aesthetically pleasing
terrain designs. There are a dozen different terrain types with "special
resource" squares sprinkled throughout
the board (oil, gold, gems, coal, gold,
fish, game, etc.). The purpose of terrain
is to allow players to find suitable city
sites, build cities there and exploit the
land. Naturally, cities founded near fertile
rivers and grasslands will fare better in
terms of growth than those on arctic and
tundra squares, but cities on hills and
mountains make excellent defensive
strongholds despite their "slow growth"
terrain.

Sid City
The game begins with each "player" (al-

though, as in Railroad Tycoon, there
can be only one human player who must
compete against from 2-6 other computer players) having a single caravan of
settlers roaming the land in search of a
suitable city site. Once a city is founded,
urban management quickly becomes the
"game within the game" in Civilization.
The player must allot the city's available
labor to work the nearby land by irrigating, mining and building roads, or pull
them off the land to create a class of
"elite" citizenry within the city itself.

The trade units generated by a city's
roads and waterways actually become
one of three things, as determined by the
player. Each trade unit either converts to
a "coin" (i.e., money, based on the
player's tax rate), a "diamond" (i.e., a
luxury item required to keep citizens content, based on the player's luxury rate) or
a "light bulb" (i.e., a unit of research
towards the next technology advance
based on whatever trade is not consumed by either taxes or the production
of luxury items). Since money is required
on a per turn basis in order to maintain
one's city improvements, and luxury
items, in turn, keep the urban populace
from revolt, it is often difficult to balance
a society's need for long term R&D
("light bulbs") against urgent,
turn-by-turn social demands. To make matters
worse, depending on one's current type
of government (despotism, monarchy,
republic, etc.), a certain amount of trade
units are lost to "corruption," depending
on the city's distance from the player's
capital (palace).

As the land is worked, food (symbolized by wheat stalks), resources (or
"shields") and trade ("arrows") are
produced. Optimally, food is produced in
surplus to the city's basic consumption
need, with the excess stored in the city's
"food box." When filled, this box is
emptied and the city grows by another
point. With each increase in population,
the amount of food required to fill the
food box increases, and by discovering

Citizens not working the land to
produce the food, resources and trade required for prosperity can become "elite
citizens." These "Ubervolk" come in three
flavors; the taxman (who creates additional coins from the city each turn), Einstein
(who produces additional light bulbs
each turn) and the ever popular Elvis
(who will constantly be putting down
revolts by creating the luxuries required
to alleviate discontent among the urban

Sneak Preview

populace). Often a society will have a
pressing need for one of these commodities. For example, a war needs
money so that military units can be purchased quickly. Having enemies with superior technology might call for every
citizen possible to become an Einstein
for a while. Likewise, the fall of one's
capitol or a revolution causing
widespread discontent creates a pressing
need for "Elvi". Thus, the super citizens
are there for the instant reward at the
cost of some long-term growth for the
city as the fields lay fallow from the drafting of farmers into the "elite citizen
corps."

than its predecessor and specific prerequisites required before higher levels of
technology can be reached. For instance,
the discovery of "Advanced Flight" requires about forty previous discoveries
(including such "oldies" as the alphabet,
mysticism and bridge building). A vast, interwoven complex of discoveries, many
of which are prerequisites for later discoveries, is built into the game and adds
much to its richness and replay value. Interestingly, players are informed of many
key events in the game by the same
type of "newspaper" headline graphics
which were also used in Railroad
Tycoon.

The People Are Revolting

The press aside, time is also an important concept in Civilization. Since the
game covers an era from 4000 BC to the
colonizing of Alpha Centauri (roughly
2000 AD), it would take a lot of 1-year
turns to complete a game. Fortunately,
early on, each game turn represents 20
years, which is later reduced to 10, 5, 3,

Civilization can be played at five different difficulty levels (from Chieftain to
Emperor). This affects computer opponent hostility (and "cheats"/"handicaps" bestowed the computer player),
but—equally important—varies the level of
tolerance the populace has for the
player. The easier the game, the more
people who will fill a city before new
citizens begin to be born "unhappy." If
there are more unhappy people than
"wealthy" people to offset their numbers,
a city goes into revolt. In this, the "Sid
City" portion of the game, dealing with
revolts becomes an ongoing aspect of
game play. There are many ways to appease the masses. Raising the luxury
rate will make people happy throughout
one's civilization (at a cost in light bulbs
produced each turn). Temples,
cathedrals, courthouses and coliseums
can be built. "Elvi" can be created. Settlers can be created (which removes a
point of unhappy population from the
city), one's type of government can be
switched and even certain wonders of the
world might help to restore order. Due to
the frequency of urban revolt, however,
every tool in the toolbox will be required
to keep a lid on unrest. Players are advised that "smart play" is to be diligent
yet creative in dealing with revolts.

Reinventing the Wheel
Advancing one's civilization is one of
the few ways that Sid Meier's Civilization compares to the popular Avalon
Hill boardgame, Civilization. In the
boardgame, one saves up to buy Civilization Cards such as pottery, medicine,
iron working, etc. Owning some cards
makes acquiring others easier, so the
evolution of discoveries progresses along
fairly logical lines. In Sid Meier's Civilization, these same advances are purchased via light bulbs (scientific R&D),
with each new discovery costing more

seven medieval (and renaissance) and
seven modern wonders of the world.
Building them not only raises one's final
game score by an impressive amount,
but also give the player a certain longterm special advantage over other civilizations. For instance, building the Colossus, since everyone came to marvel at it,
greatly increases trade at that city. Discovering the cure for cancer helps to
keep everybody happy. The older
wonders, however, are often made obsolete. For instance, Shakespeare's
Theater ceases to provide its benefit of
making people happy in that city once
the discovery of electricity is made (with
radio and television the presumed
culprits). An important part of one's playing strategy, therefore, is knowing what
"special powers" each wonder possesses
and building them, in the right place and
at the right time, to take best advantage.
The sacrifice is enormous, but the longterm benefits can be also.

On War

2 and finally 1 year per turn. This compressing of the time scale gives the activities of civilizations across the millennia the right "feel" throughout the game,
although it is difficult to imagine all of
WWII as lasting less than 10 turns. The
player will find there are more drawn-out
Punic and 100-Years type wars to be conducted than quick little 7-Years wars and
Koreas. Interestingly, in the beta version
playtested, a player will never face the
threat of a serious civil war (even at the
toughest levels) since cities which revolt
never build military units which must be
crushed, no matter how badly treated or
ignored they are. Considering their significance in history, this writer is hopeful
that civil wars will get their due in the
final version of the game.

Will Wonders Never Cease?
A major object of the game is to build
the highly expensive, long-term "wonders
of the world." There are seven ancient,

In the movie Patton, our hero says
"Next to war, all other forms of human
endeavor shrink to insignificance." In
many way, Civilization proves this out.
The nature of human happiness and
prosperity is a struggle for excellence,
not equality, and so it is that one must
develop the technologies and military
resources to insure his "place in the
sun." The struggle for excellence in
Civilization is not conducted on a purely
military basis, however, for politics and
economics are also closely related. Still,
almost every aspect of the game seems
to connect to a military application. Even
the criteria for winning the game is
biased in favor of the world conqueror
over the stellar colonizer!
The secret is to know thy neighbors.
Computer-controlled civilizations are all
competing for ascendency, so knowing
who can be bullied (like the Egyptians'
Ramses), who can bribed (like the
Americans' Lincoln) and who must be
fought (like the Mongols' Genghis) is
clearly "history lesson one." The beta
software played by this writer, however,
had no options for "random personalities" for the different leaders, so
one's diplomatic play style can become
pretty set after only a few games. The
uses of diplomat units, however, is
primarily for their military value. Gathering intelligence and conducting campaigns of bribery, treachery and
sabotage are the primary mission of
diplomats.
Even trade has overt military implica

Sneak Preview

tions. While it might seem the most
peaceful thing in the world to establish a
trade route to a foreign city, the increase
is trade only gives the player establishing the trade route an advantage.
Computer players never seem to establish them with the human player, but apparently do so with ease among themselves. Caravans are also used to rush the
production of those long-term investments known as wonders of the world,
which can quickly free up a city for more
important (and often militarily useful)
items.
It's a difficult concept to grasp, but
many a city in a republic has had to
build things as "peaceful" as a cathedral
or coliseum so that its armies could
march off to war. This is because the
populace of the city had to be "appeased" so that the armies could deploy
beyond the city gates without throwing
the whole town into unrest. It seems that
virtually everything in Civilization translates into a military advantage. While
quite historical, the overt implications of
this aspect of the game may be a turn-off
to some.
The clash of military units, by comparison to the aggressive struggle for
economic and diplomatic superiority, is almost anticlimactic. While one must sweat
over building up individual cities and discoveries, armies bump into each other
with the ultimate in instantaneous finality.
Combat is resolved by the old "ping
pong balls in the fishbowl" technique. A
unit with an attack strength of four puts
four ping pong balls in the fishbowl,
while a unit with a defense strength of
three would put three in the bowl. The
computer mixes up the seven ping pong
balls, then pulls one out to determine the
winner and eliminates the loser. Terrain,
fortifications and a unit's "veteran" status
will all effect its strength, and as technology progresses, so do unit strengths and
abilities.

Political Correctness
Civilization also strives to be a "hip"
game and deals with popular social issues from the standpoint of "political correctness." Thus, global warming is a
tremendous threat (one that is all too
often realized in the beta version). Odd,
for such a recent, unproven theory....
Evolution is expressed in the game's introduction, but at least that debate has
been around a while. Pollution, therefore,
becomes a society's primary focus after
industrialization takes place, with players
being channeled toward more politically
correct power plants, recycling centers

and mass transit to address the problem.
Even the beta test "super highway"
wonder of the world gave way to
"women's suffrage." While women's suffrage is a novel concept for its effect
during game play, it is also another brick
in the wall of political correctness.
"...

And the Omega."

Ultimately, most Civilization games
end in the "space race." Assuming that
one hasn't managed to conquer the
world (which, according to the victory
point schedule in the beta version, is the
optimal ending), one must discover the
plastics, robotics and superconductors
necessary after building the Apollo program, and build what this writer calls "the
space ark." A scant section of the
documentation covers this penultimate
endeavor, but it will require much time,
usually, before things are perfected. Time
during which players are often lunging at
each other's capitals (where their palaces

are located), since that is the only way to
sabotage the opponent's space program.
The wars can get particularly nasty
toward the end-game for this reason and
with nukes flying, global warming setting
in repeatedly and SDI defenses popping
up like weeds, the end-game is almost a
game unto itself.
One disappointing element is the continuance of technological evolution.
There is none. The technology of the
games ends at circa 2000 AD tech
levels, and then players research generic
"futuristic technology" (a.k.a. "the meaning of life") for some bonus victory
points. This writer would like to have
seen the extra effort made for nanotech
items and science-fictionesque units to
play with while the space ark is spending
some 60 years (turns) on its way to
Alpha Centauri. Of course, one wouldn't
get to play with them for very long
before the game ends, but hovercraft and
space shuttles should have been made

available despite their limited time of usefulness in the game.

"The Value of a Good Thing
Is To Have Done It."
All its diverse elements make Civilization an extremely rich and rewarding
game to play. Surely the design and
development teams must have agonized
over all that had to be left out in order to
make the game playable. Everything
from the stirrup to super highways is not
included in the final package, and this
writer can only speculate as to the effect
of their loss. One loss that everyone will
suffer from, however, is the absence of a
tutorial. Without a real "hands on; do
this, do that" introduction to the game,
new players will often find themselves in
the same kind of quagmire people did
6000 years ago. ("Sure, Ogg, pottery
sounds like a great idea, but what will it
do for us?") The beefy 120+ page
manual is going to have to be fairly well
studied before one dives into the salient
points of civilization building, and more is
the pity for players will not discover
(game) literacy until about 1000 BC or
so.
When the dust settles and one is left to
excavate the history of his civilization at
the game's end, it all boils down to a
point total. Of paramount importance is
the size of one's population and how
happy they are. This is followed by the
mega-points awarded for building
wonders of the world. Turns of complete
world peace and the generic "futuristic
discoveries" pay some bonus points, but
great negatives are assessed for any pollution within the empire (as per the
game's "politically correct" bias). Still, in
terms of victory points, there is no substitute for global hegemony through
world conquest. As in Railroad Tycoon,
a hall of fame lists the top five games
played.

The Histories
When the second issue of Computer
Gaming World was published, the cover
was a picture which satirized the apes at
the obelisk from 2001: A Space Odyssey. On that cover, the apes discover a
computer disk as their obelisk, and so
progressed forward. That's the image to
keep in mind when thinking about
Civilization. Sure to succeed beyond
even Railroad Tycoon, a new Olympian
in the genre of god games has truly
emerged and Sid Meier's Civilization is
likely to prove itself the greatest discovery in computer entertainment since,
well... the wheel!

Review

To Play Is To Learn
Sony's "Laser Library"
by Jasper Sylvester

O

ne of the toughest decisions a
computer user is likely to face is
whether or not to upgrade his existing hardware. The decision is particularly acute for those who are considering
whether to upgrade to a CD-ROM drive
or not. There are several factors which
complicate that decision. One factor is
that the consumer may pay so much
money for the hardware itself that no
funds remain for purchasing new
software. Another factor is trying to
decide whether the new hardware will be
compatible with future releases.
Sony Corporation has taken a major
step in reducing anxiety over the former
and helped some with the latter. By
releasing the Sony Laser Library System at a suggested retail price of $699,
the electronics/entertainment giant has
provided computer garners with an external CD-ROM (but not CD-ROM-XA or CDI) compatible drive and approximately
$2,000 worth of software.
The software bundled into the Sony
Laser Library System includes the
Compton's Family Encyclopedia (from
Britannica Software); the Microsoft
Bookshelf (complete with the American
Heritage Dictionary, Concise Columbia
Encyclopedia and World Almanac and
Book of Facts (1991), as well as
Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, Roget's
II: The New Thesaurus and the Concise
Columbia Dictionary of Quotations);
the multimedia Languages of the World
database (an on-line database of
Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish,
French, German, Italian, Japanese, Norwegian, Spanish and Swedish); the National Geographic Society's Mammals: A Multimedia Encyclopedia (an
interactive reference work); Software
Toolworks' World Atlas: CD-ROM Ver-

sion (featuring almost 250 VGA color
maps) and Sierra's Mixed-Up Mother
Goose: CD-ROM.
Not only does this line-up reflect a
tremendous assortment of useful
programs, but the fact that so many "off
the shelf" CD-ROM programs work with
the drive gives potential purchasers the
assurance that it is compatible with most
currently available programs. The drive
requires at least 512K RAM, a hard disk
and DOS 3.1 or above. It is highly recommended that purchasers have a VGA
monitor/adapter and mouse, since most
of the CD-ROM products to be used with
the drive will be supporting those standards. It is not, of course, compatible with
CD-I, CDTV or CD-ROM-XA. So, one is
not certain what the future will hold. As it
is, however, the drive will support the
Sierra CD-ROM games (Mixed-Up
Mother Goose, Jones in the Fast Lane,
Space Quest IV and Stellar 7),
Software Toolworks' CD-ROM game
pack (a collection of previously published games, Chessmaster 2000, Gin KingCribbage King and Beyond the Black
Hole) and Access' CD collection (Crime
Wave, Mean Streets, World Class
Leaderboard and Echelon), as well as
Interplay's Battlechess CD-ROM.
The Sony Laser Library System
seems to be a logical way for the computer gamer who wants to get right into
multimedia now to do so. Even if the
standards for optical-based computer
games were to change in the future, the
gamer would have plenty of useful
software on hand to use for reference
and enjoyment. The future is not clear,
but the amount of CD-ROM products already available makes it tempting to get
involved now.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
ScorpiaScriesS I's
Pools of Darkness

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

P

eering into the crystal ball, I see a
flood...a flood of games. The world
is awash in new releases! As the
tides recede, however, there is left only
small, dark pools. Before we jump into
the pool, however, an important bug
alert. If you are bringing characters over
from Secret of the Silver Blades, make
sure none of them are wearing Cloaks of
Displacement. Boot up Silver Blades
and check the inventories. Drop any
cloaks right then and there, before you
do the transfer.
For reasons as yet unknown, these
cloaks cause severe problems in Pool of
Darkness, most notably locking up the
game. This can happen any time, in particular when you try to unequip the
cloak. Even a cloak that has been behav
ing itself can suddenly turn bad, as happened to me more than once. So to be
on the safe side, dump the cloaks before
you bring your team over.
As most people know by now, Pools of
Darkness is the conclusion of the series
that began with Pool of Radiance. This
is a game designed for high-level characters (expect your team to be at or near
40th level by the time you're done), with
many tough encounters. Therefore, if you

have a party that completed Silver
Blades, it's a good idea to bring them
over.

Xenophobic Journey
You should also consider dropping any
non-humans from your party (if you still
have any) except for thieves (thieves,
however, aren't very useful in this game,
so you may want to consider dropping
them anyway). Only humans or thieves
of any race can advance as high as required by POD. I quickly found that my
two Elven Fighter/Magic Users were just
not good enough for this one, and
replaced them with humans. Your
fighters need those two shots per turn,
and most importantly, everyone needs a
lot of hit points.
Look at it this way: if you create a
brand new human fighter, he starts the
game at 14th level, and he comes
equipped with plate mail+3, a shield+3,
longbow +2, etc. Since SSI never hands
out goodies for nothing (well, at least not
in their games), this should give you
some idea of what you'll be up against.
This really is a game for both experienced characters and experienced
players. I don't recommend Pools of
Darkness to the novice gold box gamer.
It would be much better to play some of
the others first, rather than trying to start
with this one.
It all begins quietly enough with your ar-

rival in Phlan, ten years after you originally cleaned up the city in POR. Phlan is
prosperous now and, these days, a dull
place for adventurers. Everyone tells you
that and seems anxious to get you
moving to more exciting places.
There is very little you'll need to purchase in the shops, since your party
either has many magical items brought
over from Pool (yes, even belts of Giant
Strength and the +5 silver swords make
it across), or the ones they come with if
newly created for the game. The one
thing you should get for your characters
is a mirror (anyone with a silver shield,
however, won't need one). With Medusae
and basilisks around, mirrors are good to
have.
When you're finished roaming the town,
the game proper begins with your party
escorting Sasha (remember her from Silver Blades?) to check out some trouble
in another part of the land. You don't get
much further than past the town gates,
however, before trouble strikes a lot
closer to home.
Bane (the great god of evil) takes over.
A cloud of darkness covers the
countryside, all the good towns and cities
vanish, and only strongholds of evil are
left. Just when you're wondering what to
do, Elminster pulls you into his secret
hideout in limbo, gives you some explanations, then dumps you back into the
world. The long trek has begun.

OPINION
It definitely is a long one; there is much
to do here and this is probably the most
extensive game in the entire series, bigger even than Pool of Radiance. Don't
expect to get through this one in only a
couple of days.
What you can expect are many hard
fights along the way. You'll come up
against a lot of spellcasters, especially
when you're down among the Drow.
Every Drow you come across is a
spellcaster, either a cleric or mage type.
As Drow are very resistant to magic,
these encounters can be deadly if you're
not careful. I found Delayed Blast Fireball
to be a good spell to use against them;
they seemed less resistant to that one,
and it did a good job of taking them out,
or at least doing some damage.

Do the Limbo Hop
The pools of darkness are in four areas.
These pools are actually portals that connect the prime material plane with limbo
and, consequently, limbo with other
planes of existence. Each time you enter
a pool, you arrive at Elminster's camp in
limbo. Here you can rest up, be healed,
be trained and/or go on to a different
plane.
Travelling to the different planes is one
of the big sore points. You can't take
most of your magical items with you.
They have to be put in storage or they'll
be destroyed as you cross from limbo to
the other plane. Only mundane (nonmagical) items or special-purpose rings
(cold resistance, wizardry, blinking, etc)
will survive the passage. Rings of protection will not go through.
So all your really neat things have to be
left behind when you go on to the
tougher parts of the game (and those
other planes are tough!). Now, on the
other side (so to speak), there are
weapons and armor, as well as other
equipment to pick up as you fight your
way through the hordes. Much of this
isn't nearly as good as what was left behind, although certainly better than nothing.
The trick is, this stuff won't make the
trip back. When you're done with that
plane and return to Elminster's camp, all
the items you found (again, except for
special-purpose rings and mundane
items) disappear.
We therefore have the nonsensical situation of leaving your equipment behind,
finding replacements, and then having
the replacements vanish when you
return. What's the point, except to add ar-

tificial difficulty to a game that certainly
doesn't need it?
The main reason for accumulating all
these good things in the first place is to
have them for the major encounters.
When you go up against a Kalistes or a
Dragon King, you need your best highpowered weapons and armor, as well as
spells. Most of these critters are too
potent to be taken out in one or two
shots, and they do some heavy damage
of their own.
Yet it is in these very situations that
you don't have your best items with you;
you only have what you've been able to
find along the way. Checking out every
room and passage for equipment lends itself to extra fighting you would probably
want to avoid. This is particularly true
since there are many times and places
where the party cannot rest and heal up;
these options (Fix and Rest) do not appear on the camp menu (you can still
camp out to save the game and do other
operations).
Fortunately, there are only four times in
the game where you have to endure this
idiocy. Unfortunately, they are the
toughest four places. This includes the
big showdown at the end, where you
have to go through three hard fights in a
row, with no saving in between.
At the end, you get all your original
stuff back, and much good it does you
then, unless you plan on going through
Dave's Challenge, an area that opens
only after the major quest is finished.
The Challenge is a killer dungeon of the
nastiest type; going through it is not required.
Speaking of the end, this is the other
sore point. Ordinarily, I would not reveal
what happens, but the conclusion is so
poorly conceived that I have to say something about it.

DOS About All
You started your party out in Pool of
Radiance as fledgling heroes. They went
on through Curse of the Azure Bonds
and Secret of the Silver Blades, becoming more experienced and powerful.
Now, they've just finished a task whose
proportions are almost immeasurable,
turning back, virtually single-handed,
powers of darkness and defeating what is
nothing less than a demi-god.
What's the reward? Nothing. That's
right, nothing. After Gothmenes is
defeated, the forces of good (presumably
the good gods) step in and "turn back
the clock", so things are as they were

OPINION
when you first entered Phlan. No
one, except you, Elminster, and
the gods, remembers anything of
what happened.

more "other-worldly" feel to it
than any of the other areas.
Going through the heart section
in particular is an interesting experience, since Moander is still
alive and his heart is beating.

So, the last hurrah for your
hardy band turns out to be less
than a whisper. No cheering
crowds, no banquets, no
speeches, not even a thank you
(except from Elminster). After all
they've been through, there is
nothing for your party to do except slip out quietly by ship,
either for retirement or Dave's
Challenge.
What a downer! SSI was supposed to have learned something about reward endings after
their horrible Eye Of The Beholder "drop to DOS" ending.
That certainly isn't evident here. The
POR series is over, the characters have
advanced to where they can only retire,
and they get a slap in the face like this.
What is so sad about that (and the
"store items before crossing planes" silliness), is that Pools of Darkness is otherwise the best in the gold box line to date.

The land of Kalistes (a sort of
spider goddess) is about the
same size as the Realms (prime
material plane where Phlan used
to be), with much to do and find.

The game is challenging, and some of it
is really amazing.
This is especially so with the Moander
segment (Moander is the big green guy
you see on the back of the box).
Walking around, on, and inside this immense sleeping god is really bizarre, with

The cave of the dragon king is
small, but filled with all varieties
of nasty dragons. (Be prepared
for a welcoming committee
when you pass through the pool
to this place.) Dark Phlan (rescue Sasha again) is a twisted version of the original, and leads to
the final encounters in the palace
of Gothmenes.
The lands of the Drow will certainly
keep you on your toes, and you'll want
to keep an eye out (hehe) for the Beholders in Mulmaster. In the Tower of
Marcus, beware of the gaze creature
(hint: he can't hurt what he can't see).
And there are, of course, the usual little
side quests that are a hallmark of the
gold box games: the cave of the Silver
Blades (Vala makes a return appearance), the temple of Tyr, the ruins of
Myth Drannor (yes, the Rakshasa are
back, bigger and meaner than ever),
Taydome Keep (rescue Sasha) and
various small keeps and such where you
can do some good deeds by clearing out
the monsters.
The graphics are good, better than in
previous games, at least with VGA. The
full-screen shots are finely detailed, and
some are spectacular. As for the sound,
well, I turned that off early on. Every time
the party took a step, there was a loud
"clunk" that quickly became annoying.
The control-S command did not work, so
I had to re-boot and re-do the configuration for no sound.
"Look up the word" now is done only
from the front portion of the manual; you
no longer have to search for words
among the paragraphs (hurray!).
Overall, except for the two points mentioned earlier, I enjoyed the game. Without the lame ending and item storage requirements, this would have been the perfect finale to the POR series. Regardless,
if you can live with the flaws, you should
have a good time with this one.
That's it for this look into the crystal.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail

W

ell, here we are on the brink of
the usual pre-Christmas game
release extravaganza. Good
thing Fred and I did some cleaning earlier this year; I have the feeling we'll be
needing the room pretty soon now. One
of these days, we're gonna have to enlarge this back room. (Either that, or I
give up my packrat habits and clean out
even more old letters.... Guess we'll have
to make the room bigger, after all!)

Since the new games are just starting
to appear as I write this, the current mailbag is pretty much devoted to the older
ones, with the exception of the bug alert
for Might & Magic III (noted below).
Before we get to the hints, however,
once again, the reminder that people
who live in the United States must
enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope when they write to me for hints.
Just last week, I received two letters on
the same day which did not include
SASEs. Please remember to include that
SASE; otherwise, you won't get a reply.
(This does not apply to readers in
countries outside the U.S.)
Might E Magic III: This one is very
new, and no questions have shown up
yet, but there are some problems with it
that have surfaced even in short-term
playing. If you come across either or
both of these, you may wish to send
your disks back to New World for replacement. (They are aware of the
problems and working to correct them.)
Problem #1 is with the Greek brothers,
Alpha, Beta, etc. A quest in the game requires talking to all of them, but the program will not recognize the fact that
you've seen the one in the town of Wildabar. This is relatively minor.
The more important one by far occurs
in the Dark Knight dungeon (the one
with the red shield on the door). The instructions on the statue of Ivory Billow
may be wrong. The correct instructions
for figuring out the answer are: "Count
the secret number with Fire Hood and
Desert Breeze, but deduct Forest Green,
Frost Wing and Phantom Sorrow. Multiply by Shadow Grave." That will do it for
you. Oh, and don't forget the secret number; it's practically right there in front of
you.

Countdown: People are having some
trouble getting out of the wine cellar.
Gee, with all that good liquor down there,
why would they want to? (heh) For those
who do want to leave, I recommend
moving things around. You never know
what might be uncovered (like hints for
operating the secret door to freedom, for
instance). Left to right, top to bottom.
Spellcasting 101: It's sort of amazing
(ahem) how many are having difficulty
with the Maize Room. Wasn't so long ago
I gave a hint about that here, and now
I'm doing it again. Maybe its very
simplicity is the problem. Really, this is
easier than it looks. Just map out the
rooms carefully. There are no tricks here;
the rooms are laid out in a very
straightforward manner. When you're
done, look at the letters. Those letters
are important. That's all I'm going to
say—there's no need for me to spell the
whole thing out for you.
Martian Dreams: There is only so far
you can go in this game, and then you
have to rescue all the humans trapped in
the Dream World. Until you do that, there
is no way to melt the ice caps (among
other things). Using the machine in Hellas is no big deal, but the one in Elysium
is another matter. You need to talk to all
the Martians in the Hellas dream world
first. After you have a Martian of your
own (so to speak), go back and talk to
them again.
Eye of the Beholder: Continuing the
series of hints for the special bonuses,
here's an outright answer: the final bonus
(level 12) requires spiking Mr. Eyes in
his own trap. Not an easy thing to do,
and you must have the wand of Silvias
(and quick footwork) to pull this one off.
For the bonus on level 8, look for a room
with many inactive flame gauntlet holes
on the walls. What to do there, however,
is something I'll let you figure out (hehe).
Bane of the Cosmic Forge: Still
popular, judging from all the questions
that keep arriving in my box. One difficult point is dealing with Bane and
Rebecca in the fight at the end (one ending, anyway). Only stakes and holy
water are going to work here. Also, if you
have the silver cross, this needs to be
used in the first round of combat. (I am

not certain exactly what this does, but it
seems to help.) Finally, keep in mind
that stakes are like daggers, so a good
skill with daggers is helpful. (However, I
hear this may have been changed in
other versions, and you may need a different skill to use the stakes effectively.)
King's Quest V: Those who are
having trouble getting out of the tavern
cellar are advised not to step into the
tavern (grin). At least, not until you've
been through the desert, the forest and
the elves' place, and you've done a kind
deed for a certain small critter. Otherwise, it's pretty much curtains for poor
Graham.

Quest For Glory II: When dealing with
the fire elemental, you only need one
pouch of incense. If you have more than
that, you may experience problems in
catching the elemental. One pouch,
properly used, is all you require. Of
course, you also have to have something
to trap it in, and a little something to
chase the elemental into the item. Both
of those are fairly obvious, if you consider the nature of the elemental, and
have had a chat with Aziza.
Timequest: Some folks are having a
hard time with the Churchill broadcast.
They can't figure out how to stop Hitler
from hearing Churchill's retraction. Well,
you certainly aren't going to accomplish
much by sticking around in Dover.
Remember that different places also have
different times. (There's more to this
time travel business than meets the eye
sometimes.)
Well, that's it for this look into the mailbag. Remember if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games
RT).
By U.S. mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the U.S.):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

Spectrum HoloByte's Wordtris
by Michael S. Lasky

G

lasnost, comrades, helped make

shoot down and no monsters chasing the
cursor around the screen, ready to slay
or flay the hero. No secret mazes. No
violence. It is simply the player's abilities
with cursor keys and making split-second
decisions against the clock. Indeed, it is
that speed that makes the Tetris games
so exhilarating.

Tetris the first Soviet computer
game to become a major success
in the U.S.—indeed, worldwide. With sales
of legitimate copies now in excess of
280,000, according to U.S. publisher
Spectrum HoloByte, Tetris holds the unfortunate record of being the most
pirated computer game in the world.

What takes this game beyond the ordinary are the variations and user customization capabilities it comes with.
Garners can use the keyboard, a mouse,
or a joystick to move the letter cubes
about the screen. They also handle the
preference pointer on the opening and
drop-down menus used for customizing
the game to a player's desire.

Like all modern entertainment successes, Tetris has not only spawned sequels,
but its massive and unequalled
popularity certainly produced myriad
copycat—licensed and unlicensed—
clones. It also has three spinoffs of its
own. Directly on the hot success of
Tetris was Welltris, a 3D-well version
that was fun, but too difficult for people
who were still trying to win at the first version. The second offspring, Faces, was
released in 1990 and named arcade computer game of the year by the Software
Publishers Association. Now comes
the latest sequel—and the cleverest:
Wordtris.
For the (possibly) 17 gameplayers in
the world who don't know how a Tetris
game works, here it is in a text byte:
Various sets of rectangles fall from the
top of a computer screen to land on the
bottom. The player attempts to align a
row of these cubes across without an interruption.
When a line is formed, it disappears and the player
gets points. Sounds easy, right? The catch is that
not all the shapes fit so easily and the player must
manipulate them so that they do. As points mount,
the speed of the falling shapes increases, requiring
great dexterity and sharp spatial reasoning.

While the mouse is handy for pointing
the cursor/arrow in the menus, it performs a bit too loosely in the actual
game. Stick to the keyboard for more exacting control.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Wordtris does this concept one better. Instead of geometric
shapes falling, letters fall and the player is required, in the Scrabble tradition, to create words across and down. The letters fall to
about center level—the base line. Below is a pool into which letters sink as other letters fall on top of previously dropped ones.
So now, as if the spatial reasoning and quick reflexes that
Tetris demanded weren't enough to keep a gamer busy, one
must be able to spell. With the 60,000-word dictionary that
comes built in, as well as the player dictionary editor, words of
three letters or more are instantly recognized when they get to
the base line or below. So players must be very careful how they
arrange larger words that include three-letter words.
Wordtris, like its predecessors, is as infuriating as it is incredibly addictive and, like its forebears, is popular with players for its
utter simplicity of design and play. There are no space aliens to

Wordtris
IBM, Macintosh
1 (or 2 with modem)
$44.95
Sergei L. Utkin
and Vjacheslav A. Tsoy
Spectrum HoloByte
Alameda, CA

Players are able to select a game mode
for individual against the computer; competitive (with two players using the keyboard at the same time), cooperative
(again with two players, but this time
each helping the other) and tournament
(up to four players, taking turns at the
same keyboard). There is also head-tohead Wordtris in which two players,
each on a different computer, play simultaneously
for the best score (requiring two copies of the program and modems on both computers).

Other customizing controls include setting time
limits, limiting the use of repeat words and selecting difficulty levels. There are enough options to
keep the game from ever getting stale with
repeated replays. The variations are limitless.

Like Scrabble or any crossword puzzle, as the letters land they
form the words that the players create—and then some. Inadvertently created words will appear in the well beneath the user-controlled base line and count just the same. In fact, when the end
of the game looks near, words form and often give the gamer
new life and more points as well.
Another twist is the magic word. Depending on the difficulty
level chosen, a word of five to seven letters will be shown at the
top of the screen. If the word juggler can form it, all letters on the
screen are erased, and the point value of each letter—whether in
a word or not—are earned.
Tetris was a classic game. Wordtris does it one better. Does
that make it a better classic? In a word, Yes!

Foreign Correspondence

curate star map for 1 January at latitude
51.5 degrees North; yawing moments for
rudder demand and slip, etc.

Over There
ProFlight

to the Stars

by Paul Rigby

There are reports that scenery disks will
be available later. ProFlight is currently
available for the Amiga 500 and 3000
and ST (color low-res or monochrome hires) or even the Atari TT. Although one
can buy ProFlight from the addresses at
the end of the column, interested persons may wish to give HiSoft themselves a ring at 01144 525 718181.
The German software publisher Starbyte is unleashing a hatfull of games
onto an unsuspecting public—available
on Amiga, PC and C64, with ST soon.
The first of the four to be released is
Spirit of Adventure.
The plot is fairly interesting. The world
of Lamarge once was in the gods' favor.
The gods protected the country and its inhabitants from all dangers, but time
passed and the gods turned away from
the people of Lamarge. Don't ask why (I
just got here). The land was devastated
and Melfur, the mountain of sacrifice, exploded into many different fragments.
Only a few were aware of the magic
power of the rocks, later known as runes.

ne of the most surprising pieces
of software to appear in the UK
over the past year has been ProFlight, a Panavia Tornado flight
simulator from HiSoft (a company that
obviously considers the design of their laBeLs vEry cAreFulLy). The release is
"surprising" because HiSoft is known
more for their 16-bit languages (C,
BASIC, assembler, etc.) on the Amiga
and ST platforms.

O

With ProFlight, HiSoft has attempted to
provide the simulation enthusiast with a
flight simulator that approaches the
military realm in a similar fashion that
Microsoft/BAO approach the civil arena
in Flight Simulator.
Arriving in a sturdy box and a professionally ring-bound 174-page manual, ProFlight contains a mass of features including—deep breath: drag due to landing
gear, air brakes, elevators, tailerons and
rudder; varying wind and turbulence; multiple-view options; correct effect of
tailerons, elevators and the like at all
angles; full aerobatic capability; auto rudder, wing sweep plus bank and pitch
limiters; wing lift for sweep and flaps; induced and profile drag from wing sweepback and flaps; deflection and radarelevated gun sights; navigation aids,
waypoints, distance measuring equipment, heading and bearing; four-function
autopilot and three-function throttle; ac-

Eventually, those who managed to collect three runes were allowed to enter
temples and share in the power. Once it
became known that this was possible,
both the forces of good and evil began to
attempt to own and control the runes.
Over the centuries, the runes became a
religion. This resulted in the runes' custodians, the priests, turning into an important political power.
Meanwhile, at the same time, the
Brotherhood of Dreamers was founded.
Many people become addicted to the
drug Opitar and only the Brotherhood
knew its composition. Thus, the decay of
the reich had started. (One would never
guess this game was from Germany.)
The task? (Trumpets, please)... Take
over a group of up to six characters, find
the origin of the drug and destroy the
brotherhood.
Spirit of Adventure includes dozens of
monsters, eight different classes of characters, 3-D views of cities and dungeons,
more then 100 spells and the magic of
the runes.
In Crime Time, the player wakes up in
a dirty little hotel room and doesn't quite
remember how he or she got there.
(What's new, eh?) The player is sure,
though, that he or she must have been
drinking quite a bit (again, what's new?)
but just can't recall any details.

Foreign Correspondence

Last night there was a murder and the
protagonist is supposed to pay for it. The
player's on-screen character is not guilty,
though. Yet, the player must prove his innocence. Now if only more time was
available....
Crime Time is a text/graphic adventure
with a graphics window displayed on the
upper area of the screen and a movement rosette at the bottom left. To the
lower right corner will be found a list of
suggested actions, verbs and so on.
In Return of Medusa, one can't keep a
bad woman down. She's sleek, she's
foxy, but the bad thing is—she's
baaaaack. That's a real downer. With improved graphics that include 3-D dungeons and other features such as share
speculation and gambling, the Return of
Medusa is set 300 years later—in exactly
the same place. The evil returns into a
time where crime, drugs and violence
dominate everyday life... into a time
without hope.
Meanwhile—"...and they will spread out
and sow the seeds of damnation in evergrowing circles. Unless somebody recognizes the danger and begins to act, there

will come countless nights with a moon
wrapped in clouds and a wind moaning
its death chant..."
In Lords of Doom, the player takes control of two characters, Sharon and Charlie, and leads them in their crucial fight
against time and evil. The task is to
solve a plethora of puzzles whilst trying
to find the Lords of Doom in order to put
an end to this dreadful nightmare. An adventure that will keep one in suspenders,
there's no doubt about it.
From Vulture Publishing in the UK
comes Seigemaster. The player is asked
by the spirit of his wizard father to bring
greatness back to the downtrodden
people. The wizard will lead the player
through 100 tasks culminating in the
defeat of yet another UBG (Ultimate
Bad Guy). On the way, the player will
learn the art of seigecraft and how to live
off the land. An RPG taking an isometric
viewpoint, the player can lead a party of
up to ten characters and there are over
ten (eleven?) castles to lay under siege.
Available now on the Amiga and ST for
£25.99.
Anyone who would like to contact me

can do so on CompuServe
(75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern
Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW.
(Please include two international reply
coupons if you would like a reply.)
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD.
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80,
Fax: 01144-543-466-579.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766, Fax: 01144-268-590076.
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble contact the international operator.

Review

Chronological Kleptomania
By David M. Wilson

TITLE:

Where in America's Past is
Carmen Sandiego?
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNERS:
Claire Curtin, David Ross,
Leila Joslyn, Tom Rettig,
and Ann Kronen.
PUBLISHER:
Broderbund
San Rafael, California

names as: Casey Rah Sirah, Leif Malone, Phil R. Yup, Della Kitessen, and Rhoda Lottamiles. The goal in this historical scavenger
hunt is to offer players an appreciation of America's colorful
past, geography, and culture.
t could be "High Noon" or "Custer's Last Stand" for Carmen
Sandiego. In fact, the matron of mischief may try to steal the
golden spike from the transcontinental railroad or the Constitution itself, since the latest capers for Broderbund's cultural kleptomaniacs occur throughout the time continuum of American history. Where detective players once spanned the globe to foil her
V.I.L.E. (Villains' International League of Evil) "five-finger discounts" of national treasures, they started to traverse the timescapes of world history in order to pull off their chronological
crimes in Where In Time Is Carmen Sandiego?. Now, player
gumshoes must foil her historical heists by chasing her across
the space and time of the United States of America.

I

Historical Roots
Broderbund's Where in America's Past is Carmen Sandiego? is their latest offering in this quality educational series (a
series of computer games which, in turn, has spawned its own
television series). As in previous "Carmen" waves, the student...er...player signs on with the ACME detective agency and
receives a case assignment which starts said player PI on his/her
investigation. In the course of the investigation, players will attempt to track down V.I.L.E. henchmen with such humorous

Activating the Chronoskimmer (i.e. time machine), previously
used in Where In Time Is Carmen Sandiego?, players do the
"Quantum Leap"-frog and follow the clues. Thus, players are able
to gather clues and guess the next place and time to search. As
the player gathers clues, they input them into the game's nowstandard crime computer so that it can analyze the clues and,
eventually, create an arrest warrant.
The challenge of the game, as it is in all Carmen Sandiego
products (whether they are purchased as a stand-alone game or
played on the Prodigy Interactive Service), is to follow the line
of evidence until one has sufficient clues for the "crime computer" to issue that arrest warrant. The player loses the game if
he or she is unable to follow that line of evidence and earn that
warrant. Indeed, if the player even happens to discover the location of Carmen's henchman (or henchwoman) before getting a
warrant, the villain will leave a nasty note reminding the player
that a warrant is necessary and the player automatically loses
the case he is working on.

Printing Press
This time, the game's documentation is craftily designed to

Review

resemble an old western newspaper. The clearly written instructions are a refreshing change from many quickly written and
garbled game manuals. Along with the "newspaper," there are
also cards which depict and describe each V.I.L.E.
henchman/henchwoman in Carmen's gang. Each card has a tintype-style photograph of the baddie along with a witty description
of the individual villain.
The information on the cards is not only well presented, but it
also assists players when it is time to issue a warrant.
As a teacher, one can appreciate the fact that the game offers
enough of a leisurely pace that players/students have time to utilize the reference book included in the game box, What happened When, A Chronology of Life and Events in America by
Gorton Carruth. This thick (over 1400 pages) paperback is essential for gameplay, as well as being a handy reference book for
any would-be historian's library. Naturally, one of the purposes of
the game's design is for players to learn salient facts, pertinent
dates and some U.S. geography, but the design also provides excellent opportunities for them to learn how to use an index or
quickly peruse an atlas. In our learning center, we find it exciting
to see students not only play the game, but use their free time to
read up on some of the events they have encountered in the
course of the game. Encouraging research is certainly one of the
game's strongest attributes.

Judgment of History
The program is more than educational, however; it is also highly entertaining. Delightful artwork decorates the game, as do

cleverly animated segments that demonstrate to detectives
whether the correct course of action is being followed or not. The
humor keeps the educational aspects of the game from bogging
down too quickly in pacing or overtly pounding the student/player over the head with its lessons.
Alas, after a time, any Carmen game becomes disconcertingly
similar to adults and older players. One garners the impression
that Where in America's Past is Carmen Sandiego? probably
doesn't have enough specific knowledge to assist high schoolers,
for example, in passing history exams. In fact, the game design
seems, instead, to focus on a rudimentary understanding of the
chronology of American history, such that an adult with a fairly
basic knowledge of history can sit down and play the game with
only a rare glance at the accompanying reference book.
A helpful option would have been to allow the player to set the
game to remain in a particular time period in order to make a
thorough study of that particular time period, rather than jumping all over America's past. This would assist the student who is
studying a particular time period to gain a more detailed
knowledge of a specific subject area.
All criticism aside, the game is excellent at what it was
designed for. It stimulates an interest in and provides a conceptual framework for studying America's history. Indeed, students
in our learning center not only "Quantum Leap"-frogged through
the game, but they were stimulated enough to leap from the
game's reference book to encyclopedias and other references. In
this teacher's mind, anything that can motivate a student to perform independent research is great!

Review

Hagler versus Minter promised
to be a classic. However,

by Wallace Poulter
TITLE:
TKO Pro Boxing
SYSTEMS:
IBM
B PLAYERS:
0-2
PRICE:
$39.95
COPY PROTECT: None
DESIGNERS:
Shannon Lynn
with Jim & Thomas Trunzo
PUBLISHER:
Lance Haffner Games
Nashville, TN

September 27, 1980
Wembley, England

T

onight,

in one of the best
fights in years, Alan Minter
retained his Middleweight
Championship with a unanimous
decision over challenger Marvin
Hagler. The fight started, as
predicted, with Hagler using his
power to establish dominance in
the first two rounds. All three
Judges scored the second round 108 even without a knockdown.
Minter, however, returned the
favor in rounds three and four
with effective counter-punching.
The give and take continued
with Hagler grabbing rounds six
and nine, while Minter won the
seventh and eighth. The fifth
round was scored evenly. The
tenth round saw the beginning of
the end for Hagler as Minter's constant body attack started to pay
dividends. While occasional flurries came from the challenger,
Minter was in full control, even
while fighting off the ropes. A
huge Minter eleventh set the stage
for the round of the year.
Round 12 will be talked about for years to come. Minter started
off briskly with a couple of stiff jabs and a combination. Circling
to his left, Minter suddenly reversed direction and, as Hagler
lunged in, scored with a huge right cross counter-punch. Impressively, Minter followed up with punch after unanswered punch.
For nearly two minutes, Minter rained punches from every angle
as he looked for the finishing touch. With 10 seconds to go, it
looked all over and the referee prepared to step in. Suddenly, out
of nowhere, Hagler connected with a single left hook and Minter
went down! Minter barely beat the count and struggled to walk
back to his corner. The crowd sat stunned at this turn of events.
The judges didn't really know what to do either, all three scoring
the round 10-8 for Minter despite the knockdown. Fortunately for
Minter, his assault the previous round and the body punching
earlier had weakened the challenger and Hagler was not able to
take advantage In the understandably slow 13th. Minter took the
14th off, causing some concern but he finished strongly in the
15th to secure victory by the surprisingly wide margin of 145138 (twice) and 144-138. Minter will defend early next year
against fellow Englishman Tony Sibson, before a rematch
against Hagler, probably in Las Vegas."
Marvin Hagler and Alan Minter did indeed meet for the World Middleweight Championship on September 27, 1980. Minter was coming
off an impressive defeat of Vito Antuofurmo. Hagler was the number
#1 contender and considered the best middleweight in the world.

Minter always had a tendency
to cut and Hagler opened up
a huge gash over Minter's
eye, causing the fight to be
stopped (the present writer
cannot remember whether it
was in the second or third
round).
It has always been this
reviewer's dream to see this great
match to have been decided on the
ability of the two rather than the cut.
Lance Haffner's TKO Pro Boxing
offers that opportunity. Even better
is that the exact true-life fight result
(Minter stopped on cuts) also occurred during one of the replays initiated by this reviewer. TKO Pro
Boxing is a fight fan's dream.

Tale of the Tape
The fiction which opened this article illustrates both the positive
aspects and negative aspects of the
game. On the positive side, the fight
itself is presented via a text description. Somewhat similar to a radio
commentary, the fighter's moves,
punches, taunting, ring movement
and injuries are all detailed. Yes, it is
only text, but the game wonderfully
presents the tension of a fight that
many of us can recall from our
youth as we hid our radios under the
covers in order to listen to the latest
fight.
On the negative side, note that one
of the problems with TKO, and indeed, Jim (consultant on TKO)
Trunzo's early board game Title
Bout, is the very liberal scoring.
Recently New York state has encouraged such liberal scoring. However, in other states and countries
(particularly in the past), almost the
only way to get a 10-8 round is, and
was, to score a knockdown. In a
fight decided by a knockout, this doesn't particularly matter, but in a
close fight it can make all the difference. While in real life, the ten
point must system is by far the better one, TKO will occasionally
judge fights between Ali and Louis in which Ali will receive a 10-7 advantage in scoring without a knockdown. Hence, players will be
forced to use the round-by-round scoring method in order to get
more "realistic" decisions.
In addition, at least one judge regularly attends the same blind
school that the Fenech-Nelson judges recently visited. Fortunately,
the latest version (2.1) has corrected a number of previous bugs and
errors while adding a nice feature or two. The worst problem in previous versions was the mistaken belief that a decision is rendered to
a fighter when two of the judges cards score a draw. This should, of
course, be a draw and not a decision for the fighter favored on the
third card. Similarly, the occasional decision of the referee to stop a
fight between rounds after the last round of the contest was rather an
embarrassment. These have both been corrected.
As with all Lance Haffner game products, TKO is a stat-based textonly product. It contains over 600 active and retired fighters from sixteen of boxing's seventeen divisions. The potential match-ups are fascinating, from the obvious Ali versus Tyson to the much more
provocative Sanchez versus Pep and Cerdan versus Hagler. The
beauty of this game is the ability to match great fighters from different eras (Sanchez versus Pep) or to "promote" fights that should
have been (Frazier versus Norton).

Review

Because their careers are over, it is much easier to rank retired
fighters and the resulting performances seem to be more satisfying
than those involving current fighters. The problem with rating contemporary fighters is that the ratings tend to be much more subjective
and open to question.
Though it may seem a trifle unreasonable to question why a fighter
was left out of the database when over 600 fighters are included, one
must wonder at the absence of the great Middleweight, Charley Burley. This absence is especially disappointing in light of the fact that
he is not even available on the "Great Contenders" disk (available
separately and consisting of even more fighters to match up).
Fortunately, the game allows players to add more fighters. One can
simply study the values assigned to the 600+ fighters provided and,
subjectively, rank an up-and-coming fighter proportionately. With any
Haffner game, one does not expect a polished presentation. The
value comes from the incredible amount of data that these games
contain. Previous editions of the game came with the list of fighters
on what looked like either a photocopy or a bad print-out. More annoyingly, the rankings of the fighters were incorrect, with the WBA
and WBC headings switched. This has been changed in the new edition and the fighters are not given a governing body ranking. However, the problem of fighters' names being misspelled continues. For
example, Chris Eubanks should be Chris Eubank and Dennis Andres
should be Dennis Andries.
Are these small problems a purchase buster? Hardly! There are
several nice features which improve TKO Pro Boxing over its tabletop counterparts. One such feature is the capacity for simultaneous
punches. Others include: the ability to replay full careers in non-stop,
no-strategy computer-versus-computer mode; the option of watching
a match in a slower, spectator-oriented computer-versus-computer
bout or, of course, the luxury of having a computer opponent when
no human opponent is available. Another positive factor is the built-

in statistics feature which allows players to save a fighter's performance to disk after each bout.

Ringside Analysis
Gameplay is straightforward. Once the contenders are selected,
players move to the pre-fight conditioning phase. This will determine
how seriously the higher-ranked fighter is taking his opponent. It is a
clever way of showing how a Douglas-Tyson could occur. Next, one
selects the number of rounds to be fought (from a three-round walkout to the championship distance of fifteen rounds). From there, it is
merely a matter of selecting a basic strategy at the opening and
changing strategies between rounds as necessary.
Overall, Lance Haffner has taken a nice niche in the market by
producing exactly the stat-based games that people want. It is particularly satisfying for boxing fans who want to establish those
elaborate "What if?"s of endless sports debates. The present writer
has a particular interest in setting up bouts where the great French
Middleweight Marcel Cerdan and the superb Mexican Featherweight
Salvador Sanchez (tragically enough, both killed in accidents at the
height of their careers) compete against the boxers they might have
faced had their careers continued. Personally, this reviewer ranks
both in the all-time "Top Four" in their respective divisions and TKO
Pro Boxing provides the forum for proving that case. Like other
Lance Haffner Games, TKO Pro Boxing presents an interesting challenge for a reviewer. If one so wished, it would be easy to nitpick
these products to death, but the bottom line is enjoyment. Version
2.1 of TKO Pro Boxing just adds to the enjoyment. Those who like
other Lance Haffner games and/or find themselves serious about the
sport of boxing should seriously consider adding this product to their
stable of sports games.
In our next issue, look for reviews of 4-D Boxing from Electronic
Arts and ABC Wide World of Sports Boxing from Data East.

Industry News

Will the Personal Computer Rest in Peace?
Reflections from the Seventh Annual
Conference of the Software Publishers
Association

M

eetings of the Software Publishers
Association might be considered
something like the confluence of
several tributaries into a larger river. Twice annually, the decision-making executives,
positioning professionals and press representatives of several different interrelated industries convene together in order to pool
their collective wisdom. Hardware manufacturers, creators of development tools, software
developers, wholesale distributors, retail
buyers and the computer press assemble to
consider the status of both the consumer and
business software industries. Just as the confluence of smaller streams into a larger river
often causes considerable noise and a considerable amount of turbulence, so do the
opinions of industry pundits and spokespersons at SPA meetings.
In September, representatives of the
aforementioned group converged on Orlando,
Florida to ponder both the present and the future of personal computer software. In fact,
one panel was entitled...

The State of the Consumer
Software Industry
Tom McGrew of Britannica Software was
the first panelist to address the current situation. He stated that there was not currently a
market (or channel) for consumer software,
but that there were eight channels for the
products: mass market (e.g. department
stores), warehouse stores, mail order houses,
discount houses, so-called "super" stores,
"software only" retailers, electronics stores and
direct orders. Hence, it is erroneous to speak
arbitrarily of "the channel" and how it is doing.
Rather, software publishers need to be aware
of the different problems and opportunities associated with each venue.
McGrew noted that many publishers are still
expecting a dominant computer platform to
win over the average family's mindshare and
"take over" the living room. He stated that this
is rather naive, however, since he asserted that
the "battle for the living room" was already
over and that it was won by the dedicated
game systems. He predicted that those systems that expect to utilize the family television
as monitor were probably doomed to failure
and predicted that there would be more fragmentation in terms of family computer use
(more computers used in more rooms of the
house) rather than less. His futuristic vision
was for a home system where a file server
was connected by "skinny wire" to everything
in the house. In this way, he suggested, home
computing could efficiently serve multiple
needs without creating a bottleneck in the
living room.
Brian Dougherty of GeoWorks took a dif-

ferent tack in his analysis of the current
market status. Rather than conceding the battle for family mindshare to the dedicated
game machines, he noted the current
downtrend in NES sales. "When the first
videogame industry went into its down-cycle,
we saw the rise of the C-64," he observed.
"Now, with the downturn in NES, we're seeing
the same thing with PCs in Circuit City. Unfortunately, no one in the hardware market is
doing anything right to reach the mass
market."
To Dougherty, PCs will have their greatest
chance at reaching the mass market through
developments in portable computers. He
thinks it will take a $500 machine in tandem
with a pen-based interface to reach the
average user. Dougherty's comments reflect a
divergence between the entertainment/educational market which McGrew and Phil Adam
(Interplay Productions) represented on the
panel and his own productivity market. While
it is likely that pen-based portables would improve productivity, it is less likely that they
would be able to support the memory-hungry,
graphics-intensive entertainment programs
which today's computer garners have come to
expect.
Interplay's Adam responded to Dougherty's
remarks by arguing that computer users in
general and garners in particular will have to
continue to deal with a keyboard interface and
lamented that this frightens some potential
users. His analysis of current marketing trends
were introduced with a statement on the dismal prospects for shelf space (i.e. the successful introduction of dedicated game machine titles in software stores and mass merchandisers
means less shelf space for specific computer
titles), but he lightened up somewhat by observing that sales of DOS 5.0 had created instore traffic that would probably generate impulse sales. However, Adam warned that publishers need to have their marketing plans in
place in order to "hit the shelf running" because retailers did not have enough shelf
space to allow a product to sit and be discovered. Now, more than ever, consumers
need to have product awareness before the
product hits the shelf. Otherwise, the fall
products may not last until the actual
Christmas buying season.

Consumer Software: The
Media's Outlook on the Industry
Not only is the loss of shelf-space to other
forms of electronic entertainment a dangerous
omen, but another panel underlined another
frightening fact for computer aficionados: computers are no longer newsworthy. Philip ElmerDewitt of Time magazine emphasized that the

age when the computer could be considered
the equivalent of "Man of the Year" (as it was
during the '70s) is long past.
Charlie Kaye, a veteran CBS News
producer, agreed with Elmer-Dewitt by observing that computers have become such ordinary tools that neither the computer nor the
software is news. At one time, Kaye
reminisced, it was news to discover that a
procurer managed his stable of working girls
by using a spreadsheet. He observes that so
many people use spreadsheets in the modern
world that covering such a story would cause
nary a ripple in the listening/viewing audience
of a broadcast news show.
The broader perspective of the lack of
newsworthiness attached to computing does
not bode well for capturing further mindshare
among the masses. Indeed, it suggests that it
will be harder and harder to gain the attention
of the mass market via incremental advancements in either hardware or software. While
the computer hobbyist press (represented on
the panel by Peter Scisco, editor of Compute
magazine) and the consumer electronic trade
press (represented by Jim Wilcox of Twice
magazine) will continue to cover these advancements, they are unlikely to serve the recruiting/evangelistic function formerly served by
the mass media. It will take radical new
developments to change lifestyles and open
newer audiences for interactive entertainment.

Videogames: Are We Having
Fun Yet?
For many software publishers, the prime
savior or villain (depending, of course, on
one's perspective) in the retail sector has been
the videogame. For those who have plunged
into support of the cartridge market (particularly, of late, the sixteen-bit cartridge market), the
rewards have been handsome enough that the
game machine market may be viewed as a rescuer from sales doldrums. For those who have
focused on the personal computer market for
their profits, the decline in shelf space and its
attendant consequences (each product having
to prove its ability to move in a matter of days
or weeks) cause the cartridge phenomenon to
be viewed with bitterness and suspicion.
For the former, there is good news. Joe
Morici of Capcom believes that videogame distribution has become a larger part of software
distribution in general and that it is likely to become even a larger part of the market mix
with the success of the new sixteen-bit machines. In a reversal of Morici's written diatribe of
Spring, 1991 (a letter in which he urged
developers not to abandon the 8-bit market
and its proven profit base), he conceded that
the 8-bit market was declining rapidly and that
16-bit entertainment would rule the future.
For those who are uncertain of the future of
computer entertainment, Kelly Flock of Lucasfilm offered a glimmer of hope. He assured
the listeners that the Lucasfilm strategy with
regard to platforms is to leverage existing assets and think in terms of product lines rather
than platforms. He began by noting the difference in mindset between one type of platform and another. That is, he stated that computer garners tend to be older and more mature, willing to accept a steep learning curve
on a product while videogame players tend to
be younger and need easy interfaces and
short manuals.
Hence, he suggested that his company's
flight simulation products would continue to
be disk-based products, but that SCUMM

Industry News

(Script Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion)
products like I ndiana Jones and the Fate of
Atlantis and LeChuck's Revenge: The Secret
of Monkey Island II were easily adaptable to
CD-ROM platforms and videogame consoles
due to their simplified interface. Flock continued to emphasize personal computer development, however, by noting that Lucasfilm's
optical strategy calls for upgrades (addition of
voice, sound, additional graphics and/or
second languages) for optical platforms rather
than products developed especially for CDROM systems (CDTV, CD-I, MPC and others).
The skeptical perspective with regard to the
continuation of the "personal computer" revolution was espoused by Trip Hawkins, chairman
of Electronic Arts. Trip perceives that entertainment software companies can be placed in
one of five positions: 1) entrenched (sticking
with 8-bit NES development or staying strictly
with floppy disk-based designs), 2) prayerful
(hoping that CD-ROM will develop quickly), 3)
nostalgic (continuing a commitment to floppybased products and hoping NES dies quickly),
4) desperate (positioning one's company as innovative enough to do something completely
different, whether there is an installed base or
not) and 5) nomadic (a platform-independent
existence in which one is continually pulling
up one's figurative tent pegs and moving into
new territory whenever the market demands it).
Hawkins offered strong words against the
hardware manufacturers who cannot agree on
CD-ROM standards and observed that there is
not a CD platform on the horizon which can
be reasonably expected to penetrate the

"heartland" in the near future. He noted that
the current crop of 16-bit cartridge machines
is "pound for pound the best value of the consumer" and expounded EA's success in reaching the 20-year-old Sega Genesis customers
who have graduated from 8-bit videogames.
He explained that EA has discovered that the
Sega gamer includes both children and
adults, whereas the personal computer customer was basically an adult market.
Prophetically, Hawkins did see a potential
mass market for entertainment software which
would combine a wide variety of customers—interactive cable television. His observations
about the possibility of turning the computer
processor which needs to be installed in cable
television customers' homes (in order to take
advantage of fiber optics' nearly 1,000 available channels as opposed to the nearly 100
theoretically accessible by current technology)
into a genuine computer with optical storage.
He gave no hint as to how that would be accomplished, but the subsequently announced
joint venture (see "Inside The Industry") indicates that there must be a way to do so.

So, Do I Use My Computer for
a Doorstop?
The general thrust of the conference for
entertainment software publishers seemed to
be that without broadening the market beyond
its current width, the market cannot grow.
Realizing that a market which is not growing
will usually slip sidewise for a time, then
decline, the publishers desire a solution. They

realize they will not get the penetration necessary to become a "mass market" force until
there is enough standardization that potential
consumers are no longer confused, yet they
have discovered that the "standard" desired in
CD-ROM has become a plethora of standards
(fifteen different standards in actuality).
Publishers experience a nightmare of frustration by just trying to support all the types of
printers on the market, much less the different
graphics card, monitor and sound card configurations. Now, it looks like CD-based platforms are not going to be the standardization
which publishers had anticipated. Many
panelists spoke out in frustration over how the
hardware manufacturers were not providing a
solution. Several voices called for the Consumer Software Section to decide what minimum configurations they would and would not
support, as well as for the software publishers
to standardize their drivers and install procedures. Alas, the same competitive edge that
keeps the hardware manufacturers from standardizing separates the software publishers.
The truth is that personal computers will still
be a vital factor in the software mix for the
next few years. Any efforts toward standardization will only enhance the future of the
personal computer as an entertainment
device. Further fragmentation can only endanger its future. It is nowhere near time to
turn one's personal computer into an anchor,
but it is time for both the software industry
and the consumers themselves to be concerned about the potential alienation of computer gaming's future.

Letters

I invite anyone who wishes to call or
write us, free of charge, to request a
copy of Xenocide's game story line. I am
sure they will find it sounds nothing like
"fascist propaganda" and that the game
is quite fun to play, the way computer
games are meant to be!

Fame of the Year
I wanted to drop a small note, thanking
you for the CGW 1991 Game of the Year
award. Of all the awards and sales accolades Wing Commander has received,
two make me the proudest. The Computer Game Developers' awards for
sound, technical achievement and visual
presentation, and the CGW Game of the
Year. Why? The CGD awards are determined by other game developers, and
the CGW awards are determined by the
readers (real, live game players!) and the
editorial staff. In short, the people who I
design my games for, and therefore the
ones who I strive to impress. Receiving
the CGW award tells me I really did something right with Wing Commander, and
that more than anything else is important.
So, it's with great pride that I tell the
"unofficial" trade magazine of the computer game industry, thanks!
Chris Roberts
Origin
We're glad you took the time to share
your feelings with not only our
editorial staff, but with our readers. Of
course, it never hurts to lead off a "Letters to the Editor" column with correspondence from an award-winning
celebrity, either.

After reading your October 1991 review
of Xenocide I feel compelled to set the
record straight and to clarify critical misin
formation about our product Xenocide, a
fast-paced action/adventure game for the
IBM PC and Apple llGS.
The review begins by introducing a
book by the same title as our game.
Your editor obviously has not done his
homework. Xenocide was copyrighted by
Micro Revelations two years before the
book was released. Although the review
mentions that the book was only
"brought up as a point of reference," it
can in no way, either by its title or
material, be compared to the game
Xenocide. The review states that "the
meaning of the book's title, 'Xenocide,' is
genocide of aliens, the extinguishing of
an entire extraterrestrial race." Indeed,
this may be the meaning the book is at-

tempting to confer, but in no way does
the Xenocide game manual suggest anything of "eradicating an intelligent alien
species." In fact, the manual describes a
period of 2.5 millennia that we have existed in peace. It is not until recently that
the human race has been faced with extinction by genocide from the invading
aliens! In fact, the Xenocide story line
details the long and arduous steps that
we have taken to help settle the invading
aliens and accept them into human
society! Indeed, this idea of
peace-before-war is what our society today should be
(and is) doing. Yet, the review calls the
manner in which the Xenocide manual
presents this process as "gleeful, thoughtless and irresponsible."
It is only after many attempts at peace
that you, as the player, are called to
defend the human race from extinction.
Your goal in the game is to destroy three
moons (all viciously captured by the invading aliens) orbiting your home planet.
This is what Xenocide is about—destroying your own moons so as to remove the
threat presented by the aliens there in
hope of defending your own home world.
The review goes further to compare
Xenocide's documentation with that of
fascist propaganda. Fascism is a form of
government by dictatorship, forcible suppression of the people and belligerent
racism, and is commonly associated with
Adolph Hitler's Nazism. In no way, shape
or form can any part of the Xenocide
documentation be compared to the
beliefs of a fascist doctrine. Describing a
peaceful, democratic and defenseless
society as is done in the story line as
being fascist propaganda is grossly incorrect.
You owe your readers the respect to be
sure all information about a product is
factual and represents the true intent of
the product before you print a review.
Xenocide was never designed to solve
"complex moral issues" as your review
suggests it should. We have designed a
256 color game that combines the best
of all worlds: a 3-dimensional Hovercraft
level, a panoramic side view level with
realistic effects of gravity, and a smoothscrolling overhead view level, each with
its own unique music score and graphics
details.

Brian Lent, President
Micro Revelations, Inc.
On page 75 of CGW #87, Charles
Ardai noted that the game was in no
way connected to Orson Scott Card's
novel of the same name. Hence, there
was no error in editorial fact-checking.
It made no difference which came first,
the novel or the game, because neither
was related to the other. Only the title
is common to both properties. Isn't it
ironic, however, that a company can
choose a title like Xenocide that both
rhymes with genocide and evokes
visions of alien genocide and then be offended when a reviewer and an
editorial staff take them at their title's
word. To be sure, "xenocide" is not in
the dictionary, but by both sound and
sense, it indicates the eradication of an
entire species. Xeno- means alien and cide references killing (usually murder,
as in patricide, matricide, fratricide,
suicide and homicide). That such an action is what is intended may be seen
in the game's documentation when it
says, "Lock and load. It's time to commit xenocide!" However one may try
to stack it, the very name of the game
puts the player in a mindset for killing.
Now, admittedly, one of the staples
of the action game diet is "killing." The
sprite-o-cide involved in most action
games is generally relatively bloodless
and sterile. Yet, the emphasis in most
of those games seems to be on the onscreen character's survival, the rescue
of a helpless victim and the desire to
defend something precious. The fiction
in Xenocide sets up a situation where
the protagonist must destroy three
moons and everything on them. Worse
than that, the on-screen character is
first presented as bored, reckless and
restless, such that his motive in the
game has more to do with his desire to
find action than to truly defend his
planet and his family (albeit the nobler
motives are mixed in with the baser
motives). Remember, the review stated
that Xenocide is "...a very exciting action game," but questioned the moral
underpinning of the game.
The publisher seems offended that
the reviewer compared the documentation to fascist propaganda. Perhaps,
this is because they did their job too

Letters

well. The section of the manual entitled "The Situation" describes a
genetic hybrid that is so evil compared
to the human civilization that is so
good that one cannot help but wonder
how "honest" the set-up actually is. According to Webster's Third New International Dictionary (Unabridged), propaganda is the dissemination of information
in such a way as to influence a person
or group toward specific action. "The
Situation" section is designed to
prejudice the player toward the action
summarized in the last sentence on
page 3, "LOCK AND LOAD. IT'S TIME
TO COMMIT XENOCIDE!" [sic]
Now, to be sure, the CGW audience is
slightly different than many magazines
which review computer games. Our
average reader is older and, hopefully,
more mature than those of most of the
magazines that specialize in action
games. Our readers look beyond the
games to consider technologies used,
philosophies expressed and real-world
implications, as well as the more mundane concepts of interface, game
mechanics and graphic/sound presentation. So, although we recognize the
generally positive quality of a game
like Xenocide, we will speak out
against what we perceive as thoughtless presuppositions surrounding the
game design. Frankly, we see very few
reviewers who actually address these
real-world considerations and we feel a
responsibility to do so. It is not our intent to discourage anyone from playing a game which they might like, but
it would be our fault if we never spoke
about real-world implications and the
state of the genre got progressively
worse. That is why, even at the risk of
going overboard, CGW's publisher and
editor decided to let the review run as
it did and continue to stand behind
our critic today.

Self-UMSed Stamped Disk
Envelope
Free upgrades for UMS II are available
by sending the original disks in a self-addressed, stamped disk mailer to: Intergalactic Development, Inc., 1427
Washington Street, Davenport, Iowa
52804. We will also include our 12-page
newsletter with helpful hints, questions
and answers. The upgrade is also available as a download on CompuServe
[GAMEPUB DL13].
D. Ezra Sidran
Intergalactic Development

Doesn't Ad Up
COW keeps getting better and better
with each issue—keep up the superlative
work! I do have two gripes, however:
Where is your CDTV coverage and why
do you give advertisers awards for the
"best ad" in your magazine? These
awards might be relevant in an issue of
Advertising Age, but not in a computer
gaming magazine.
[no name]
Denver, CO
We would like to urge readers to sign
their comments when they send letters
to the editorial staff Normally, we do
not print them, but this reader asked
some relevant questions which we will
attempt to answer. First, according to
a Commodore representative, there
are only about 30,000 CDTV consoles
in the hands of consumers in the
United States. Although the company
is allegedly broadcasting television
ads in selective markets and the
machines are supposed to be available
in mass market outlets, they have yet
to make their presence known in the
real world. We would like to see CDTV
succeed as an extension of the Amiga,
as well as a stand-alone machine. How-

ever, we feel like its strongest use is as
a game machine and Commodore has
done its best not to position the
machine as such. Thus far, there is no
reason to cover the machines. If CDTV
becomes more available and more distinctive games are published, we will
be glad to cover CDTV.
Second, the "Top Ad" awards are not
out of place in Computer Gaming World
for a very good reason. Since CGW is
read by most of the decision-makers in
the entertainment software industry, allowing our readers to vote on the "Top
Ad" is a means of letting the readers
tell the industry which ads are most effective and best meet their needs. Further, entertainment software companies are, by and large, too small to
be of much notice for the mass market
awards presented in Advertising Age.
Hence, this more focused competition
offers an incentive for companies who
would not ordinarily be competing to
continue to improve and take risks in
their advertising strategies.

Break on Through
I hope to see more previews of technology breakthrough games, such as Ultima VII and Strike Commander, in your
magazine. Both games seem to warrant
extensive coverage.
Raffey Tehan
Albany, CA
We will continue to try to feature
sneak previews of games which have
compelling new technology, features
or subject matter. With the amount of
competition in the print media, it is unlikely that CGW will be able to sneak
preview all the hot new titles, but it is
sure a given that we will try!

SimGame Designer
In regard to a possible SimCity 2,
great! May I suggest various sizes of
roads (from residential two-lane roads to
super-highways). To capture the feel of
real city zoning, the size and shape
restrictions of the individual zone 'types'
will need to be eliminated. Whoever
heard of a city made up of only parallel
and perpendicular divisions?
Sewer lines, storm lines and creeks,
waste water treatment plants, buses and
other forms of public transportation (an
all-bike city?), dams and hydroelectric
power...I can't wait.
Mike Niblett
Santa Clara, CA
Here's lookina at "2." kid

Industry News

Inside the Industry
"New" Hollywood Meets "Old" Hollywood in New Joint Venture

sion into new
entertainment
media with some
trepidation.

A

s Of October 2, 1991,
the para-phrased 19th
Century editorial about
the weather (which said that
everybody talks about it, but
nobody does anything about
it) no longer applied to the
term "multimedia." Now, the
combined electronic presentation of audio, video and data
called multimedia has spawned
a logical partnership.
The logical partnership for
multimedia always seemed to
be a joint venture between traditional entertainment media corporations (motion picture,
recording and/or print-media)
and entertainment software
companies. Time Warner,
Electronic Arts and the venture capital firm of Kleiner
Perkins Caufield & Byers
(the firm which helped capitalize Lotus, Symantec and EA,
among others) have announced just such a joint venture.
The name of the new corporation created by the entertainment triumvirate is SMSG,
Inc. (San Mateo Software
Group) and signals a myriad of
new possibilities for reaching
the mass market through interactive products which involve
"multimedia." The new company will be located in San
Mateo (home of Electronic
Arts) and will be led by W. M.
(Trip) Hawkins IlI, chairman of
EA and president/CEO of
SMSG, Inc.. Officially, Hawkins is expected to split time
50/50 between companies.
The creation of the company
means that Sony is not going
to be the only consumer
electronics company with
enough experience in multiple
fields within the entertainment
industry to influence software
developers to play in their
arena. Many industry observers
have watched Sony's expan-

Although Time-Warner brings
certain passive media properties to the "party," as it were,
astute observers should be
aware that the large media conglomerate is already a software
publisher (Warner New
Media) and involved with "interactive" cable television experiments. So, the new
company's charter is not immediately clear.
What is clear is that TimeWarner would like to move
their cable-television operators
into the world of fiber-optics,
potentially expanding the available channels for cable
recipients from 60-100 available channels to 1000 or more.
In order to keep from having
to wire every house with fiberoptics, cable operators would
like to place (theoretically) a
sophisticated computer processor in every cable customer's
receiver box. This would mean
that the processor could contact a neighborhood node (like
computer modems access),
determine the availability of
desired programming and
download the custom programming to the cable customer's
box. Since the processor would
already be on board the cable
box and the mass media customer would (presumably)
want to have such a box to
maximize his/her available
programming, it seems possible to build this box as a
multi-functional multimedia
computer.
None of the three companies
have announced that building
such a box is definitely their intention, but such a move
seems logical, given the recent
track records and interests of
the partners. What is definite is
that the formation of SMSG
means that three companies
have combined to produce not
only potential entertainment on
demand, but customized enter-

tainment. Trip Hawkins has always had a vision in which
entertainment software would
change the world for the better. If the creation of SMSG
does what it appears it will do,
the new company will potentially solve three issues which Hawkins has often addressed in
recent years: standardization,
limitations of CD-ROM and the
need to reach the mass market.

Mediagenic Files
For Chapter 11
Bankruptcy
Once one of the largest entertainment software companies,
Mediagenic, filed for Chapter
11 bankruptcy on October 7,
1991. Officials at the company
suggest that 1990's
$20-million-plus judgment in favor of Magnavox (in finalizing a longterm litigation over patented onscreen action) amounted to
the final straw, but industry observers cite vacillating management and disappointing sales
as significant causes, as well.
Mediagenic's reorganization
plan calls for almost all of the
company's indebtedness to be
converted into equity (i.e. common stock). A committee of
unsecured creditors and the
company's two secured
creditors have already approved the plan, which would,
in essence, mean that existing
creditors would own 80% of
the common stock and the current roster of stockholders
would have their holdings
reduced to approximately 4.5%
of the outstanding common
stock.
Although the existing common stock was delisted from
the NASDAQ system by the
National Association of
Securities Dealers, the agreement credits the conversion of
debt to stock as being worth
approximately $17 million.
Mediagenic also notes that
the reorganization
under Chapter
bankruptcy laws
will not affect

either its European or
Japanese subsidiaries. The
company also insists that it is
still planning to release
Leather Goddesses of Phobos
II, The Lost Treasures of Infocom and other Christmas
releases as scheduled. Neither
the European or Japanese (Activision) offices will require
any reorganization.

Broderbund Files
For Initial Public Offering
Broderbund Software announced on October 11, 1991
that it had filed a registration
statement with the Securities
and Exchange Commission pursuant to releasing an initial
public offering of common
stock (IPO). Alex, Brown &
Sons is the principal underwriter of the offering, which is
expected to consist of
3,257,184 shares of common
stock. The lower end of expectations for price per share
would be $9.25 and the estimated upper end of the price
range would be $11.00 per
share. The total amount of the
common stock so issued will
be sold by existing
shareholders.
In the wake of the successful
Microprose IPO, prospects
seem positive for the Broderbund offering. Speculation
would suggest that the placement of such an amount of
stock from existing
shareholders may indicate that
long-term investors, such as
Jostens, Inc., may be reducing both their stake in Broderbund and their current high
level of input in the latter's future direction. If so, this would
place more authority in the
hands of Broderbund's
present corporate management and allow them more
freedom in planning the
company's future.

Bestseller List

Survey

Computer Strategy and
Wargames: The 19001950 Epoch

his article concludes the annotated paiktography (list of games) which began in
CGW #88. It should be noted that the
ratings are an individual preference and do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the publisher or editorial staff of this magazine. Also,
please note the platform availability; a five-star
game on an Atari 800 that is several years old
is not of the same sophistication as a new
product designed for a PC 486-33. However, it
has been given its rating for what it did and, to
a lesser extent, what it still does, and perhaps
for the place it holds in this reviewer's heart
and memory.
These ratings may generate a deluge of complaints, but again, these are intrinsically subjective and a discriminating reader should be
able to temper the ratings with this writer's normal reviews in order to ascertain the inherent
biases. If any readers have additions/corrections/modifications (particularly to help fill in
missing data), please send them to me in care
of this magazine or via modem on GEnie (address: M.E. Brooks).
Legend: xxx = Data not available.
Line 1: Title

126
Wargame Paiktography

138
Warlords: Strategy

144
Western Front Strategy

Line 2: (Machine Format [Atari / Commodore / Apple ell / TRS-80 / Apple llGS /
Amiga / Atari ST / Macintosh / IBM]; Issue of
CGW in which that game was mentioned;
bold print refers to major article) Company /
Designer / Date of Publication / Price (O/P:
Out of Print)/ Rating:

= Good use as a magnet holder
= Avoid
**
= Marginal
*•* **** = Average to Good
= Very Good
***** = Highly Recommended
="andhlf
= Not Rated)
N-R
Line 3: Difficulty (Beginner/Intermediate/Advanced); Environment
(Land/Naval/Air/Diplomatic); Level* (Tactical/Operational/Strategic); # of Players (M:
modem option)
Tactical: man-to-man up to company level.
Turns represent seconds to hours.
Operational: battalion-level to division-level.
Turns represent hours to weeks.
Strategic: corps-level to theater army or
higher. Turns represent weeks to years.
0

Military Unit

Fire Team
Squad
Platoon
Company
Battalion
Brigade
Division
Corps
Army

# of Men

23
912
50
40120150
5001,000
3,0005,000
10,00015,000
20,000- 80,000
100,000up

Malta Storm

(Am/ST/I; #65,72,74) Simulations Canada;
Robert Crandall; 1990; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Nav/Op-Str
1-2
A simulation of the battle for the Mediterranean between December 1941 and August
1942 utilizing three-week turns.
Malta Strike
(Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Arneson; 1980; 0/P;

N-R
Beg/Air/Tac
1
Tactical combat in the World War ell Mediterranean theater.
Mare Nostrum
(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
World War ell action between the Royal Navy
and the Italian Fleet.
Marianas Turkey Shoot
(AP/1) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

Survey

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Bat/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M

A simulation of the first eleven weeks following D-Day (6 June - 28 August 1942).
Operation Whirlwind
(A;#3.5,37) Broderbund; Roger Damon;

The largest air carrier battle in history, as
well as the most one-sided. WWIl action with
the last gasp of the Japanese.

1984; 0/P; **+
Beg/Land/Tac
1
Ancestor of Field of Fire, Panzer Grenadier
and Wargame Construction Set (cf. infra), '
this tactical simulation of an urban assault
during World War ell remains fun to play,
despite its age. However, overall, it has not
aged all that gracefully.

Metz-Cobra
(C/A) DKG; xxx; xxx; 0/P; N-R

Int/Land/Op
1-2
Break-out from the Normandy beachhead,
1944.
Midway: The Battle That Doomed Japan
(I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

Overlord

(ST) CSS; Ken Wright; 1989; xxx; N-R
Int/Land/Op
1
A divisional-level simulation of the Invasion
of Normandy.

1987; $35.00; N-R
Int/Nav/Op-Str
1-2
Now in its second (1989) edition.
Midway Campaign
(A; #37) Avalon Hill; National Microcomputer

Associates; 1980; xxx; *
Beg/Nav-Air/Op
1
An operational/strategic simulation of the
Midway campaign, this game has been superseded by improvements in computer design.
Primitive graphics and gameplay do little to enhance its durability.
MiGs and Messerschmitts
(Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Wesley and Ross

Maker; 1980; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac
1
Tactical World War ell air combat in the East.
Miracle at Midway
(Ap/I; #65,66) General Quarters; Owen P.

Hall, Jr.; 1989; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
The decisive WWll battle in the Pacific.
Moscow Campaign
(I/Ap/ST) Simulations Canada; Stephen St.

John; 1987; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
A simulation of Operation Typhoon and
White Storm (30 August 1941 - 13 February
1942).
Normandy, Battles in
(C/Ap; #40,42,54) Strategic Studies
Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1987;

$39.95; **
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
The Normandy invasion and break-out, this
Strategic Studies Group simulation is marred
by the utilization of the Battlefront system in a
situation where it is inapplicable. The historical
use of fire and maneuver tends to bog down
in a war of attrition; corps maneuverability becomes mired in a morass of engagements
which yield ahistorical results.
Normandy, Battle for
(A/Ap/C/I; #3.4,37) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; David Landrey; 1984; 0/P; ***

Int/Land/Op
1-2
An operational simulation of the invasion of
Normandy, this game is easy to learn, although the documentation covering the actual
landings leaves much to be desired. A solid intermediate level game in 1984, it is dated and
suffers from a lack of joystick input, yet this
reviewer still enjoys it.

North Atlantic Convoy Raider
(xxx) Avalon Hill; xxx; xxx; 0/P; N-R
xxx

One of Avalon Hill's earliest releases, a simple
strategy game based on World War ell naval
strategy.
Objective: Kursk
(A/C; #5.2) DKG; Mark Sommerlott; 1984;

0/P; N-R
Int/Land/Str
1-2
Objective: Kursk
(A/C; #4.4,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

Gary Grigsby; 1984; 0/P; **
Adv/Land/Tac-Op
1-2
A tactical/operational simulation of the
largest tank battle in World War ell, it is very
detailed. However, user input is tedious via keyboard and the game system overall is somewhat bland.
Operation Com*Bat
(Am; #75) Merit; Scott Lamb; 1990; $49.95;

N-R
?/Land/Tac
1-2; M
Abstract wargame.
Operation Keystone
(I; #28,31) Overt Strategic Simulations;

T.J. Peto, Jr.; 1986; 0/P; *
Int/Nav/Tac
1
World War ell submarine operations in the
Pacific. Similar to both Silent Service and
GATO (cf. infra), but less interesting than
either.
Operation Market-Garden
(A/C/Ap/I; #5.3,5.4,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; 1986; Chuck Kroegel and David

Landrey; 0/P; *+
Air/Land/Op
1-2
A tactical/operational simulation of the
largest Airborne operation of World War ell, this
game suffers from graphic sensory deprivation—determining the road network is a lesson
in frustration. Also, input may not be readjusted in mid-play, and overall, the user interface is both clumsy and unforgiving.
Operation Overlord
(Ap/ST; #32) Simulations Canada; Stephen
St. John; 1986; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Land/Op
1-2

P-51 Mustang Flight Simulator
(M; #60) Bullseye; Donald A. Hill, Jr.; 1989;

$59.95; N-R
Air/Tac
1-2; M
Cut from the same cloth as the Fokker
Triplane Simulator (cf infra) but slightly more
detailed.
Pacific Storm: The Midway Campaign
(Am/ST/I) Simulations Canada; xxx; 1991;

$60.00; N-R
?/Nav/Tac-Op
1-2
Pacific Storm: The Solomons Campaign
(Am/ST/I) Simulations Canada; xxx; 1991;

$60.00; N-R
?/Nav/Tac-Op
1-2
An operational simulation of the South
Pacific (1942-1943) in two-week turns.
Panzer Battles

(C/Ap/I; #68,69) Strategic Studies Group;
Roger Keating and Ian Trout, 1989; $39.95;
Adv/Land/Tac
0-2
The Battlefront (cf. infra) system on the
East Front, with six scenarios (Minsk, Moscow,
Kharkov, Prokhorovka, Kanev and Korsun). Interestingly enough, Moscow, Kharkov, Kanev
and Korsun have all been the subjects of
paper wargames and the computer offers a different perspective.
Panzer Grenadier

(A/C/Ap; #5.5,37) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Roger Damon; 1985; 0/P; **
Beg/Land/Tac
1
A tactical simulation of armored warfare on
the Eastern Front during World War ell, it is
marred by historical inaccuracy. Reconnaissance by fire is overemphasized, and opportunity fire is hit-and-miss. It lacks the panache
and elan to yield an enduring game experience.
Panzerjagd

(A/C; #4.6,37) Avalon Hill; Richard W.
Scorupski; 1984; $30.00; *
Beg/Land/lac
A tactical simulation of armored warfare
during World War ell, it is obviously dated by
newer efforts and has little to recommend it
today.
Panzer Strike

Survey

(C/Ap/ST/I; #45,47) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1988; $44.00/$49.95; •*+
Adv/Land/Tac
0-2
A tactical simulation of World War II smallunit actions in the West and East Fronts. Very
detailed, but the lack of a panoramic battlefield view often allows one to lose track of
objectives, and it may take hours to complete
a "thirty-minute" assault.
Panzer War

(A; #4.6) Windcrest Software; George A.
Schwenk; 1983; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Land/Op
1-2
Operational battles on the Russian Front
played for amusement, not historical accuracy.
Patton Strikes Back

(M/I) Broderbund; Chris Crawford; 1991;
$59.95; N-R
Int/Air/Tac-Op
1-2
Chris Crawford's forthcoming entry covering
the Battle of the Bulge (World War II).
Patton Versus Rommel
(C/M/I; #35) Mindscape; Chris Crawford;

1987; $14.95; **+
Int/Land/Op
1-2
An operational campaign in France, 1944,
this simulation was characterized by innovative play systems marred by difficult trafficability and passage of lines.

Perfect General, The

(I; 86) QQP; Mark Baldwin; $59.95; 1991; N-R
Int/LAnd/Tac
1-2; M
By the designer of Empire (cf. infra), this
abstract game of tactical battles looks like it
will be very interesting with its multiple
scenarios.

(M/I; #48,51) Spectrum HoloByte; Gordon
Walton; 1988; 0/P; •*+
Adv/Nav/Tac
1
PT boat tactics in the South Pacific; relatively
good graphics and game play on a subject
rarely covered, but it's no Jack Kennedy.
Pursuit of the Graf Spee

P.O. W.
(Am) ActionWare; xxx; xxx; $39.95; **+
Beg/Land/Tac
1
An straight arcade "shoot-em-up." Distinguished by excellent graphics and sheer fun,
this game provides mindless entertainment.

(Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Joel Billings; 1982; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav/Tac
1-2
Simulation of the early World War II battle
off Montevideo Harbor. Very dated.

Power at Sea

(ApfT) Discovery; Dave Arneson, Dave Wesley and Ross Maker; 1979; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Op-Str

(C;#46) Accolade; Distinctive Software, Inc.;
1987; xxx; •
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
1
The WWII battle of Leyte Gulf is presented
with a tremendously reduced order of battle
and the combat itself is limited to arcade
resolution.
Prelude to Jutland

(Ap/I; #65) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall,
Jr.; 1986; $35.00; ••
Beg/Nay/Tee-Op
0-2; M
The preliminary battles of 1915 and the
Grand Battle itself. Minimalist conception of
graphics and user-clumsy interface.
PT-109

RAF: Battle of Britain

A simulation of up to 12 fighter aircraft in
the World War II Battle of Britain, complete
with wire-frame graphics.
Red Baron

(I; #74,75,76,81,83,84) Dynamix; Damon
Slye; 1991; $59.95; •****
Adv/Air/Tac-Op
1
The best World War I air simulator ever
done. Graphics, sound, historical accuracy and
superb game play combine into a complete experience.
Rising Sun, The
(An/11 General Quarters: Owen P. Hall. Jr.:

-

Survey

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M

Adv/Land/Op
1-2
The desert campaign (1940-1943) covered
from a strategic viewpoint.

The Russo-Japanese War (1904-5). An interesting period that has been rarely simulated.

Silent Service

Road to Moscow

(C/I/A/Ap/Am/II-GS; #25,26,30,37) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1985; $19.95; ••
Adv/Nav/Tac
1

(C; #40,41) Ba'rac Limited; Phil Gardocki
and Greg Mojher; 1984; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Land/Op-Str
1-2

A tactical simulation of submarine warfare in
the South Pacific during World War II. Detailed
rules, historical accuracy and layers of complexity made this simulation a necessity in
every gamer's library when it first appeared.
But it has been rendered obsolete by time and
superseded by Silent Service II.

A corps-level simulation of World War II's
War in the East (for a more contemporary
treatment, cf. Second Front).
Rock of Stalingrad, The. Later published by

Game Designers' Workshop.
(Ap) Benchmark Software; Stephen Newburg; 1983; 0/P; N-R
xxx
xxx
An early attempt to simulate the World War
II epic Battle of Stalingrad. No graphics.

highly recommended, and it is to be hoped
that a MS-DOS version will be forthcoming.

Rommel: Battles for North Africa

Sands of Fire

(C/Ap/I; #50,51,64;65) Strategic Studies
Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1988;
$39.95; ***
Adv/Land/Op
0-2
Rommel in the Battlefront (cf. infra) system,
this simulation offers several famous battles of
the African Campaign as well as the "
design-your-own" option.
Rommel: Battles for Tobruk

(A/Ap/C; #32,37,48,50) Game Designers'
Workshop; Frank Chadwick; 1986; 0/P; *+
Adv/Land/Tac-Op
1-2
A tactical/operational simulation of World
War II's desert battles, this game is very
detailed and complex. Supply and air rules are
among the most complex ever devised, but
sheer unplayability and ennui will deter most
players. The graphics deserve special mention,
since they look like someone ate a Big Mac
and threw up onto the screen.
Rommel at el Alamein

(Ap/ST/I; #52) Simulations Canada; Bill
Nichols; 1988; $60.00; **+
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
Operational study of the World War II battle
(1 July - 6 November, 1942). SimCan's
philosophy of producing fog-of-war-intensive
command simulations works reasonably well
in this theater of war.
Rommel at Gazala

(Ap/ST/I; #30,40,41) Simulations Canada;
Stephen St. John; 1986; $60.00; **+
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
The Battle for Tobruk (26 May - 27 June
1942). Again, SimCan's fog-of-war approach
works reasonably well for the desert warfare
depicted herein.
Russia

(C/Ap; #39,40,41) Strategic Studies
Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1987;
$39.95; ****+
Adv/Land/Str
1-2
A simulation of the entire Eastern Front
(1941-1945), it is similar to both War in Russia and Second Front (cf. infra). However, it
offers a more impressionistic and less quantitative analysis. Even with its age, this product is

Silent Service II

(M/I; #74) Three-Sixty Pacific; Gordon Walton; 1990; $49.95; **
Beg/Air/Tac
1
World War II North Africa from the tank
commander's cupola, this game offers both arcade and simulation play. One of the more interesting graphic/sound aspects is the gun
ejecting an empty shell with a satisfying
"thunk." but in many ways, "thunk" also
describes the game play.

(I; #74,76) MicroProse; Arnold Hendrick;
1990; 59.95; ****+
Adv/Nav/Tac
1
A remake of Silent Service, this game
brings what was a fine simulation up to stateof-the-art graphics and gameplay. It does not
seem to have engendered the rousing reception that its predecessor received, but it
remains the best World War II submarine
simulation available.
Sky Shark

(C; #61) Taito; xxx; 1989; xxx; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac
A World War II-era arcade aerial "
shoot-'em8up."

Search and Destroy

(C/I; #43) xxx; xxx; xxx; 0/P; *
Beg/Nav/Tac
1
World War II destroyer simulation, distinguished by nothing of importance. More
reminiscent of an arcade-type product, with
certain similarities to Destroyer (cf. infra).
Second Front

(I/Am; #65,68,72,73,85) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1990; $59.95; ****+
Adv/Land/Op-Str
0-2
The Eastern Front of World War II, covered
from start to finish. Different levels allow one
to see losses taken down to squad level.
Replace commanders, build armies, seize objectives. It's all here, and this is the simulation
to have on the Eastern Front.
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe

(I; #74,76,77,88) Lucasfilm; Lawrence Holland; 1991; $69.95; ****+
Int/Air/Tac-Op
1
Lucasfilm's newest entry, finally appearing
after a one-year delay. It places emphasis on
the bomber offensive over Germany (194345), with B-17s and German fighters such as
the Me-262 jet. It features excellent graphics
and attempts to portray tactical, operational
and strategic levels (and generally succeeds).
Sherman M4

(I) Lorelei; xxx; xxx; xxx; •*
Beg/Land/Tac
1
An arcade-type treatment of desert warfare
during World War II.
Sieg in Afrika

(C/Ap; #4.5,5.1) Simulations Canada; xxx;
1984; $60.00; N-R

Sniper!

(#61,63) CompuServe; Steve Estvanik; xxx;
xxx; ***
Air/Land/Tac
1-multi
Based on the SPI game of boardgame fame,
the on-line version of man-to-man infantry combat uses ASCII characters to provide satisfying
human-to-human competition for those tired of
competing with "artificial" intelligence.
Sonar Search

(C) Signal Computer Consultants; xxx;
1984; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav/Tac
1
Early simulation of baffles in the North Atlantic during WWII (the player's three destroyers
against five computer submarines). One of the
first computer wargames to use a keyboard
template as a game aid.
Spitfire Ace

(A/C; #4.4) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1984;
0/P; *
Beg/Air/Tac
1
An early combat simulator, which has been
severely wrinkled by age.
Spitfire '40

(C/Ap; #69) Avalon Hill; Mirrorsoft Ltd.;
1986; $35.00; 0
Int/Air/Tac
1
World War II flight simulator; poor graphics
and poorer execution. It flies like a bus with
the maneuverability of a tractor-trailer.
Stalingrad Campaign

(C/I/Ap/ST; #37) Simulations Canada; Bill
Nichols; 1987; $60; *
Adv/Land/Op-Str

Survey

An operational/strategic simulation of the
1942-1943 Russian campaign, this game fails
due to lack of user implementation, poor
documentation and the sheer inability of the
game to deliver any semblance of player participation.
Storm Across Europe

(C/Am/I; #62,65,74,75) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Dan Cermak; 1989; $39.95/59.95;
Int/Land-Nav/Op-Str
1-3
Similar to the boardgame Hitler's War, except the computer interface is much more
awkward. The graphics are primitive and the
documentation somewhat sparse. Yet, as a
game covering the entire Eastern and Western
Fronts of World War II, it can be fun to play.
Sub Battle Simulator

(C/I/Ap; #36,38) Epyx; Gordon Walton; 1987;
0/P; ***
Adv/Nav/Tac
1
World War II submarine simulator in either
the Atlantic or Pacific theater. Time has made
this effort obsolescent, but it did have some interesting features (and some not so interesting, e.g. one's submarine could claw its way
across the coast of Spain rather than transiting through the Straits of Gibraltar).
Submarine Commander
(A) Thorn; xxx; xxx; 0/P; *

Int/Air/Tac-Op
1

Int/Nav/Tac-Op
xxx
xxx

Third Reich, The Rise and Decline of the
(Am,ST; #62;86) Avalon Hill; Thalean

A simulation of the World War II Battle of the
Philippine Sea.

Software; 1992; ?; N-R
Adv/Land-Air-Sea/Str
0-2
Forthcoming translation of the classic board
wargame to a computer format. Wargamers
are expectant, but have some reservations because of earlier disappointments in attempting
to translate great boardgames into reputable
computer games.

Surrender at Stalingrad
(C/A; #37) DKG; Marc Summerlott; 1986;

Tigers in the Snow
(A/C/Ap; #37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

The World War II southern offensive in the
East carried on in DKG's inimitable format, i.e.
primitive graphics, inadequate user interface
and overall slowness of execution.
TAC

(A/C/Ap/I; #3.4,37) Avalon Hill; Ralph H.
Bosson; 1984; $30.00; *
Beg/Land/Tac
1-2
A tactical simulation of armored conflict
during World War II. Similar to PanzerJagd
(cf. infra), and just as obsolescent.

$49.95/$59.95; **+
Adv/Land/Tac
0-2

An operational simulation of the Battle of the
Bulge, its primitive graphics, play mechanics
and poor user interface have been superseded
by more recent efforts.
Tobruk: The Clash of Armour
(C; #49) DataSoft; Steve R. Williams; 1987;

xxx; *+
Beg/Land/Tac-Op
1

Top Gunner Collection
(A/C) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1986; 0/P; *

Essentially a computer-assisted boardgame,
Tanktics features hypothetical World War II
German-Russian armor battles. The player can
only play the German. It is notable as one of
the first computer wargames.
Their Finest Hour

(I; #65,66,67,75,77,82,83) Lucasfilm;
Lawrence Holland; 1989; $59.95; ****+

Typhoon of Steel

Beg/Land/Op
1-2

Ostensibly a "simulation" of World War II
Eastern Front tactics, it is extremely primitive.
xxx; **+
Int/Land/Tac
1

1985; $30.00; **
Beg/Nav/Tac
1-2
The Battle of Tsushima during the RussoJapanese War. Clumsy graphics and user interface, but it is one of only two computer games
covering this period.
(C/Ap/Am/I; #53,54,64) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1988;

Deane; 1982; 0/P; N-R
xxx
2

Tanktics
(A/Ap) Avalon Hill; Chris Crawford; 1982;

Tsushima
(C/Ap) Avalon Hill; Kiya Overseas Industry;

Chuck Kroegel and David Landry; 1981; 0/P;

A tactical/operational "simulation" of the
African campaign covering the Battle of
Gazala with a strong arcade element interwoven into the product. Rather than complementing each other with ease, the simulation and arcade aspects denigrate each other's
appeal.

Tanks and Squads
(xxx) CSC Software; Al Winfree and Tim

TSKFRC-58
(Ap) Jagdstaffel; xxx; 1983; 0/P; N-R

The Battle of Britain done in Lucasfilm's inimitable style. Multiple planes, a campaign option and a design-your-own scenario option
offer an outstanding product.

Beg/Nav/Tac
1
Virtually the first submarine simulator, it was
innovative in its time, but now offers virtually
nothing for the simulation gamer.

0/P; *+
Int/Land/Op
1-2

the Atlantic and Pacific theaters. Very early effort with no computer opponent.
To the Rhine
(Ap/ST/I; #43) Simulations Canada;
Stephen Newburg; xxx; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
The War in the West, 29 August - 11 December 1944.
The Train: Escape to Normandy
(I; #45,47) Accolade; Artech Digital Entertainments; 1988; xxx; **
Beg/Land/Tac
1
A grade-B war movie made into a computer
game of the same caliber. It ignores the fact
that the French Resistance of World War II
was an ineffective organization and that its
most efficient members were Communist
Party cells—rescue art masterpieces from the
clutches of the SS.

Beg/Air/Tac
1
Three arcade games in a package, Hellcat
Ace (cf. infra) is the only one within these
review parameters. One of the first combat
flight simulators, this is of interest today only
to the collector.
Torpedo Fire
(Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; John

Lyon; 1981; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav/Tac
2
Submarine warfare in World War II in both

The sequel to Panzer Strike (cf. infra), this
covers the remaining theaters of World War II
(Pacific, Asia, etc.). Similar to its predecessor
with all of its strengths and weaknesses.
U.M.S.

(ST/I; #43,48,51) Firebird; Ezra Sidran;
1987; $49.95; **
Int/Land/Op
0-2
A wargame design kit, characterized by easy
design parameters. However, accuracy is
sacrificed for playability, and often playability
is sacrificed for graphic display. Maritime
operations are ignored, so its universality is
not "complete." It will visually impress your
friends, although it is clumsy and awkward.
U.M.S. 11

(I; #74,75,87) MicroPlay; Ezra Sidran; 1991;
$59.95; **+
Int/Air-Land-Nav/Op-Str
0-multi
A newer version of U.M.S. (see above), with
more emphasis on strategic operations. A
visual feast and a playability desert. The
"design-your-own" disk is marketed separately,
and company support for the title is tenuous
at best.
Under Fire

(A/C/Ap/I; #25,27,37,41) Avalon Hill; Ralph
Bosson; 1985; $59.95; **+
Adv/Land/Tac
1-2

Survey

A tactical simulation of World War II infantry
and armor. Open-ended with a versatile map
maker and scenario builder, but it does show
its age.
Under Southern Skies
(Ap; #4.3) Avalon Hill; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

over much-needed details as to what is (or
should be) happening and the graphics are
reminiscent of a sex-education movie showing
sperm travelling in various directions. Its main
appeal is to the true naval aficionado, and not
to those with only a marginal interest.

1984; xxx; N-R
Beg/Sea/Tac

Warship that Changed History, The
(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

1-2

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
The voyages of the WWI naval vessels
Goeben and Breslau.

Up Periscope
(C/I; #38) ActionSoft; xxx; 1986; 0/P; ***

Adv/Nav/Tac
1
Similar to Silent Service (cf. infra). Excellent
documentation and good game play, but
Silent Service 11 (cf. infra) has assumed the
mantle of graphics and utility in the contemporary market.

Western Front
(Am/l; #88) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
M

Gary Grigsby; 1991; $59.95; ****+
Adv/Land/Op-Str
0-2
The sequel to Second Front (cf. infra), this
covers what most historians refer to as the
"Second Front" (i.e. the war between Nazi Germany and the Western Allies, 1944-45).

The WWI Battles of the Coronell and the
Falklands.

White Death
(Am/I; #66,68) RAW; Al and Joseph Benin-

U.S.A.A.F.

(A/C/Ap; #26,27,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1985; 0/P; *****
Adv/Air/Str
1-2
An operational/strategic simulation of the
bomber offensive over Germany (1943-1945)
on a daily basis. Scenarios range from one
month to two years, and playing time is almost that long. With German production and
industrial devastation the key, it remains a fascinating product. Based upon its commercial
success, it would appear that its fans are
limited to this reviewer and the designer.
Vulcan

(I; #56,64) CCS; R. T. Smith; 1989; $39.95; **
Int/Land/Op
1-2
Similar to Desert Rats (cf. infra), this simulation covers the Tunisian campaign in WWII
North Africa. Mediocre graphics and game
play do little to enhance the program.
War at Sea
(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
The exploits of the WWI German cruiser
SMS Emden.
War Eagles
(I; #69) Cosmi; Ron Paludan; 1989; xxx; *+

Beg/Air/Tac
1
A World War I flight simulator. One of the
first out on the IBM block, its graphics are
chunky, game play is awkward, and overall,
there is nothing to recommend this as anything more than a thinly disguised arcade
product.
Wargame Construction Set
(C/A/I/ST/Am*; #34,75) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roger Damon; 1986;

$29.95/$34.95/$39.95*/* *
Int/Land/Tac-Op
1-2

Basically the user-modifiable source code of
Roger Damon's previous works (Operation
Whirlwind, Field of Fire and Panzer
Grenadier—cf. infra), the game's potential for
design-your-own scenarios is limited by the failings of the system's mechanics. It is most applicable to the World War II era; a novice may
well find its flexibility interesting, although the
graphics are dated.
War in the Falklands
(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

xxx; $35.00; N-R

0-2;

War in the Pacific
(I) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary

Grigsby; 1992?; ?; N-R
Adv/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str
0-2
Gary Grigsby moves his Front (Western,
Second) to the Pacific. This should be a very
detailed simulation of the World War II campaigns, and based on former designs, should
come highly recommended.
War in the Pacific
(I) Koei; ?; 1992?; ?; N-R

Adv/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str
0-1
Currently titled The Admiral's War in Japan,
it is being slightly revamped for American
taste.
War in Russia
(A/Ap; #4.4,5.1,5.2,29,37,62,65) Strategic
Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1984; 0/P;
***
Adv/Land/Str
1-2
An operational/strategic simulation of the entire Eastern Front (1941-1945), this game is
easily learned and played. Sheer size and certain defects in the artificial intelligence present
the difficulty. However, it does show its age,
and has been superseded by Gary Grigsby's
Second Front (cf. infra).
War in the South Pacific
(C/Ap; #36,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

Gary Grigsby; 1987; 0/P; **
Adv/Nav/Op
0-2
World War II in the South Pacific—a
logistician's dream (or nightmare!). Complex
and interesting, but it attempted to accomplish
more than it could deliver. Recommended
only to those with a specific interest in the
period. For a better treatment, cf. War in the
Pacific by the same designer.
Warship

(A/C/Ap/ST/I; #33,34,37,42) Strategic
Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1986; 0/P;
**
Adv/Nav/Tac
0-2

A tactical simulation of Pacific surface naval
engagements during World War II. The
documentation and gameplay seem to gloss

casa; 1989; $49.95; ***
Adv/Land/Op
1-2; M
The Battle of Velikiyi Luki (World War II,
East Front). A direct and literal translation
from the boardgame of the same title, it suffers from some user unfriendliness. However,
if one liked the board game, this will keep
White Death in one's library.
Winged Samurai
(Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Wesley and Ross

Maker; 1980; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac
1
Similar to Flying Tigers (cf. infra), only with
worse graphics, if that is possible.
Wings

(Am; #67,69,74,76,77,83) Cinemaware; xxx;
xxx; 0/P; ***+
Beg/Air/Tac-Op
1
The first "accurate" World War I flight simulation, this was more of a cinematic treatment
of aerial combat than a historically correct gestalt. However, it is fun to play—perhaps falling
somewhere between "cotton candy" and "beer
and pretzels." One of the Amiga products that
this reviewer misses on the PC-machines.
Wings of Fury

(Ap/I; #42,51) Broderbund; Steve Waldo;
1987; $34.95/$39.95
Beg/Air/Tac
1
Wings of War
(C) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Charlie Mer-

row; 1985; 0/P; *
Int/Air/Tac
1-2
World War II air combat; poor graphics and
mediocre play render this product obsolete.
Wolfpack
(Am/I; #61,62,65,72,73) Broderbund; John
Garcia; 1990; $54.95; **
Int/Nav/Tac
1
Submarine operations in the World War II Atlantic. Superb graphics and the ability to play
either German submarine or Allied surface
combatants cannot disguise the historical inadequacies of this product.

r€

ar

-

Strategy

Swords and Calculators
Warlords Play Tips
by Donald E. Cooper

O

ne of the most attractive features
of SSG's Warlords is its combat
resolution, which is simplified
without being simplistic. Although the
combat algorithm is described in detail in
the instructions, the odds for victory in
battles between unequal opponents are
not immediately clear. The accompanying spreadsheet analysis describes the
probabilities for victory in simple one-onone situations, as well as providing
guidelines for predicting the outcome of
more complex battles.
In the table, the two columns on the left
list all relevant combinations of attacking
factors ("AF") and defending factors
("DF"). Since neither the attacker nor the
defender has any special advantage, only
the situations in which the attacker has
the advantage are listed. If in a given
case the attacker is weaker, the labels
are simply reversed throughout. The bottom line of the table (1 versus 1) is applicable to all cases of equal attacker
and defender strength. The third and
fourth columns list the probability that
any given hit (out of the two hits required to kill a unit) will be made by the
attacker on the defender ("ATI - HIT
PROB") or by the defender on the attacker ("DEF HIT PROB"). The fifth column
("ATT WIN") lists the probability that the
attacker will win the encounter, and the
sixth column ("DEF WIN") gives the corresponding probability for a victory by
the defense. For simple one-on-one encounters, the win probabilities are a complete description of the possible outcomes. However, in multiple unit battles,
the two hits required to kill a unit may
come from different opposing units, so it
is important to know the expected number of hits that a weaker unit will make
against a stronger unit. This is listed in
the final column ("AVG DEF HITS").
This table is useful in determining the
risks involved in any particular attack
and balancing these risks against possible benefits. For example, in the early
stages of a game the player's hero (effective combat factor of 6) can attack an
enemy city held by a single light infantry
army (effective combat factor of 4 in a

vantage possessed by high-level armies.
The odds change if a +1 hero is added to
the attacking stack, raising the effective
combat strength of the player's heavy infantry to 6. In this case, each army will
render an average of 0.33 hits onto the
enemy before perishing and the player
will probably lose about 6 armies before
achieving victory. Thus, the odds have
swung slightly in the player's favor and
he may want to attack.

city). The player will win this battle more
than 3/4 of the time, which is a
worthwhile risk for an important city.
However, if this is a small city with a sluggish economy and is only capable of
producing light infantry, the player's hero
just might have better things to do.
The righthand column of the table is
useful in determining the force required
to defeat a powerful (8- or 9-level) army.
Suppose an enemy hero accompanied
by a griffin army has penetrated behind
the player's lines and captured an important city and the ferocity with which the
griffins fought suggests that the invading
hero has some powerful artifacts. The
player could really use those artifacts,
but if one delays attacking for a few
turns one may confront a large group of
armies vectored in from distant cities.
How much force is required to defeat the
invaders? Suppose the player has a
stack of "8" heavy infantry available, and
they will be attacking a lone hero with an
effective combat factor of "9" (the griffins
perished in the attack). Since the attacker has the weaker armies, consult the
table row for AF=9 and DF=5, then
reverse the listed probabilities. Each
heavy infantry army would have less
than a 3% chance of defeating the
enemy hero single-handedly, but we can
expect that it will inflict 0.22 hits on the
powerful foe. Thus the expected hits for
the entire "8"-army stack is 8 x 0.22=
1.76, which is still less than the 2 hits required for victory. Most likely, the
player's entire stack will become cannon
fodder and the enemy will emerge untouched! This illustrates the extreme ad-

For the mathematically inclined, here is
the rationale behind this analysis. The attacker hit probability (AHP) is the probability that the attacker will hit the
defender (=1-0.1DF), multiplied by the
probability that the defender will miss the
attacker (=0.1AF), divided by the probability that either the attacker or defender
will hit the other:
AHP = [(1-0.1DF)(0.1AF)] / 1(10.1DF) (0.1 AF) + (1-0.1 AF) (0.1 DF)]
The equation for the DHP is similar,
with the AF and DF switched.
Either side will win the battle whenever
it gets two hits before the opponent. If
AH denotes an attacker hit and DH a
defender hit, then the following combinations are a win for the attacker:
AH,AHprobability=AHP2
AH,DH,AHprobability=AHP2xDHP
DH,AH,AHprobability=AHP2xDHP
Thus the probability of an attacker win
is AHP + 2 x AHP 2 x DHP. Similarly, the
probability of a win for the defense is
DHP2 + 2 x DHP2 x AHP.
The calculation of the average defender
hits is somewhat more complicated. This
quantity will be the sum of (1) the
average hits expected before the attacker
makes one hit, and (2) the average hits
made after the first hit has been sustained and before the second hit kills the
defender. These two terms will be equal,
and each is the sum of the infinite series
DHP + DHP2 + DHP3 + =DHP/(1-DHP).
It is useful to keep this table by one's
computer whenever playing Warlords
and to consult it often.

Strategy

Conversions
Received
Hard Nova (Electronic Arts) Amiga
The Immortal (Electronic Arts) IBM
Starflight 2 (Electronic Arts) Amiga, Macintosh
Gradius (Konami) Super Nintendo
Space Quest IV (Sierra) Macintosh
Flight of the Intruder (Spectrum HoloByte) Amiga
Secret of the Silver Blades (SSI) Macintosh

Strategy

W

estern Front is a detailed simula-

tion of the Allied invasion of
Fortress Europa and the destruction of the Third Reich. The sequel to
Second Front, it covers the theater
most familiar to Americans. This article
will note various strategies and tactics
which may assist the player.

The Allies: Basic Strategy
No matter how much one dreams of invading Fortress Europe and blitzkrieging
the Wehrmacht with little loss, it is wise
to forget it! Or better yet, it would be useful to read John Ellis' Brute Force—a historical study which explains how the
Western Allies simply bludgeoned the
Nazi war machine with superior equipment and manpower (actually, the Russian Front took care of the latter parameter). Throughout the war, sixty percent of German manpower was engaged
Nach Osten, and the Western Front was
almost a sideshow. The German war
machine simply does not have sufficient
manpower to offer a defense in depth.
Therefore, one must use the "Rubber
Band" offensive strategy—keep stretching
the German defense. It cannot be strong
enough everywhere; as it is attrited, a
weakness will develop that will allow the
Allies to pour through. Depending on the
nature of the breakthrough, a Falaise
Pocket may be established that can bag
a large number of troops. The Germans
will retreat through France, and establish
a defensive line on the West Wall, after
which one reverts to the Rubber Band
again, until such time as another hole is
created, and onwards to the destruction
of the Reich.
Remember the victory conditions. The
destruction of large numbers of German
divisions is appealing, but victory
belongs to the Allied player who captures
four points worth of German cities. While
Berlin is worth three by itself, often it is
easier to capture four separate one-point
urban areas.

Invasion Sites—Primary:
While there are numerous invasion
sites, a detailed examination and/or actual play will rapidly reveal that there is
only one site which offers a sufficient
beachhead for expansion, geographic
propinquity to Allied airpower, and minimal Axis reaction—Normandy. An invasion at the Pas de Calais will generate
a strong German reaction, and the Allies
may not be able to establish more than a
toehold on Festung Europa.
Italy is another story. A decisive in

by M. Evan

vasion will be virtually impossible due to
the rough and mountainous terrain of the
Italian peninsula—coupled with the fact
that once Italy is liberated, one must then
contend with breaking over and through
the Alps. It can be done, but it is a very
risky undertaking.

Secondary:
Secondary invasion sites offer more
latitude.
Italy: Historically, Anzio was a sound
strategic concept ineptly coupled with
the tactical initiative of World War l's Gallipoli—which resulted in what was
facetiously referred to as "the largest
P.O.W. camp in World War II." However,
the basic function of the Italian Theater is
to tie up the maximum number of
enemy troops while minimizing one's
own commitment—unless one can
achieve that rare and elusive breakthrough. Thus, this reviewer recommends
several possible small invasions north of
the front lines. They may not achieve a
break-through, but they will tie up German troops. Eventually, the German line
will become too thin and will crack in
several places—then the exploitation
phase can begin.
France and the Benelux: Anvil/Dragoon, the invasion of southern France,
historically did little. By the time of the virtually unopposed landings, the defensive
lines had shifted east. In game terms, if
an invasion of southern France is necessary to achieve a breakthrough, this
means that the Allied player has made
some serious errors. This invasion can
do some damage, but it is normally better to save the amphibious landing craft
and supplies for mini-landings along the
northern coasts. In this manner, the forces facing the main thrust of the Allied armies will have to stretch like the desired
Rubber Band and will eventually break.
Airborne Forces: Think of airborne forces as "Kamikazes without Planes." Not
powerful enough to seize and hold terrain
independently, they are magnificent for
drawing off enemy forces and allowing
the major combat elements to achieve a
breakthrough. A somewhat callous handling of airborne elements can pay substantial dividends—and, occasionally,
they can even be rescued before decimation. An airborne drop on Genoa, resupplied by air (a Western version of
Goering's promise regarding Stalingrad),

can often allow the elements to dig in
and protect themselves until a quick
breakthrough is achieved by the infantry
divisions, for instance. Airborne elements
allow for plenty of strategic creativity.
Political Points: Political points represent a sort of "favors used." Historically,
the Allied strategic air forces detested
CAS (close air support) and tactical missions. Thus, it was only on rare occasions that they could be "diverted"
from their primary missions. Similarly,
the backlash from relieving a general has
its own cost—his patrons and subordinates may not take kindly to his relief.
Thus, each general has a "political cost"
attached to his persona and, as one
might guess, Montgomery has one of the
highest ratings in the game.
The Allies only get two political points
per turn (at more difficult levels, this may
be reduced to zero!). An interdiction mission costs thirty (30) political points—this
is actually a massive "carpet bombing",
similar to that historically used in the
breakout of Operation Cobra (where
the Panzer Lehr division was virtually exterminated, as well as LTG Leslie McNair,
who happened to be the recipient of a
"shortfall" by friendly fire). This mission
is guaranteed to punch a hole in any German line; the problem is that it is politically and prohibitively expensive.
One can usually achieve better results
by a closure of the battlefield. Many air
missions will be conducted independently
by the computer tactical air forces, and it
is "cheaper" to isolate a sector of the battlefield (e.g. Normandy) by insuring that
all bridges into the area have been destroyed. Since the computer will usually
destroy the bulk of them, it is cheaper to
pay a two-point political cost per bridge
and go after the one or two bridges still
remaining. Similarly, an effective isolation
of German forces will wreak havoc with
their communications, and allow an Allied player to recreate a Falaise Pocket
(hopefully without the Gap).
Insofar as relieving generals are concerned, on the offensive, it rarely matters.
Since the Allies should rarely be forced
on the defensive, it is simply too expensive to relieve Montgomery (which this
reviewer would like to do, based on
general principles), or any other leader.
The costs incurred could be better expended elsewhere.

Strategy

is independent of Western Front activity,
and is date-oriented (quasi-historical).

Brooks
Mobile Warfare: Creating a large armored force south of Metz may often
compel the Germans to react in a mobile
war. By this time, their armor forces have
been depleted, and the Allied forces can
usually sweep around and cut off the
West Wall with ease.
Corps and Divisions: A large corps is
a clumsy corps. Thus, when too many
troops are compressed into a corps
frontage, they take unnecessary casualties. Therefore, insure that corps are composed of three divisions and allow the
remainder to be used in reserve. Often,
the tactical commander will force-feed
these reserves into the battles, where
they will have a combat-multiplier effect.
Production: The Allies have sufficient
industrial capacity to win the war. Replacing obsolete armor with the M4/76 Sherman and the Firefly may result in a
shortfall for as long as a month, but
there will be periods of inactivity while
preparing for the next major push. If this
activity is coupled with poor weather, the
shortfall will be rendered harmless, and
when the offensive is resumed, it will
have a much more powerful thrust.
Similarly, airpower will sweep the
Luftwaffe from the skies. Note that the P38 Lightning in its capacity as a fighterbomber has the same load capacity and
cost as the A20 Havoc bomber, yet it
has twice the range. A word to the wise....

The Axis
Basic Strategy: Never attack! Repeat
it over and over, "Never attack!" The Germans simply do not have sufficient manpower or equipment to engage in a
mobile confrontation with the Allied forces. Of course, there is always an exception to a rule; an airborne landing behind
one's lines may safely be assaulted, but
that should be about the only exception.
Too often, a ripe isolated Allied unit can
be destroyed, but in so doing, the
Wehrmacht will find that its units become
decisively engaged by follow-on Allied
units and thereby defeated in detail.
Does this mean that the German must
simply accept every Allied push? Of
course not! The German "offensives"
should be limited to bombardment attacks. This type of "offense" will minimize German losses and allow the
Wehrmacht to remain in dug-in and fortified positions.

Trade space for time. The Germans
do not have the ability to defeat the Allies, but can achieve a victory simply by
insuring their own survival. Pray for bad
weather, as it allows safer movement and
retards the Allied offensives.
Political Points: Political points are essential to the German. The replacement
of commanders is much more important
in order to conduct a viable defensive
strategy. Therefore, use capable
"firemen" to be rushed to the areas of
greatest risk. Politically unreliable
generals may incur a random disaster
(i.e. involvement in an attempt to assassinate the Fuhrer) and be rendered hors
de combat, but the maximum utilization
should be made from the more capable
leaders while they are available.
Recognize One's Limitations: Defending in the hedgerows of Normandy can
bottle the Allies up for a period of time.
However, overstaying one's welcome can
result in becoming
mired, weakened,
lacking supplies
and unable to
evacuate to the
next defensive
line. Only practice
will enable a
player to determine when discretion becomes the
better part of valor.
In fact, a quick
retreat from Normandy in order to
establish a
defense along the
Seine and other
river systems can
be effective. Note
that the Eastern
Front is always a
source of dismal
tidings. That is, in
normal activity
turns, one division
shatters, while
during heavy activity, four German divisions are
shattered. This impinges heavily on
manpower assets
available. The normal/heavy activity

Production: German production is a
source of little joy. The air war is a lost effort; while ME-262As can be built, their effect against the Allied air juggernaut is
minimal. This does not mean that pinpricks have no effects; simply do not expect miracles from the "secret weapons
of the Luftwaffe." Armor should be
upgraded as rapidly as possible, but in
the Axis case, a shortfall can prove fatal.

Conclusions
Western Front is a player's challenge.
The Allied side is more interesting to
play, as it creates the tempo of the
game. The German side is recommended
for those interested in a purely defensive
contest. The computer opponent is
capable but not brilliant. Therefore, while
it will not make any brilliant counterstrokes, similarly it will not make any
egregious errors. Time is the arbiter of
victory.

Editorial

by Johnny L. Wilson

S

tate of the Industry: As of this
writing, this editor has just
returned from the 7th Annual Conference of the Software Publishers Association. Though the SPA extended a
professional courtesy to all journalists
who attended, this journalist was very
concerned by what he observed. The
SPA no longer seems responsive to its
members. The relatively small consumeroriented firms who founded the organization have very little say in the way the association pursues its mission. For example, the much-ballyhooed anti-piracy
campaign has been completely focused
on business software. One wonders how
much effort it would have taken to include consumer software in the expensive campaign. Yet the mega-corporations that have taken control of the organization have no desire to include
many of the formative companies in the
SPA in their effort.
Indeed, it appears that the SPA may be
nearing a fragmentation. Several major
entertainment software publishers informed this editor that they are now
choosing which one or two employees
would attend SPA meetings rather than
bringing their entire management team
to the functions. They perceive that the
cost has far outpaced the value. Yet
when they protested the increases in
dues and conference charges, they were
merely informed that their expenses were
less than most trade associations. So at
the same time that the conferences are

becoming less valuable for networking
(due to decreased participation), the cost
of doing business at such a conference is
going up. Surely the SPA could create a
tiered dues/participation schedule that
takes corporate size into consideration.
Of more importance to consumers, the
SPA seems unwilling to focus beyond the
issues of, for example, how the retail
channel feels about publishers and what
hardware platforms they don't have confidence in at this particular time. Instead
of forming work groups to standardize "Install" programs, software drivers and minimal levels of hardware to support, the
conference program most resembles a
relic of the recent consumer electronic
past, a polyvinyl record with a needle
stuck in the groove—repetitive. If the SPA
cannot be forced out of the groove, perhaps it is time to form a new industry association which is more equivalent to a
compact disc than a polyvinyl record.
One perception keeps pounding away
at this journalist's head. If the entertainment software industry hangs onto its
proprietary software tricks, self-perpetuating industry traditions and short-sighted
approach to future development, we will
never see this industry capture the hearts
and minds of ordinary people. If the entertainment software industry does not find
some way to agree upon and support the
equivalent of a VHS standard box that
can function as a basic appliance
whether the "user" ever understands all
its advanced functions or not, there will

never really be a "mass market." The industry will have lost the opportunity and
will find itself as outmoded as a
Betamax or a stereo turntable.
State of the Magazine: CGW, like the
industry it covers, must continually strive
for a focus point. There are so many different directions that entertainment
software can move in the next decade:
videogame machines, multimedia boxes,
interactive television, fiber-optic networkbased entertainments, venue-based interactive experiences and virtual realitybased amusement parks. This means
that the journalists who cover such an industry must attempt to be aware of what
might be happening in all these areas.
It is an exciting, but difficult, chore to
try to present the relevant implications of
these new and varied approaches to computerized entertainment without offending
one's traditional audience. Yet, part of
our charter is to keep our hobbyist
readers informed of the interrelationships
between entertainment software firms
and corporations involved in these other
approaches. This is why we continue to
devote space to "industry" stories such
as the formation of SMSG software, the
meetings of the Software Publishers Association and conferences on future endeavors such as Intertainment '91. In this
way, we hope, CGWs readers will be the
information surfers of the future who
know both "What's happenin' now" and
"What's about to happen?"

