"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine 100+ Gift Ideas For The Holidays December 1993 Number 113 17209 Interrogating Daryl Gates The Chief Briefs Us On Police Quest 4 DOS In Space In Depth coverage of Privateer Master of Orion Outpost Strategies SEAL Team Syndicate Betres DW& Blood In $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian Arena 1091284720916 "


"Suear of Destiny kollenstein 3D Graphic Adventure Dir. 1111 Il t ill LII I II II III MHED AZWA FLOOR 8 SCOREUUES 4400 3 HEALTH ANNO 367 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH ARRO 17% 831 FLOOR 9 SCORE. LIUES 2800 3 HEALTH AMOS 80% 939 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players * saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" e the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"Mabowski THIBLUE THM RAY THE GETTYSBURG ADDRESS Lle rrell News artit e l M Where will you fire the first shot? ecreate the power and excitement of the Civil War! As the leader of either side in this challenging simulation, you recruit, train and direct your armies around the American countryside. When two armies clash, fight out a Micro Miniatures battle in fast, high-resolution animation! Historically authentic, The Blue and the Gray features up to 200 animated figures per battle, naval units and blockades, river and rail transport, breathtaking graphics atmospheric sound and music. Cauta Authentic historic interludes faithfully recreate the atmosphere of the period! GEEPEEGER NON PEREMPUR Includes a FREE copy of a specially commissioned book on the Civil War! Watch your armies battle in fast, high-resolution animation 01993 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #80 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FEATURES Master of Orion Milking MOO in a New Review Sneak Preview: Outpost Sierra Gets Sirius About Space Sneak Preview: Arena Not Just Another Flash In The Dungeon se Kringle's Computer Corner CGW s Annual Holiday Buyer's Guide SuperComputers Go Head-to-Head Busfight At The PC Eval Shareware Holiday Buyer's Guide Bits on a Budget for Holiday Hackers Hardware for the Holidays A Thrustmaster Checklist For Flight Sim Buffs : Adventure: The Text Generation New Games In An Old, Old Style 110 Arena pg. 28 Illustration by David Meneham ebeneza Be a Pinball Wizard Our Silver Sphere Survey with a Tilt Football Head-to-Head Dynamix vs. MicroProse At The Line Of Scrimmage It's \"Career Commander,\" Space Cadet Privateer Expands The Origin Universe  Chief Daryl Gates Interviewed CGW Does Some Detective Work Investigating Police Quest 4  Discoveries of the Sea An In-Depth Review Of An Introductory Product 144 Play Myst For Me Clearing The Haze Around Broderbund's CD Adventure Privateer pg. 132 KIDS & COMPUTERS 147 The Scisco Kid Rides Again! An Introduction To Our Special Kids & Computers Section 150 Nurtureware For Laptots A Compendium Of Edutainment Product Reviews 180 Remember when All \"Computer Games\" Were 25? MicroSoft's Arcade Pack Is A Blast To Our \"Ancient\" Past 184 European Computer Trade Show (ECTS) \"Ugly American\" Johnny L. Wilson Invades Overseas Labyrinth Of Time Electronic Arts Goes Inter-dimensional 192 SERESS SR 196 Tom Landry Takes A Hike The Further Adventures Of A Computer Coach BALL PLAVER. 2 200 DI Pinball Survey pg. 110 A Clever Chess Ploy EA Makes Its Move With Kasparov's Gambit "


"...Santa behind schedule... ...unexplained delay... ..Rudolph frantica RECOMES WHO Bring a Lemming home for the Holidays! If you can't find our great games at your favorite retailer, call. 1(800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today Lemmings products are sold at Radio Shack and other fine software stores. Circle Reader Service #109 Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 "


"210 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Silver Seed An Ominous Trend In Ultima Offspring 216 Secret Seals SEAL Team Hints For Point Takers 220 Mob Rule Go From Geek To Alien Ganglord With These Syndicate Tips 222 Who Named That Ice Cube Greenland, Anyway? A Nordic Compass For Interplay's Lost Vikings 228 234 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Associate Editor Chris Lombardi Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Chuck Miller Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Coordinator Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"Rogers\" And Hammerblows In The South Pacific QQP's Wargaming Lite: Battles of the South Pacific Pacific Theatre Of Operations A Pearl Among Harbors From Koei Continuing Strategies In Warlords II Robert Hayes Completes His Quest For Conquerors Keating's Killer Komments Designer Roger Keating On Warlords II 237 241 244 A Last Stab For Gold, Juno, Sword Beach Blanket Combat In Three-Sixty's V for Victory 248 Is Grigsby Stalin'? War in Russia Is His Third WWII Trip East, Courtesy Of SSI Fun In The Trenches SSI Imports The Great War For Fans Of World War I 252 The Great War pg. 252 Battles Of The South Pacific Pg. 228 Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Zifr-Davis Publishing Company, a division of Zill Communications Co., 130 Chaparral C. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672.910. Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co.. 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, MI. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars. made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B Genie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Subscription Dept. 1(800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 (714) 283-3000 x41 DEPARTMENTS 10 Editorial (Standardization) 251 Opponents Wanted 12 READ.ME (News) 258 Taking A Peek 98 Scorpion's Mail 259 Advertiser Index 124 Scorpion's View 269 Hall Of Fame (Dark Sun with Bonus Hints) 270 Reader's Top 100 Poll 188 Over There 272 What's Hot? (Overseas Software Report) 273 Patches 206 Letters From Paradise 274 The Rumor Bag 224 CWW Editorial (De-ploribus Baggum) (Moving Into The Empire Deluxe Finals) Printed in the U.S.A. "


"ON THE FIELD OF FIRE Sterling Ambrusle The First Realistic 3-D Battlefield. Run from hut to hut or hit the dirt and take cover behind trees and rocks. MILO PASSO.notified about repected Unmatched Depth and Authenticity 80 historical missions based on actual combat reports provided by the UDT-SEAL Museum Association Inc. Leading Edge Simulation Technology See tracers and explosions through your own eyes or soven external views. Hear real digitized battle sounds. You and your team jump out of a Huey and belly through 200 yards of mud and darkness toward the village. You signal your team to fan out and take out the guard posts, but your flanker goes down-booby trap! Suddenly rounds from an AK-47 shriek overhead and the night is ablaze with tracers and the shock waves of mortar fire. Welcome to \"Forest of Assassins\", Vietnam's Mekong Delta. Your worst nightmare come true. Available for IBM and compatibles. (SEAL ELECTRONIC ARTS Seal Team is a trademark of Electronic Arts. 1993 Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #61 "


"Real Ordinary Reel Magic Our add-in board brings the next generation of CD-ROM games to your PC bigger than life. Say adios to wimpy graphics. Herky-jerky movement. Bogus sound. And phony . ur N Si There's more to games than a mouth that sort of moves or tinny sound. Now play PC games and feel just like you're sitting in a theater controlling the action with your joystick. It's ReelMagic,\" the new MPEG playback adapter from Sigma Designs. ACTIVISION SIERRA READYS Clris Get the full-blown multimedia kit, or spring for just the board if you already have the rest of the gear. COMPTON'S NEWMEDIA trilobye zAccess ACCESS entertainment GAMES Discover the new generation of ReelMagic games from these manufacturers, and look for more exciting titles coming soon. "


"ReelMagic 489 scenarios.ReelMagic Al 256 VS. 32,768 COLORS Why settle for a mere 256 colors, offered by current PC games, when pumps up the reality ReelMagic gives you theater-quality graphics meter so you can crank | with over 32,000? up the fantasy. GRUNTS VS. CD-QUALITY AUDIO Get 16-bit We've also included 89: CD-quality sound that plays Sound Blaster Activision's Return to Zork to and Windows \"compatible software. The 8-bit audio you're used to just doesn't compare. experience the excitement A 5FPS VS. 30 FPS ReelMagic-compatible Pccomputing of full motion POLICE QUEST4 games run at 30 frames-per-second, MVP  video now. ASOM TRUE full-motion, so you avoid jerky, blocky images. FINALIST It's not real unless ReedMagie Adapter it's ReelMagic. Call 1/4 VS. FULL SCREEN Now you 1-800-845-8086 ext. 313 for a can get theater-quality video in a full-screen image for a realistic, dealer demo near you. Or you can B movie-like experience. stick with real ordinary. Oh joy! ODENSE IIIIIIII Only ReelMagic Makes It Real. DESIGNS 1993 Sigma Design, Inc. The Sigma Designs logo is a registered tradernark and Red Magic is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. All other brand rures and products are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders Circle Reader Service #121 "


"EDOOORDAL Star Search scar Sear The Sub-Standard In Computer Software Star Search Star Seat 10as W Star Searcnyo Search SERURUG Star Sear by Johnny L. Wilson tate of the Magazine: This is a very exciting time in the history routine for joysticks that drives some gamer's controllers absolutely of Computer Gaming World. Not only are we creating magaberserk. Of course, Origin often gets the blame for this type of thing D zines of record size, but we are watching the world of entertainbecause they are so often pushing the limits of state-of-the-art rechment software completely restructure itself. The big deals which occur nology. Yet, the most recent problem points out a mindset in the almost daily within the telecommunications industry are going to computer game industry that needs to be changed--resistance to impact the world of interactive entertainment in a big way. Now, it standardization. is affecting the industry at the corporate level (capitalization, strategic At the recent Fall Conference of the Software Publishers Associaalliances and long-range planning). Next, it will affect software pubtion, I asked the chairman of a committee on standards when we were lishers at the development level (new interfaces, metaphors and going to get installation routines and drivers standardized to the point concepts for new kinds of games and different markers and delivery that gamers can merely load and play. This easy-going fellow grumsystems). Later, it will affect you, the computer gamers, when new bled that the consumer software industry can't even agree to standproducrs reach you via different media. We want you to rest assured that CGW will stay abreast of these developments, attempt to keep ardize on a box. you informed of the potential impact on your life and hobby, and Yes, there is the problem in a nutshell. This industry cannot even \"still\" provide the comprehensive coverage of computer games that do what almost every other mass market consumer industry (includwe have always sought to provide. Even when you see pages coveringing the video game market) manages to do-standardize the packagtechnologies and alliances that don't seem immediately relevant, we ing. What advantage would this have for the consumer? It would will strive to make clear what the impact will be on you. No matter provide easier storage for one thing. We could even build special what kinds of coverage you see in CGW, it is there because we shelves for our computer games, just like we do for video tapes, answered the following question in the affirmative, «Will it be inter compact discs, cassette tapes and most books. It would enable retailers esting and useful to our readers?\" to put more boxes on the shelves, simultaneously reducing the shelf Some have asked why we are so «trade-oriented,\" wondering why space wars chat kill some titles before they have a chance to catch on, we bother with conference reports and company profiles. We think and meaning, potentially, a wider range of titles from which gamers they are integral to understanding where the hobby is going. You can't can choose. Incidentally, it would reduce some of the pulp waste from really understand where the products are going and why without oversized boxes full of air. understanding the people and companies that make them. Some One marketing director protested that they used recycled materials sources have claimed that we are \"going cartridge and diluting our for their oversized air-boxes. We pointed out that it takes a percentage computer game coverage. We will cover \"cartridge games\" in the same of new pulp, even when using recycled materials. She said that they way we have always covered them, only when the software seems of needed weird boxes to get the customer's attention. I said that the the quality that it would be of interest to our readers. video-tape publishers didn't. I also noted that the audio CD folks As Editor, I hope these assurances will allay any fears that astute don't need weird boxes (though one of their standards does use readers may have entertained upon seeing how large the magazine is wasteful packaging for security purposes). getting and reflecting upon the Ziff-Davis acquisition of Computer Gaming World. Yes, you will see us try different types of editorial as Further, major retailers like Sears, Kmart and Walmart have warned the world of interactive entertainment continues to evolve. Yes, you software publishers that they will no longer stock merchandise that will see us adopt a more friendly, conversational tone as we reach out does not fit as we reach out does not fit a standardized size. Instead of taking this opportunity to to more and more new gamers. No, you will not see us throw out the solve a problem, software publishers are griping about the greedy PC with the bath water and no, you will not see us remove the strategy retailers trying to stifle their creativity. How ironic! Here are the and replay articles that have kept the hard-core gamers coming back experts in mass merchandising trying to help the software publishers for over 12 years. We're still the same folks. We still want to be bigger reach the market they've always dreamed of reaching the massesAND berrer. and the software publishers want to stay in their niche of origami State of the Industry: Once again, an Origin release has touched boxes. the nerves of computer gamers and sent forth a cry of, «Aren't we ever In such an industry, I suppose it's useless to ask for standardized going to have computer games that we can just load and play?\" Yes, sound and peripheral drivers. After all, we want to do our own thing, the developers of the infamous late and unlamented Voodoo Memory even if it costs money and potential customers every day that the chaos Manager have done it again. Privateeroffers a new required calibration continues. CGW Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"BUY THE BEST OF 193* And get the best of '91 & '92 FREE *As Chosen by Computer Gaming World & PC Games — WIZARDRY OVER 4.6 TRILOGY MILLION SOLD WIZARDRY V, VI & VIL Winner of over 15 International Awards WIZARDRY, the game that pioneered first-person perspective & defined computer role-playing for more than a decade. Now, the award-winning WIZARDRY V, VI & VII are available in 1 complete package, at 1 incredible price. Three best selling games, with over 500 hours of engaging,replayable adventure, come to you with a savings of 25% off individual suggested retail prices. UlzzzCRUSADERS DARK SAVANT TATE CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT REDEFINING ROLE-PLAYING FOR AN ENTIRE INDUSTRY 1993 ROLE-PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1992 Fantasy Role-Playing Game of the Year PC Games 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine HTLAKO TRADER613 ( Undy. Rocky 930 CA Best GamPlus Magazine of the Year BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE PAVING THE WAY FOR THE SYSTEMS OF THE FUTURE 1991 Best Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Best Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Top Role-Playing Game, April 1991 Computer Gaming World EQILIC NILLA CON BELL HIDE LOUD HOT LAI BE CANCEL NUK WIZARDRY Y had, m ert a SOCORDI THE LEGACY OF HEART OF THE MAELSTROM BREAKING AWAY FROM THE WIZARDRY SYSTEM OF THE PAST and I Greater Denon appears baqaczim CATECH SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, P.O. Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 THE WIZARDRY TRILOGY FAX# (315) 393-1525 Scenarios I, II & II The original classics that set the trend in Available at a software retailer near you, or call: fantasy role-playing are now available at a new low price! Circle Reader Service #123 (800) 447-1230 "


"READ.ME The Latest News From The Gaming World Rock, Technology, and Junk Bonds Converge on Multimedia HOWIE MARDEL ever was the \"convergence of media\" so clearly illustrated as in the the Education and Entertainment announcement of the new 7th Level multimedia company. Founded ny Founded Network, so the formati Network, so the formation of 7th Level had by former MicroGrafx co-founder George Grayson and former Pink a natural synergy with his overall goal. Floyd saxophonist Scott Page, 7th Level will produce entertainment and In keeping with the convergence feeling, the company's first release will educational titles for the PC and Machintosh computers. be Tuneland, a children's singGrayson and Page had previously collabhouse, Walt Tucker (named along program with Howie orated in entertainment and technological after Walt Disney and Mandel as the voice for the extravaganzas on behalf of the National Preston Tucker, two of Page's lead character. Tuneland feaCenter for Missing and Exploited Children. favorite visionaries). The two tures 42 songs and more Their event, the Grand Scientific Musical partners added music producer than 12,000 hand-drawn Theater held in conjunction with Fall Bob Ezrin (producer on Pink animation cels (7th Level COMDEX '92, was a computer-controlled, Floyd's The Wall, Alice has not officially live multimedia spectacular in which digital Cooper's Killer, and KISS' announced their relationtechnology and special effects were integratDestroyer albums, plus being ship with an animation ed with both live performances by credited as house) that represent Hollywood stars and computer-genthe producer about 40 minutes of actuerated characters. that encoural footage. 7th Level expects to be able Both Grayson aged Peter Gabriel to to produce products like Tuneland on a six and Page felt go solo) as co-chairmonth production cycle, compared to the that the perman. nine to eighteen month production cycle of formance was To add further most most multimedia products. so successful to the feeling of Children's titles, like Tuneland, will be that Grayson convergence, fundpublished under the Desktop Playground lured a team of ing for the new Series label, and titles for older gamers are advanced procompany was pro on the way. Asked about specific plans for grammers away vided by a conentertainment that would be geared toward from MicroGrafx sortium put an older audience, Page told CGW that the to handle the comtogether by for first product in that series would be unlike puter end of the mer Drexel anything currently available on computer. business, and Page Burnham Lambert He hinted that the game would involve turned over the \"junk bond king\" Michael Milken and comedy, action and role-playing, but would facilities of his multiLorimar Telepictures co-founder Mery be oriented around an adult, variery entermedia production Adelson. Milken's current dream is to build tainment show. Scott Page, Howie Mandel, Bob Ezrin and George Grayson-Multimedia Quartet Sierra Secures Savoir Faire to acquire Coktel Vision for $5 million up front and another $5 million plus upon reaching certain revenue and profitability ierra On-Line (NASDAQ: SIER) has finalized a relationship with France's Coktel Vision S.A. which was initiated in mid-1992 (CGW #99, p. 16). Under that original agreement, Sierra would become the exclusive publisher/distriburor of Coktel Vision's educational and entertainment products for the United States. On October 20, 1993, Sierra announced that it had reached an agreement in principle targets over the next four years. In addition, Coktel Vision will assume responsibility for handling European sales for both their own products and those of Sierra. The agreement is subject to French government approval, but should be final by late October. Coktel Vision is the publisher of the Gobliins and Inca series of computer games, as well as an entire line of educational products. SIERRA Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"GLOBAL DOMINATION V.0.0.0.0.0.0 & The Ultimate Multi-Player Conquest Simulation inally, you can conquer your friends in state-of-the-art graphic splendor! Amass armies with your choice of units, then invade! Watch your back, though you'll need to divide your forces with care to avoid being conquered yourself! Global Domination is turn-based and features modem play; a wide variety of historic opponents from which to choose; random world generator; large number of units; spies; diplomacy & subversive activists; by far the best graphics and sound ever seen in a conquest game, and even more fun than Napoleon had at Waterloo! AREN RESOURCE PIRE ESH TO HIRIGST RIVOLUTION BRAZ START UEHICH THE Take your ego for a rollercoaster ride as you see your empire rise and fall! DAWID, THEROLD.CO.PO Here's where you amass your armies and make your moves! CRWY. HOMES.IN.TAL FENEGAL Take tactical control of a battle in graphically stunning animated combat! 01993 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234. Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #81 "


"Steve Jackson vs. The Secret Service Game Maker Appeals For Electronic Freedom TAN DARK SIDE teve Jackson Games, publishers of find for the government on the \"intercepsuch popular games as Illuminati, Car tion\" count under the Electronic Wars and the GURPS role-playing sysCommunications Privacy Act, ruling that tem, have filed an appeal in their suit the Secret Service's confiscation of the BBS against the U.S. Secret Service. The suit computer was not an \"interception\" as involved a Secret Service raid of the Steve defined by the ECPA. Attourneys for Steve Jackson Games office in 1990, in which Jackson and the Electronic Frontier government agents seized three computers, Foundation will appeal this finding, believincluding the company's BBS. At the time, ing that the Fifth Circuit Appeals Court the company was working on their GURPS will reverse the decision and thereby estabCyberpunk role-playing supplement which lish a stronger precendent. one Secret Service agent claimed was «a The Justice Department has preserved handbook for computer crime.\" their right to appeal on the counts that SJ Although the Secret Service found no Games won. evidence of criminal activity on the confisSavs Steve Jackson, \"I hope they do cated computers, they returned the equipappeal. I think the Fifth Circuit will uphold hent months later, after having read and what we've already won, which will make erased the contents of the BBS and destroy the precedent carry far more weight. Other ing one computer. SJ Games won on the cases like this are coming up, and the govmajor counts of the suit and was awarded ernment has to learn to keep its hands off $50,000 for damages and $250,000 in of bulletin boards and e-mail.\" attourney's fees. The judge did, however, STEVE JACKSON GAMES The latest addition to SJ Games' Hacker card game spoofs the incident with the Secret Service, Go US West, Young Machine 3DO and US West Partner In Interactive TV Test N n October 4, 1993, 3DO and US p. 11) in which the CEO was questioned President Robert Faber informed CGW at West Communications announced about 3DO's plans with regard to such the Software Publishers Association's Fall their intention to work together in tests. In the earlier interview, the CEO had Conference that the current generation of providing the set-top terminal (STT) for expressed reservations about such tests 3D0 players will not connect to the netthe communications company's 1994 test because of the capacity for hardware manuworks and that the company has no intenin 1994. Omaha, Nebraska is the site for facturers to get stuck with thousands of tion of attempting to sell STTs with CDthe test where, pending FCC approval, U S kludged units that serve no other purpose ROM drives to network providers. Cow West intends to test its new system to prothan to function for a brief time vide interactive entertainment, educational period during a trial run. Thus, and informational programming, home the US West agreement shopping and video on demand via a comimplies that 3DO feels confimunications network. dent that they will exit the test The test, which will incorporate the with a solid prototype 1 same graphics and animation technology Omaha 3DO owners will into the STT as that in the 3DO not be able to simply hook up Interactive Multiplayer, is expected to their new multiplayers to the U prove the viability of 3DO technology to S West system, however. The serve as a standard for STTs for other cable STT units are a special streamtelevision and telephone company projects. lined design that will only As CEO Trip Hawkins observed, «We incorporate the processing and want to create a worldwide standard.\" He graphics capabilities of the further commented, «We're demonstrating home machine. Currently, neithat our new technology can be used in anyther telephone companies nor stand-alone or nerworked environment.\" cable television providers seem Ironically, the announcement was made convinced that it is in their less than a week before CGW's earlier interinterest to include a CD-ROM view with Hawkins appeared (CGW #112. drive in their STTs. 3DO Omaha Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"DETROIT LIIMPRESSIONS Can You Change Automotive History? 9-6072 SEC TOP SPEED 120MPH GRAETNO 10 LISTNAT TORRES ROAD HOLDIGEHO TOHORTH EASTERN USA D9 CARSO CUPT .990 COUNTRY CITY 19 MFG TALK NAMRE SCOTMOBILE COST TO BUILD 1 315.000 COST TO TESTI 59.998 IHFRESSIONS AUTOS IMPRESSIONS AUTOS MOTH 9.003 JAN 1953 300.000 DONE: SAVE CHANGES 385.000 MARKETING CONCERTS TESTS TO REVI 1950 ENOT Design cars and put them through their paces with a variety of performance tests! Create unique marketing campaigns to blow away the competition! As your auto empire grows, open up new factories and sales offices around the world! Impressions  Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 234; Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #82 "


"REVIEW Hanging aging From Orion's Bell A Review Of MicroProse's Master of Orion by Martin E. Cirulis nuclear Engines Tural and allows a maximum Maneuverai BI Classif camlar. (Excerpts from Black Box recording ISN INDEFATIGABLE, recovered from space debris, Tarandor System. 12/23/2435) \"...amn how long it takes, get me that tac analysis, pronto!\" \"Yes, Ma'am!\" \"Captain Boonel Sensors reading five battle wagons coming out of hyperspace behind us.\" \"Relax Ensign. Those are Meklar Cruisers, they're on our side. Or at least they were last time we made planetfall. Just maintain target lock on that Sakkran Destroyer squadron.\" \"Ion Cannons at full power, Captain!\" \"Excellent! Fire on my command. Tell McCloud I'm going to need full maneuvering power if we're going to dodge those Stinger Missiles. Helm, bring us to What was that!!\" \"Th—That was the RODNEY, Ma'am. She...she just shook apart. Sensors read some kind of Graviton Beam coming from the Sakkran fleet.\" \"Sweet Boudica!!! The lizards have gray ity weapons! Shields Fulll Helm, full 180. Emergency Eva--\" (End Tape) nother world, another fleet, another battle. It's just another day in the neighborhood brought to you by MicroProse's latest wargame, Master of Orion (MOO). This piece of science fiction software invites you to «Build an Empire to span the Galaxy\" in the finest Civilization and Global Conquest traditions, and probably only Choose the aret of research cur scientists tous on the most pedestrian of us could refuse such an offer without a trial spin. This Pisi  turn-based game is easy enough to unIridium Fuel Cells (Range 61 derstand that you can jump right in moves shies at ware two la Larsecs per with only the barest riffling of the clear and concise (perhaps too concise) nasto AT manual. But trust me, you will dog-ear this book in a hurry as you flip back to get the scoop on surprise after surprise. \"The Stars, Like Grains Of Sand...\" quite a lot. If you take this world, be prepared though I am su Though I am sure MicroProse is most comto hold on to her dearly because you can fortable with comparisons to its own prodcount on visitor's popping in to say \"Hi!\" with ucts, MOO is better summed up by the a few dozen well-armed battle wagons. phrase: \"It's like Snaceurd HO! but with all While it is possible to win the game if some the options.» The setup is pretty basic. You start with a single world amidst a spread of other race gets to Orion first, it will definitely make your quest for domination harder. This stars. The stars are home to hundreds of worlds waiting to be explored, exploited and a objective is constant from game to game, but developed, and somewhere out there are five its location is random so there is always inalien races with the same situation and centive to send your scouts out as fast an agenda: Control a majority of the known as possible. This galactic \"carrot-on-a-stick\" galaxy and eliminate all who stand in the way. helps to pull this game ahead of the generic It's standard spaceploitation fare, but where spaceploitation pack. MOO distinguishes itself is in the details. The title is the first clue that there is a little from that of other games with 13 different something extra afoot. The \"Orion\" to be environmental classes of worlds ranging from mastered is a forgotten world, and it holds Terran standard through frozen Tundra to some very important technologies which go to the first race to success Master of Orion fully colonize her. You'd think that would be enough incentive for a race TITLE: Master of Orion PRICE: $59.95 to plant their flag there, but there's SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz, 2MB RAM, VGA more. Given that this world is a treasgraphics, 14MB hard drive ure trove of techno-tidbits from a space; supports Ad Lib, PAS, Roland MT-32, Sound Blaster long dead race, any scientific resound cards scarch budgeted on this world yields PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNER: Steve Barcia quadruple the normal results. Now PUBLISHER: MicroProse what would you pay?! As it turns out, Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 . Beta A IBM Pange ParTec opnun MICROPROEE ATAS Game Design Fleet capaces et Technet Turu Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"The car Trum recor NEUTRAL find SPIEST O NE SPEL Burthi HIDE SHRUTAGE ESPIONAGE « Gond 151 Mershans UECAL SECURITY KC SECURITS LOCALASES THE CHANCE OF CATCHINC ALL CREMY SPICS ALLOCATIONS: LSC ALANCTALY RESOURCES SPIES IS  Prepare Treets Form Trade Agreement Ofer Tribute URO Exchange Technolog highly radioactive. Each of these worlds can ciency for a later phase, or perhaps one have any of eight special characteristics that can trade another race for the technolcan modify population growth, industrial ogy or simply fund enough spy cells to output or technological research. On a map steal it from them. that can hold up to 108 stars, this offers a lot HIDE SAEDTAGELSPUDRADE Barloks MOO also adds another nice touch of variation, with some dog worlds that are to the tech race genre by acknowonly colonized as a last resort, and some gems so Someti ledging that technology becomes that are constantly struggled over. cheaper and smaller as one advances KIDE SRLOTAGE ESPIONAGE The map even has its own kind of galactic beyond it. Since shipbuilding in this Horde \"terrain\" in the form of Nebulae that retard game is based upon placing compomovement and disrupt the shields of ships nents into four standard hull sizes that Sakkras and planets a la a certain Wrathful movie. have finite internal tonnage, this little HIDE SREDTAGE ESPIONAGE STATUS REPORT RUDIENCE TOX With all of these worlds, nebulae and characaddition creates a whole new life for reristics set randomly for every new game, it lished, but slowly grow more and more profolder weapons. No longer are devices comitable until they become a major considerawill take a long time before a player becomes pletely obsolete as soon as a new one comes tion in declaring war. Sure, the Alkari may be along. It is true that lasers (the basic in your way, but their peaceful trade is worth Level 1 weapon) are made obsolete by Dreadnought every two or three years. It's mid-level shields, but most other weapsomething more to think about. ons can do a little damage against the highest shield strengths. Because of Spy networks in alien empires are estabthis, it becomes viable at times to use lished by pouring money into them, but their 20 semi-obsolete weapons in the space effects are not quite so blatant. You can tell that one new one would take up. your spies to merely hide out in a friendly cmpire, or you can tell them to become active Howymyr Twenty little hits are sometimes worth spre depuis toch a lot more than one big one. This kind by stealing technology or blowing things up. 15 Threten/Break Treats and Trade of technological flexibility makes for Nothing paves the way for an invasion like another great tactical facet of the game, exploding defenses. Usually a race will object bored with the serup... not to mention the and it's refreshing to see a little innovato the use of these agents, often lowering their c odd random events that intrude upon your in tion in what is quickly becoming a standard relationship rating with you to the point of war-torn little Galaxy. I don't want to ruin war. But if your spies are lucky enough they aspect of the genre. can complete their missions without revealing any surprises, but I would suggest boning up \"This Means War!» their race, or better yet, they can pin their on your \"Menace from Space\" Star Trek epideeds on another race and thereby create sodes, both old and new. No matter how you play this game, conflict diplomatic mayhem. Of course the flip-side will be a part of it. It is in this arena that you of this option is that the same thing can be Caught Up In The Space Race will be tested both as a strategist and a tactician. Strategically, you must balAs per the popular trend in sci-fi wargames, ance exploration and development of a large part of MOO is dedicated to research new worlds with technological research and development; but unlike other games, and the production of warships and where technology is represented by merely a planetary defenses to prepare for war level, MOO gives you 50 basic levels of techwith at least some of your alien neighnological development in six different discibors. plines (Computers, Construction, Force Now just because conflict is inevitaFields, Planetology, Propulsion, and Weapble doesn't mean you can't spend a few ons). Most of these first 50 levels result in game years preparing the way through actual named developments. If you manage less direct methods. Diplomacy, Spyto exhaust these, then you can still make se, then you can still make ing and Trade are all present in MOO W H I TE advancements, though in a more generic way, as they are in Civilization, but they are more done to you. There's nothing quite like the just as you could develop \"Futuristic Adabstract and subtle in this game. There are no look of an enraged Bulrathi diplomat declarvancements in Civilization. specific units for these functions in Moo; ing war over something you didn't even do. The power of these touches to give the game instead they are handled through manipulaEconomic decisions are made at the planeits own character can not be understated. It is tion of your budget. Alien leaders with whom tary level through the use of slider bars. Plancmuch more satisfying to see the Armored you have spatial contact can be reached at tary economic output can be applied to five Exoskeleton your Construction Techs have developed, rather than a generic window tellmost times during the game, unless they get areas: Shipbuilding, Defenses, Industry, angry enough to withdraw their diplomat, ing you that you have achieved \"Construction Ecology and Technology research. Needless Level 24.\" Each development leads to two or and you can use this route to exchange techto say, the latter three begin to get neglected three new devices to research, so one can also nology, forge alliances or threaten war, create during those long galactic wars, but if you let make strategic choices within each discipline. trade agreements or simply kiss up to a more things slide too far you'll end up with an If one is feeling badly pressed by militant powerful race through gifts of money or techinefficient, poisoned and backward empire neighbors, one can choose to push the adnology. The trade routes lose money during with lots of weapons that don't work very vancement of armor and leave factory effithe initial years when they are being estabwell. 39 December 1993 Page 17 "


"funti fillary terran environment 30 this way is advantageous in that you get to keep all the expensive factories, you don't lose diplomacy points with your neighbors by burning worlds down to bedrock, and if you capture enough factories there is a chance you will be able to get some new technology from your enemy. The only drawback to this kind of combat is (and here MOO compares to the original boardgame of Civilization) that it's very population intensive; trying to seize two or three worlds this way in a few turns can deplere your empire of citizens and leave a lot of factories standing idle. PLANET SIZE 155 Fac Tota Labs LASTE: 0 POPULATION: 155 weapon or special device has its own particular pyrotechnic show when fired or activated. The player is given a choice between running the ships or letting the computer move them, but since combat is so straightforward I see this latter option being used very rarely. The computer is a fairly strong, if not very subtle opponent in the tactical arena, and it usually uses its technological advances to their most damaging potential. Ship groups can re treat from battle at any time after surviving a combat round and will warp back to the nearest friendly planet if their side eventually loses, or will rejoin their original fleet after the battle if victory is the result. Once space is secured, a fleet can bomb a world clean of inhabitants and factories, or await the arrival of troop transports sent from neighboring worlds. Transports carry population away from the origin world to arrive as troopers at the target world. Ground combat is a quick, theydielyou-die round by round occurs automatically until one race stands alone on the planet surface. Numerous technical advances can give troops combat modifiers that can turn a fair numerical fight into a rout. Capturing worlds Through Alien Eyes... No discussion of MOO is complete without looking at the alien races involved. There are ten races that can fill any of six slots in a game; you choose one and how many other races After all this preparation, it would be a shame if the actual battles were over quickly or were so convoluted that all the fancy equipment you researched never got used. Have no fear, MOO strikes a solid balance between detail and playability. Ships face each other in groups defined by ship type across a screensized spacefield 11 x 8 movement points large. This field will occasionally contain a smattering of obstructive asteroids and the world in dispute if it is colonized. Ships move od fire in an initiative system based on their engine class and maneuverability rating. Weapons can be fired at any target, at any point during a move, so long as an enemy ship or world comes within range of that specific weapon type. Missiles and torpedoes will track a target from across almost the entire board. Here detail is again rich as each DAAAAAAAAAAAAALLAG EVITU S SETTE The Sakkra empire has grown in strength, Already they control 8 star systems.. VEROLEHLODLES EQUIFIED Dao ? OFF LIGI 160 "


"COLONTES you wish to compete against, and the comand the two nominees for Galactic leader are puter randomly selects the rest. Depending from the two largest empires. In order for any on your style of play, this selection could spell leader to be crowned Master of Orion, they the difference between conquering the unimust hold a two-thirds majority in council. verse and being Galactic Second Banana. Sometimes your allies will vote for you or, if Each race has its own unique advantage and you are still a minor power, expect you to vote a philosophical point of view when it comes for them. to interspecies relations. The fact that only six of the ten are inGalaxy Map volved in any given game and that each racial advantage tends to change the shape of game  play means that the replay value is very high. THINERALS In a month of play there are still a couple of Map Key races I haven't fought for or against. And even more enjoyable is the fact I have to tinker with my grand strategy every time to allow for new opponents. Advice To The Warlorn There are two ways one can achieve ultiThis system is a novel way for a player to mate victory in MOO. The first and most decide when they want out of a game. If they bloodthirsty is to simply exterminate every think their situation is untenable they can cast other race in the Galaxy. The second option a swing vote for one of the two major powers, still involves its share of conquering, but it is or simply abstain and bide their time for a more political in nature. It seems that every better situation. Should an Orion Master be so often a tele-conference of all the racial crowned against your wishes, you can choose leaders is called where they (and you can vote to ignore the creation of a new Federation and on who should be the ruler of the universe. pit yourself against the combined might of The number of votes you can cast is directly the joined races; needless to say, this is a long proportional to the size of your population, tough fight. Kiecka Betrathi Merthon Alkor Sokkra Derich And The Stars Sing \"MOO!» Master of Orion is one of those games where one must actually put effort into finding something inadequate about the game design, and that in itself is probably the highest praise this reviewer can give a product. Yes, if I were an all-powerful being I might alter MOO to allow for more than six ship designs at a time, or make small ships a little more relevant, but these things matter little against such a well crafted piece of gaming software. As for the game's manual, it leaves many details to be desired, and without an index, it can be difficult finding the details that are included. But even in spite of this weakness, I and many gamers like me will be unable to resist this game's overwhelming power. MOO should appeal to both hard-core and novice wargamers. The light touches and nods to classic sci-fi themes should draw in and entertain the general software public as well. This product will offer enough late nights and missed appointments to make it a definite Game of the Year candidate as well as Exhibit A in many divorce cases. My only regret is that my friends had to offer advice over my shoulder instead of playing against IS EAR POPPING. If it were any more real, your chair would be in a 30°bank. Our new Microsoft Flight Simulator has four planes, each with its own instrument panel created digitally from actual photographs. There are storm clouds and sunsets to fly into. Crashes are scarily real. And you can fly to airports anywhere in the world. For even more detailed flights, there are New York and Paris scenery enhancements. Everything is at your reseller. So, take off. Microsoft FUELT FUEL RIGHT OBEST OIL'T UP pullilula Circle Reader Service #99 1993 Microsoft Corp. All rights reserved. Microsoft is teisteted trademark of Microsoft Corp \"Now York and Paris scenery enhancements coming this fall. Hight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Arik "


"THE RED CRYSTAL \"The Seven Secrets of Life\" @OP. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. NOREM Seek out the seven secrets of life .... Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or with a partner. Simply, one fine adventure and role playing endeavor. MODEM PLAY 1 OR 2 PLAYERS WORKING TOGETHER OR IN HEAD TO HEAD COMPETITION BREATHTAKING GRAPHICS FASCINATING ECONOMIC SYSTEM LARGE VARIETY OF MONSTER TYPES OVER 50 DUNGEON LEVELS  AUTO-MAPPING FEATURE The \"Red Crystal: Seven Secrets of Life\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #110 "


"HEIRS TO THE THRONE Foop. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. The King is dead. His brother is returning from the crusades. The barons are vying for power. It is your job to challenge the rogue barons and bring the kingdom together. The others have made their stand. Now you must lead your troops to victory over mountains, swamps, deserts, and through forests. You have the potential ... it's up to you and you alone. SUPERB GRAPHICS UP TO 4 PLAYERS SIMPLE AND INTUITIVE INTERFACE GREAT COMPUTER OPPONENT 30 DIFFERENT OPTIONS FOR EACH GAME (You control it all) UNLIMITED VARIETY OF LAND TO CONQUER  MANY TERRAIN TYPES (Etecting Production and Combat) HALL OF FAME The \"Heirs to the Throne\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"CASINO ADVENT 03 . Welcome ta ICITY LIMITS Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. It is vacation time... you can sit at home watching the grass grow or enter our world ... LUCKY'S CASINO ADVENTURE. This could just be your lucky break. Everyone can \"win\", but only the best can hold out for the full three weeks. Travel between the many casinos, have a bite to eat and rest in the hotels. Nothing has been left out in this state of the art experience of a lifetime. Games Included: 5 Different Pokers, 8 Different Slots (all completely different), Paigow, Bingo, Keno, Baccarat, 3 Different Video Pokers, Money Wheel, Blackjack, Casino, Craps, Red Dog. Roulette, Caribbean Stud (ALL REAL CASINO QUALITY Supports All Major Sound Cards 256 Spectacular Colors Tournament Play Scoring History 640 x 400 VESA VBE 1.2 Compatible Three Week Adventures to experience The \"Lucky's Casino Adventure\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"WORLD BOLET BATTLES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC QQP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. C4YSZEIT The time: World War II The place: The South Pacific Wage war for the sole ownership of the South Pacific. Historically correct battles challenge all, to do better than the Navy did as it happened in WWII. Not only naval combat, but air and land combat. Create and transport armies to enemy ports through air, naval, and bombardments from your adversaries to take over their bases. MANY SCORCHING BATTLES TO CHOOSE FROM  PLAY JAPANESE OR U.S. FORCES MODEM PLAY EXPERT MENUS OR NOVICE MENU  SEVERAL LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY STUNNING HISTORICAL ACCURACY HUNDREDS OF SHIP AND PLANE TYPES INTUITIVE INTERFACE Circle Reader Service #202 The 'WWII: Battles of the Pacific\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Game On The Edge Of Forever SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still la Development An Early Look At Sierra's Outpost by Martin E. Cirulis Martin Cirulis is a freelance writer and Science Fiction author who has Our planet has been destroyed, but not before one massive SpaceArk recently completed a novel with Lucius Shepard. A space game connoisseur, he has been built to carry away the legacy of Earth rended by her brightest believes firmly in the \"four eXs\": explore, expand, exploit and exterminate. and strongest citizens. The player takes the helm of this last desperate ust when I felt confirmed in my opinion of the current trends in bid for survival and must make the decisions that will either shape the Science Fiction computer games, I literally stumbled across a new future of humanity or bring it to an end. product that threw my assumptions into disarray. While attend. Although this plot may be a little familiar, the detail with which it ing the World Science Fiction Convention in San Francisco this has been executed will bring sighs of appreciation from even the most past September, I noticed the Sierra banner flying proudly, and jaded SF gamer. For instance, the promptly shuffled through the Outpost Mothership is not just a recycled plot crowd hoping to see some new device from the Paramount prop deadventure game demos or maybe partment. This virtual vessel took even acquire some of the Mana of over two months to design and imevery writer at a convention: Free plement in the game, and is a comStuff. Imagine my surprise when I posite of theoretical NASA designs realized the program on display for Colony ships. The same can be wasnt another quality adventure said for almost all of the equipment game, but was an incredible lookto be dealt with in this game. All of it ing strategy game called Outpost. is realistic, carefully detailed, and The surprises didn't stop there. lifted from the latest high frontier Not only was this a strategy game, research, though I guess they will but it seemed to be designed for have to modify the probe designs the CD-ROM format, and it was somewhat. running from Windows! Also, Of course, it's easier to lay hands on while I stood there amazed I began Filted arth hydrogen prou the topibere at Jupiter, the nollises to realize that not only was this this kind of design information when the head programmer's last job was game Science Fiction, but the sciAl research for NASA. Bruce Balence was so hard one could bounce a meteor off it. Needless to say, I four's obvious love of the subject really shows through in this project. had to know more and, after hastily scrawling \"PRESS\" on the back He is sure enough of his craft that he is hoping to receive product of a cab receipt and, sticking it in the brim of my hat, I corralled a endorsements from prominent figures in the Astronomy and Acrocouple of guys who looked suspiciously like designers and went about space fields in return for a possible percentage of the proceeds being finding an explanation for this wonder. donated to various high frontier organizations. «Your Mission, should you choose \"Will the last person leaving the Earth please to accept it... shut off the lights?\" According to Bruce Balfour and Jon Bock, head designer and Outpost begins with a 25-year countdown to doomsday. The player project artist respectively, this is a game of a dark and heroic future. has this scant quarter century to build a MotherShip, select the The colonization continu e proput OR lon che allows the spacecraft to rea tuonth= the pen Finlit ontein c hing Launched on its intunlar voyage Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"Outpost-Tuin 1 Factory Report Factory Name: 18120 Nose Cartellraduction levet Producing Bulldozers p lader Miner Full Producing Slates Functional Status: Breakdown Sys flessure Status: Al Management Fully Stecked Outpost PANT CLIC PARLE JUBAH EPFRIEDS AUTRE IO PERTS VS 2014 appropriate equipment, and I Lule This means that in Outpost, the primary enemy isn't a choose a staff of right-hand marauding alien race or some ancient relic from galactic people. There will probably wars past, but capricious Fate herself. Bruce and Jon were be very few sure bets here, perversely proud of the fact that players will not be able to and the gamer will be left build anything that won't break down, blow up, or just be pondering the possible trouswallowed whole in a ground quake. Entropy is alive and bles ahead and making eduwell at this Outpost. The player will be kept busy reacting cated guesses as to what to and researching counter-measures for a myriad of new combination of personnel and potentially devastating disasters. This is a game that and equipment will enhance shows how dangerous space really is without having to survival potential. An open resort to triple-tentacles Escargot-men looking for dates. line of credit with the PsyPlayers who are skilled enough to craft a colony that can chic Friends Network probsurvive and prosper will eventually encounter the band of ably wouldn't hurt during malcontents that checked out with those supplies. They will this phase. have done pretty well for themselves also, well When these choices are made, for betenough to become viable competitors. This, in ter or worse, and old Terra Firma is turn, leads to many areas where the player will crumbling into history, the Motherhave to decide whether to compete or cooperate. Ship lumbers into the sea of stars and Since prime real estate and minerals are at a all personnel slip into suspended anipremium in the great dark, one can readily end mation. But just before the lights go out up trading for desirable commodities in demand in the captain's cubicle for a few decor for technologies in which the defector colony ades, the player's character must make OSTATE VENEMAYE yw has pulled ahead of the player's colony. As in any one more decision: Despite all this I TILANTEE trading situation, the key is to garner more than preparation, the course is not yet deterone proffers. Note that while raw force isn't an mined, and the player must point the Outpost option in its current incarnation, these expedition in the direction that will negotiations are the player's opportunity to put most likely lead to a new home. the screws to the loyal opposition via economic Again reflecting the realities in space exploration, Earth orbit teleforce. One simply has to be careful with what is scopes have only been able to discover which stars are most likely to traded away, since traded facilities do not pick up and move, they host Gas Giants (large planets like our Jupiter and Saturn). Such star merely become property of the opposing colony right where they systems promise the best chance of finding something smaller and sit--even if they sit in the middle of your colony. more solid, but the player has no way of knowing if there are indeed more viable bodies until hearing the results from \"Hal...Oh Hal?» one of the scarce number of probes in the ship's Though some of this may sound inventory. Unfortunately, these probes only daunting, the program does provide travel at slightly more than twice the Mother assistance. A pseudo-AI personality Ship's speed, so a general direction must be chohelps to fulfill the player's duties and sen first. At the halfway point, the player's charwarn of impending disaster. There is acter is awakened to analyze the more detailed also a never-ending supply of reports, probe telemetry and choose a final, fateful target from an overall status report for one's system from the short list of likely candidates. entire colony to individual updates As if this wasn't enough to weigh on the mind from each and every facility under the of the savior of mankind, the game introduces a player's control. renegade faction within the expedition that nor Also programmed into this game is a only helps themselves to a good portion of availmicro-management system that will alable supplies, but has struck out on its own in low one to assign mundane turn-tocompetition with the player's crew. turn rasks to the computer assistant while attending to more «If it's Tuesday, this must be Alpha Centauri.» Hale important details, such as the morale of the personUpon arrival at the target world, it becomes necessary to nel or the creation of posend down the robots from another detailed NASA model, lice units if one decides to The Seed Factory. This self-replicating robot factory prepares ignore their needs. This the colony zone for habitation and supplies the crew with the ability to concentrate on initial modules to be used as building blocks for Humanity's new tasks instead of the new home. Now the satisfying aspect of game play begins. same repetitious ones The player must balance needs versus resources, work versus should free this title from morale, and research versus production. The new world is not the boredom-factor that a stagnant one, it is a dynamic, dangerous place which requires crops up in other sim-type the development of new skills and technologies in order to games. ensure survival and prosperity. chance Outpost December 1993 Page 25 "


"    GAMEPORT. Finally, a Joystick Connection for Your Notebook! Elle Control Level Help Agricultural Dwe Transform your high-performance portable into a serious simulation machine with the Notebook Gameport. Connect an IBM-compatible joystick or yoke and rudder pedals. The Notebook Gameport not only maximizes the entertainment potential of your notebook computer, it's also the quickest, easiest joystick connection for your desktop! Ask your local retailer for the Notebook Gameport, or call Colorado Spectrum to place your order. \"Mine eyes have seen the glory.» The graphic quality of Outpost is simply incredible, and the design team deserves full credit for pushing the envelope on the current technology. Considering the game will run comfortably on a 386/25 with four megabytes of RAM, the photo-quality animation sequences are stunning. The portions I have seen are equal to those seen on television shows that use computer graphics for special effects. Granted, the game is designed primarily for CD-ROM, so the DOS version will take 20 megabytes of hard drive space to do the same job a little slower and with less pizzazz, but even the CD-less among us will still enjoy a beautiful 640 X 480 playing field, with each tile and terrain square crafted in exE vel Outpost Turn treme detail. Jon Bock crafted most of these images using AutoDesk 3D, and the animation has been meshed seamlessly with gameplay to give players every chance to suspend disbelief and immerse themselves fully in the simulation. The decision to use a simple Windows interface is definitely a courageous choice when the trend this year in science fiction games has been to create extravagant and flashy interfaces, usually at the expense of gameplay. The game is scheduled for release in March of '94 in both CD and DOS formats with a Mac version likely to follow within a few months. Dependent upon the success of Outpost, long-range plans include a series of expansion disks that will extend the game universe by developing the storyline and introducing new rules and features as plot devices. Disks may include an actual all-out war and first contact with an alien race. Even without these expansions, the game's large and accurate starmap contains hundreds of stars that change most of their planetary values with every game. Hopefully this dynamic map will keep the reOutpost la play value high. This game is sure to create quite a splash, and deservedly so. If interactive entertainment truly wishes to be taken as scriously as books or film, then I think this is definitely the kind of high ground to seize. In an economic climate where originality is considered a risk, and rehashing old ideas is not only seen as smart but is strongly preferred to the development of new projects, Sierra deserves full marks for taking a step outside their usual beaten track and supporting a new Outpost. This is one reviewer who hopes it will grow and prosper. Cow GAMEPOAT COLORADO SPECTU 748 Whalers Way, E-201, Fort Collins, CO 80525 International Telephone (303)225-1687 (800) 238-5983 9-Pin Connector to Computer's Serial Port Easily connects to all IBM compatible notebook and desktop computers. Pass-through Serial Mouse Port Mouse remains fully operational while gameport is in use.     GAMEPORT CERET Four-axis Gameport Supports joystick & rudder pedals simultaneously No calibration, jumpers or manual speed adjustments necessary Circle Reader Service #49 Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"You can outfly this guy... But can your COMPUTER? Yesterday's high speed games have pushed your personal computer to its limits. Today's games are breaking them. You need a computer with no limits. You need to fly a FALCON. Introducing the Falcon MACH 5. The latest advance in our line of high speed personal computers, the MACH 5 is the ultimate machine for gaming, personal and business use. It features new VESA Local Bus technology and the fastest 486 processor to produce over 40 VGA frames per second. 30 frames per second is flicker free to the human eye. The MACH 5 is serious hardware for serious players. The MACH 5 comes standard with: VESA Local Bus Motherboard with 256K Cache and Intel 486DX/2-66 Microprocessor VESA Local Bus Graphics Card with 1 Megabyte Video Memory VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card (4 Megabytes per second transfer rate) 4 Megabytes of RAM Upgradable to 32 1.2 and 1.44 Megabyte Floppy Drives 130 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive The MACH 5 Internal Caddyless CD-ROM Drive (350 ms) CTX 14\" Super VGA Color Monitor is Complete Including Mini-Tower Case Shipping For Only Creative Labs SoundBlaster Deluxe Multimedia Speakers Microsoft DOS 6.0 3 Button Serial Mouse 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover CH Products Flightstick Joystick and High Speed Joystick Port Backed By Our 1 Year Parts and Labor Warranty $2,499 66 III Fractal landscape created with VistaPro 3.0. 3D modeling courtesy of Oregon Data Products. Prices subject to change without notice. Optional equipment shown. To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Circle Reader Service #67 VISA & MasterCard Accepted. Financing Available. "


"SNEAK PREVIEW F'nesu Blond In The Role-Pla vie Alreno, Politics, Peril and Power in Bethesda's The Elder Scrolls, Volume 1: Arena by Johnny L. Wilson SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development M h e formula is deceptively simple. A patron recruiting a first level player character Unfortunately for the wizard, he cannot deFoozle (X) has entrapped an importo do his/her dirty work. Fortunately, V.J. stroy the staff after his nefarious deed because tant personage (Y) in a situation (Z) Lakshman and Julian Lefay, the designers of the destruction of the artifact would undo his from which Y is helpless to remove himself or Arena, are kindred spirits in this regard. The spell and release the real Emperor. So, he does herself. A heroine or hero (A) is recruited to reason the player's character is chosen is be the next best thing. He divides the staff into cither face X (the wicked wizard, corrupt eight pieces and hides them all over the king, demented demon, etc.) in a massive known world. Naturally, the player's characmagical showdown which leads to bliss (B) ter has to collect and assemble all cight pieces for the kingdom, world, dimension, etc. ((A+(M*8)) in order to release the Emperor ((X/A)+(Z-Y)= B) or use superior intelligence from his cosmic captivity (Z-Y) and reset the and magic to remove Y from the clutches of desired equilibrium (B) by exposing the wizX ((A+(Z-Y))-X = B) and return the situation ard (X). to the best of all possible worlds. Sometimes, PE Sound easy? It's not. Bethesda Softworks the formula is expanded as magical artifacts has elected to create a huge world split into (M) are added to the scenario: nine provinces. This means that there are ((A+(M*x))+(Z-Y))-X = B) (where x reprecause he/she is an offspring of one of four nine cultures and habitats, complete with sents the number of pieces of the artifact Imperial Guards, an elite group sworn to politics and weather. Want to see snow? Visit which the heroine/hero must recover and protect the king. The apprentice cannot reSkyrim, the Land of the Nords. Tired of assemble in order to be able to accomplish the cruit the Imperial Guards themselves, behuman-looking humans? Try Elsweyr, home task). cause their absence from the side of the of the feline race known as the Kjajiit (sic) or The Elder Scrolls, Volume 1: Arena follows the last and most complex formula. The faux-Emperor would alert the wizard that his Black Marsh, home of the reprilian Argoniplan had been betrayed. So, the apprentice ans. Add three kinds of elven races, a dwarven wicked wizard has entrapped the benevolent and erudite Emperor in a dimension in which appeals to the offspring of this elite crew in race and another band of humanoids, and the time passes (and hence, the Emperor ages) order that they, though inexperienced, can world gets fairly rich. There are desert environments, mountainous regions and swamps, accomplish what their progenitors could very slowly relative to the game world. To and all function with realistic rerrain and not-the restoration of the Emperor. further complicate matters, the wizard has weather (snow piles up in drifts, puddles mirtaken on the appearance of the Emperor and ror buildings during the rain, etc.). no one would know about the imprisonment Further, characters adventuring in the if it weren't for that wizard's apprentice. The worlds of Arena will discover that their way is wizard's apprentice is too Mickey Mouse Jhey have been summoned (oops, wrong apprentice), that is, too inept to by Sagar Jharn. Imperial aided or hindered on various occasions by Battle Mage of the Empire, groups with their own agendas and belief be able to rescue the Emperor by himself, so on rumors of treachery... systems: Brotherhood of War, Order of the he recruits the player's character to accomGentle Hand, Order of the Red Rose, and plish what he cannot. more. Another nice touch is that, as characNormally, this would cause me to experiters wander the streets and alleys of cities ence my first rebellious act of disbelief. I within this world, they can pick up both always want to know how the player's charAh, did I mention an artifact? The artifactuseful information and strange red herrings acter got stuck in the story. I'm rarely satisfied in Arena is a staff of power, the magical item from the citizens and denizens of these lowith the standard means of a more powerful used by the wizard to imprison the Emperor. cales. If a rumor is valid it will not only recur, Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"The Very Best Classic City Simulation TIEDan one IRIDNO PRORROSINA R R IARI E dedelalelelerde arada \"I always wished Sim City had more \"game\" to it; Caesar has that. Caesar goes far beyond its Sim City origins and provides the serious game player with a real lion's feast. Hail Caesar\" Computer Gaming World GRRRRRROZZERIA \"Caesar has the same sort of feel to it that Sim City did, but the game play is much more streamlined, detailed and enjoyable. There's also a lot more here than in Sim City... Incredible...a true gem of a game\" Computer Game Review CHARLIER B \"Highly recommended...near perfect.\" PC Entertainment CAESAR \"Exciting and addicting not to mention exhausting\" Compute ORONG 22 \"It's a Sim City that goes further\" Amiga World Golden Triad Award Computer Game Review Nominated for the CGW Strategy Game of the Year Computer Gaming World Highest Score Ever Awarded To A Game PC Entertainment ec ROME WASNT BUILT IN A DAY. HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE YOU? Impressions Sim CityTM is a registered trademark of Maxis Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #83 "


"Salas Health: 26/26 Leuco1 Gold: 105 Ste190 Int: 20 Uis:61 0 00090 +0 SACS PS140 Mayic Oct :+2 1o Rit:+1 yox illos 60 10 Hit:+ 10 0cread: +1 Spd 51 End:38 Per 55 Chocida! +1 it will become more specific as characters ger I also like the fact that the game closer to its source, whether that be a tavern, has no level limits. One doesn't temple or inn. So, it pays to interact with have to attain a certain experience characters, and the program is designed to point level to move on, and charunveil rumors, quests and helpful hints as if acters can keep improving, ad inHere's what you do. Go to Laughing GUTS, that's just south one was peeling an onion layer-by-layer. This of hece, and ask for a remarkably enigmatic character called finitum. How do the designers Morgun the Warrior. I'm pretty sure he's got a job for a is worthy. intend to enforce play balance in uh Bed Siko you   such 16 45 4 5| Also, as in most computer role-playing delivery job though, you know? such a systemThroughout the games, the player will need to complete miniworld, there are some really quests in order to have enough money, retough monsters, liches and vamsources and experience to continue with and pires in particular. These monfulfill the main quest. In Arena, however, the sters have their own agendas and designers have taken the \"people and paper\" can provide some pretty hefty role-playing model and tried to keep matters game); multiple paths to solve problems as in balancing on their own. I haven't so that the compurer feels like a human DunWasteland (there is always more than one way experienced one of these in the early stages of geon Master who improvises according to the out of a situation); a risk/reward approach as the game, but I'm looking forward to them players' actions. So, although the standard in Dragon Wars (every dungeon has short cuts when the game is finished. formula for mini-quests (discovering a patron which are usually more dangerous, and safer in a tavern who hires the player's character to paths which take longer); and something of a Final Calculation perform a mercenary mission) is used, these fame/notoriety rating as in Darklands (the One of my great complaints with first-perquests are divided into Mundane and Noble game sets up PERK (perquisite) flags when son point-of-view games has been that the Quests, randomly generated by the computer the player's party is successful in certain acdesigners tend to be looking for quick comtions and these allow the characters bar, fast scrolling and graphic pizzazz without Joruya Magwyr to get tips, pardons and quests, on remembering the need for story, character Breton Healer Fatigue 78 occasion). I'm also excited that the building and interaction. To me, the last year game is realistic enough to realize has seen a movement that makes many firstthat players are not always going to rank CRPGs seem more like action games on B41:58 be successful and allows nona video game machine than the rich, sophisH493fb: +0 Heal 104:40 player characters (NPCs) to bail ticated role-playing experiences that first Luc:55 CORUS FTS: them out on occasion. drew many of us into the world of computer Exp: 0 To be sure, the game features the games. Fortunately, Arena breaks the trend. obligatory icon-based command It gets back to the roots of role-playing withlines of most modern CRPGs. out losing the technological pyrotechnics of Donc There are 11 icons on Arena's comits competitors. mand line and they are fairly selfArena isn't just another flash in the dunand set with appropriate risk/reward ratios). explanatory: Cast Spell, Steal, Use, Automap, geon. When it pushes polygons about the Also, there is a \"political circumstances overDraw Weapon, etc. Within thar command screen, it's going somewhere, usually somelay\" that will allow important quests to be line, combat orders to other members of the where interesting. When it uses a special efinserted when certain conditions are met, and party tend to be reduced to the simple «Profect, it's creating an atmosphere, usually a a percentage of probability that the party will tect PC at all costs» and «Follow me\" variety, fascinating one. If Arena captures the imagihear valuable rumors which increases by 1% but that's been standard since Ulfor every new experience level attained by the tima VI revised the way combat AI player's character. was handled for other members of the player's party. Differential Equations Yet, there are nifry new features within the game, as well. This is So, what makes Arena different? What's so o one of the few games where players hot about it? Frankly, I'm impressed because can customize magic spells using a Arena is the first CRPG of recent vintage that point and click magic system. The is using state-of-the-art technology to present prototype secmed very versatile and stunning (and fast!) first-person perspective the designers were attempting to visuals without forgetting the lessons of the link special effects to spell elements past in terms of game design. I am impressed d in such a way that even the player's by the frame rate and scrolling of this game, custom spells would look impressive during nation of other gamers like it has captured even on a 386SX-33, and I am delighted with combat. It is also slated to be one of the first mine, it may well be the game that establishes the special effects tricks used on the magic CRPGs to support Logitech's new Cyberman, the new formula for CRPGS-P for proven spells. the input device that gives vibratory feedback ideas, '+ N' for new technology, '+ C for However, I'm even more thrilled that the when characters bump into objects or happen creative innovation, '= S' for successful standdesign team has chosen to include questionto be struck by weapons. I haven't had a ard. Indeed, it is likely to mean (in terms of based character generation as in Ultima IV chance to experience the game with Cyberan older arena) that the Emptor (consumer) (and that the questions seem more interesting man at press time, but I hope to do so, soon. instead of the Emperor gives the \"Thumbs and less judgmental than those in the classic Up!\" CGW Serta Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"officially sanctioned INDYCAR TM R A C I N G MOVE OVER DHE VDS Racing To Real IndyCart Racing IndyCar Racing is the real 3-D thing. Blast through the corkscrew at Laguna Seca. Dopplershifting IndyCar engines scream to the max. Suddenly, someone spins. Blam! Parts fly, everywhere. You slip by. Whew! Caution light. Time to pit. Take on fuel. Right side tires. Adjust front wing. Too late! You finished 2nd. Get 'em at Michigan. Feel too real? (Almost.) REPLAY PE P1974 SOF. RIGHT FRONT COMPOUND PRESSURE CHANGE TIRE DONE 116 Stefan Johansson THE 18811926 6 01255 Real Graphics: Experience all new Papyrus 3-D Super Texture technology. Bit-mapped cars, tracks, terrain and scenery, accurate down to the last detail; including billboards, paint schemes and decals on actual IndyCars. Tread marks \"groove\" every turn to help you find the line.  Real Game Play: Gobs of Newtonian physics calculate real car behavior...speed, chassis, engine set-up, tire temp and wear, fuel load, track bank, etc... hundreds of calculations per second. What you do makes a real difference.  Real Set-Ups: You choose wing angles, tire types and pressure, suspension, camber, gearing, and more: Adjust turbo boost, brake bias, roll bar settings from the cockpit. Custom tune engines in the dyno room. (Or take the default car and hit the track running.) From the creators of Indianapolis 500. The Simulation First in a series of Real World 3-D Racing Games PAPYRUS PUBLISHING, INC. ATTENTIFICATION 126 11826 294699 ULLS EI Distributed exclusively worldwide by GAMES Virgin Games, Inc. Papyrus Publishing WON Indy Car Racing Available November 1993 Real Race Tracks: Michigan International, Laguna Seca, Milwaukee Mile, Long Beach... you get it all in IndyCar M Racing...right down to the grass, fans, stands and six real TV camera-type replays from car-cams to blimps. The Indianapolis 500 is a registered trademark of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. Indianapolis 500: The Simulation is a trademark of Electronic Arts Inc. Actual IBM PC screens shown. Circle Reader Service #108 "


"3DO EXPERIENCE Electronic Arts software for the 3DO system is about to revolutionize the way you play games. The new 3DO system delivers photo realistic graphics, CD-quality sound and gameplay so real it's hard to tell where your living room ends and the software begins. CS ST EL C2 Electronic Arts has been A at the forefront of innovative technology throughout our ten year history. We have supported all of the major successful hardware platforms, and led the pack onto the Sega Genesis.\" Now we've recognized the technological leap 3DO has to offer and we're planB01 ning to introduce twenty 3DO new titles for 3DO over the next twelve months. "


"We are developing titles with Hollywood-style special effects, full-color video and intense game. play. This new software ranges from Super Wing Commander to PGA TOUR Golf to Peter Pan. Grab the controls of your il lira fighter jet and stop the alien invasion in Shock Wave: Fight your way to the Super Bowlin John Madden Football, your cleats biting into the turf. Rip through the squalid city streets, the cold, hard bite of a steel chain assaulting your face in Road Rash: It's software as you've never seen it before. Face the future with Electronic Arts and 3DO. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark al Electroaic Arts. 300 and the 300 lagos are trademarks el The 300 company. All rights reserved. Sega and Crasis are trademarks ol Sega Laterprises Lid. PGA TOUR la telstered trademark used by permission, Super Bowl is a registered trademark of the NFL and its member clubs. Wing Commander is a registered trademark ol Origin Systems, Inc. Unless otherwise specified, all Illes are trademarks or registered trademarks of Electronic Arts. ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #62 "


" Shek 30 Esse t thane EAG 46mgs, A, A word COMEDY A Rana X. XX Cro COXI 20ed: ? -WW *** Ennnnnnnnnnnnn "


"DEC Computer Gaming World's 7th Annual Holiday Buying Guide DEARS anta Claus isn't the only computer game addict among our readership that waits until the last minute to spread his holiday cheer. To help him and his fellow gift-giving procrastinators, every year we try to round up as many of the newest games as we can lay our hands on so that we can provide our celebrative readers with a sleighful of screen shots and information prior to the holiday buying season. Of course, we aren't fortune tellers, so we can't guarantee which games will actually ship in time to appear in your holiday stash, but we've been careful to include only the games that are on final approach for their landings on software shelves. Also, since we haven't experienced the complete games, the mentions in this buying guide do not constitute a full recommendation. Our goal is simply to describe those games which we think will be of interest to our readers. This year, the good news is that the software elves have been very busy, so we have lots to write about. The bad news is that we looked at many of the games in pre-release form, so we can't provide all the hard technical data that many of our readers would like for us to publish. Still, what we have tried to do is describe the games well enough that all the good little boys and girls can decide what software or hardware they want for the holidays. They can circle and highlight their favorites, and subtly drop this issue in the hands of their favorite Santa, Father Christmas, Hanukkah Harry, sugar daddy, parents, grandparents, spouse or significant other. ILLUSTRATIONS BY KELLY FREAS "


"zo-YOD. JO IFK 33 GOFFERS ing level by level, down through the stories of a space station in search of Evil's wellspring. The graphics are superb, with stunning lighting effects and art that could only come from dark and demented minds. The floor plans of the levels, no longer limited to the rigid angularity of Wolf 3D, are richly intricate, and the overhead map utility will be the gamer's constant cartographic companion. The depth of the game play has not improved much over Wolf 3D, though there are buttons and levers that one can push and pull to uncover secret passageways and weapon caches. Id may have been slightly optimistic when they said Doom would play well on a 386SX;gamers will most likely need a 486 to get the experience that the designers intend. But what an experience! Id Software, IBM ($40.00, Episode 1 is shareware and available for the cost of shipping and handling by calling 1-800-Id-Games). Dracula: Like something out of Tim Burton's The Nightmare Before Christmas, gamers \"Top this, Brothers!\" may find Psygnosis' Dracula stuffed in their stockings. Donning the garb of a vampire-kilArchon Ultra: The original Archon was one them with current graphics and sound. The ler, the player takes the role of Jonathan of the carly titles developed by a young, bold, game play hasn't change all that much Harker and sets out to destroy the infamous visionary group of software artists» that were though creatures now have extra combat Count. The macabre world of Dracula is a going to \"realize the potential of the personal powers, and the dynamics of the \"luminosity» computer.\" Among these Electronic Artists cycle have been tweaked. Graphically, the Meno: were Paul Reiche, Jon Freeman and Anne creatures have refined animated movements, Westfall, whose brooding visages graced the and there are a variety of 3-D battlefields with record album-like packaging of the first «batterrain objects to add variety to the combat stew. Even after 10 years, Archons blend of action and strategy is fun and unique, and should please the joystick-bangers among the new generation of gamers. Strategic Simuladariga tions, Inc., IBM ($49.95). Doom: If action gamers were knocked back Dracula on their heels by Wolfenstein 3-D, then they'd better pad their prominent posterior protrufree-scrolling, 3D environment strongly sions before booting Doom. «Visceral» was a reminiscent of Id's Wolfenstein 3D. There are word thrown around in discussions of Wolf three stages to the game, and the object is to Archon Ultra 3-D, but Doom will redefine the term in the destroy a certain number of monster-generatgaming lexicon, and \"gratuitous\" comes noing coffins to proceed to the next stage. The tle chess\" game. Although the game was set where near the description of Doom s violent player scrambles around a tedious maze of on a chess-like board, and the players chose excesses. The player (or players, through the corridors gathering innumerable keys to unone of two sets of pieces, Archon was only lock innumerable locked doors, while hoardintended network and modem options) take loosely based on the chess paradigm. Players ing bullets, food and holy wafers to keep the role of a space marine in a brutal and moved their pieces around a grid in an atbloody battle with The Ultimate Evil, fightsupplied. The game play, the graphics, and tempt to capture strategic «power points,\" \"me-too\" game engine are—like Keanu while the board's \"luminosity» cycled underReeves' acting in the Copola film-uninfoot, constantly changing the balance of spired. Psygnosis, IBM ($59.95). power. The use of magic made the contest Earth Invasion: Raise shields and arm even wilder: the \"king\" piece of both sides weapons, Windows gamers. It's time to precould summon elementals, shift the flow of pare for an Earth Invasion! Offering photo-retime, resurrect pieces from the dead, and heal alistic True-Color graphics (plus standard 16the wounded. When two creatures met on the and 256-color VGA graphics), full MIDI field of battle, the play dropped into an action sound support, fast 3D scrolling, smooth aniintensive battle of joysticks. PESHE GET mation, five difficulty levels, and over 30 Archon Ultra takes all of the elements of levels of play, Earth Invasion gives the player Doom Archon and the sequel, Archon II, and updates three complete games in what are the most BROR LA Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"Sana y o kuadodas upes IV 0 LASER-GUIDED MISSILES THAT CAN PINPOINT A WINDOW. A 10-TON BOMB LOAD THAT CAN LEVEL A TOWN. MAYBE THE BRITISH AREN'T SO CIVILIZED AFTER ALL. 910 was 16610 Tornado. Now in the States. TUTTO The Tornado. The plane that shredded runways Integration and Spectrum HoloByte, you'll sit and totaled buildings during the Gulf War. The plane in a cockpit where the analog dials actually work. that can scan the You'll operate the Thermal ORIOL terrain ahead and Imaging And Laser Desigautomatically hugnation (TIALD) system every hill and valwhich zooms in on targets ley at just 200 as small as the turret of a feet. And the plane tank from as high as with wings that 20,000 feet. And you'll sweep forward to even control a squadron with Come in low and fast, and you can actually see the cables in the bridge you're about to raze. maneuver a mission planner so through tight bombing runs and sweep back accurate it's used to to outrace even the fastest fighters. train real Tornado pilots in the RAF. Digital Integration Now you can climb into Britain's hottest Fly this devastating aircraft once, plane without joining the RAF. With Published by and you'll be glad the British Tornado, the flight sim from Digital Spectrum HoloByte are on our side. For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9PM-5PM Pacific Time). "


"2920000HT100000 ya Wanan advanced action games available for windows. Earth Orbit Mission is reminiscent of Galaxian, Ground Defense Mission offers Defender-style action, while Deep Space Mission takes off a la Wing Commander. Requirements, however, are a touch on the heavy side, demanding a 386/SX 25MHz system or berter (though it definitely plays best on a 486), 4MB RAM, Windows 3.1 and DOS 5.0. An accelerated video card, preferably offering Truc-Color, is best, though not required. Sounds and music are exceptional with a 16-bit sound card and MIDI; 3D graphics rendered in Autodesk 3D Studio visuTUR seit S1473 IITIDOS Earth Invasion can Laser Games, IBM with CD-ROM, SegaCD and 3DO ($59.95, $54.95, $59.95). Metal & Lace. Anime fans, as predominantly male as action-oriented gamers, should appreciate some of the beautiful round-eyed females who are draped in seductive poses to provide the ambiance for this game. The game itself, however, offers merely some new spin on one of computer gamedom's oldest ideas: man-to-man or machineJoe & Mac Caveman Ninja to-machine combat a la Karateka, Street Fighter, Bad Dudes, Budokan, Tongue of the fish, poisonous seed-spitting plants, and a Fat Man and a cast of thousands. The spin is giant dinosaur or other ill-tempered meanie that there is something which must be dealt with on each level to win around the arcade sequences interaction in a the fur-clad babes and move on. From the sleazy bar, complete with bimbos and a place \"stone wheel\" packaging to the comical, atto pick up new weapons, and that the comtractive graphics and the upbeat jungle music, batants are not men. Indeed, these are female this game is an entertaining delight sure to 'mechs (Robo-Babes in the game's fiction) liven things up in Bedrock or wherever men out of another Japanime tradition—the still eat meat. New World Computing, IBM robotic warrior sagas. Megatech, IBM ($29.95). ($49.95). Mad Dog McCree. In the tradition of coin Rebel Assault: May the Force, and a CDop games with laser guns and video villains, ROM, be with the Star Wars fan this holiday American Laser Games has released Mad Dog season. In this game of hot n'heavy joystick McCree. Players take on the role of a no-name action, LucasArts uses actual music and dig. stranger (a la Clint Eastwood's vintage charitized footage from the Star Wars films and acter) who comes in to rid a western town of 3-D rendered graphics to put on one of the the tyranny of the title villain, McCree himself. To do so, the game shuttles the player through first-person gunfight after first-person gunfight. The good news is that the scenes are reasonably well-acted and have enough randomness that one cannot merely memorize every sequence and move quickly through the game. Some of the stunts are as good as those we've seen at Universal Studio's C ATE stunt show. The bad news is that it is a PILOTS OWU SCORE (11700 1645 relatively short game by computer game Rebel Assault standards (though perhaps not by multimedia standards) and the action may not be hottest sight-sound shows to be seen from a paced fast enough for the most jaded twitch CD-ROM game. The player will don a Rebel and flex fans. On the IBM, it may well be the flight suit and blast his or her way through 15 action game \"for the rest of us» since the different action-oriented sequences: navigatmouse makes a formidable pistol and the paceing the hairy canyons of Beggar's Canyon, seemed just challenging enough. Unfortuweaving through an asteroid field with TIE nately, the Genesis and 3DO controllers fighters in pursuit, making a suicide attack on seem sluggish in comparison and reduced the a Star Destroyer, and blasting through the enjoyment of the overall experience. AmeriStormtrooper-infested hallways of a Rebel base, among others. In terms of game play, it DUIT is very simplistic and is reminiscent of early laser disk coin-ops-but what a show! LucasArts, IBM with CD-ROM ($69.95). Shadowcaster. As described in CGW#111, Shadowcaster's 3-D \"in-your-face graphics make this game a \"must play\" for every hack and slasher. Player characters get to morph MENU AMERICAN Score 00000 into six different creatures (with differing attacks and strengths) in order to fight some of Mad Dog McCree the most fascinating monsters ever to grace LOCK ally steal the show. 3DI Productions, Inc., IBM with Windows ($39.95). Firefall Arcade. In the style of classic, fastpaced video games comes Firefall Arcade for the Macintosh. The choice is a simple one in this game of skill and agility-kill or be killed. As the player tries to make his or her way through nine, heart-pounding levels of excitement, ferocious fireworms, slinky sliders, and the perpetual death star\" all stand in the way of success. Fortunately, triads, heat seekers, cannons, and V12s are at the player's disposal. Every bit of firepower will be needed to survive. Employing 3-D animated effects and a cool soundtrack, Firefall Arcade serves up a visual and audible treat. However, it will test one's mettle-only serious trigger trippers need apply. Inline Software, Macintosh ($49.95). Joe & Mac Caveman Ninja: Ah, to return to our ancient past when an axe took care of our enemies and a good knock on the noggin got you a date. If you're pining for the prehistoric in the Fred and Barney vein, this captivating game will have you beating your chest and whooping with delight. In one or twoplayer mode, the object is to hurl axes, tomahawks, fireballs and stone wheels at your enemies while picking up valuable nuggets like food and bonus points. If Joe or Mac down the chili sauce or eat a hot pepper, they'll cook any barbarian in their path. Enemies include preranodons, electrified flying DAMAGE Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"Pyongy Inch PACIFICE RETRACING THE MISSIONS OF WORLD WAR II FLYING ACES IS FASCINATING, BUT REWRITING HISTORY IS THE * S T R K E * ULTIMATE CHALLENGE HIN In Pacific Strike, you cruise into all major battles of the Pacific theatre Pearl Harbor, The Coral Sea, Midway, Guadalcanal, the Solomon Islands, the Marianas, Leyte Gulf, Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Now you can change the outcome of each battle and the entire war through your own successes and failures. Can you force an end to the war before the bomb is dropped on Hiroshima? Load 1000-b bomb Fly the Wildcat. Corsair. Helloat. Devastator, Dauntless, Avenger and Helldiver, enjoying the astounding realism of their fully instrumented cockpits. You'll do more than practice!  Hone your skills as you face relentless enemy pilots in Zeros, Kates, Vals, Bakas, Betties and more so graphically detailed that you can even see enemy pilots and insignia.  Prove those skills in a stunning variety of missionsgrueling dogfights over the Pacific, dive bombing runs against carriers and warships (including the Yamato!) and challenging rocket attacks on pillboxes, airfields and other ground installations. AIWA LUZO Manila! ARSH wajalei #ORIGIN We create worldse Actual screens may vary. A Stand-Alone Game Made in the USA An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Copyright 1993, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Pacific Strike is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We cregte worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Eloptronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts BISMARCK his or ARCHIPELAGO CAIN Bougainville BRITAIN SO Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #104 New Georgia Port Moresby San "


"computer screens. When the art from Raven Software (The Black Crypt) is combined with the game engine from ld (Wolfenstein 3D, Doom) and the soundtrack from Origin, the result is extra special. In addition, gamers who opt to purchase Logitech's CyberMan (see the hardware section of this buying guide) will have an extra-special sense of being there since the input device vibrates in the gamer's hand every time the enemies score a hit. Origin Systems, Inc., IBM ($79.95). DE SPEC happy to hear that up to 8 players can be is looking for. Talk to the space spoofs on the accommodated in over a dozen enhanced Bridge to learn how to beat Cybergeek at five network scenarios. Best of all, there is even a arcade games and free your pickled ruler. Carl scenario editor called the VRchitect. Now Raygun introduces you to Beefender, where you can be the master of all you survey and flying cattle of the Bovine Liberation Organicreate levels of action that no computer could zation (BLO) must be shot down in two-diever dream up. Velocity Development, IBM mensional space. Isaac Claponclapov teaches and Macintosh ($59.95). tactics for Grogger, a tricky dodge and hop Speed Racer in the Challenge of Racer X: Snea game set in a galactic carhop. A Yoda lookImagine Outrun with a plot. Speed Racer uses alike offers a shareware-style shooting game the familiar characters of the popular aniwhere flipping quarters at pesky solicitors makes them go away. In another game, Earth mated series (a first experience with anime for many gamers), voice clips, and some plot devices from the television series to enhance what would otherwise be just another driving game. The mechanics have the feel of many a coin-op racing game, but there are additional features to be added to Speed Racer's Mach 5 racer, and scenarios built into each race, just like in the cartoon. For example, gamers accelerating through the Valley of Destruction have to find a particular opponent and push the bad guy's car into a spinSpeed Racer out. This action will cause a pincapple (with typical hidden jewel) to fly out of the car so Last!, intergalactic garbage such as cigarette that the police can arrest the international butts and nauseous effluent must be \"bagged\" jewel smuggler/race driver. Those looking for to score points. Finally, Captain Major Buzz a simulation will be tremendously disapArmstrong with his six-pack support system pointed. Those looking for a clever action monitors Phlegmings, the best take-off in this game with a lot of nostalgic twists simply package. Tiny walking Phlegmings must be won't be able to resist. Accolade, IBM whacked by your spaceman with a golf club ($59.95). and a healthy swing, lest they gum up his The Geekwad Games of the Galaxy: The spacesuit. Flicking Phlegmings can be phun, evil Cybergeek has imprisoned King Wacky but overall Geekwad is a cute collection of in a jar of jalapeno jelly, and only a geekwad shareware-quality games for the unabashedly imbecilic. Tsunami, IBM ($34.95). can save him. Fortunately, if you buy this package, you are just the Geekwad Tsunami 190209 88902 8923 Shadowcaster Spectre VR: Old timers might remember the classic arcade games in the tradition of Battle Tank and Asteroids. Now, these crude wire-frames that evolved into the polished prize of Spectre have undergone yet another evolution. This wild, polygon-filled scroller shoot-'em-up is just right for multi-player good times on IBM and Macintosh networks, as well as solitaire fun on a single computer. In this sequel product, new enemies such as slicers and smart acid pools will trouble players, but improved weaponry such as spinners, proximity mines and pulse bursts provide sufficient antidotes. Network players will be Tea 263 Companions of Xanth. As previewed in our July issue (CGW #108), this graphic adventure breaks new ground for Legend Entertainment. It is their first release using a parserless interface (there is a parser, but it is nearly transparent) and it is a very funny game, based on an interesting literary license. When Piers Anthony wrote A Spell for Chameleon, the first Xanth novel, he certainly couldn't have expected the number of forthcoming titles it would generate. Even less would he have expected that the competition described in one of those Xanth novels would appear as a separate computer game. Based on the novel Demons Don't Dream, Companions of Xanth offers some traditional adventure game puzzles, but it also has some that cannot be solved without the help of the said \"companions,\" characters familiar from the Xanth books themselves. Legend Entertainment, IBM ($59.95). Dracula Unleashed: When the Count says Xmas trees delivered anywhere... \"Oops!\" Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"EMPIRE Songs The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic Availa NOW Windows Version  An Addictive Strategy War Game  Network and Modem Compatible  Super VGA Giaphies  Advanced Seenario Editor  Superior Computer A.I.  Digitized Sound Effects  Various Difficulty Settings ccompletely Re-Alayale Scenario Pack By Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky 4 st AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818.999-0607 outside U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302)  New World Computing, Inc and White Wolf Productions. Empire Deluxe is a trademark of New World Computing, Inc. Now World Computing is a registered trademark of New World Compung, Inc IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary. Circle Reader Service #102 NEW WORLD COMPUTING "


"OLSAED F340 Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Father he wants to neck, young damsels will end up from one of the leading developers of aniwith more than a hickey. They will, in fact, mated adventures. Westwood Studios/Virgin find the experience very draining. In the wake Interactive Entertainment, IBM and IBM of Bram Stoker's Dracula, and in preparation with CD-ROM ($62.99). for Halloween, Viacom New Media (forGabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers. This merly ICOM Simulations) has released gaming exercise in terror is an adventure Dracula Unleashed, the latest and greatest of game that builds on myth, symbolism and their CD-ROM titles. Based upon the game superstition in order to pull the gamer into a engine employed in Sherlock Holmes, Consultdark and dramatic world. Gabriel Knight is a ing Detective, Dracula Unleashed features imwriter who investigates a series of bizarre murproved audio and video, and, for those with ders (for the purpose of writing a novel) and appropriate graphic cards, a revamped discovers that there is more to both the crime SVGA interface. The result of these improveand himself than he had previously considments can be readily seen and heard from the ered. The dark palette of the artwork is remimoment the story begins to unfold. Video clips exhibit remarkable clarity, smooth flow and precise lip sync. Acting is professional and, thankfully, believable, audio descriprions spice up the atmosphere, and on-line assistance provided by ol' Van Helsing himself (audio only) helps familiarize the player with the gaming system and available options. Gamers with a taste for the macabre will find their cravings nurtured and their fears unleashed in this interactive horror movie. Viacom New Media, IBM with CDROM ($69.95). Fables & Fiends: The Hand of Fate. In this Dracula Unleashed sequel to The Legend of Kyrandia, the first title in the Fables & Fiends series, attention turns niscent of a graphic novel that couldn't be approved by the Comics Code and is outstanding in setting the mood. The sound effects and music add to the intensity of the playing experience, and the conversations are richer than we can ever remember having experienced in one of Sierra's graphic adventures. Sierra On-Line, Inc., IBM ($69.95). Look at the fireflies Goblins 3: Continuing with the outrageously charming wit and cartoonish animated antics that made the first two Goblins titles so popular, Goblins 3 is destined to amuse, entertain and puzzle all who step into Companions of Xanth the crazy world concocted by the French to Zanchia, the femme fatale of Kyrandia and designers at Coktel. In this particular branch most impulsive of the mystics. As prominent of the Goblins story, the unlikely hero is figure in this story, Zanthia must save Blount, a journalist by trade and an advenKyrandia from a strange curse placed upon turer by heart. Having always wanted to visit the land. It seems that Kyrandia is slowly faraway lands, this headstrong writer and disappearing, one tree, rock, and blade of hard-headed goblin sets out for Foliandre grass at a time. In addition to a more involved Mountain in search of the Jewel of the World, story and tougher puzzles than faced by Brandon in the original Kyrandia, romance blooms forcing Zanthia to deal with the inept affections of her suitor, Marko. One can expect this visit to Kyrandia to offer significantly more challenge and play time than its predecessor. As expected, gorgeous graphics, atmospheric music and rib-tickling humor abound. Technological improvements provide more accurate scaling and more realistic Fables & Fiends: The Hand of Fate lighting in this enchanting game experience a famous artifact thought to bestow special pleasures to the individual who will take it to his people. Watch Blount change from a weakling to a true hero as he shrinks, grows to giant size, sprouts wings and transforms into a werewolf. Bizarre fun guaranteed for the puzzle lover. Sierra On-Line, Inc./Coktel Vision, IBM ($39.95). Plumbers Don't Wear Ties. Billed as an interactive romantic comedy and coming from a new multimedia company named United Pixtures, we thought that an interactive soap opera had finally hit the SVGA screen. Instead, the minimally interactive story is more like a radio play with digitized pictures. To be sure, some of the digitized pictures are of rather prurient interest, but the pacing of the digitized speech is amateurish and the interaction is much too limited. One has more of a feeling of playing a full-color version of television's National Driving Test with the verb \"Dating\" substituted for «Driving,\" rather than making a real difference in the story. United Pixtures, IBM with CDROM ($23.95). Take Put Look at Open Close Give Talk to Catch Listen A swart of foreres hovers beside the babbling brook. TO Police Quest 4: Open Season Police Quest 4: Open Season: Former L.A. Police Chief Daryl Gates played a leading role in designing this latest offering in the Police Quest series. Beginning with the brutal murder of one of L.A.'s finest, the player dons the badge of a detective on a bizarre murder case. Life as an L.A.P.D. homicide detective is no picnic: as if the bad guys weren't tough enough, the player must deal with the press, and must follow strict police procedures at all times. From the manual that reads like \"the book» that officers must go by when enforcPage 42 Computer Gaming World "


"OLIKAAL Advanced Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTIN 2 taltion FORGOTTEN REALIS DUNGEON HACK HACK YOUR WAY THROUGH THE DUNGEONS OF YOUR NIGHTMARES! here's only one thing better than wielding wits and weapons in a danger-filled AD&D dungeon adventure — and that's wielding them in limitless danger-filled dungeon adventures! Which is what you get in DUNGEON HACK.\" With the randomized dungeon generator, custom set-ups and over 4 billion possible dungeons, no two games need ever be alike! This single character AD&D fantasy role-playing adventure is easy to use. Generate your character from 6 races and 12 character classes (including multi-classed), select dungeon difficulty, and off you go! Auto-mapping charts your explorations with printable maps. Passwords let you re-use favorite dungeons or let your friends generate the same dungeons in their game. Want more? Digitized sound effects and 256-color VGA graphics make DUNGEON Hack an experience u'll treasure Mover and over again! IBM & COMPATIBLES CD-ROM AVAILABLE To order, visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with VISA/MC (U.S. & Canada only). 2 1993 TSR, Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. IBM 256-COLOR VGA DISPLAYS. LOUNGEON WACKOR 09TZOUT Dungeon Generation slome Environments Dungeon Depts1 Food Consumption @ MNSHC Power FOOD AVREBE Key Freevency HNC TIDS Pt Frequency Hunts CHENI Zones O acer Leuch Huis II Fuzzles Encounter Undcud Ency Seels 13SSETT ERSY 20 SEO  SBE TO HARD 2 SUP SEEL R3r3 Hou Om Dungeon Seed random> 143545021101 45201 ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, DUNGEON HACK, FORGOTTEN REALMS, the TSA logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive tikenesses thereof are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc. "


"SURROUNDED BY ANTI-AIRCRAFT. HUNTED BY SAMS. EVEN MACH 2 ISN'T FAST ENOUGH. IT'S A STORY CAPTAIN DEAN PENNINGTON DIDN'T THINK HE'D LIVE TO TELL. WOULD YOU? of flyin America's most deadly 3.0, up to sit go mano a FALCON A TRUE STORY capabilities of the F-16 Fighting life. Like real pilots, you'll fly Kuwait, May 23, 1991. Captain Falcon. Nothing, aside from a true with a wingman, allowing you Dean \"D-Dawg\" Pennington dives F-16, captures the \"hair-on-fire\" feelWith Falcon SPECTRUM to engage in to take out an Iraqi 85mm gun ing of flying America's most deadly 3.0, up to six aerial tactics players can emplacement below. \"Flares, break fighter like Falcon 3.0, Spectrum like bracket mano. May the left!» his wingman screams. He HoloByte's computer simulation. best man win. HOLOBYTE maneuvers. wrenches the stick just as a SAM Instead of enemies who fly in explodes 10 feet behind his F-16.  circles, Falcon 3.0 adversaries fly Anti-aircraft batteries now open up according to true fighter doctrine all around, engulfing him. Too low to so they're no pushovers. And avoid the anti-aircraft, too slow to Kuwait looks like Kuwait since evade another SAM, he's faced with real geographic theaters are a hopeless choice and less than a faithfully mapped. quarter of a second to make it. NOT JUST A SIMULATION Lighting afterburners, he rockets to OF A WARPLANE safety before they can lock on again. Spectrum HolaByte A SIMULATION OF WAR THE STANDARD BY Falcon 3.0 lets you fight as part WHICH OTHER FIGHTERS A HIGHER LEVEL OF FLIGHT of an entire campaign. The misARE JUDGED Unlike some sims, which more sions you fly play a crucial role in Captain Pennington survived closely simulate the arcade expeyour side's success. But they're not on skill, nerve and the awesome rience than the flying one, Falcon hard-wired. Each result affects the 3.0 features a depth of play overall war effort-and determines that almost rivals real your next mission. Succeed For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). "


"01993 Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. All rights reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. and go on to hit the enemy in his Go head-to-head over a modem or media guide to air-to-air combat own backyard. Fail and find the bad with up to six players over a netcalled Art of the Kill to help you guys breathing down your neck. work. It's possible because each fly like an ace. It all starts with FALCON 3.0 VS. MiG-29 Electronic Battlefield Series Falcon 3.0. title works with the others, from The simulation for people who MiG-29 VS FALCON MiG-29 to the upcoming F/A-18 want to fly the not-so-friendly simulation. There's even a multiskies. Electronic Battlefield Series simulations link up. So you don't just choose your mission, you choose your aircraft. Care to fly for the other side, comrade? Spectrum HoloByte Miss-29 FALCON Wa DIVIDISLIV ART KILL THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE CYBER-BATTLEFIELD Choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES The fight of your life. Circle Reader Service #125 "


"B S GUNS IS IQUOR LEVI BABY NEEDS USED ing the law, through mandatory weapon from location to location solving puzzles as qualifications, to visiting actual police \"hang they go, but these are locations right out of outs,\" and dealing with the citizens and scum our childhood memories. Anyone who has of L.A., one finds a remarkable degree of ever read the enticing billboards for tourist work-a-day police realism as a result of Gates' traps will be able to identify with such exotic contributions. Set in a new, enhanced game attractions as the combination alligator farm engine with marvelous digitized backand miniature golf course, or the world's grounds, this game may be more appealing largest ball of twine. To top off the humor, than True Crime television. Let's just be carethe game features some zany (optional) arful out there.... Sierra, IBM and IBM with cade sequences for the eye-hand adept. LuCD-ROM ($69.95 floppy; $79.95 CDSam & Max Hit the Road casArts Entertainment, IBM ($59.95). ROM). Simon the Sorcerer: Start with a spellbook C... IV. Sladowe of Durlase tough, but often illogical puzzles. The game and a large cauldron filled with swamp water. saward-winning is divided into three different sections, but the Mix in a dash of Altered Destiny, add a smidOuest for Glory series will be pleased to know largest and most important one is the Great gen of Levend of Kyrandia. Then, blend in a that Shadows of Darkness, their fourth Quest Undergound Empire itself. Players, as the large portion of The Secret of Monkey Island for Glory game, will soon be out on store unnamed adventurer(ess), must discover the topped off with a hint of Waxworks and mix shelves. This latest title, an unusual combinareason behind the disappearance of the popuwell. The result? Simon the Sorcerer, a wacky, tion of the animated adventure and role-playlace of West Shanbar. Both the floppy disk tongue in cheek quest about an adolescent ing genres, takes gamers to a mythical version of the game and the CD version sport out to save a magical dimension from an evil Transylvanian valley on a quest to rid the land marvelous images and special effects (particuwizard. With humor most closely resembling of evil and face the Dark One himself. Prior Tarly when played with the Reel Magic board that of LucasArts' Monkey Island, Simon the to that encounter, however, players will have from Sigma Design), but the CD really Sorcerer features a rich world of tasty puzzles to survive a realm filled with the undead, shines with an excellent original score perwraiths, vampires and grotesque monsters formed by an actual, rather than synthesized, orchestra. Activision, IBM, IBM with CDJogon ROM ($79.95). KUKUTY Sam & Max Hit the Road: LucasArts had to change their philosophy about interfaces in order to make this game work. Sam & Max are two talking animal detectives in the weird and wonderful world of comic artist Steve Purcell. Purcell is the artist that LucasArts taps most often when they need some kind of odd physical comedy, but his comic books are Star Trek: Judgment Rites also noted for a sardonic wit extraordinaire. Quest for Glory IV: Shadows of Darkness Since part of the fun of the comics is being designed to test the wits of the most astute surprised by the witticism of Sam & Max the adventurer while keeping the humor level (including a rabbit reminiscent of the furry talking dog and rabbit, the designers opted turned up to maximum. Attractive graphics, little beast from Monty Python and the Holyno not to use pull-down menus of typed out lifelike animation and a catchy soundtrack Grail). In the role of either a fighter, magic er, magic conversational gambits. Instead, players draw the player into this tale of a boy and his user or thief, the player must fight, conjure or choose the general attitude that Sam and Max dog as they cross dimensions to meet beersteal their way to success. Shadows of Darkness will show in a conversation and the wise swilling trolls, werefrogs, a company starved features an improved icon bar with more remarks cumble out faster than BBs from an swampling, and more. Playing Simon the Soravailable options, an upgraded arcade combat overturned carton. In addition to presenting cerer is guaranteed to bring a touch of joy to system, and the ability to import one's hero the largest characters placed on-screen in a the holidays. Activision, IBM ($49.95). from previous games or begin anew. Three LucasArts graphic adventure, the game feaStar Trek: ludement Rites Once again it's skill levels allow gamers to adjust play to their tures a pop-up interface so that the entire rime to boldly go where no one has gone liking in this adventure designed to provide a screen is used for animation. In graphic adbefore. Interplay's sequel to their first Star unique blend of dark suspense and light huventure tradition, Sam & Max are direcred Trek adventure, Judgment Rites, is like its mor. Audio and graphics are traditional Sierra predecessor, with eight episodes in the tradiquality, employing a style that lends interesttion of the classic television series. Each epiing substance to this supernatural game sode consists of a specific mission requiring world. Quest for Glory IV: Shadows of Darkness the usual dose of puzzle-solving in order to looks to be another award winner. Sierra, progress. Further, all eight episodes are part IBM ($69.95). of one overarching plot which becomes inReturn to Zork: As previewed in CGW creasingly apparent as the player reaches the #112, the familiar environs of the Great Unkalk to Look at Oren Move Frog Consuine Place up Close Use game's conclusion. Space combat also plays derground Empire have been transported to Talk to Remove Wearche an important role in Judgment Rites, as it did a world of live-action video. The game sports before. Fortunately, though, those \"enterSimon the Sorcerer an innovative pop-up interface and some prising» folks at Interplay have increased Look at Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"WING COMMANDER. PRIVATEER THE WAR AGAINST THE KILRATHI RAGES ON. TO SOME, IT MEANS DEATH, SLAVERY OR DISHONOR... TO OTHERS, IT'S THE CHANCE TO MAKE A QUICK BUCK.  Make your own alliances and choose the life of a pirate, merchant or mercenary. You accept your assignments from the Mission Computers, Mercenary's Guild, Merchant's Guild or the nefarious fixers that inhabit every bar, Customize your ship according to your needs and budget-you can modify weapons, armor and other systems. And you'll need them, because your enemies want more than just a new kill stenciled on their prowthey want your cargo too. Upgrade your ship, from your grandfather's old Tarsus scout to the sleek Centurion fighter or Orion gunship-combat plays a vital role no matter how you decide to earn a living. . Explore a complete universe with more than 50 bases and planets in almost 70 systems-agricultural planets, merchant colonies and mining bases. PRIVATEER WHERE DEALS ARE MADE WITH A HANDSHAKE AND BROKEN BY A VOLLEY FROM A MESON CANNON. ORIGIN. Douglas 92 We create worldse Actual screens may vary A Stand-Alone Game Made in the USA An Electronic Arts Gompany P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX Privateer is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Wing Commander Orlgin, and we create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Copyright  1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. For IBM PC and 100% compatible systems, Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #105 "


"playability by allowing gamers to select a combat difficulty level equal to their space fighting prowess and interest: Federation Cader, Cader Graduate, or Seasoned Veteran. In addition to the elements that made Star Trek: 25th Anniversary so entertaining, are the inclusion of new, detailed artwork, fresh musical scores, more sound effects from the original series and improved game interaction through an enhanced icon interface. Those who enjoyed their initial «trek» with Interplay will certainly find Judgment Rites a nostalgic and entertaining experience, especially so with the digitized voices of the original cast members Kirk, Spock, Bones, Uhura, Sulu, Chekhov and Scotty. Romulan Warbirds, Klingon Battle Cruisers and Elasi Pirates beware! Interplay Productions, Inc., IBM ($59.95). The Beverly Hillbillies: \"Come and listen to my story 'bout a man named Jed, a poor mountaineer barely kept his family fed. And then one day he was shootin' at some food...\" and Capstone stepped into licensing crude. Spoils, that is. Properties, movie rights. Capstone has added yet another license to their stable with the computer rights to Twentieth Century Fox's The Beverly Hillbillies. In this In this new action adventure based upon the movie of the same name (featuring the whole Clampett clan of Jed, Elly May, Jethro and Granny), the player assumes the role of ol Uncle Jed himself. From Bugtussle to Beverly Hills, Jed must take his family from scimmin' GORG BIS Ivoz logo \"Hit him again, Santa he's still wigglin'!\" Nehre volk og Ele . Electronic Reading Land: The first in D.C. Fatty Bear Fun Pack: There is no better True's early learning products series, The Jimi mediator between an aspiring youngster and Learning Experience, Electronic Reading Land a computer than Fatty Bear. This cherubic teaches children 3 to 7 years old how to read. teddy talks in a compelling cartoon whisper Hosted by Jimi, a fully animated learning Hosted by limi ti that kids can't help but listen to. In this guide and partner, this edutainment program incorporates digitized speech (over 500 words), animated graphics, music by Jimi Hendricks and a host of activities designed to make the process of learning to read a fun and exciting experience. Emphasis is placed upon building phonic skills, nurturing reading independence, and developing letter sound correspondence and phonemic awareness. While not up to Sierra's titles in graphic splendor, Electronic Reading Land is still graphically appealing, especially to its target audience. Audio and visual feedback to the learner is effective, emphasizing pronunciation and Fatty Bear Fun Pack spelling skills. An on-line Parents and Teachers Guide completes the package, providing package, he's playing games with the 3-8 year direction and assistance to those directing the old set and interacting in courteous, patient learning process. In all, Electronic Reading and amusing ways at all times. The games Land looks like a fun way to get early readers include Reversi, Tangrams, Go Fish, Lines & hooked on phonics. D.C. True, Ltd., IBM Boxes, and a Paint Set that will have your ($49.95). child experimenting with colors for endless hours. Fatty Bear has always delivered top entertainment value for the dollar, and this little game pack is no exception. Humongous Entertainment, IBM, IBM with CD-ROM, Macintosh and 3DO ($44.95). Kid Keys: New from Davidson & Associates is Kid Keys, the \"Magical Typing Tutor\" that brings the keyboard to life. Unlike many other typing tutorials, Kid Keys was specifically designed with children in mind, employing large, easy to read type and stressing accuracy over speed. Three different activities Electronic Reading Land assist kids to progress from learning key posiThe Beverly Hillbillies in the nearby swamp to swimmin in the cement pond, collecting a heapin' helpin' of inventory items along the way. Incorporating a very simplistic graphic interface, modest VGA graphics, a tolerably passable audio soundtrack and predominantly banal puzzles, The Beverly Hillbillies is definitely a light duty action/adventure romp. Though the neophyte or occasional adventurer may find it his jug of moonshine, serious adventurers should look elsewhere for their requisite dose of questing entertainment. Capstone, IBM ($34.95). Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"Most People Can't See a Single Reason to Try Something Besides SimCity. We See 2000. Coming this Christmas. MAXIS Circle Reader Service #94 "


"IT'S ALL IN > Sources indicate that a rival syndicate has developed a dangerous new computer program, and our research boys want it. Your mission: build Company Agents using cybernetic implants and hi-tech weaponry. Utilizing action, strategy or a lethal mix of the TEAM SELELTLON AGAYAM T two, you can infiltrate COMP PURCHASE fifty remarkably detailed futuristic cities, each 'alive' in real-time. B: To confiscate a copy of Syndicate, visit your local software retailer, or call toll free 1-800-245 4.5 25. Available for the IBM PC and compatibles. & Eliminate the Hooligans. Take control of the city. But expect maximum resistance "


"YOUR HEAD. DATADISK NOW AVAILABLE NEW MISSJONS SUPPORTS NETWORK PLAY NEW WEAPONS @ @ SYNDICATE elite @ ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #63 "


"Move Guess tions to typing smoothly and accurately. Using high resolution VGA graphics, digitized speech and sound effects, «Helping Hands» to show exact finger placement, and entertaining animations, Kid Keys encourages children to learn a skill that will benefit them for the rest of their lives. Davidson & Associates, IBM ($49.95). Lenny's MusicToons. Children young and old alike will be making music and having a blast with this new musical software package from Paramount. Designed to inspire musihree six musical playgrounds filled with animated HILDUR DIODE SSL DELETE I NIRINDE mators) than many animated cartoons, and the overall effect is a delight. Electronic Arts, IBM, IBM with CD-ROM, Macintosh, Macintosh with CD-ROM, 3DO ($49.95). Putt-Putt Goes to the Moon: With even more delightful sounds and animation sequences than its successful predecessor, PuttPutt Goes to the Moon is edutainment with an accent on entertainment. It seems Purr-Purt was visiting the fireworks factory when he reenacted an old line from The Honeymooners («To the moon, Alice!\") because the wrong lever is pulled at the wrong time. It's the right time for gamers, though, because this game teaches cooperation (via a lively animated lunar rover) and introduces a new crop of animated supporting characters that will run Grande MATTINTHAJATI P 33 F1. F2. F4. X F5. 16. HELPIF 10.IRIS 18. MAGIC ESC POINTS: 0 HEHETH: 35 LEVEL: 1 GAME LEUEL: 2 TUUS: 2 Mind Castle: The Spell of the Word Wizard copy of Mathology just doesn't add up. Lawrence Productions, Inc., IBM ($49.95). Mind Castle: The Spell of the Word Wizard: Lawrence Productions have found a more amusing way to take a vocabulary test and, like a swarm of birds, kids will (gaggle] [fly] [Alock) to play it. When one stumbles upon a demented wizard during the game's prologue, it is a quick matter to be turned into a frog and sent on a two hour excursion into proper vocabulary through the five levels of play offered in this game. Each puzzle within the castle takes a pre-set number of minutes and deducts them from the two hour \"clock,» but since the game is not played in real time, youngsters ages cight and up can always consult a dictionary or their parents for grammatical guidance. While the game is not particularly ingenious in story or presentation, it is solid stuff that young wordmongers may flock to. Lawrence Productions, IBM and Macintosh ($59.95). Peter Pan: A Story Painting Adventure. Perhaps the most distinctive in the line of EA*Kids games, Peter Pan: A Story Painting Adventure is a cross between a graphics adventure and exploratory software. The cute little paintbox at the bottom of the screen serves as Putt-Putt Goes to the Moon Mathology cartoon characters that provide gaggles of on-screen antics. All the action begins in Lenny's fun room where almost every item provides some interactive entertainment. Birds fly, fish swim, and Lenny eats sweets while he watches PTV (Penguin TV). Definitely a \"kideriffic» piece of software. Paramount Interactive, IBM with Windows and CD-ROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($59.95). Mathology. It's 500 B.C. and the gods are nor smiling. The evil god Apathy and his minions have led the world into the \"Age of Darkness.\" Now, only a carefully chosen champion can help Zeus thwart the plans of Apathy by learning the «Numbers of Light» and finding the \"Gems of Wisdom\" necessary to bring this evil age to an end. The player as \"chosen one\" must do his or her part to defeat Apathy in this educational math-oriented action-adventure set in ancient Greece. Unfortunately, after releasing a truly brilliant social studies title in The Lost Tribe, Lawrence's Mathology leaves much to be desired. Though the concept of honing math skills in this action style gaming environment does have merit, a clumsy interface and only mediocre presentation make this title's value questionable. Though development of critical thinks ing and mathematical understanding are stressed, they are so obscured by the trappings that one questions the learning benefit to be gained. As it stands, with other quality programs available to encourage youngsters in developing their math skills, picking up a came to get a friends back! through the entire product line. Young children will learn about the solar system and improve their math skills while engrossed in the graphic adventure aspects of this puzzlesolving and exploration game. Humongous Entertainment, IBM, IBM with CD-ROM, Macintosh, 3DO ($54.95). The New Kid on the Block. A collection of interactive poems, The New Kid on the Block brings poetry alive for children ages 6 to 12. Clicking on the various words and phrases results in on-screen antics that coincide with the selected word. Clicking on \"liver\" causes an on-screen youngster to turn a yucky purple. Clicking on the word \"porcupine\" causes a group of porcupines to \"fling» their needles. Seventeen poems by Jack Prelutsky are fcatured in this wacky and occasionally wicked animated poetry book. Children can choose to read the poems themselves or have them read aloud. A \"Let Me Play\" mode allows kids to explore language on a word-by-word basis. included poems are «My Dog, He is an Ugly Dog» and «Forty Performing Bananas.\" Broderbund Software, Inc., IBM with Windows and CD-ROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($39.95). The Selfish Giant: Following Shelley Duvall's Its a Bird's Life, Oscar Wilde's The Selfish Giant arrives as Sanctuary Woods' second Peter Pan: A Story Painting Adventure both an iconic command line interface and help screen. As Peter progresses through the world in a series of beautifully animated sequences, he occasionally runs into problems. Children choose from the animated icons in the paint box to solve puzzles and help Peter out of his difficulties. Game play is simple, the concept is well-executed, the graphics are better drawn (by experienced Hungarian aniPage 52 Computer Gaming World "


"COMMIT TO EXCELLENCE FRONT PAGE SPORTS IT'S MINUS 25 DEGREES WINDS ARE HOWLING AT 45 MPH AND THERE'S TWELVE FEET OF SNOW ON THE GROUND. FOOTBALL ANYONE? your team, call the plays, and watch your players spin, flip, dive and risk career-ending injuries. Front Page Sports: Football Pro. So real, you'll wish you were wearing a helmet. That's right. Football. Yeah, in this weather. What are you a wimp? This is how football was meant to be played. Front Page Sports: Football Pro is the real thing. For the die-hard fan who lives for Sunday afternoons and can't stand the thought of the off-season. You're not just coach for a day. You run the whole league for the whole season with real NFL rosters and stats. You're in charge. You're the coach so you control everything, from designing your own plays to signing free agents and making trades. There's even a college draft! Sub in and out whenever you want. Design uniform colors. This is your chance to prove you can coach your way out of a paper bag. So pick SOCIATION FOOTBALLPRO Available at retail for IBM/compatibles. Or call 1-800-757-7707. Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Officially licensed product of the NFL Players Associaton TM OR ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSED TO DYNAMIX, INC.  1993 DYNAMIX INC. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"title in their l-tales collection of interactive storybooks. Created for children 3 years old and up, The Selfish Giant combines the wellknown fairy tale with the benefits of multimedia—colorful graphics, animation, story narration, fun songs and games. An interactive coloring book, a castle builder, and a face creation activity supplement the story. Sanctuary Woods, IBM with Windows and CDROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($39.95). The Tortoise And The Hare: It's an age-old tale, but it's as fresh as ever in the loving hands of Broderbund's Living Books group. Simon the Crow tells Aesop's tale of the value of hard, steady work over procrastination and hurriedness. The program has two modes: one that reads the book to the child, and one that lets the child explore the dozens of animations sprinkled around cach page of the story. The animation and sound effects are marvelous, and the young reader will find a ton of giggles in all of the point-and-click silliness. Besides encouraging kids to read, the books will help develop written word-to-spoken word associations, as kids can click on individual words in the story to hear them read aloud. For readers ages 3-8. Broderbund, IBM and Mac with CD-ROM ($39.95). tastic Phenomena. Complete with accurate historical data on ancient Roman culture, The Hypnotic Harp will have kids eight and older cheering for the artful adventurers while they confront deadly gladiators, evade savage lions, and compete in a chariot race, all from the safety of their computer desk. Sanctuary Woods, IBM with Windows and CD-ROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($39.95). Video Jam: This amazing, easy-to-use program enables kids or grown-ups to make their directorial debut with their own animated mini-movies. Production proteges select from more than 50 cuts in six categories of music including rock, classical, rap, international and others. Then they can audition and hire from more than 40 wacky cartoon charVictor Vector & Yondo: The Last Dinosaur Egg NI INCO KUMI LAIN Video Jam Victor Vector & Yondo: The Last Dinositu Egg: The second installment in the Victor Vector & Yondo series of I-ventures, The Last Dinosaur Egg continues the interactive comic book adventures of our hero Victor Vector and his faithful pooch Yondo. As field agents of The Museum of Fantastic Phenomena, this digital duo is given the task of traveling through time in search of ancient, eerie artifacts. The current assignment: save the dinosaurs from extinction by visiting the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous eras, and retrieving the last dinosaur egg. There are, however, those who wish to stop these heros from acheiving their goals. In addition to dealing with enormous, deadly creatures of the past, Victor & Yondo must also escape the clutches of arch-rival RAM Axis. Will the villain prevail? Will the last dinosaur egg be saved? Will Victor meet the gorgeous Delta Mode, a beautiful female time traveler? Tune in next week. Sanctuary Woods, IBM with Windows and CD-ROM and Macintosh with CDROM ($39.95). Victor Vector & Yondo: The Hypnotic Harp: The Hypnotic Harp is Sanctuary Cuary Woods' third I-venture in the Victor Vector Yonde series, and it offers yet more interactive comic book action as Victor and Yondo head back to the exciting days of Nero's Rome. Of course, there won't be time for fiddling on this mission as our intrepid heros seek to recover Nero's harp for The Museum of Fanin old woman lived in the cottage with her cat and her ben. After three weeks and no eggs, she turow Ure Ugly Duckling out. 11 The Ugly Duckling acters-animals, frontier westerners, stoneage rockers, ghouls, sea creatures, etc. Next, grab one of the 27 Hanna-Barbera-styled background scenes: tribal village, western town, moonscape, underwater world, haunted houses, and a selection of wild phantasmagoric sets with undulating light shows. With music, actors and scene selected, directors head into the studio to \"film\" action with casy control over movement, props and \"magic\" special effects. A setting even directs characters to move to the beat. After filming, characters directors can save their work to play it back for friends and family. The program includes five sample videos to give kids an idea of what they can create. Video Jam is an adorable, entertaining creativity tool that kids 8 and up should take to like little Fellinis. Teacher's Editions are also available. Electronic Arts, IBM ($49.95). Word Tales. Milo, a child-friendly alien, has landed with one goal in mind-teach children ages 4 to 7 how to read. With a focus on initial letter sounds and vocabulary building, Word Tales offers entertaining animations and music combined with interactive fun and games to reinforce the learning process. Simple enough for children to use on their own, Word Tales is filled with fun and surprises. Time Warner Interactive Group, IBM with Windows and CD-ROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($59.99). The Ugly Duckling. Hans Christian Anderson's \"The Ugly Duckling\" has been a childpleaser for many generations. Now, children can enjoy Shannon Gilligan's beautifully animated computer adaptation. Packaged with a cute stuffed duck, The Ugly Duckling offers children hours of entertainment while helping them develop their reading skills. In addition to over 500 animations and sounds, three songs have been provided for sing-along purposes. From the Ugly Duckling itself to marching ants to flying books and slithering sea monsters, The Ugly Duckling is all it's \"quacked» up to be and a fine first effort for this young company. Morgan Interactive, IBM with Windows and CD-ROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($49.95). Soon the Hare was way ahead. He couldn't even seo the Tortoise. The Hare was getting very hungry, so he wont to find something to eat The Tortoise And The Hare Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"scova eva_3 gent of configuration options will keep galactic commanders busy for eons. Merit Software, IBM ($69.95). Dungeon Hack: The latest first person perspective CRPG from SSI is Dungeon Hack, a Forgotten Realms AD&D product using 2nd Edition rules. Unlike most first person perspective dungeon romps, Dungeon Hack is of the single character variety. Also unlike similar products, this game is highly customizable. A random dungeon generator enables gamers to generate countless dungeon levels, and so while the goal is always the same (finding and destroying the evil overlord), cach game is unique. Gamers can specify the number of dungeon levels, the difficulty setting, and the number of monsters, traps, puzzles and other surprises. Each dungeon also produces a seed number that can be given to friends so that they can generate the same dungeon. Monster totals and \"HAH! Missed me!\" player skills tallied at the end of the game allow for dungeon competitions among the more competitive players. Featuring fully animated 256-color VGA graphics, auto-mapBloodnet: The Prince of Darkness is back Command Adventures: Starship: Will thereping with printable maps, and major sound and, of course, he wants your blood. But he still be heroes in the year 2127 Galactic card support, Dungeon Hack is sure to spawn wouldn't mind sucking your data, too. Two Standard Time? Will the galaxy be open for a revived interest in dungeon hacking and literary genres, gothic vampire tales and cyexploration and exploitation? Or, will pirates slashing. DreamForge Intertainment/SSI, berpunk, collide against the dark and surreal rule the spaceways? Command Adventures: IBM ($59.95). backdrop of 21st Century New York. Players Starship has the answer to these nagging quesof this role-playing adventure will jack-in to tions and more in a game specifically designed BRESSOR the cyberdeck of Ransom Stark, a down-andfor those who prefer their CRPG dishes out freelance hack who becomes enmeshed in served up cold (remember, in space no one a vampire-lord's plot to control cyberspace can hear you freeze). The Galactic Wars are and the world. Cyberpunk role-players may now over, but much danger still awaits those fry their werware over the rich character gen bold enough to traverse the distant reaches of cration system (like Ultima IV, it uses the space. Yet, all that's required to seek one's answer to \"ethical dilemmas\" to determine a fortune is a sturdy ship, a capable crew, and a player's character), extensive skill system, and ZIDARSTEIN broad array of future-tech toys (decks, moddies, smart drugs, bio-weapons). The graphDungeon Hack ics, including the odd interpretation of Interplay 10th Anniversary Anthology: Incyberspace, are wonderfully bizarre, and the terplay celebrates its «Tin Anniversary\" with fiction has a very hard edge. Pop the noota silver disc of 10 games-one from each year ropics, cowboys, break out the dog-eared of their publishing history. The disc has some Gibson & Sterling, and prepare yourselves for real classics, including two CGW Hall of what might be the best simulation of our M STER13 Dark Future this side of Chiba City. MicroEL CREILLES Fame games. The much-loved Wasteland MOOS Prose, IBM ($69.95). transports players to the post-holocaust deCommand Adventures: Starship serts of the American Southwest. Heavy firepower and judicious use of an excellent skill good blaster at one's side. Featuring outsystem are the only hedge against becoming standing CD quality audio (with up to cight vulture chow. The multiple solutions of puzdigital sound effects played simultaneously), zles and the detailed story of Dragon Wars first rate graphics and animation, and a rich earned it a special place in role-players' hearts. blend of strategy, action and role-playing eleAlso, Bard's Tale will provide enough hardments, Command Adventures: Starship offers core hack n' slash and devious dungeon laythe role-player an atmospheric and engaging outs to keep the RPGer in the dark all winter experience. Real-time space and ground comlong. Among the other products are Star bat, multi-layered parallax scrolling, random Trek: 25th Anniversary, Lord of the Rings, Bloodnet universe generation, and a massive continCastles, Battle Chess, Mindshadow (an all-text P OSTED DI Wia BALAPOSTELE Deck Enter Cyberspace Deciting unit December 1993 Page 55 "


"ITLL BLUR YOUR VISION. MAKE YOU DIZZY. WARP YOUR MIND. AND ITS PERFECTLY LEGAL. Sid AS VOOns "


"en vanwege It's the story of a demented rodent and a twisted feline, Sid The Mouse and AI E. Cat, who splat, crash and blast their way through over 80 loony Rube Goldberg-style puzzles and over 75 mind-bending Toons parts including hairdryers, hat pins, and anvils. Welcome to Sid and Al's Incredible Toons\" Following in the footsteps of its award-winning predecessor, The Incredible Machine, Toons seems harmless enough. But once the boulders 2 start rolling, anvils start falling, and dynamite starts blasting, you know you're in for * a sick ride. With four different levels of difficulty, there's something for everyone: Cake Walk. All Braun/No Brain. Really Really Hard. Or Loony Bin. There's even a Home Toons Mode so you can make, Save and trade your maniacal your maniacal We cartoons with all the your deranged friends. And if Sid and Al start getting out-ofcontrol, just flush 'em. Or, when the situation calls for drastic measures, nuke 'em. 99.000R Sid & Al's Incredible Toons.\" You couldn't have more fun if you dropped an anvil on your own head. MIMMITTEDET vnamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Available at retail for IBM/compatibles. Or call 1-800-326-6654. OR ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSED TO DYNAMIX, INC. WINDOWS IS A TRADEMARK OF MICROSOFT CORPORATION.  1993 Dynamix Inc Circle Reader Service #117 "


"adventure), and Tass Times At Tone Town (a very hip graphic adventure that received too little attention in its day.) This is an excellent value for those who want to fill their game library with classic designs of days gone by. Interplay, IBM with CD-ROM. Nomad: Part of a wave of action/strategy/adventure games based on space trading, Nomad places the gamer in the position of a hand-picked Earth Special Intelligence agent who has been volunteered for a Top Secret Level One mission. It seems that Earth is at a significant disadvantage. Ever since making contact with extra terrestrials, Earth has been on a technological slide downward, being unable to manufacture starfaring spacecraft. However, with the recent discovery and rewill not be an easy one. Gamerek, Inc., IBM ($39.99). Ultima VIII: Pagan: It's the land that's named \"Pagan,\" not what's going to happen to the Avatar. Or is it? In the latest game in computerdom's most epic series, Lord British removes the Avatar from Britannia proper and presents an entirely new series of challenges. The characters are larger, animation is thcir ultimate nemesis, the God of Snakes. Those who enjoyed the previously mentioned titles should enjoy this light-duty CRPG. Seasoned veterans should let this title slither by. Virgin Interactive Entertainment, IBM ($29.99). 916 Guard Room Whatare you doing here? Looking around Ich wing a nice little look Beer Hell, just malto cure we don't catch you talking to the guy in the shackdes. He's a thief Warriors of Legend Nomad The Shadow of Yserbius: This classy comeUltima VIII: Pagan on for the popular ImagiNation Network more fluid (using the most \"cels» per move(INN) takes the fantasy role-playing games of ment in the business). The emphasis has Yserbius and Twinion and drops them into shifted from a party-of-characters mentality one box. As far as the genre goes, these gan to an individual-in-conflict mentality, and offer standard fare, although the rate at which the combat has more of an action feel than a players carn gold and experience points is traditional CRPG atmosphere. Origin Sysdownright Carter-esque in its excesses. No tems, Inc., IBM ($79.95). matter, the object of this game is to delve into Warriors of Legend: Possessing the look ten levels of the off-line game, and then use and feel of Virgin's earlier releases Spirit of and feel of Virgin's earlier releases Spirit of the one month, free usage certificate to exthe one Excaliburand Conan The Cimmerian, Warriplore the on-line game. Players will then disors of Legend focuses less on the strategic cover what real computer role-playing is all element and more on role-playing. The same about, as they team up with other members episodic format is employed, offering seven from around the country in live, interactive segments of play as one's band of four charsessions. There's nothing like slayin' monacters (a warrior, thief, wizard, and archer) sters and grabbin' gold with good friends. sets out to battle the vile Black Circle and Sierra, IBM ($59.95). pair of a crashed alien vessel, Earth now has vessel, Earth now has the ability to launch advanced intelligence gathering missions. More than a role-playing title alone, Nomadoffers up an additional mix of action and strategy elements in the tradition of epic star exploration games of the past (Starflight and Star Control 2). Don your helmet and strap in for action. This mission sa og Caesars World Of Boxing: Imagine a game with managerial strategy, customized boxing characters, rotoscoped boxing action, and video-taped film footage of ring girls between rounds. If it sounds a lot like Data East's ABC's Wide World of Sports Boxing with a few more bells and whistles, that's because it is essentially the same design. Players get to design their boxers, promote individual fights through a full boxing career, and learn how to handle the most devastating opponent ever faced by a sports professional—the press. Philips, CD-I ($49.98). Electronic Sports Planner, College Football Edition. This intriguing little piece of software helps college football fans keep track of their sport from week-to-week. It includes four basic features: a game tracker that keeps a running total for selecting winning teams; a \"StatsChecker» that presents a statistical database of the 1992 season; an office pool simulator which makes customized charts Entre SA \"Shut up and PLAY BALL!\" Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"WHICH ON-LINE SERVICE HAS REAL PEOPLE PLAYING ALL THE TIME? ROERS MS-DOS: MODEM REQUIRED Shawnee Golden Maia Jessie Eriond MAGINATION 32 GOPReptile JohnPH Ko tkisser Golden Options VIRTUAL COMMUNITY & CYBERSPACE THEME PARK Whisper? Options Golden Goldenlaia. Option Options HEY FOLKS! EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO GETON-UNEK IN THIS BOX WE EVEN PAY FOR YOUR FIRST $20 OF PUNI The Sierra Network mana: 891 magic! Su casts Poison Cloud! Cantankerous Human Wizard casts Death Darts on the party affecting White Haut Kender. Sifu, Sinbad and causing 35 danage! Cantanherous Hunan Wizard casts Backfire on Sinbad! Engaging Combat! THE IMAGINATION NETWORK! Call 1-800-743-7721 for details on Imagination, or see one of the retailers listed below and we'll see you on-line. Chatting with your friends and staying up all night playing games is fun. But have you ever done it on-line, and in real-time? Well, now you can with Imagination available at your favorite software retailer. Inside this box you will find your passport to all the adventure and new friends that are waiting for you on-line. All you need to get on-line is at least a 386 computer, VGA monitor, 2400 baud modem, and Imagination which is now available from your software retailer. It already comes with a $20 usage credit that gives you plenty of time to explore your new world for FREE. Imag Nation THE IMAGINATION NETWORK Imagination Is Available At These Fine Stores. EGGHEAD. SOFTWARE Babbage's <electronice boutique D Incredible Universe SOFTVVAHEETC Computer City TM indicates a trademark of The ImagiNation Network Code Number 451.  The Imagination Network All Rights Reserved "


"and weekly rallies and prints them out; plus a schedule of the entire 1993 college football season. Bright Ideas, IBM ($19.95). Firestone Country Club Links Championship Course. Akron, Ohio, sight of the legendary Rubber Bowl, is also the sight of a premier stop on the PGA Tour-Firestone Country Club's South Course. This course, the subject of the latest SVGA championship course disk for the Links golfer, is presently the home of the NEC World Series of Golf. The brainchild of millionaire industrialist Es Tev = IM . 889. 8. Rica e nka Suki . Bakhtaran Racey Gal 3 Trigeminal 4 Royal Flesh a \"CHECK, MATE!\" Quarter Pole 15000 CF Harvey Firestone, Firestone Country Club has been carefully recreated for desktop golfers, featuring the rich colors of October foliage and the challenge of one of the world's most demanding courses. However, make sure you take a sweater along. Ohio's chilly in December! Firestone Country Club, the sixth Super VGA championship course, requires Links, Links 386 Pro or Microsoft Golf. Access Software, Inc., IBM ($29.95). Quarter Pole. Tired of fighting the crowds at the racetrack? Don't like the fragrant aroma wafting from the stables? Is betting at the track just too much of a gamble? If so, then Quarter Pole is possibly one's best option for becoming a hot bettor on the horses with the least personal risk and discomfort in volved. Employing a first-person perspective interface similar to that of adventure games, rather than the usual menu screens, Quarter Pole brings a unique outlook to horse racing not available in other offerings. One can visit Big Al's Tip Booth, the Auction Tent, the Betting Window and the Grandstand. In an effort to build their fortunes, up to 10 bettors can get in on the action at one time. Play trifectas, exactas and daily doubles without risk. Players can even own and manage a stable if they desire to do so, buy and sell horses, and enter them in the races. Quarter Pole brings thoroughbred racing home for the holidays. In fact, it's open every day of the year, including Christmas. MicroLeague Interactive Software, IBM ($49.95). Casino Gambler Kit. When it says Villa open new offices, build/expand facilities; the Crespo on the label, there is usually a good Marketing Department to plan advertising gambling game inside. This time, however, campaigns and media buys; the Laboratory to there are five. This «kit» is a combination of design new technologies; and the Factory to five of their Coffee Break Series gambling ger workers moving on getting different modgames and include Dr. Wong's Jacks+Video els to market. Impressions, IBM ($59.95). Poker, Casino Craps, Duckus Roulette, Dr. Thorp's Mini-Blackjack and Ruckus Poker. Each is a quick game requiring virtually no documentation, yet most have a surprising amount of depth and gambling savvy. For the gambler this holiday, stay away from the Christmas Club savings account the Casino Gambler Kit is a safer bet. Villa Crespo, IBM ($49.95). Detroit: The high concept of this game is \"Automotive Tycoon.» Gamers capitalize an automobile company in any part of the Fantasy Empires world, not just Detroit) in 1908. From a graphic overview screen that looks like a map Fantasy Empires. Falling into the same of the company's factory complex and serves category of such titles as Populous II and as the main menu, gamers move the different Civilization, SSI's Fantasy Empires transports areas of their concern: the Administration the player into a world of mystical kingdoms Building to hire/fire employees, negotiate where one's goal is to build an empire with wages and make job assignments, as well as the help of a computerized Dungeon Master. Based upon the Dungeons & Dragons game LAKE PAGELOADEHOREONID world, Fantasy Empires employs a unique BRENTS digital mediator who guides the gamer through all clements of play, making sure he LEAR SPRING 8B8BY or she complies with all the official D&D AIR COOLED rules. Up to five \"rulers» can play at one OO time-human or computer controlled. ExPARAL TIRE tensive character interaction employing advanced artificial intelligence provides for challenging diplomatic encounters, while commanding multiple troop types and interDetroit acting with fantastic races is facilitated HAND BRAKE SECONDO HENDEHIELD TIFRESSION CARE 1985 HARE FROTOTYPE CAR Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"MORPHING IS THE SHADOWCASTER'S STRENGTH... AND HIS ACHILLES' HEEL. The furious pace never falters in Shadowcaster, the unique smooth-scrolling, point-ofview action/adventure from ORIGIN. You'll fly, swim and run through indoor and outdoor environments including dungeons, caverns, castles, mincs, volcanoes and underwater caves. And when being human is simply not good enough, incredible morphing technology transforms you into other worldly creatures before your cyes.  Each of your six metaforms (eline, floating eye, gremlin, frogman, flamc lizard and terramental) unleashes new powers and reveals new weaknesses.  Straightforward play mechanics allow you to master the basics quickly and concentrate on the combat and visual puzzles that keep things moving at breakneck speed. Realistic realms feature the most outstanding 3-D art animations and texture maps in any point-of-view game, while digitized sound effects and a dynamic sound track surround you with the sensations of an intensely real world. EIDOTE DD FOR Designed by Raven Software Actual screens may vary # ORIGIN. We create worlds Look for the Shadowcaster Clue Book: Iluminations! An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Shadowcaster is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc Raven is a trademark of Raven Software Origin ond We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Available at a software retaller near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"through a user-friendly interface. Real-time combat, from an overhead perspective, cffectively draws the player into the action. Sending heroes on special quests and building up fortifications rounds out play. Digital sound effects, atmospheric music, and attractive 256-color graphics complement this highly playable package. Strategic Simulations, Inc., IBM ($59.95). Logos Bible Crosswords. One can test their Bible knowledge against fun and challenging puzzles by Terry Hall and Tyndale House Publishers in Logos Bible Crosswords. Two hundred crosswords can be solved on the term future of a city. Now, players can design highways and freeways to alleviate the stress of ordinary avenues. Players have a lot more options for clean power plants. Finally, cities do not have to have that square gridiron look. New ways of placing zones and the ability to place roads at a diagonal mean that players can even design historical urban areas like Washington and Paris. Maxis Software, Macintosh (IBM in '94) ($69.95). with an entry point and an exit. The Nanotank must cross the board while ensuring that the tank is connected to a powered trace.\" The pathway is littered with odd components—switches, diodes, capacitors, relays, Optocouplers, teleporters and the player must manipulate these components, occasionally using solder to repair broken parts, to make clear the pathway to victory. One doesn't need an Electrical Engineering degree, but that kind of problem-solving smarts would sure help. Twin Dolphin Games, IBM with Windows ($39.95). Positronic Bridge. Even though it uses a high resolution interface, Positronic Bridge's strength is not in its visual presentation. Its strong suit is in its artificial intelligence and ability to challenge gamers with playing skills from novice to master. The program tunes itself to the user's skill level so that as the player's ability increases, so does that of the game; it more or less learns as the player does. Unlike many similar games, Positronic Bridge does not allow the computer to cheat-it can't look at the player's cards to make its decision. In addition, a copy of the best-selling booklet The Basics of Bridge by Montgomery Coe is included. A practice L131 Logos de Crosswarts Calle Fake A Sm Hints Help BUSBOY X Completa 149 Sa Epurt. T o EL MICURE TOE HDE ARAB DDE h a in for you wounds De UBAPUCA TEOT Tome_ 201314) DERBEELAHI 12 Tonebudete WE RUE VE 12 Sabalet Tobiasrden Enos BMELD ELEGIDITET MAAR NOGLE in a couco Where toode DAW LESS ALGUM 1 H B T N P 5 6 C E HDD Em A DEIRE am ADEDOS EL TID F 11) Logos Bible Crosswords Te pred options Disaster Windows Debug Neaper Positronic Bridge Socrates Chess 3.0. If one is looking for the world's strongest PC chess program\" with advanced artificial intelligence, search display (showing the computer's thought process on each move), a user friendly design, common function hot keys, and extensive handicapping features, Socrates may provide the perfect challenge. The culmination of over 15 years of development, Socrates 3.0 (the latest version of this chess program-version 2.0 was employed as the engine for Kasparov's Gambit) combines state-of-the-art artificial intelligence with an easy-to-use interface. While it will not win any awards for its Spartan graphic and audio design, Socrates is the only chess program to achieve a plus score against human Grand Masters in an established tourscreen or in the printed form. If you are running Logos Bible Software (sold separately), Logos Bible Crosswords cross reference the puzzle clues to the appropriate verse in the Bible. The puzzles can be gauged to one's skill level with difficulty settings, and single or whole-word hints are but a click away. Puzzles may be saved in progress, colors may be customized, and a special font, Scribbles, is included in both True Type and Adobe Type Manager formats for that penciled-in look. Logos Research Systems, IBM with Windows ($39.00). Nanotank. In this bizarre Windows puzzle game, the player controls a microscopic probe as it traverses the treacherous innards of a computer system in search of an evil virus. The 100 levels are set up like circuit boards NACLENGE Taht A Dreat Crotond Score Seved Easy de ACROSIS 16 Thi n 17. Shoulder wraps 14 Yarald + Ca 4 HP HP Tooted 15. Delike brew 16. Minor task 0 Cnbarcot DOWE There at Landing SimCity 2000 mode and built-in help keys allow the player to polish their game. Two versions are available: Version 1, the basic version, and the Competitor Version, which features several bidding variables and additional scoring systems. ReadySoft, Inc., IBM ($49.95 Version 1, $99.95 Competitor Version). SimCity 2000. SimCity 2000 is an exponentially improved version of one of the most successful computer games ever. Players still have the power to build a metropolis from the ground up, but now gamers cannot make decisions without considering the political and economic implications. Rapid transit requires more consideration of actual logistics cual logistics (placing transit stations at appropriate sites and deciding when they are underground and when they are elevated). Education (schools and funding) plays a major role in the longTake A Break! Crosswords, Volumes I & II nament. Excellence, however, doesn't come cheap. Players will need a 386 or 486 PC with 2 486/50MHz CPU and 4MB RAM recommended for tournament level play, not to mention the cost of the program itself. Machiavelli Designs, Inc., IBM ($149.95, $129.95 limited time special introductory price). Nanotank Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"Close encounters nightly. There's only one way to find out. Sign up and meet us in Federation II available only on GEnie. For the cold reaches of space, there's an awful lot of chummy people here. That's because Federation II isn't one of those shoot-the-ship computer games. This is a universe full of people. Real people, online, working with other real people in real time: busily building their fortunes, planets...nay, empires. And they'd love to throw some work your way so you can do the same. Of course, there's a lot of bargaining, buying and bulling that goes into it. We're social creatures, after all. But if you're one of those special individuals who understands that creating an empire is ever so much more interesting than destroying aliens, maybe you can thrive in our space. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 81 N or 71E half duplex (loxal echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt,enter XTX99225, NIGHTLY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Federation II GEnie multi-player games IS S et Herleri BOLAR ORBIT 100% Organic Opponents. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Circle Reader Service #73 "


"COMBA JUNGLE DESERA SIANGLE BAT BASI NOOYM AMIR 2013 KARITATE VICE CONSUS E DATATRITE. MATERIER BE WIRUS. Take A Break! Crosswords, Volumes I & II: Designed for use in a Windows environment, this exercise in alphabetic aerobics comes courtesy of Dynamix. With over 750 puzzles broken down into several sizes and complexity levels, there is enough here to keep one busy long enough to get their money's worth for this product. While an animated faery is your host, the animations and voice features also make their contributions to what is, essentially, a newspaper substitute for most of us (however, since these puzzles can be printed out, one can still solve them in the paper and pencil medium). The intuitive interface comes in particularly handy when playing against the clock for bonus points, and the inclusion of an auto-check feature and on-line hints will help serve the crossword-impaired among us. Dynamix, IBM with Windows and Macintosh ($49.95). Unnatural Selection: The premise to this \"From the Halls of Montezu-uma ...\" game could be the plot to the inevitable JuCarriers at War II: Covering fleet carrier two games in the one package: a strategic operations from 1936-1946, this sequel to game featuring divisions maneuvering SSG's popular re-release of Carriers at War through weekly turns, and a grand tactical includes player-suggested feature enhancewargame played in real time with a miniatures ments and additions, plus enhanced artificial feel to it. Although the game was released opponents using SSG's WarRoom Al system. with an historical novel and video cassette, we Scenarios include Plan Orange (the clash exexpect that only those who can overlook its MIG MET perts expected between the U.S. and Japan in historical shortcomings will have the where1936) which features plenty of battleships withal to discover that an enjoyable game lies and only a few carriers, several covering a within the box. Impressions, Amiga and IBM hot mom more active British fleet to oppose the Japa($69.95). Unnatural Selection nesc advance into Southeast Asia, plus others covering those late war kamikaze battles, inrassic Park 2. Genetic engineers have so percluding an apocalyptic battle during the Alfected their art that they have unlocked the lied invasion of Japan in Operation Olympic. secrets of life. Of course, absolute power corSSG, IBM ($84.95). rupts, and one of the engineers takes the Ed Grabowski's The Blue & The Gray: modern archetypal role of Evil Scientist While not deliberately riding on the coattails breaking away from the group and using the of the Ted Turner cpic Gettysburg, Imprestechnology to engineer behemoth reptiles sions is surreptitiously here to feed the waxing and she's got no amusement parks in her interest in the men and history of the AmeriE8 El Cld business plan. To combat this rapidly breedcan Civil War. Like the film Gettysburg, the ing menace, the player is called upon to fight game The Blue & The Gray will not slake che Alolan reptiles with reptiles. With a fully stocked thirst of the true devotee of this era; it was Genetic Engineering laboratory, the player designed with an emphasis on pure entertainThe Blue & The Gray must create his or her own reptile army byment rather than historical accuracy. In ef Gettysburg: In a well-timed but largely cobreeding creatures for selected traits. Once fect, The Blue The Gray is a clean, playable incidental release with the epic film of the the perfect army has been assembled, the play game system which serves as an enjoyable, same name, this Windows Wargame has got shifts to an island battlefield. The player loads low-complexity wargame. There are actually plenty of options and light-weight gaming up transport helicopters with creatures and charm. Featuring brigade level units and time supplies, and then drops the goods at strategic 356 Filo Fio Dining Central increments that can either be ticked off locations on the island. Through careful manually or let run at various speeds, there breeding and skillful use of behavior modifyare plenty of gauges to monitor for each unit ing drugs, the player's army may eventually (morale, fatigue, ammo, etc.), but commandoutbreed and outfight the enemy. Claymaers have little to worry about besides issuing tion clips of the reptiles in action adds a general orders. Artillery units are almost a unique dash of graphic pizzazz to this odd and sub-game unto themselves (fortunately there compelling title. Maxis, IBM ($49.95). aren't too many to keep track of) as one sets their direction, firing trajectory and ammuCarriers at War II nition type. Easily learned and quick playing, SPECO STRENGTH STAMINA SEPSE DE 1801 WD 3th ust Harpers Ferry O Por More FM Ord M1336 GOLD AG Alla Delt! Furopewell F Enga O AL W R ER Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"Beyond fantasy. Beyond legends. If you've been looking for the mother of all Sign up now: fantasy role-playing games, we know where 1. Set communication software for 8IN or 71E you can find it. half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 Online, in GemStone III\"M baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. This is no kill-the-dragon-thank-you-very Immediately upon connection, enter HHH much computer game. And it goes far beyond 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99224, FANTASY any of the other so-called legends in the online then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit arena. card ready. In the U.S., you may use your Here in GemStone III, you're joining real checking account number. (There is a $2 monthpeople, in real time for your online quests. ly fee for all checking accounts.) For more Some of the best role players and game masters information in the U.S. or Canada, in the country all meeting together in a call 1-800-638-9636. vast and constantly evolving world, rich with fascinating characters and demanding adventures. It's a place you fps can play forever. GemStone III\": GemStone III makes every other fantasy Shadow World game history. And your friends are on already here. So sign onto GEnie today, and welcome home to GemStone III. GEnie multi-player games GemStone Ill is a trademark of Simutronics Corp. Shadow World is a registered trademark of Iron Crown Enterprises, Ine. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Optional graphic front-end program available for IBM PC only. 100% Organic Opponents. SIMUTRONICS Circle Reader Service #74 "


"Gettysburg File Safetch Display Command Status Game Onges ecca ferro nnnnnn Britain ale the provinces under player control; to make management decisions regarding the training BES Schilfm of troops and assignment of personnel; and 2 XE B 494 to use terrain to their advantage in the tactical arat battle sequences. Unlike its predecessors, SA RTK3 has gotten away from the clunky keypad interface that drove many gamers crazy with redundant input. Now, a smooth mouse-driven interface keeps the game moving, and eye-pleasing VGA graphics bring it up to date. Koei Corporation, IBM ($59.95). Third Reich PC: Where, oh where has Gettysburg Avalon Hill been? While the story behind the Victory at Sea Gettysburg is a quaint wargaming diversion production of an IBM version of their popuship, politics and logistics are emphasized lar Third Reich boardgame is a long one, for the Windows wargamer. Swfte, IBM for with only a minimal amount of complexity, suffice it to say that the old Amiga version Windows ($49.95). code was completely scrapped and a new The action is punctuated with video clips of Harpoon II: With a war room look to the team has put together a wholly new product the fighting and the sounds of war. A full raphics and a great gaming tradition to build for the PC. While not based on the recently 100,000 word \"book\" of hypertext is avail-awaited sequel to what many released advanced version of the boardgame, able to players who want to access the history Third Reich PC still rocks with all of the bells and make their play a truly holistic experipacked with years of player suggestions and and whistles of this classic WWII European ence. The monster\" computer wargame of technological improvements over its illustriTheater strategic-level wargame. Units are this holiday season, Victory at Sea is will make ous predecessor. Features include SVGA hifleers, air forces, corps and armies that mafleers, air forces. corns and armies that ma a big splash. Three-Sixty Pacific, IBM and res graphics, military vector-style maps of the neuver around the hex grid map through Macintosh ($69.95). entire world (modeled down to two meters quarterly turns. Economics are emphasized as per screen), a complete weather model, and Walls of Rome: If you haven't taken a look global naval conflicts in 15 scenarios. The a Mindcraft's Siege games because they're set database has been enlarged and graphically in a fantasy world, or because you heard some enhanced, and there is a logistics model that bad things about their speed and Al, it may even includes aerial refueling. Aimed toward be time to reconsider the system. The Siege higher-end machines (at least a 386/33, but a Germany engine has been significantly improved and 486 with 8MB of RAM is encouraged), the brought into a historical setting. Romans, interface has been redesigned to the point Greeks, Parthians, Celts, Gauls-chose your where the design team says «It's not Harpoon France command and then choose to attack or defor Windows. It's Windows for Harpoon.\" fend dozens of historically accurate and beauThree-Sixty Pacific, IBM with Windows Se tifully rendered cities of the ancient world. ($69.95). New game features include campaign games Romance Of The Three Kingdoms III: Third Reich PC in addition to individual battles, increased Combining elements of strategy gaming, engineering options (undermining, sicge role-playing and wargaming, Koci's historical nations must commit their resources in battowers, battering rams), and a more extensive series of games (Nobunaga's Ambition, Rotles of maneuver and attrition along the tles of maneuver and attrition along the game editor/scenario builder. The command mance of the Three Kingdoms and Bandit Kings game's three \"fronts.\" Though the game has interface has been reworked, and the game of Ancient China) have been a welcome been delayed while the artificial opponent is seems to run faster. It also appears as though change of pace for gamers ever since they being perfected, Avalon Hill hopes to make reached U.S. shores. Like its predecessors, the Al has become more savvy, attacking their splashy return to computer gaming by RTK3 requires gamers: to make economic many different points and adjusting to the this Christmas with a spruced up, hot-rodded and diplomatic decisions in order to build up dynamic of the battlefield more quickly. A system that should quiet the skeptics. The great concept may finally be maturing into a Avalon Hill Game Company, IBM ($59.95). EFA.203PISTE good game. Mindcraft, IBM ($59.95). BEEGBAR ESEGELS Victory at Sea: A collaborative effort put options Reports Orders out by the dean of board wargaming, renowned writer James F. Dunnigan, and Three-Sixty Pacific, this epic depicts the vast struggle between the Japanese and the Allies XEGT DER DAN in the Pacific Theater of WWII. The detail leaves no island bypassed. Played in real time, players have the ability to telescope the action (and time scale) up from the highest levels of command, down to an operational perspective. Taking into account huge databases of Harpoon 11 Walls of Rome information compiled by Dunnigan, leadersoa, sorten Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"We don't know from friendly skies. the-loop, look elsewhere. If you're interested in a career, sign on to Air Warrior only on GEnie. You've beat all the flight sims? A furball doesn't raise a sweat anymore? Ten minutes of WWI combat isn't even challenging? Hmm... Maybe you are ready for Air Warrior That is, if you think you can handle the most realistic combat flying there is. Because Air Warrior does more than correctly model 28 different WWII aircraft, complete with spins, stalls and buffeting. It puts you up against other human beings. Online, in real time, for as long as you care to play. That's why Air Warrior attracts the aces. So if you're just looking to do a friendly loopSign up : 1. Set communication software for 8IN or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the Uh=prompt,enter XTX99223, AIRCRAFT then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Air Warrior O CEE GEnie Loo multi-player games ( 209 KESM4L 09 m Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company Graphic interface required and available for selected machines 100% Organic Opponents. corporation Circle Reader Service #75 "


"zo-yarasu painting, gluing and finishing. After making a purchase, an annoying salesman shows the competitive racers on a poster in his trailer. Another poster, this one active, offers access to four racing scenarios with three difficulty levels. The blocky, polygon-filled graphics and crude scenery yield a disappointing driving experience. But inexperienced drivers\" will be challenged to make it through the backroads to the track on time without getting any tickets. Since winning a race yields performance upgrades, the game may have decent replay value. If Backroad Racers, which seems geared for boys aged 8-16, isn't quite your speed, there are two other packages in the Power Modeler series: European Racers, which is now available, and High Tech Aircraft, scheduled for future release. RevellMonogram, Inc., IBM CD-ROM ($69.95). OCHT oo \"Eight tiny reindeer, my foot!\" D GRID Gta EVE Coaster Aces Over Europe: The anxiously awaited improve the armchair jet-jock's game playfollow-up to Damon Slye's Aces Of The Paing. The 165-page soft-cover book is written cific will soon be buzzing the towers of local by Pere Bonanni, an instructor pilot with the software peddlers. Though the interface and National Guard and recognized personality campaign game features are virtually identical among serious sim fans. The well illustrated to previous Dynamix sims (why fix what ain't guide covers basic flight maneuvers and has a broken?!), this is a major revision of the set of tests to drill the reader on lesson comAOTP engine. The most notable improveprehension. The videotape mixes air combat ments are a \"Tall Resolution\" mode (a instruction and actual air combat footage, 320x200 pixel view that gives gamers a larger and will make swell viewing when the family window on the world) and gradient shading is gathered for the holidays. Spectrum (allowing planes to have realistic paint jobs Holo Byte, VCR ($39.95). and fuselage derail). New missions will have gamers setting their bomb sites on bridges, railways, V-1 rocket launchers and radar sites, and a huge arsenal of new planes will have the player fighting or flying: P-51s, -47s, -38s, Spitfires, Mosquitoes, Me109s...and the lisr goes on. While we haven't played with the final, optimized code, it seems that the frame rare will be comparable to Aces of the Pacific with the «1947\" upgrade. Dynamix, IBM, ($69.95). DAMAGE Backroad Racers Power Modeler Coaster: Roller coasters have been around since the early 1900s (earlier if you consider La Marcus Thompson's Switchback Railway, an early coaster predecessor). Loops were later added to increase the thrill of the ride, though in one case, poor loop design resulted in the death of all passengers-their necks were broken, the result of excessive strain. Still, roller coasters became so popular that some 1500 were in use in the U.S. during the Roaring 20s. Today only about 230 coasters dot the countryside in small and large amusement parks. Whether or not one has a coaster nearby, gamers can experience the \"thrill\" of the ride and of coaster design with Disney's Coaster, a roller coaster simulation. Though several pre-made coaster designs are included, the purpose of Coaster is to let the player design his or her own ride, from the ground up, and then test it out. Built-in critics will evaluate one's design as the player views their dream ride from a front row seat. Disney Software, IBM ($24.95). IndyCar Racing: From the pit crew that brought Indy 500: The Simulation to the finish line comes a racing simulation that will redefine state-of-the-art racing sims. From the more detailed physics underlying every aspect of the model, through instant replays 03.00 102001 Backroad Racers Power Modeler: Combining a Revell model with a CD-ROM, this unique package delivers instructional demos with a racing simulation. Regardless of model included, the program offers a choice of \"buying\" and racing one of four muscle cars on the lot: '71 Hemi Barracuda, '70 Boss Mustang, 67 Chevelle or '67 Malibu SS Pro. After checking out the cars, modelers enter the garage to learn facts and figures on the vehicle, watch an animated, exploded view of the model's assembly, see complete assembly diagrams, and watch video modeling tips for Aces Over Europe Art Of The Kill: While not a game, this book with companion videotape is a crash course in flight combat tactics that may well Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"HOLY CHEAT THE WORLD'S FIRST GAME UTILITY LEGALMECHEZER You're not playing by their rules anymore... Baselling Axis the Gamecheater gives you a few new tricks in your favorite games special powers, enhanced weapons, and extra lives. So now you can get on with the adventure, past that nasty spiked pit, without burning your last life in a bad Super Dave imitation. Or you can loose your vengeance with that outlaw turbo laser cannon you've always wanted. With Axis the Gamecheater, you get the little boost you need to keep the game fun! Superpowers are yours on demand — with just the press of a key! Axis the Gamecheater provides custom cheats for dozens of the most popular games, on PCs or Macs, and we're adding new games all the time. Ask for it at your favorite software source! For more information, call 800-926-9677 PUBLISHING or 901-682-9676, Fax: 901-682-9691 Circle Reader Service #44 Copyright  1993. B.scline Publishing, Inc. All rights foreign and domestic reserved. Axis the Gamechoster and the Baseline logo are trademarks of Baseline Publishing, Inc. All other names are trademarks of their respective holders. Help! I'm being held captive in the fine-print disclaimer! Baseline "


"Mobil TOYOTA DO mo San Francisco: Flight Simulator 5 Scenery Upgrade Skylane to a Learjet and a sailplane, Flight Simulator 5 offers something for most airborne gamers. Microsoft Corporation, IBM ($64.95). San Francisco: Flight Simulator 5 Scenery Upgrade. With the recent release of Microsoft's Flight Simulator 1.5.0, could a Mal1899 lard scenery disk not be far behind? San Jose 6630 38 3a 1984 to Marin County, Napa to the Golden Gate, Flight Simulator pilots can see it all in amazing detail. Mallard used satellite photographs as IndyCar Racing the foundation for their realistic ray-traced landscapes, and then created enhanced polygon images for low-level landmarks. It's so that take advantage of extra RAM, to the realistic that Bay Area residents will not only overall look of the texture-mapped cars, Indyrecognize the big buildings downtown, but Car Racing offers high performance gaming highways, neighborhoods and districts as that qualifies for the pole position in every well. Stay tuned for Washington D.C., Las area. This is a simulation where the difficulty hty Vegas, L.A. and San Diego in the months to levels let rookies get around tracks like come. Mallard, IBM ($49.95). Laguna Seca with ease, but has expert levels where it is challenging enough to simply try to get around a high speed oval. For more details, see the sneak preview in the August issue (CGW#109). Papyrus Publishing, Inc., IBM ($74.99). Microsoft Flight Simulator 5: With the blue skies over Redmond, WA never looking better, the release of Microsoft Flight Simulator 5 will certainly result in many upgrades to . this long-standing and best-selling sim. Providing digital pilots with a long list of new features to enhance their flights of fancy, Flight Simulator 5 offers a new latitude and Super-VGA Harrier longitude system to help users locate destinations and current location; a «Land Me\" feature that enables inexperienced pilots to Super-VGA Harrier: The game play and complete their flights without landing noseinterface are essentially the same as described first; and more realistic sound effects and in the review of AV8B Harrier in CGW#106, scenery (which expands in detail as apbut the graphics have been enhanced tremenproached by the aircraft). In addition, the dously. Computer pilots still fly carrier-based weather system has been replaced with a more missions off the deck of the Tarawa, still user-friendly and controllable version. Basiprosecute intercept missions with less than optimal AIM-9M Sidewinders, and attempt cally, the whole package has been spruced up to provide a more realistic and attractive' TAWADS map window. However, the acto control 70% of the island pictured in the flight environment. Photo-realistic instrution sccms both faster and smoother than the ment panels (digitized from actual aircraft) earlier incarnation. Also, those who have not and realistic time-of-day effects have been yet upgraded to VESA compatible SVGA can added, as well. From flying high in a Cessna still play the simulation in regular VGA mode. Domark, IBM ($59.99). LLLL Strike Commander-Tactical Operations: No one is exempt from the certainties of life-Death and Taxes-not even mercenary F-16 pilots in the 21st century. While Strike Commander players hope to keep Death on hold as long as possible, taxes may be more difficult to evade than a hard missile lock. In the first add-on to the Strike Commander universe, the Turkish government decides Microsoft Flight Simulator 5 that it needs to broaden its revenue base and increase taxes on mercenary activities. In order to pay the taxes or move their base elsewhere, players must come up with a wad of cash-fast. This means tougher, more lucrative missions against B-1B Bombers, F-4 Phantoms and F-117 Stealth Fighters in such locales as Hawaii, S. Africa, Syria, Siberia, Nicaragua and Ireland. New features include General MIDI support, improved digitized sound effects, rudder pedal support, and a \"realistic\" option for those who enjoy a more challenging flight model. Origin Systems, IBM ($29.95). Valkyrie. Ahhh, we love the smell of burning silicon in the morning! From the moment the speaker thumps with the dull roar of chopper blades and raises to a crescendo playing Wagner's Die Valkyrie, this helicopter fight/flight sim is there for a rollicking ride. While the graphics are not up to the standards of Maximum Overkill by any stretch of the imagination, the solid, polygon-filled objects are quite functional as one quickly grasps the flight mechanics and bounces through the ten missions included. A diversion with a raucous arcade feel, the Valkyrie helicopter flight simulator has multiple difficulty settings, multiple camera views, replays, and features a full screen display for all the action. Those not adept with a mouse can use a joystick. Gametek, Macintosh ($49.99). reviewing Position Missions settings Screen Size D Valkyrie Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"All Pros. No Cons. 02030 40 50 40 VALYMOUS Bag Cara They hayo Oxasirisha Pracy Ur0014 et pour ERSK FISIER2131214: You're down by six and Junior Seau just PLAYERS sacked you again. Now it's 4th and 18 with only a minute to go. Should you go long to Sterling Sharpe, or dump it in the flat to Thurman Thomas? In Unnecessary Roughness\" it's your call. But don't worry. You've got all the NFLPA ti Vit ola s pros you'd ever need to build your team. Like \"Neon\" Deion Sanders. John Taylor. Or Michael Irvin. And if they're not enough weapons for you, you'll also have a playbook that's thicker than a lineman's head. Unnecessary Roughness also features rotoscoped player graphics. Plus a rotating 3-D game orientation with infinite camera views that actually put you down on the field. Meanwhile, up in the booth Al Michaels handles the play-by-play, making this football game as real as you can get. Without getting hit, at least. Available for the yours, rush to your IBM PC and 100% compatibles. To score favorite retailer or call 1-800-245-7744. AL MICHAELS CALLS THE SHOTS ROUG ch ist NELPA test the A pictures ed temaer Bus toodane OMR 1933 properties of the 191) fruta, d e u sed onder best Made Foutate or Pay Ac diffold by the Nati Pages Action M Henn GAMES WITH PERSONALITY. Circle Reader Service #34 "


"I TABIA READ.ME column, Commodore's Amiga CD32 should be available in limited distribution in time for the holidays. Those who pick up this CD-ROM gaming console will find the initial selection of games a touch limited. As is the case with most new systems, many of the initial releases will be computer game conversions; titles that take full advantage of the machine's new capabilities will be slow in coming. At press time, the actual titles to ship with CD32 had not yer been determined, so it is difficult to say what to expect at present. At its low entry price, however, it will only take a few really exceptional titles to make the purchase of this console a worthwhile one. It certainly has great potential, but Commodore has to overcome its reputation for poor marketing before the skeptics are silenced. Commodore Business Machines, Inc. ($399.95). AVerKey Multimedia: Although is seems this product is geared toward helping business people project computer screen presentations through large screen or projector televisions (the thick manual explaining how to use Windows, clicking and dragging objects, etc. is a dead giveaway), we could not help but notice its more \"practical\" gaming applications. The A VerKey basically translates video signals for 640x480 resolution VGA monitors into standard NTSC or PAL video signals for TV. What this means is that one can drag their computer into the family room and plug it into the TV set for all to share. A 9-volt DC power adapter plugs into the wall, and signals can be sent out through either an S-VHS plug, a standard stereo cable, or back out to other computer monitors for multiscreen hook ups. This package includes a flicker filter and software control TSR program. Digital Media Labs, IBM ($349.00). \"Do you smell something burning?\" rently under development. Panasonic ($699.95). 486 Power Kit: Tired of moving ever so s-l-o-w-l-y? Unable to play the newest games? Can't afford a new 486 computer? Well, there are alternatives. One is a 486 Upgrade Kit from Buffalo which offers an affordable upgrade from most 286 and 386 computers to 3DO Multiplayer: No infomercial is required to make gamers aware of the 3DO multiplayer. The newest 32-bit game machine allows gamers to: play games with digitized video or fast polygon handling, listen to audio CDs while watching an intriguing kaleidoscopic light show (courtesty of the built-in firmware); view and manipulate photographs stored on Kodak Photo-CD discs; and watch film and animation stored on CDs (compressed using Super Mac's Cinepak standard). At press time, the actual number of available titles for the system were limited to Crash 'n Burn (Crystal Dynamic's racing game with fast scrolling, but no physical model that comes bundled with the multiplayer), Shelley Duvall's It's A Bird's Life (Sanctuary Woods' children's title), Mad Dog McCree (American Laser Games' digitized shooting gallery presented in interactive film format), Putt Putt Joins The Parade (Humongous Entertainment's graphic adventure for children), and Putt Putt's Fun Pack (the Humongous answer to Microsoft's Entertainment Pak for the younger set, featuring six classic games). Fortunately, many more are cur486 Power Kit near 486 performance. The kit is comprised of a Texas Instruments 486DLC CPU, speof a Tex: ria cial cache activating software, and a chip puller. Slow 286 and 386 computers will benefit the most by this 15-20 minute do-ityourself upgrade; 386/33 and 40MHz systems will show only moderate improvement, The 486DCL has no math coprocessor, but can make use of one if added. It does include a 1K internal cache, though, which helps improve performance. If dollars are tight, but ost is necessary to play the latest games, ne \"Buffalo chips may be just the thing to case that strain. Buffalo Products, Inc. IBM ($199.00 $469.00). Amiga CD32: Mentioned in our last issue's FlightStick Pro FlightStick Pro: For those who swear by their CH Flighstick (or who can't afford a Thrust Master), it's time to consider an upgrade. This version features three fire buttons and a \"coolie\" hat four-way viewing switch and, although the configuration is not user programmable, it can be used out of the box 3DO Multiplayer Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"\"My Most Dangerous Adventure Of AN Will Never Be Shown On TV.\" CO \"I've had some close calls. But this is crazy! In The Challenge of Racer X\"you'll face danger two ways. First, you'll take on the mysterious Racer X\"in a 200MPH free-for-all. You'll need everything in the Mach 5's arsenal just to stay close... Autojacks to leap clear of danger, chopper-blades to cut through obstacles, even a new on-board CRT that allows you to receive messages from Pops, Trixie, Spridle and Chim-Chim. And that's just the half of it. You'll also race against me from the cockpit of Racer X's incredible Shooting Star. But it won't be easy. Because Snake Oiler, Captain Terror, and all the evil villains from my TV show are CO 10. O 20 ZOIE 000 299 out to send you over the guardrails. So fasten your seatbelt. Because you're gonna rip around blind curves on icy mountain roads. Leap over rocky chasms. Witness horrible fiery crashes! Gosh, I hope no one gets hurt.\" Coming soon for Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis.\" To order, visit your favorite retailer or call 1-800-245-7744. G1s Available for the IBM PC and compatibles. 01993 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved 01993 Speed Racer Enterprises, Inc. Speed Racer and Racer X are trademarks of Speed Racer Enterprises, Inc. and are used under M is a registered trademark of inter Dicense national Business Machines. All other trade marks and registered trademarks are properties of their respective owners. SuperNES is a regis tered trademark of Nintendo of America Inc Sega and Genests are trademarks of Seza Enterprises Ltd. ACCOWDEN GAMES WITH PERSONALITY Circle Reader Service #35 "


"Reel Magic to support X-Wing, F-15 Strike Eagle III, CyberMan: Not to be confused with the larger arena. Advanced Digital Systems, IBM Strike Commander, Privateer, Falcon similarly named arch-enemies of Dr. Who, ($169.00). 3.02/MiG 29, Microsoft Flight Sim 4.0 and CyberMan is Logitech's newest \"rodential\" Reel Magic: Tired of low quality multimeTornado. CH Products, IBM with joystick peripheral. More than a simple mouse or dia video? The solution might be the Reel port ($99.95). joystick, CyberMan is a 3D controller offering Mavic add-in board-an MPEG full motion tactile feedback and pitch (forward and backvideo board with 16-bit sound card. The ward rocking), yaw (side-to-side motion on board is capable of delivering full-screen, 30 the same plane), and roll (side-to-side move frame per second, high-quality video from a ment around an axis) support. When develsingle speed CD-ROM drive. The board uses opers take full advantage of the support its own MPEG decompression chip to crunch available with this controller, one will be able video data without drawing CPU processing to perform more complex actions such as power. The result is very impressive. Several leaning forward and back or looking left and company's have comitted to supporting the right. Though CyberMan will operate under board, and there will be a few titles ready for Windows as a normal 3-button mouse, its real Christmas, among them Activision's Return design is for three-dimensional gaming (use to Zork and Interplay's Lord of the Rings CDCyberMan as a mouse under Windows may provide less ROM. Sigma Designs, IBM ($449). than satisfactory results). CyberMan will be Creative OmniCD Upgrade Kit: From HELLO!MUSIC!: This multimedia packbundled with several fast-action interactive those creative minds at Creative Labs comes age from Yamaha is for those who would like games. It is, however, backward compatible another multimedia hardware combo offerwith existing entertainment products. Loto enjoy the rich, realistic timbres of sampled ing a double-speed, multi-session photo CD instrument sounds with their software, but gitech, Inc., IBM ($129.00). compatible CD-ROM drive manufactured who may not have the extra slots or the technical finesse to configure one of the new by Matsushita, a proprietary interface card, all waverable cards. The actual HELLO!MUSIC necessary cables, and several programs including Aldus Photo Styler SE Photo-CD acpackage is really the CBX-73 tone generator module bundled with music software from cess and imaging software. The speedy CD Passport: Turbo Trax, a sequencing program; has a 64KB RAM buffer, a 300KB/sec transMIDI Player, and Quicktunes. The CBX-T3 fer rate and 320ms access time, is CD-ROM is a 16 bit wavetable sound module that is XA ready, allows for up to four singleor double-speed CD drives to be daisy-chained together, has a front-loading automatic tray (caddyless) and is a snap to install. Those who already have a 386SX or better system with a sound card can add CD-ROM capability at a Reel Magic good price with this low-cost, MPC Level 2 Fan Card I and II: Although we get fan compliant bundle. The only shortcoming is cards in the mail every day here at CGW, the lack of any CD games in the package. seldom do we get ones that plug into a PC Creative Labs, Inc., IBM ($399.95). slor. This computer card contains cither one Creative Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD & or two small fans to keep the air circulating SCSI-2: Two additional sound cards have around the boards and microchips. Now, been added to Creative's stable of thorough\"more than the power supply can be kept cool HELLO!MUSIC! breds. The Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD proby the computer's fan, and the Fan Cards run vides a greater degree of compatibility with a a quietly, too. T. S. Micro Tech, IBM ($23.95 compatible with general MIDI level 1, and broader range of CD-ROM drives, including single-fan card, $44.95 dual-fan card). with the flick of a switch, the Roland MT-32 both singleand double-speed units. Supported are drives by Creative/Panasonic the Game Blaster: This product is another con(in a limited capacity). The CBX-73 also Sony CDU31A, and the Mitsumi FX001 and verter that allows VGA signals to be passed to provides 192 different instrument sounds, 10 LU005. The Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 is a TV set. The Game Blaster, however, makes drum kits and digital reverb (through a prodesigned for those using SCSI-1 and 2 datano pretense about business uses, but goes prietary digital signal processor). intensive devices. It features an Adaptec conright for the gamer's heart and wallet). AlWe found that it took an MPU-401 MIDI troller chip and Adaptec's EZ-SCSI software. though it does not allow for the simultaneous card to make the CBX-T3 module \"talk to\" Data throughput is claimed at four times the showing of signals on both a monitor and TV games that support general midi. Unfortucompetition. Both boards offer the same high set, the Game Blaster has two distinct advannately, DOS games won't work with the quality sound support as previous Creative tages: it is considerably cheaper, and it comes CBX-T3 when it's connected to the serial 16-bit cards, will accept the Wave Blaster with an assortment of game software deport, because the driver is available only when daughter card (offering General MIDI comsigned for family room entertainment. The running Windows. patibility wave table synthesis), and come in package includes Broderbund's Prince of Pervithout the Advanced Sigsia, Velocity's Spectre Challengerand Jetfighter Although a very good product, nal Processing chip. Creative Labs, Inc., IBM II. Any computer gamer's elf might do well HELLO!MUSIC! is yet to be supported in its ($249.95 MultiCD, $279.95 SCSI-2, this year to look at this product and bring PC native mode by computer games. Yamaha, $50.00 additional with ASP). entertainment out of the closet and into a IBM, MAC, MIDI ($449.00). H LLO USC Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The humor and originality of Zork are always present... its images are the most spectacular in the history of video games\" JOYSTICK MAGAZINE \"The interface may be revolutionary [and] allows a richness that has been absent heretofore in graphic adventures.\" Johnny L. Wilson, COMPUTER GAMING WORLD An epic adventure...underground. RETURN TO ZORK A Cast of Hollywood Actors Over 1 hour of Spoken Dialouge Revisit Flood Control Dam #3 _ Try to Outwit Devious Dwarves Buwas JASON HERVEY ROBIN LIVELY A.J.LANGER JASON LIVELY EDAN GROSS SAM JONES ROMEINFOCOM ascuna wa ACTIVISION MODERNOS JOE ASPERIN CELE INFOCOM.\" MICHELE EM SISEDONADO DESIGN BY VUU MER DE PETER SPRAVUL VED DIRECTED DETED CODAGUE ISION Available for IBM and Compatibles. Enhanced version for CD-ROM also available. To order: See your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Circle Reader Service #37 "


"HITTITUDE ** zagova cat ESA puter graphics. Berkeley Systems, IBM with Windows and Macintosh ($49.95). Doodle-mation: This Windows diversion is for the \"power doodlers\" in the audience. Doodle-mation allows the user to select from a variery of shapes and animate them with special effects. The animated scenes can be edited frame-by-frame with a VCR-type controller, and music can be added. Favorite screens can be captured for use as Windows wallpaper, and favorite patterns can be turned into screen savers. Screen Magic, IBM with Windows ($29.95). Easy Boot: Games are notorious for requiring \"special\" boot configurations. Booting one's system in a variety of different configurations is often the rule more than it is the exception. Many gamers have found an easy solution to this configuration dilemma through the use of batch files or a utility program such as Easy Boot, a multi-configuration editor and selector. Through a menudriven interface, Easy Boot allows the user to set up and switch easily between 15 different se \"Darn heavy microchips!\" SE 13 items 159 CD-Blaster: One can stuff thousands of Compute's Adventure Game Player's little goodies into a stocking with this single Handbook: Opening lines like, \"Hold onto CD-ROM. It features over 1000 sound efyour joysticks folks...,\" are not the best of fects, 300 MIDI music clips, 100 video screen beginnings for a resource focusing on advensavers, 200 photos, 400 talking icons, 100 ture games. Arcade games, yes. But advencursors, and a mixture of digitized voices and ture, no. Nonetheless, Compute's latest impressions from Homer Simpson (\"DO!\") offering, by Raymond Lueders, is a thorough to Bill Clinton (\"OH!\"). Those who have as ouide to 37 popular adventure games. Lookmuch fun playing with multimedia tidbits as ing through the list of included titles, one gets with games should find CD-Blaster a wealth the idea that a concerted effort was made to of fun resource material. Aristo-Soft, Inc., include solutions to the most current and IBM with Windows ($39.95). worthy quests, though there are a number of older titles represented (this book was two years in the making, thus accounting for some po of the more weathered walk-throughs). Assistance is provided for Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis, The Legend of Kyrandia, The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes, Quest for Glory III, The 7th Guest and 32 other games. Handy maps, object location lists and representative screen shots serve to enhance the value of each CD-Blaster solution. Plus, a brief scenario accompanies every game. Though we don't consider it «the Computer Gaming World: Real computer ultimate guide to adventure games» as gamers want real reviews, in-depth strategy, claimed on the cover, it is still a handy reand an inside track on the computer game source to have on hand for those cold, wintry industry. For more than 12 years, Computer nights spent in the dungeons. Compute Gaming World has been doing just that. In Books ($21.95). fact, we are continually trying to pack even The Disney Collection Screen Saver: Hi ho, more information, perspective and graphics hi ho, it's after work we go... Welcome to hi ho, it's after work we go... Welcome to into each new issue. So, with a modest dose this, the latest in the After Dark series of of humility, we suggest that a one year subscreen savers. Here, Mickey is cast in the role scription (12 issues for $28.00) might be just 0) might be just of the Sorcerer's Apprentice, Goofy (dis)orof the Sorcerer's Apprentice, Goofy (dis)orthe right stocking stuffer to keep computer ganizes one's Windows display, and a whole gamers feeling like it's the holiday season, all gamut of Disney escapades ensue. There are year long. Computer Gaming World ($28.00 even official sounds and voices to give that domestic, $78.00 foreign air mail). full Disncy dimension to the animated comThe Disney Collection Screen Saver configurations. Though not necessarily the fastest way to reboot one's system under a different configuration (there are some speedier utilities), Easy Boot is definitely the easiest to use. CLEAR Software, Inc., IBM ($49.95). Lights Out Sports Fans Major League Baseball Screen Saver: Licensed from Major League Baseball, this amusing Windows screen saver focuses on the team logos from throughour the league. These logos play in simulated \"games\" of baseball, have home run contests, hold spring training, and perform other feats of baseball skill. Quadrangle Software Corporation, IBM with Windows ($55.00). Mega Rock Rap 'n Roll: For those in need of a beat, one's computer keyboard can be used to assemble several different, original music tracks in a variety of different studios\" (pop rock, rock you, boom boom bap, etc.). A colorful collection of controls allow for varying instrumentation, solos, and several other jive, rap and reggae tricks. A \"hip help Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"Find a well Cast a spell Make a mistake Go to #*%!! CIMON THE CORCERER on his quest. In a wacked-out world filled with beer-swilling trolls, a schizophrenic two-headed TM clerk, swamplings, werefrogs and more, he must acquire the knowledge of a sorcerer Wherever you go, expect the unexpected. Because Simon is no ordinary sorcerer. and defeat the evil He's an adolescent with an attitude, who wizard Sordid. Discover a accidentally stumbles upon a magical dimension on the very verge wondrously animated world. Unravel the mysteries of a puzzling plot. And beware that your biggest mistake would be would be of collapse. As fate would have it, only Simon can save it from a tyranny of evil. Armed with a sharp wit and a missing all Kalk to Lanta Oren the fun of responder clodie boleto e tongue to match, our reluctant ...Simon The Sorcerer! hero sets INFOCOM... forth An Activision Company Circle Reader Service #38 To order: see your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Simon The Sorcerer is available for IBM and compatible computers. "


"man,\" provides the on-line help for the less Clues series through Origin Systems, Shay Soloist: When used in conjunction with a musically inclined. Paramount Interactive, Addams has struck out on his own with Sound Blaster card, a microphone, and any IBM with CD-ROM and Macintosh with Quest Busters: The Book of Clues. The major musical instrument that one can play, Soloist CD-ROM ($79.95). change between this and the earlier Quest for is an interactive lessons instructor and anaMovieSelect: Tired of scanning endless Clues offerings is the lack of coded key words. lyzer. It awards points for speed and accuracy shelves, wading through countless videos. Included previously as an added measure as the user plays (or even sings) on key to searching for just the right flick to take home against \"spoiling\" one's gaming pleasure by match the notes on screen. It is even possible for the evening? If so, try viewing Paramount inadvertently seeing the solution to one puzto use Soloist to help tune instruments. Since Interactive's MovieSelect. \"The Intelligent zle while looking for that of another, most no MIDI interface is required, it works with Guide To Over 44,000 Videos.\" \"This guide gamers disliked the necessity of having to virtually any instrument, and transposition is is designed to assist one in quickly, easily and decipher these words in order to solve the done automatically. A nice product, but for intelligently choosing videos prior to arrival puzzle addressed. The clue books actually some of us, it would take a miracle to learn to became a puzzle in themselves. Thankfully, play music better. Ibis Software, IBM this coding is now just a faint memory. A new ($59.95). design in the layout of each walkthrough, Uninstaller: Okay, you've finished playing highlighted and self-contained clue seg. \"Balls of Fire for Windows\"and now you want ments, serves to direct the reader's attention to remove it from your system. Easy, right? to the correct part of the walkthrough, pre Not necessarily. Cleaning up after messy venting them from seeing the answers to puzWindows installations can be a troublesome zles encountered in other parts of the game. and tiresome experience. Fortunately, MicroHelp has come to the rescue with Uninstaller, Micralicia Velastaller a handy housekeeping utility for the Windows user. Put simply, Uninstaller removes an apSalice plication, all its files and all references to it, 1. SUMENES ACADEMIC DE including WIN.INI, SYSTEM.INI, and apMovieSelect File Help este deleted H CITIRAME SWEDEN e ech CNILAMESWEADEHP Phone le ore C ucos le flemore CALANESWICADET Select the Sadece OPEEAED POE TA HOP Deco w pobed Uninstaller ETRT at the video store. The four main programs, MovieSelect Recommends, Find It!, Hollywood Guide and Previews, allow one to sift through its massive database (VideoLog Select, favored choice of video industry professionals) from an interface one would expect of Hollywood-hi-res, 256-color glitter and gold. MovieSelect Recommends provides a list of recommended videos based on user preferences; Find It! lets one search the video database by title, actor or director; Hollywood Guide provides direct access to information on movies, actors and directors; and Previews allows the user to view any of the 12 included QuickTime digital previews. Movi eSelect provides quick search times and helpful assistance for the film fan. Paramount Interactive, IBM with CD-ROM and Macintosh with CD-ROM ($59.95). QuestBusters: The Book of Clues: After a long stint publishing the six-volume Quest for WinSleuth Gold Plus The Book of Clues features solutions to 35 adventures, most of current vintage, including Alone in the Dark, Betrayal at Krondor, Darkside of Xeen, Freddy Pharkas, Realms of Arkania, and Ringworld. Maps are included for those games requiring them. Adventurers for those games requiring them. will find a stocking full of help with this resource. Clue Book Express ($18.95). Screenies: Individuals! That's what we Americans are! Though we tend to express our individuality in odd outlets. Silly license plates, bumper stickers, tee-shirts, buttons, fancy hedge-trimming—it's all a part of the American way. Now you can assert your uniqueness and jazz up your computing environment with Screenies. Screenies are illustrated computer frames that attach to your monitor with Velcro strips. The available designs include Etch-a-Sketch, Howlin' Wolf, Drive-In Movie, Retro TV, Cat Box, and the office favorite, Ren and Stimpy. There are dozens of other designs as well, including two for the practical-minded: a dry erase border and a corkboard. They're a great gift idea for the stumped shopper. Screenies, 13\", 14\", and 15\" monitors ($11.95). Show plication specific INI files. Uninstaller will even remove applications across a nerwork server and all workstations on the network. Though it's not 100 percent foolproof, it's certainly a handy tool for the DOS-dummies among us. MicroHelp, Inc. IBM with Windows ($79.00). Win Sleuth Gold Plus: Windows gamers entering the multimedia generation are likely to encounter installation and configuration woes in making the transition to sound and CD-ROM capability. A handy tool to ease that move is WinSleuth Gold Plus, a utility that enables one to troubleshoot hardware and software running under Windows. Having trouble with DMAs and IRQs? Trying to fine tune system performance? WinSleuth will help get Windows squeaky clean. Dariana Software, IBM with Windows ($189.00 SRP, $99.95 introductory special through January 1, 1994). CGW SEASONS . GREETINGS Screenies Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"\"I found this game exhil arating. Many a night the adrenaline was pumping and palms were sweating.\" Fred J. Philipp QuestBusters \"The skillful synthesis of full motion video digitized speech, CD audio quality soundtrack, and a pleasing variety of game play make INCA one of the finest multimedia games yet published.\" Stephen Poole CD-ROM Today «a cinematic tour-de-force...\" -Video Games & Computer Entertainment INCA TM Multimedia CD COKTEL VISION See your local retailer or call: (800) 757-7707 Part of the Sierra Family TM indicates trademark of or license to Sierra On-Line, Inc. Circle Reader Service #39 "


"Holiday Buying Guide Index 3DI Productions, Inc. 600 15th St. Manhattan Beach, CA 90266 (800) 545-7677 Clear Software 385 Elliot St. Newton, MA 02164 (800) 338-1759 Id Software, Inc. (800) 434-2637 Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third St., Suite 0234 Cambridge, MA 02142 (617) 225-0848 Access Software 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. Salt Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 793-0073 Clue Book Express P.O. Box 85143 Tucson, AZ 85754 Accolade 5300 Stevens Creek Blvd. San Jose, CA 95129 (800) 245-7744 Commodore Business Machines 1200 Wilson Dr. West Chester, PA 19380 (215) 431-9100 Inline Software, Inc. 308 Main St. Lakeville, CT 06039-1204 (203) 435-4995 Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 COMPUTE Publications 324 West Wendover Ave., Suite 200 Greensboro, NC 27408 (919) 275-9809 Activision 11440 San Vicente Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90049 (800) 477-3650 Advanced Digital Systems 20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (800) 888-5244 Creative Labs, Inc. 1901 McCarthy Blvd. Milpitas, CA 95035 (800) 998-5227 KOEI Corporation 1350 Bayshore Hwy., Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 (415) 348-0200 Lawrence Productions, Inc. 1800 South 35th St. Galesburg, MI 49053 (612) 665-7075 Dariana Software 5241 Lincoln Ave., B5 Cypress, CA 90630 (800) 892-9950 American Laser Games 4801 Lincoln Rd. NE Albuquerque, NM 87109 (800) 863-4263 Legend Entertainment Company 14200 Park Meadow Dr. Chantilly, VA 22021 (800) 658-8891 Davidson & Associates 19840 Pioneer Ave. Torrance, CA 90503 (310) 793-0600 Aristo-Soft, Inc. 7041 Koll Center Parkway Pleasanton, CA 94566 (800) 338-2629 Avalon Hill 4517 Hartford Rd. Baltimore, MD 21214 (800) 999-3222 D.C. True, Ltd. 1840 Oak Ave. Evanston, IL 60201-3686 (708) 866-1864 Logitech, Inc. 6505 Kaiser Dr. Fremont, CA 94555 (800) 732-2928 Logos Research Systems, Inc. 2117 200th Ave. West Oak Harbor, WA 98277-4049 (800) 87 LOGOS Digital Media Labs 47013 Fremont Blvd. Fremont, CA 94538 (510) 438-9088 Berkeley Systems 2095 Rose St. Berkeley, CA 94709 (510) 540-5535 LucasArts Entertainment Company P.O. Box 10307 San Rafael, CA 94912 (800) STAR WARS Domark Software, Inc. 1900 South Norfolk St., Suite 202 San Mateo, CA 94403 (415) 513-8929 Bright Ideas P.O. Box 22356 Denver, CO 80222-0356 (415) 332-7223 Machiavelli Designs, Inc. 2550 Ninth St., Suite 204 Berkeley, CA 94710 (800) 955-4634 Electronic Arts 1450 Fashion Island Blvd. San Mateo, CA 94404 (415) 571-7171 Brderbund Software, Inc. 500 Redwood Blvd. Novato, CA 94948-6121 (800) 521-6263 Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Rd. Flower Mound, TX 75028 (214) 539-2575 GameTec 2999 NE 191st St., Suite 800 North Miami Beach, FL 33180 (305) 935-3995 Buffalo Products, Inc. 2805 19th St. SE Salem, OR 97302 (800) 345-2356 Maxis Software 2 Theatre Square, Suite 230 Orinda, CA 94563-3346 (800) 33-MAXIS Humongous Entertainment P.O. Box 180 13110 NE 177th Place Woodinville, WA 98072 (206) 485-1212 Capstone Airport Corporate Center 7200 Corporate Center Dr., Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 Media Vision, Inc. 3185 Laurelview Cir. Fremont, CA 94538 (800) 845-5870 CH Products 970 Park Center Dr. Vista, CA 92083 (619) 598-2518 Ibis Software 140 Second St., Suite 603 San Francisco, CA 94105 (415) 546-1917 Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3 D ACTION SINCE WOLFENSTEIN! BLAKE STONE ALIENS OP GOLD  N TAEvv AAN No GRAPHIC VIOLENCE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. engaging Adlib music; Intense Sound BlasterTM sound effects Terror has been unleashed! And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future. Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00. you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section, The BBS phone lines are:  (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchasech by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY Dr. 19 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors Take on dozens of vicious opponents in combat APOGEEN JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFT WAR P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND.TX 75049 Battle through 60 levels of 'heart-pounding terror! Blake Stone: Allens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #41 A001CGW "


"Holiday Buying Guide Index continued.. Megatech P.O. Box 11333 Torrance, CA 90510 (800) 258-MEGA Psygnosis, Ltd. 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (415) 883-3000 Merit Software 13707 Gamma Rd. Dallas, TX 75244 (800) 238-4277 Quadrangle Software Corporation 305 E. Eisenhower Parkway, Suite 208 Ann Arbor, MI 48108 (313) 769-1675 Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc. 2105 S. Bascom Ave., Suite 165 Campbell, CA 95008 (409) 776-2187 MicroHelp, Inc. 4359 Shallowford Industrial Pkwy Marietta, GA 30066 (800) 922-3383 Readysoft, Inc. 30 Wertheim Ct., Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, L4B 1B9 Canada (416) 731-4175 Time Warner Interactive Group 2210 Olive Ave. Burbank, CA 91506 (818) 955-9999 MicroLeague Interactive Software University Office Plaza, Suite 201 Bellevue Building 262 Chapman Road Newark, DE 19702 (800) 334-6572 Realism Entertainment 6N522 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106-1209 (708) 595-7487 T.S. Micro Tech 20818 Higgins Ct. Torrance, CA 90501 (800) 959-9419 MicroProse Software Inc. 180 Lakefront Dr. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 (800) 879-PLAY Revell-Monogram, Inc. 8601 Waukegan Rd. Morton Grove, IL 60053 (708) 966-3500 Tsunami Media, Inc. P.O. Box 790  Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 683-9283 Twin Dolphin Games, Inc. 220 Twin Dolphin Dr., Suite B Redwood Shores, CA 94065 (415) 637-9300 Sanctuary Woods Multimedia Corp. 1875 South Grant St. San Marco, CA 94402 (415) 578-6340 Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 United Pixtures 1323 East Broadway, Suite 301 Glendale, CA 91205 (818) 502-0211 Screenies 18971 Sonoma Hwy. Sonoma, CA 95476 (707) 939-6060 Mindcraft Software 2291 W.205th St., Suite 201 Torrance, CA 90501-1451 (310) 320-5214 Viacom New Media 648 S. Wheeling Rd. Wheeling, IL 60090 (708) 520-4440 Screen Magic 820 Florida St. San Francisco, CA 94110 (415) 648-8056 Morgan Interactive, Inc. 41 Sutter St., Box 1158 San Francisco, CA 94104 (415) 693-9596 Velocity Development Four Embarcadero, Suite 3100 San Francisco, CA 94111 (415) 776-8000 Sierra On-Line, Inc. P.O. Box 485 Coarscgold, CA 93614 (800) 757-7707 New World Computing 20301 Ventura Blvd., Suite 200 Woodland Hills, CA 91364 (818) 999-0606 Origin Systems Inc. P.O. Box 161750 Austin, TX 78716 (800) 245-4525 Sigma Designs 47900 Bayside Parkway Fremont, CA 94538 (800) 845-8086 Villa Crespo P.O. Box 1818 1725 McGovern St. Highland Park, IL 60035 (800) 521-3963 Panasonic One Panasonic Way Secaucus, NJ 07094 (201) 348-9090 Spectrum HoloByte 2490 Mariner Square Loop Alameda, CA 94501 (800) 695-GAME Virgin Interactive Entertainment 18061 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (800) VRG-INO7 Papyrus Publishing 35 Medford Street Somerville, MA 02143 (617) 868-5440 Strategic Simulations, Inc. 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2901 (800) 245-4525 Walt Disney Computer Software, Inc. 500 South Buena Vista St. Burbank, CA 91521-6385 (818) 973-4015 Paramount Interactive 700 Hanson Way Palo Alto, CA 94304 (415) 813-8055 Strategic Studies Group, Inc. 8348 Monticello Dr. Pensacola, FL 32514 (904) 469-8880 Westwood Studios 3540 West Sahara Ave., #323 Las Vegas, NV 89102 (800) 874-4607 Philips Interactive Media of America 11111 Santa Monica Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90025 (800) 845-7301 SWFTE International, Ltd. P.O. Box 219 Rockland, DE 19732 (302) 234-1750 Yamaha Corporation of America P.O. Box 6600 Buena Park, CA 90622-6600 (714) 522-9011 CGW Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"In Search Of... The Ultimate Game Machine CGW Explores The Mysteries Of Hardware And Compares Two \"GameFrames\" tor, and a local-bus IDE interface (for controlling the hard drive). The hard drive is a 424MB Western Digital drive with built-in 128K cache buffer. (At press time, we were informed that this system now includes a double-speed CD-ROM drive --Ed.) In the other corner, weighing in at $2,817 is the Falcon Mach 5. It is a 486-66MHz computer, sporting 4MB of onboard RAM with a 5.25\" and 3.5\" floppy drive and drawer-style\" 150KB/second CDROM drive. The motherboard also features a VL-Bus, which supports a Genoa 8500VI. graphics accelerator (1MB of memory) as well as a VL-Bus floppy, serial and parallel controller card. I tested the system with the optional MAG 15\" non-interlaced monitor. The hard drive is 212MB. Also included with the Falcon Mach 5 is a CH Gamecard III and Flightstick Pro, and a Sound Blaster Version 2.0 with additional RCA out-jacks, and a pair of self-powered speakers. That's the tale of the tape, but what does it all really mean? First, let's look at the processor. The processor, or Central Processing Unit (CPU) is the heart and soul of the computer, the neural center of all your computer's activity. A 486-66MHz processor is the best and brightest of the 486DX line of CPUs from Intel, supporting over 1.2 million transistors in a single chip and able to process well over 40 million instructions per second. A 486 CPU, whatever the speed, is a 32-bit chip, meaning that it can handle its information in chunks of 32 bits of binary data. The 486 also features another integrated chip, a floating-point processor, which handles all of the complicated math tasks of the computer. 486SX chips are essentially 486DXs, except that the integrated floating point processor has been disabled. You may also see 486 computers advertised as SLC chips. This is a term used to indicate non-Intel 486 clones, the most popular of which is the Cyrix 486SLC. The SLC is essentially a clone of the 486SX, but engineered for a lower power drain and designed for the limited power environment of laptop computers. Both of the computers facing each other in this feature are DX2 chips, which are Intel's \"speed doubler» chips. Essentially, they are 486-33MHz chips which have had their internal clock speed doubled by Paul C. Schuytema Yoday's hottest games require more than just our own werware to solve their mysteries; they also feed voraciously on hard1 ware, hungry for MIPS, megabytes and megahertz. With the technological ante being raised every time we take a breath, it's hard to determine how much of a machine we need to handle the processing tasks of today as well as tomorrow. Reading CGW regularly will GW regularly will provide you with much needed guideposts, and currently, all fingers point to a 486-66 MHz system as the basic platform of choice. Add to that as large a hard drive as possible, a sound card, VL-Bus video, a large, crisp monitor, and a CD-ROM drive, and you have assembled a serious PC game machine. Beyond the basics, what are the differences between systems? How do they perform on the field of battle? That, good readers, is my task for this day. Sitting on my old oak desk are two of the hottest 486 systems you can purchase: a Gateway 4DX2-66V and a Falcon Mach 5. I've worked with both, and they are both excellent, quality computers, light-years beyond the old 8088s of only a few years back. But how they perform head-to-head is a question that I have yet to answer, and as I write these words (on my trusty no-name 486-33), I have no conception as to which machine will be the champion of champions. We will journey down that road together, and as I load each system with the most voracious, power-hungry game software available, I'll ask more out of these two computers than NASA asked out of its mission control computers when we put a man on the moon. Time to dim the lights, warm up their heavy-duty power supplies, plug in my flightsticks, and let the games begin. In one corner, weighing in at $2,995, is the Gateway 4DX2-66V. Included is a 486-66MHz processor, 16MB of RAM, one 3.25\" floppy drive, and a Sony 150KB/second CD-ROM drive with an integrated CD tray. The motherboard features a VL-Bus which hosts an ATI Ultra XLR graphics accelerator with 1MB of onboard memory. It ships with Gateway's 15\", non-interlaced, Crystalscan moniFalcon Mach 5 CONFIGURATION: 486-66MHz, 4MB RAM, 250MB Hard Drive, Mitsumi CDROM drive, 3.5\"& 5.25\" floppy drives, Genoa 8500VL graphics accelerator with 1MB VRAM, 14\" Super VGA monitor, mouse, keyboard, DOS 6.0, CH Flightstick Pro, CH Gamecard III, Sound Blaster Version 2.0, powered speakers. COST: $2,499 OPTIONAL ACCESSORIES TESTED: MAG 15\"non-interlaced monitor ($317) MANUFACTURER: Falcon Northwest 263 S. Bayshore Drive Coos Bay, OR 97420 (800) 258-6778 "


"1.2 to 66MHz. «MHz\" is a term which refers to millions of cycles per Now that we have defined our terms and know the stars of each second and is used to rate a CPU's internal crystal clock, which keeps system, it is time to put them to the test. First, we'll look at some the chip in sync and running smoothly. While somewhat of an \"dry\" numbers that indicate benchmark performances in areas imporabstract term, a processor with a higher MHz rating will be a faster tant to game players. The first test is hard drive performance, which processor. will indicate the rate at which a drive can read and send data to the CPU (the data-throughput), the amount of time it takes a hard drive Probably the next most important feature of these two systems is to find and access a particular piece of data (the average seek-time), the VL-Bus. A bus is a data-channel which allows the CPU to to and an overall performance rating. communicate with the rest of the computer's components. For years, the dominant bus has been the ISA (Industry Standard Architecture) Road Work (Data Throughput) bus, a slow, 16-bit bus which generally runs at 8 MHz. This is fine for such things as modems, but is a major bottleneck for video and Hard Drive Performance (with Smartdrive disk caching) hard drives. A local bus breaks this limitation by providing a direct path from the CPU to certain components of a system, such as a video Transfer Seek Performance Rate Time Index controller. While local buses have been around since the \"dawn\" of 3,466 KB/sec 13.8 ms Falcon Mach 5 computers, desktop local buses have only really surfaced in the last 24.6 Gateway 4DX2-66V 2,838 KB/sec 11.7 ms few years. The problem was that, up until very recently, there was no 21.6 486 33 MHz \"generic\" clone set standard, so a local bus video card that would work on one system 10.5 1,215 KB/sec 16.9 ms 386 40 MHz \"generic\" clone wouldn't be guaranteed to work on another. The VL-Bus is changing 10.7 1,082 KB/sec 12.8 ms that by providing an industry standard bus configuration. The bus is \"Ancient\" IBM/XT 85 KB/sec 79.0 ms named for the VESA (Video Electronics Standards Association) In these tests, the Falcon's victory in the data-throughput test is a developed constraints and restrictions, which limits the bus speed to result of the VL-Bus disk controller, which allows large amounts of around 40 MHz, with no more than three VL-Bus components on a data to move very, very quickly from the disk to the CPU and system. VL-Bus components can also perform a feat known as \"bus memory. The Gateway's edge on seek time is due to the hard drive's mastering,\" in which they actually take precedence over the CPU for integrated 128K cache buffer. a time to perform a given function. In the near future, the PCI Bus, developed as a result of a push from Intel, might give the VL-Bus a Conditioning (Basic Performance) run for its money, but for now, the VL-Bus is the safe, high-performThe next test indicates basic levels of computer performance using ance road to take. an IBM/AT with a OMHz 80287 math coprocessor as a benchmark system. In this test, the video test indicates not the frame rate of the Another important concern for game players is the monitor itself. video, but rather the raw speed in which information can be transLarge is definitely better, and a 15\" monitor feels far superior to a 13\" ferred from the CPU to the graphic card's video memory. The CPU or 14\" model. A non-interlaced model is the way to go, since it means and FPU tests indicare how fast the imaginary IBMIAT would have that the electron beam which creates the display redraws the entire to operate to equal the performance of the tested systems. screen each pass (as opposed to an every-other approach on interlaced monitors), which eases flicker and eyestrain, and greatly improves the System Performance image's clarity. CPU CPU Test FPU Test DOS Text Speed Speed Falcon Mach 5 66.7 MHz 222.9 MHZ 544.8 MHZ 13,284 chrs/ms Gateway 66.9 MHZ 223.4 MHZ 546.7 MHZ 7,801 chrs/ms 4DX2-66V 486 33 MHz 33.4 MHz 111.5 MHz 272.4 MHz 3,130 chrs/ms \"generic\" clone 386 40 MHz 40.2 MHZ 59.6 MHz no FPU 2,386 chrs/ms \"generic\" clone Benchmark software: Landmark Version 2 At the most basic levels, the Falcon and Gateway are dead even until we come to the video dara performance. The Falcon motherboard's VL-Bus and the Genoa card are able to transfer raw data at nearly twice the speed of the Gateway. This discrepancy brings us to our next test, which indicates how quickly the systems can display three-dimensional polygon information in real-time animation. While the data transfer test is more abstract, this Superscape (a well-known virtual reality development company) test more accurately represents the tasks the computers will Gateway 4DX2-66V be asked to perform in the heat of intensive gameplay. CONFIGURATION: 486-66MHz, 16MB RAM, 424MB Hard Drive, Sony CD-ROM drive, 3.5\" floppy drive, ATI Ultra XLR VL-Bus video accelerator with 1MB VRAM, Superscape Three Dimensional Frame Rate Test 15\" Crystalscan monitor, mouse, keyboard, DOS 6.0, Windows 3.1, choice of application software. (times given are in seconds) COST: $2,995 MANUFACTURER: Gateway 2000 Falcon Mach 5 with Genoa accelerator 610 Gateway Drive Gateway 4DX2-66V with ATI accelerator 45.4 P.O. Box 2000 486 33 MHz \"generic\" clone with Diamond Stealth accelerator 15.3 North Sioux City, SD 57049 (800) 846-2000 386 40 MHz \"generic\" clone without accelerator 13.3 41.6 "


"While the Falcon system could transfer video data much faster than it felt like the Falcon struggled a bit as it took 11 seconds to draw the the Gateway, the ATI card in the Gateway was more adept at scene. Since Links 386 Pro is one of the handful of programs that processing the information into an actual image we can see. Both actually make use of more than 4MB RAM, and since the Gateway perform light-years beyond the \"king of the heap\" video accelerator system sports a whopping 16MB. the performance difference can of only 18 months ago, and phenomenally better than a non-accelereasily be attributed to this extra RAM. I should mention thar to run ated video display system. Links on the Gateway, I first had to run ATI's VESA-mode emulator The Thrillah With Vanilla (Main Event) program from the DOS prompt. While these tests clearly show the two systems to perform well Round 4 (The 7th Guest) beyond standard 486 systems, we haven't seen how their stamina holds up to the excruciating demands of game software. For this bout, Finally, I showered and neatly folded my warwick-plaids and lit up the systems mer head-to-head ar center ring with identical, optimized a nice calabash pipe, took a mellow puff, and picked up a sweet, config.sys and autoexec.bat files which maximize the amount of free though hauntingly disturbing Victorian porcelain doll. I loaded up conventional memory, and are \"vanilla\" systems, meaning that noth7th Guest. In the Stauf mansion, I simply recorded the time it took ing is loaded except the drivers necessary to access such things as the to ascend the eerie blue marble stairway up to the second floor. The CD-ROM drives and sound cards. Falcon won out at 14 seconds while the Gateway nosed in second at I should note that the Gateway does not include a sound card 16 seconds for the long climb. While the Gateway's extra RAM allows (though it does have a Sony CD-ROM controller card which provides it to crunch the video numbers more quickly, 7th Guest reads its video CD-ROM sound). I installed a Sound Blaster Pro in the Gateway, directly off the CD-ROM, and it seems that the Falcon's CD was able and used the same set of studio monitors (not those included with the to deliver the data faster. Of all the games I installed, I only had Falcon, which are a little low on bass-response for my tastes) for both problems with the 7th Guest on the Falcon, which required some systems. I used the same CH Flightstick Pro on cach system, but on tweaking and reinstallation even with the Genoa fix provided by the Falcon, I plugged the joystick into the dedicated controller card, Trilobyte. while on the Gateway, I used the port on the Sound Blaster card (the Gateway does not include a game port). Those disclaimers aside, I set Split Decision out several hours and installed X-Wing, Strike Commander, Links 386 Pro and 7th Guest on both systems to see how they would play. As you can see, performance wise, both machines fared nearly equally in the field of play. As for my subjective impressions, both Round 1 (X-Wing) were dream-machines, full of enough power for every game I threw First, I dimmed the lights and brought up X-Wing, and performed their way. The quality of the video was an absolute toss-up, both my test of entering the first training mission, accelerating to full producing rich, gorgeous displays, and with the Sound Blaster inpower, heading through the first four gates, then performing a double stalled in the Gateway, both sounded as good as I had hoped. roll before entering the fifth gate. This test not only required CPU Can I pick a winner? Well, it depends on what you really want to intensive polygon calculations, but also required hard disk access to do with your steroid-fueled game computer. If you want a computer move from the training room to the first mission. The Gateway to double as a nine-to-five system, and you run a lot of Windows performed the flight in 22 seconds while the Falcon came in close at 23 seconds. applications, I would have to recommend the Gateway. The ATI graphics card is set up to run Windows better than the Genoa card Round 2 (Strike Commander) installed in the Falcon, Windows is included, and the mouse is genuine Microsoft. Next, I dropped my blaster helmer and slid into my khakis and loaded up Strike Commander. I set up a dogfighting training mission On the other hand, if you want to go all-out for games, the Falcon with five ace bogies (MiG-21s) coming at me at 15,000 feet. I timed is the best ber for your money. You get a better monitor (the MAG not only the time to load the mission (from the armament screen) but monitors, both 15 and 17\", are PC Magazine Editor's Choice also the time it took to accelerate to 500 knots and then execute two winners), and a bundled joystick, high-speed game card, speakers and and a half snap rolls. The Falcon performed the run in 35 seconds sound card. Though, I will say, the Focus keyboard included with the while the Gateway took 40 seconds. I should note that Strike ComFalcon feels cheap compared to the \"liquid-touch\" of the Gateway mander is probably the most hardware-intensive game yet released, Anykey keyboard. and loading the mission took the brunt of the time. Both systems ms If you are looking purely at the dollar signs, the Mach 5 and the performed the snap rolls so quickly that I had to shake back a bloody 4DX2-66V finish in a dead heat, value-wise. While the Mach 5 is nose and a potential \"red-our.\" $178 lower in price and includes over $200 worth of gaming accesRound 3 (Links 386 Pro) sories, the 4DX2-66V offers 12 additional MB of RAM, a hard disk almost twice the size, Windows software, and a choice of one \"real Sloughing my khakis for some plaid polyester pants, I headed for world\" application program. Links 386 Pro and the second hole at the Belfry, in North Warwickshire, England. On both systems, I set all levels of realism to maximum The bottom line, though, is that both of these systems are the best (overkill, really, since who needs to see every needle on a pine tree 300 of the best, and I'd bet that whichever you purchased, you'd be very yards away?), and simply recorded the time it took to render the satisfied with the ability to fly immelmans around nearly every other second hole's panoramic scenery (I chose the second hole instead of computer on the planet. Though \"ties are like kissing your sister,\" we the first since Links 386 Pro loads trees and other objects into memory hope this comparison at least gave you a better understanding of the the first time it renders a course, so the first hole is always a slow draw). factors involved in a gaming hardware purchase and made you The Gateway stole the show, rendering the scene in 5 seconds, while berter-armed for the hardware wars. Cow "


"BEST Stocking Up On Holiday Joy With Our OF THE Holiday Shareware Picks REST by Chuck Miller I hexes are occupied, with the winner holding the most territory. While play is simple, Hexxagon is an extremely addictive game, more so than many similar titles. This shareware gem features 256-color VGA graphics, Sound Blaster sound effects, multiple difficulty settings, and an easy-touse interface. A built-in board editor allows the player to construct his or her own board designs, with the ability to save five favorite configurations. Hexxagon is one of the best stocking stuffers around for both the strategy gamer and for those who normally don't play strategy titles. It is available for $20, plus $2 shipping and handling. Upon receipt of payment, Hexxagon II will be mailed to all registered owners. I highly recommend it. s we enter the Holiday season I equip their fighters from the Supply Room. A thought I'd offer my own abbreviated When ready to depart, the player begins misB uying Guide of excellent shareware sion one (rwo additional missions are availtitles to stuff in your favorite person's stockable upon registration). Each mission consists ing. Because of space constraints, I have limof nine or ten levels of wave after wave of ited the focus to three of the shareware attacking ships with a final \"boss\" ship at the industry's highest caliber publishers: Apogee end of each level. Software, Epic MegaGames and Software In addition to the exceptional 256-color Creations. All of the following titles are VGA graphics, a substantial audio soundhighly recommended, and most are more track is provided, as are the requisite digitized reasonable than retail for any Scrooges in the sound effects. Major sound boards are supcrowd. ported, including support for General Midi. Those wishing to enlist with Raptor, as well Reaching the Apogee as check out other new titles from Apogee A steady stream of entertaining and playshould contact Apogee Software, P.O. Box able games have flowed from the prolific 476389, Garland TX 75047 or call (800) shareware fountain known as Apogee SoftGAME123 (MasterCard, VISA and Discover ware. Their only significant failing has been accepted). Raptor is $34.95 plus $5.00 shipthe continued use of EGA images in a VGA ping and handling and is due for release in world. Thankfully, this has changed with the early December. Action aficionados will find release of four new games: Halloween Harry, it a holiday treasure. Duke Nukem 2, Blake Stone 3D and Raptor: Call of the Shadows, the latter two being the Such Wonderful most significant of these new offerings. While Software Creations I intended to cover boch Blake Stone 3D and My favorite of three new titles from SoftRaptor, I was unable to coax my beta of Blake Stone to run it arrived the day this column ware Creations is Hexxagon, and its registered was due). So, I will limit my coverage to that sister Hexxagon II, developed by Argo Games. Similar to Thromulus and Spor, Hexxagon is a of Raptor. turn-based, animated strategy game of conquest. Pitting two players against each other (human vs. human or human vs. computer), Hexxagon requires that you obtain and control more hexes on the playing field than your opponent in order to win. Each player begins with three hexes and seeks to acquire more by moving or jumping to adjoining vacant hexes, or by landing next to an opponent's hex(es) and consuming their piece(s), replacing it or them with their own (cell mutation, Raptor of sorts). This process continues until all WEIDER Squarez Deluxe 1 Squarez Deluxe, the second game from Software Creations, is another strategy title. The goal of this strategy puzzler, which has a Tetris-like feel, is to race against the clock or stay ahead of your opponent in the process of building \"squarez\" (square blocks of tiles, as the name implies). What makes this puzzle game interesting, though, is the variety of pieces used. Sporadically, hazardous chemicals, missiles, bombs, spikes, and other bizarre items appear in one's picces, making placement a critical matter. Forming a square containing one of the special pieces activates it. Speed also plays a factor, rewarding faster players with more points. Three levels of play help spice up the action: Basic mode for traditional puzzle gamers, Normal mode of fering a balance of special tiles, and Extreme mode filled with bizarre tiles and surprises. Support is provided for one or two players. In addition, Squarez Deluxe requires VGA graphics and 640K RAM, and features Ad Simply put, Raptoris Apogee's most professional and competent release since their publishing of Id's Wolfenstein 3D. A top-down perspective, vertical scrolling shooter, Raptor offers a look familiar to players of Xevious and Sidewinder, sporting smooth animation and high quality VGA graphics. One begins each mission from the Hanger Deck where, before deparring for battle, pilots register in the Locker Room (entering their name and selecting from one of several portraits) and DC0000 00 CCOO @ QUOOCOOO 1000000 : 0000200 1000000 Hexxagon Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"TAREHNERIS CHIPS &BITS TIE .15 'IRON HELIX CD You are out gunned and on the run from a deadly defender robot with only your wits to prevent intergalactic war. Your mission: destroy the doomsday weapon on board a derelict spaceship. Iron Helix combines fluid nonstop action with stunning photo realistic 3-D graphics and a dynamite soundtrack S60 \"MECHWARRIOR 2 Climb into one of 16 Battle Mechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100-ton machine that can annihilate a squadron of F-15s in a heartbeat. And you're about to battle your way across the planetary terrain. From ice to desert to urban land. S42 CITIE PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-599-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 Visa & MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping Times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with the same product. ALL SALES FINAL IRON HELIX Top tele. sogno to be meg ! ESS SITACE 502 gian VISASTOA A CARTOON AVENTURIOT O LCROATIASI Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI,APO, & FPO $3 per order. Air Mail to Canada $5 per order. 2 Business Day Air $5 per order; PR,HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea add'l; AK $19 1st item + $2 ea add'I Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + $6 each add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa Air Mail $25 1st item + $6 each add'l. Handling $2 per shipment \"DAY OF THE TENTACLE' Dr. Fred's mutated purple tentacle is out to take over the world. Travel through time with three outrageous characters. CD ROM version has full digitized speech. Features the voice of Richard Sanders who played Nesman on WKRP. Floppy Disk $39 CD-ROM S45 \"SSN-21 SEA WOLF' is the se. quel to the smash hit 688 Attack Sub. A crisis has erupted and fighting between the US and Russian's navy has occurred As the commander of the SSN-21. you are ordered into battle to destroy the fleet. Features over one hundred 16-bit digital true stereo effects. $52 OOO Les IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION IBM CD ROM Thrustmastr Game Card $27 Thrustmastr Rudder CS $99 Thrustmaster WCS II $94 Video Blaster Virtual Pilot $69 Voice Blaster $64 $349 $9 S15 IBM SIMULATION $44 $46 $52 Acoustic Research P22 S79 Acoustic Research P42S159 Acoustic Rsearch P570$319 Acoustic Rsearch P622$239 Adlib Sound Card $34 Adlib Gold Sound Card $99 Adlib Programmer's Man $6 Adv Gravis Ultrasound $129 Champ Joystick $19 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Flight Stick Pro Joystick $57 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Labtec 105 Powr Speake$21 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Maxx Control Yoke $54 Maxx Rudder Pedals FLT$39 Media Concept $59 PC Symphony Pilot Control Stand $20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16$149 Pro Audio Spectrm Plus$129 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Sony SRS9 Speakers $16 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $219 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 SBlaster Discovery 16 $469 SBlaster Discovery 8 $399 SBlaster Edtainment 169519 SBlaster Edutainment 8$448 SBlaster Power Speaker $24 Sound Blaster Pro Dix S124 Snd Blaster Voice Editor $54 Sound Galaxy BX2 S65 Sound Galaxy NX2 S79 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $119 Snd Galaxy NXPRO 16$169 Snd Galaxy Multimedia $399 Snd Galaxy 16 MMedia$499 Sound Machine $94 Sound Star Sound Enh $9 Thrustmaster Driving CS$99 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrustmaster Flight CS $59 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim$29 Knights of the Sky $29 Sky Chase F117A Stealth Fighter $42 Life and Death $19 Speed Racer $36 F15 Strike Eagle 1 $7 Life and Death 2 $24 Strike Commander $46 F15 Strike Eagle 2 915 Lightspeed Strike Com Speech Pak S18 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Scen $17 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Stunt Driver F15 3 Aces Pak $49 Mantis Experimental Ft $28 Stunt Island $36 F15 Strike Eagle III $41 Maximum Overkill $43 Sub War 2025 $42 F19 Stealth Fighter $12 Max Overkill Mission 1 $28 Syndicate $33 F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 Max Overkill Mission 2 $28 Tank $16 Falcon 3.0 $48 Max Pac $19 Task Force Admiral Pack$52 Falcon 3 Scen 1 $24 Mechwarrior 2 $42 Team Yankee $19 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Mig 29 $33 MegaFortress $12 Team Yankee 2 S24 Falcon AT $16 Megafortress Mission 1 $26 Test Drive 2 S30 Fire & Forgel 2 $30 Megafortress Mission 2 $26 Test Drive 2: Collection S19 Fleet Defender $48 Megafortress Mega Pak S38 Test Drive 2:Euro Chal S6 Flight Planner $24 Miami Enforcer $39 Test Drive 2:Muscle Car $12 Flight Simulator 4.0 S42 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $49 Test Drive 2:Supercars $12 Flight of the Intruder $15 Mig 29 Fulcrum S32 Test Drive 3 $29 Fly the Grand Canyon $39 New Facilities Locator S12 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $12 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Orbits $37 Thunderhawk 59 Grandest Fleet $36 Pacific Strike Tie Fighter $48 Great Naval Battles $44 Power Boat Simulator S39 Top Gun Danger Zone $20 GNB America in Atlantic $21 Power Hits: Battle Tech S32 Tornado $48 GNB Super Ships of Atl $19 Power Politics WIN $19 Tracon 2 GNB Scenario Builder $28 Privateer $52 Tracon 2 WIN Gunship $12 Rapcon $29 Tracon WIN $28 Gunship 2000 $37 Reach for the Skies $31 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $36 Gunship 2000 Scen Disk$24 Red Baron VGA $36 Voice Commandr F117A $18 Harrier Assault S32 Red Baron Mission Disk $24 Voice Command F15SE3518 Harrier Assault SVGA $48 Red Storm Rising ODCPS12 Western Europe Disk S9 Hawaiian Odyssey S16 Sailing Instrctr Pack $239 Wing Commander S19 Heatwave Sailing Simulator 3 $42 WC Secret Miss 1 & 2 $20 Heroes of the 357th S15 Sailing Sim 3 East Coast 32 Wing Commander Dix $48 HoverForce S31 Sailing Sim 3 W Coast $32 Wing Commander 2 $48 Hyperspeed $12 Scenery Collection Set AS19W C 2 Operation 1 or 2 $22 Indy Car Racing $48 Scenery Collection Set B$34 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 Instrument Pilot Scen E $59 Scenery Collin California$19 Wing Commander Acad $34 Instrument Pilot Scen W $49 Scen Collin Great Britain$19 Wollpack $15 Japan Scenery Disk $19 World Circuit $32 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Sea Wolf $52 World Circut Champ Ed $45 Jet Fighter 2.0 Miss Disk$19 Seal Team X-Wing $38 Jump Jet Secret Weapn Luftwaffe S34 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $20 Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 Shuttle S26 X-Wing Mission Disk 2 $20 Killing Cloud S6 Silent Service 2 S19 Yeager's Air Combat $21 Circle Reader Senice #46 ATP Flight Simulator $19 A.T.A.C $30 A10 Avenger 1993 $46 A320 Airbus AH-64 Helicopter Aces Over Europe $41 Aces Europe Mission 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission 2 $27 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission 1 $27 Aces of the Deep $42 Air Duel $34 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Aircraft Scenery Design $35 AirportFacilities Dir $12 Allied Forces $9 Armour Geddon $32 Armoured Fist $52 Assignment Miami $26 Attack Pack $42 B17 Flying Fortress $24 Battle Command $6 Birds of Prey Blue Max Aces Great WarS6 Car and Driver Cardinal of the Kremlin S6 Coaster $32 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Crash Course Cyber Race $42 Das Boot Submarine $9 Delta V $48 Design Your Own RR S19 Elite Plus $19 12 Roads to Gettsyburg S48 7th Guest S54 7th Guest 2:11th Hour $65 A Christmas Carol S18 Adult Reference S24 Ady of Brad Stallion S39 Ady of Willie Beamish S39 Aegis: Guardian of Fleet S54 Aesop Multimedia Fable S30 Airworks Music Library S34 Alone in the Dark $48 American Vista $52 Americans in Space S41 Anabel Dream Anc Egyp$52 Atlas Pack $71 Atlas of U.S. Presidents $26 B17 w/ Silent Service 2 $42 Backroad Racers $43 Battle Chess S46 Blue Force: Next of Kin $44 Bodywork: Adv Anatomy $52 Britannica Family Choice$64 Busty Babes $32 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 California Travel $9 Campaign $35 Castles 2 $50 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan S21 Conquests Robin Hood $42 Conspiracy $45 Crossword Cracker $50 Curse of Enchantia Cyber Space $38 Day of the Tentacle $45 Deep Throat $42 Desert Storm $32 Discoveries of the Deep S37 Don Quixote S24 Dracula $48 Dracula Unleashed $51 Dragon's Lair $36 Dune $54 EcoOuest $42 PEC CGW : $29 S34 S6 $32 $26 $26 $42 $39 "


"HCAPONS UT PULSE CAMNON 12 BELUS WALTHERMO Lib/Sound Blaster compatibility. Twenty and Zone 66. The first, Solar Winds, offers audio soundtrack, Zone 66 offers joystick bucks plus $2 shipping and handling delivers players the opportunity to explore the vastjockeys a healthy dose of entertainment for the registered version featuring many game ness of space in the tradition of Starflight and their money. However, occasional thumb enhancements. Star Control. As Jake Stone, a galactic bounty twitchers may find the action a bit much to Gamers with greater action in mind should hunter, the player is charged with completing bear, as this title is quite intense. Zone 66 also check out Night Raid (Argo Games), an arnumerous missions which force him to requires some extra configuring to get it up cade shoot 'em up where you must defend choose between stellar government and rebel and running, because it employs an ultra-fast your lonely desert bunker from wave after forces. Though much of the game involves mode that takes full advantage of 386 or faster wave of planes, helicopters, scuds and paradelivering goods in exchange for desirable systems and, as such, will not work if you have chutists. Let just three 'chutists land and the (and necessary) items, and in fighting off any memory managers or TSRs loaded. game's history. Successfully defending your Se defending our hostile attackers, one must, in the end, take a \"The shareware version of Zone 66 includes stand on one side of the conflict. Staying alive the first of four missions, all of which are intermission performances—pizza delivery long enough to reach the game's conclusion available once registered. These include: Forwas my favorite—and the chance to see your will be no easy feat. Careful management of eign Shores, Ice Wind, Desert Heat and War name immortalized in digital light on the resources and regular game saves are necessary Planes. Registration is $30, plus $4 shipping High Score page. to avoid becoming a crispy cinder in space and handling. An add-on module of four Each level is comprised of a certain number additional missions is also available for $25 of transport planes flying overhead, dropping or, if one prefers, all eight missions can be had parachutists on their way across the screen. for $45, plus the $4 S&H fee. A 386 or better Shooting a plane before it begins unloading system, 2MB RAM and VGA graphics are 'chutists is the best route, as a screen full of required. Though the keyboard is supported, falling troopers are harder to handle. Howa joystick is highly recommended. ever, as a plane explodes, it often drops wreckage on paratroopers who have landed. Let one bomb or missile slip by, though, and it's INIC good-bye bunker! Night Raid features 256-color VGA graphSolar Winds ics, multi-channel sound effects (for Sound Blaster and Disney Sound Source), over 20 \"camper's stew» concoction of gaming minutes of music (Ad Lib/Sound Blaster) and elements, Solar Winds includes fast-paced aran easy to use interface. Though simple, cade action, strategic planning and role-playNight Raid is a blast to play! ing elements all stirred together to make this sci-fi title a tasty and filling dish. While emZone 66 phasis does seem heavier in the action (shipto-ship combat) and strategy (resource Those desiring to experience one or both of management) elements, there are still suffithese worthy titles should contact: Epic cient role-playing components to widen the MegaGames, 10406 Holbrook Drive, Potoappeal of the game beyond that of strategists mac MD 20854 or call (800) 972-7434 to and wargamers alone. place an order, or (310) 983-9771 for general In all, Solar Winds is an exceptional product al product information. VISA and MasterCard are acinfo and worth the $30 registration fee (plus $4 cepred (MD residents add 5% sales tax). S&H). For that price you'll receive both epiWell, this concludes our look at shareware COORA HO M OFTFR. I also non sodes of Solar Winds (The Escape and Unititles for the Holidays. Until next time, great Night Raid versc-only Episode 1 is shareware); a hint gaming and best wishes for a blessed Holiday A 286 or better PC is required, though a booklet, a disk of bonus games; and a shortcut booklet, a season! 386 is strongly recommended. Registration ispatch that gives you extra energy and missiles. andling a mere $15, plus $2 shipping and handling Send Us Your Best A 286 or better, VGA graphics and 512K (while the shareware version includes only If you have authored a shareware or public three levels, the registered version adds an Zone 66, a high-tech 32-bit arcade game for domain game for MS-DOS compatible, extra 11 levels). Those wishing to order either 386 and faster MS-DOS compatibles, allows Macintosh or Amiga computers and would Hexxagon, Squarez Deluxe and/or Night Raid the player to be a pilot in a war-torn future like to have it considered for review in this should send a check or money order (in U.S. where survival requires defending the homecolumn, please send two complete copies on dollars) to: Software Creations, 26 Harris land from hostile enemies. In this action title, 3.5\" disks with documentation and a cover Street, Clinton MA 01510 (MA residents add one must fly a fighter jet through a huge 360letter to: 5% sales tax). Please specify disk size. To place degree scrolling playfield viewed from a topBest of the Rest an order with VISA or MasterCard, call (508) down perspective. The goal: inflict massive Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 368-8654. damage on enemy bunkers, artillery and indusAnaheim Hills, CA 92808. [6W trial sites, effectively stopping them in their Games of Epic Proportions tracks before there's no one left to defend. Two titles from Epic MegaGames that soon Featuring a unique introduction, excellent may be swooping your way are Solar Winds VGA graphics, and a high quality, upbeat Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"WYS CHIPS &BITS PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'I 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 'POLICE QUEST 4: OPEN SEASON' You're a detective for LAPD. A tough job under any condition, but especially now that you must solve a string of random murders. Features digitized background and video captured actors. $42 \"QUEST FOR GLORY 4' Your challenge is to rid the land of evil by destroying the Dark One himself. When you explore the realm of the undead to find him, wraiths, vampires, and monsters are lurking waiting for your next mistake. $42 ERIC UNREADY GATEWAY | COMPANIONS OF CD-ROM 156-COLOR SUPER VON THE 'ERIC THE UNREADY UNREADY' is on a madcap quest through this hilarious fantasy world packed with dragons, unicorns and the dreaded Attack Turtles. Cut through a swath of destruction as you unravel the secret of Queen Morgana. Features Hi-Res SVGA graphics. 3.5\" $21 LEGEND CD ROM \"GATEWAY 2: HOMEWORLD More deep space adventure, more alien encounters more exotic new worlds & special effects in the continuing saga. Battle a fantastic cult of terrorists & cross the event horizon of a black hole to discover mankind's last hope for survival the Heechee Homeworld. $34 COMPANIONS OF XANTH Explore Piers Anthony's magical world of mystic wonders and become a player in a game where the stakes are the existence of magic itself. Interact with Elves, Ogres. Demons, Centaurs, a serpentine Naga princess, and the deadly Gap Dragon. $36 WLEGEN ALEGEND IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $38 $39 $37 $49 Ectasy $32 El Gnio Del Jaguar WIN $46 Eric The Unready European Racers $44 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 F15 2 w/ B17 $44 Family Doctor $51 Fantasy Empires $36 Fascination WIN S39 Fatty Bear's Funpack $34 Fatty Bear World Game S44 Fatty Bears B-Day Surpr$38 Gobliiins Gobliiins 2 $30 Gofer's Winkel Advet $29 Great Cities World Vol 1 $52 Great Cities World Vol 2 $52 Great Naval Battles $55 Gunship 2000 W Scen $44 Guy Spy $29 Guy Spy Terror Deep $36 Hell Cab $65 Hi-Tech Aircraft $43 Impressionist Sources $49 Inca S42 Indy Jones Fate Altantis $52 Interactive Storytime V1 S30 Interactive Storytime V2 S30 Interactive Storytime V3 $30 Iron Helix $60 Jack and the Beanstalk $34 Japanese Alive $118 Jersey Devil $34 Jones In The Fast Lane S42 Jungle Book WIN S24 Jutland S52 King's Quest 5 WIN S42 King's Quest 6 $48 King's Ransom $38 Koshan Conspiracy $48 Labyrinth $39 Lands of Lore $35 Laura Bow 2 $42 Learn to Speak Spanish $64 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Library Art: Renaissance$60 Loom $39 Lord of the Rings Lost in Time $42 Lovely Ladies $39 Mad Dog Mcree $32 Mammals S92 Man Enough S48 Mantis Exprimntal Fightr $45 Mario Teaches Typing $48 Microcosm $49 Mosaic Magic $34 Multimedia: Vivaldi WIN $34 My Private Collection $39 Myst $64 Omar Sharif on Bridge $46 Oshkosk *92 PC Pix $39 Phantasmagoria $59 Pilgrim Quest $64 Presidents: Start George $94 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $44 Putt Putt Joins Parade $48 Putt Putt's Funpack $34 Rebel Assualt $44 Return of the Phantom $12 Rodney's Funscreen $46 Ruturn To Zork $48 Scrabble Deluxe $30 Secret Monkey Island $39 Shadow of the Comet $48 Shelly Duvall's Bird Kile $42 Sherlock Holmes 1 $44 Sherlock Holmes 2 $44 Sherlock Holmes 3 $51 Shuttle $24 Sim Ant $48 Sim City $48 Sim Earth Slater & Charlie $42 Software Toolworks Ref $79 Space Quest 4 $39 Spellcasting Bundle S32 Spirit of Excalibur $32 Bloodstone Char Edit $16 Star Trek 25 Anniversary$46 Blue Force: Next of Kin $42 Stellar 7 $42 Castle Wolfenstein $32 Street Atlas USA $108 Codename Iceman $15 Stronghold $36 Colonel's Bequest $15 Sweet & Low: Amer Folk $32 Conquests Robin Hood $36 Talking Classic Tales $60 Conquests of Camelot $15 Talking Jungle Safari $60 Conspiracy Deadlck File S34 Team Yankee 2 Covert Action S9 U.S.Atlas 3 Multimedia $52 Crime Does Not Pay $12 U.S. Atlas with Automap $64 Cruise for a Corpse $19 U.S. President $32 D Generation $28 USA Wars: Civil War $32 Dark Hall $9 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 $52 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Under a Killing Moon $48 David Wolf Secret Agent $15 Velveteen Rabbit Childr$58 Day of the Tentacle $34 Video Cube Deja Vu 182 WIN $28 Vital Sign: Good Health $61 Discoveries of the Deep $37 Where World CSD Dix $59 Don't Go Alone W.Commander/ Ultima 6557 Dragon Knight 3 W.C./ Underworld $59 Dragon's Sphere $42 Winning Elections $83 Dreamweb $36 Wolf Pack $39 Duck Tales $15 World Atlas $58 Earth Invasion WIN $26 World Vista $52 Earthrise World of Xeen $42 East vs West Berlin 1948 $9 Wrath of the Demon $29 $24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready IBM ADVENTURE Flashback $29 Floor 13 007 Jame Bond Stith Aff $12 Fool's Errand $12 Adv of Willie Beamish $24 Freddy Pharkas $42 All Dogs go to Heaven $17 Free DC S6 Alone in the Dark $35 Future Wars $9 Alone in the Dark 2 $36 Gabriel Knight $42 Altered Destiny $29 Galleons of Glory $19 Amazon $29 Gama Force $6 An American Tail $21 Gateway B.A.T. $6 Gateway 2:Homeworld $34 Batman Returns $32 Gateway Collect 1 & 2 $32 Beverly Hillbillies $30 Godfather $29 Bloodnet $42 GrailQuest $12 Bloodstone $34 HUMANS $26 Circle Reader Service #46 Hare Raising Havoc $12 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hired Guns $32 Homey D. Clown $27 Hook S32 Hound of Shadow S14 Inca S29 Inca 2 $42 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $36 Innocent Until Caught $38 Inspector Gadget $34 Isle of the Dead $38 Jack the Ripper $39 Jagged Alliance $48 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 King's Quest 6 VGA $42 King's Ransom $38 Kristal Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $42 LA Law Laffer Utilities WIN $24 Lane Mastadon S6 Laura Bow 2 $36 Leather Goddesses $12 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Legend of Kyrandia 2 $35 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGAS12 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGAS19 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $42 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun 834 Lost File Sherlock Holmes26 Lost in Time $36 Magic Pockets S18 Manhole $25 Manhunter New York $28 Manhunter SanFrancisco $15 Maniac Mansion $18 Martian Memorandum S19 Merchant Prince $39 $32 $9 Metal Mutant S32 Mixed Up Faery Tale $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose S29 Nebulas S27 Out of this World $36 Pepper's Adventure TimeS29 Plan 9 from Outer Space$31 Police Quest 1 VGA $24 Police Quest 2 $15 Police Quest 3 VGA Police Quest 4 $42 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $44 Return of the Phantom $39 Return to Zork $46 Rex Nebular $36 Rex Nebular Master Edit$52 Riftwar Legacy Riftwar Legacy CE $16 Ringworld $35 Rise of the Dragon $34 Robocop 3 SDI Sam & Max Hit the Road$38 Screen Antics WIN S 19 Search for the King S24 Secret Monkey Island S23 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster $52 Shadowgate WIN Space Quest 1 $16 Space Quest 4 Space Quest 5 $34 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 S34 Star Trek 25th Annivrsry $36 Star Trek:Judgment Rite $38 Starship Stellar 7 Surf Ninjas Teen Mutant Ninja Turtle $25 Terminator 2029 $37 DEC CGW2 S7 Ell $21 $15 $34 $36 $48 $38 $21 $37 "


"PERIPHERAL SURVEY Highway To The Hardware Zone A Survey Of Thrustmaster's Line Of Flight Sim Enhancements by Tom \"KC\" BashamBasham is co-author of Falcon 3.0: The Complete Handbook and Dynamix Great Warplanes: The Ultimate Strategy Guide. Tould-be pilots no longer have to join the military and dedicate years of their lives to training to know the thrill of strapping into a cockpit, planting their feet on rudder pedals, grabbing a flight stick, and kicking in the afterburners. Just as PC-based flight simulations have made great strides in bringing realistic combat situations to the armchair fighter jock, hardware has also kept up the pace so that a large enough payload of external controllers has been developed to make the flight sim experience a more visceral one. One company in particular has made flight sim hardware Job #1. Thrustmaster, Inc. rustmaster, Inc. began with a goal: to bring realistic-looking, fully functional throttle control devices to PC es to PC Fight simulators. From modest beginnings, the Thrustmaster product linc has ballooned to include multiple variants of the original throttle control, multiple lines of joysticks, rudder pedals, high-end game cards, and even a full cockpit model! and forced to use the keyboard for most your PC, just as though you typed it at the functions. keyboard. For example, if the letter \"\" was Molded to fit the user's left hand, the WCs assigned to Button 1, pressing Button 1 has six buttons and a three-position rocker would generate a \"t\" on the computer screen, switch mounted on the grip. Three buttons just as though the user typed it at the keyare mounted on the front of the grip and are board. Since the keyboard plugs into the operated by the user's ring, middle and index WCS, it is still totally functional as well. fingers. The remaining three switches and the During a game, users may mix keystrokes and rocker switch are mounted on the side of the WCS button presses freely, so the WCS does grip and are operated by the user's thumb. not have to be unplugged from the PC when The WCS has gone through several design the user wants to do other tasks, such as word modifications, and is now available in three processing. The PROM inside the WCS variants: the WCS Mk I, the UPROM up comes factory programmed with preset butgrade for the WCS Mk I, and the WCS MK !! ton assignments for most PC flight simulators. The user configures the WCS for the desired program by setting a bank of DIP The WCS Mk I switches found along the front of the unit. Although made of plastic, the WCS is The WCS Mk I is the original throttle amazingly stout. During many hours of indesign concept. Using a PROM (programtense air battles, I often slammed the throttle mable ROM) chip, users plug their keyboard to either the fore or aft stop extremely hard. into the unit, then plug the unit into the keyboard connector of their PC. Based on Despite abuse at my hand, my original WCS values stored in the internal PROM, each Mk 1 has survived nearly two years of flight button is assigned a particular key. Pressing simulating without a single crack. the button sends the assigned keystroke to The Mk I has many advantages. By storing multiple configurations in the PROM, the Mk I can be used with multiple flight simulators. Also, by using user-replaceable PROMs, replacement chips containing configurations for new products can be purchased so the Mk I does not become obsolete. Its largest advantage is the application of HOTAS to flight simulators. Anyone who has ever tired of finger gymnastics across the keyboard while flying Falcon 3.0 will greatly appreciate the many buttons and switches which can now be within easy reach. The WCS Mk I does have a few drawbacks, however. First, because game publishers do \"Chief test pilot\" Buzz Hoffman enjoys respite between sorties in Thrustmaster's cockpit with not adhere to a standard keyboard layout, the fiberglass F-16 fuselage. PROM will eventually become outdated and The Throttle Jockey's Dream The first of the Thrustmaster line, the Weapons Control System (WCS), is loosely modeled after an F-15 throttle and is based on the Hands On Throttle And Stick or HOTAS concept. HOTAS designs attempt to place every function a pilot could possibly need during combat on the throttle and stick. In this way, he never has to remove his hands from the aircraft's controls in order to operate radar, weapons, or other critical items. Prior to Thrustmaster products, flight sim users were woefully disadvantaged in this respect RESCUE FERENCY Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"STAR TREK Artwork IBM 32 CHIPS &BITS NNINE STAR TREK 25th ANNIVERSARY CD' Piloting the Enterprise is a thrill itself but now hear the actual voices of the original crew plus test your intergalactic problem solving in eight separate space and ground missions Features the music and sound effects from the TV show and VGA graphics. $46 PROFES 'STRIP POKER PRO' combines the strategic play action of 5 card Poker with some very different table stakes. 3 lovely opponents who are willing and able to bet it all for the chance to \"beat the pants off of you.\" Play against 3 opponents simultaneously. Features SVGA graphics and optional data disks. $33 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 The Admiral The similand Berg TOTO 'PRINCE OF PERSIA 2' The evil magician is back, this time he assumes your identity, steals your beloved princess and casts you out as a beggar. You must battle through 15 treacherous levels encountering serpents, spikes. spells, skeletons, and swordsmen. Then things might get murky. $44 \"LOST ADMIRAL' is a turn based production naval strategy game. Features 9 scenarios, a random map scenario. 15 campaign games, flagships with special abilities, very strong artificial empire, in depth officers ranking system, accumulates your career history as you play and a 2 player option. $19 \"HAND OF FATE is the second title in the Fables and Fiends series. Foi low an offbeat young mystic Zanthia, who must voyage to the cen. ter of the world to undo a hideous curse. Contains hours of fun for all Legend of Kryandia fans. Features unforgettable characters and awesome graphics.S34 QOPIBM ADVENTURE IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ADULT IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $36 $29 $34 Term 2029 Oper Scour $19 Term 2029 Rampage $38 The Dark Half DEMO S6 The Dig $45 The Prophecy Time Quest $12 Trolls $7 Under a Killing Moon $43 Uninvited $6 Uninvited WIN Universe 1-3 Each $34 Walker $32 War in Middle Earth $12 Warriors of Legend S19 Weird Dreams S12 Where Amer Past CSD S37 Where in Europe CSD $29 Where Space CSD Dix $44 Where in Time CSD $32 Where in USA CSD DIX $45 Where in USA is CSD $29 Where in World CSD $32 Where World CSD DIX $52 Wonderland $16 Yserbius $24 Zak McKracken $18 Dyno-Quest Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 Easy Street $36 EcoQuest 2 $34 EcoQuest VGA $32 Evelyn Wood Dyn Read $24 Fatty Bear B-Day Surpr $32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Incredible Machine VGA $29 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA S29 Kidworks $30 Kidwriter Gold S32 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 S30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 S30 Mavis Teaches Typing $29 Mavis Teach Typing WINS34 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Storyteller Vol 2 $30 Mozart's Music Machine $18 Munchers Bundle S29 Orbit: Voy Solar System $39 Peter Pan Painting Adv $34 Phonics Plus $25 Picture Perfect $32 Play Room $35 Power Hits: Kids $9 Print Shop Deluxe S49 Print Shop Bus. Graph $29 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Quarky Quaysoo's Sci $29 Read 'n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme Reader Rabbit 1 $37 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Reader Rabbit Read Let $37 Robot Writer Plus S30 Rock A Doodle Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Sec Island Dr. Quandry $38 Slater & Charlie Go Cmp$30 PC-Pix CD $39 Snapdragon $29 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack Planet of Lust $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Sex Olympics Speedreader WIN $30 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Speedreader WIN DD A $12 Strip Poker 3 $31 Speedreader WIN DD B $12 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 $19 Speedreader WIN DD C $12 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 $19 Spell it Plus $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 $19 Spell-a-Saurus $27 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 $19 Spelling $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 $19 Spelling Wiz $22 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 519 Sticky Bear Spellgaber $32 Strip Poker Professional S33 Stickybear Opposites $23 Strip Poker Pro DD 1 S16 Stickybear Parts SpeechS32 Strip Poker Pro DD 2 $16 Stickybear Reading S24 Strip Poker Pro DD 3 $16 Stickybear Read Comp $30 Strip Poker Pro DD 4 S16 Stickybear Read Tutor $31 Strip Poker Pro DD 5 $16 Stickybear Shapes $29 Strip Poker Pro DD 6 $16 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor$32 Story Sketcher $42 IBM ROLE PLAYING Super Munchers $29 Super Solver:Midnite Res$30 2400 AD Super Solver Spellbound$31 Arborea Jour Inner Sanct$34 Super Spellicopter $21 Arena Treasure Mountain $39 Bard's Tale 1 Char Edit $16 Tree House $39 Bard's Tale 2 9 19 Under Sea Adventure $39 Bard's Tale 2 Char Edit S16 Bard's Tale 3 Bard's Tale 3 Char Edit $16 IBM ADULT Bard's Tale Construction $27 Black Crypt $32 Adult Reference CD $24 Bloodwych $15 Adve of Brad Stallion CD$39 Buck Rogers Countdown$12 Busty Babes CD Captain Blood Centerfold Squares $21 Celtic Legends $32 Deep Throat CD $42 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Ecstacy CD S32 Challenge 5 Realms CE S16 Femme Fatale S26 Champions S37 Fmme Fatale DD 1-3 Ea $18 Champions of Krynn $19 Jigsaw Pinups S19 Champions Krynn CE $16 Lovely Ladies CD $39 Cobra Mission $42 My Private Colection CD$39 Companion of Xanth $36 Circle Reader Service #46 Conan $16 Corporation $14 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Curse Azure Bonds CE $16 Cyber Empire $16 Cyber Space $39 Cybercon 3 $29 Cybergenic Ranger S9 Dark Heart of Uukrul CE S16 Dark Queen of Krynn S32 Dark Queen Krynn CE $16 Dark Sun S52 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp S34 Darklands $37 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Editin $51 Daughter of Serpents S19 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Death Knights Krynn CE $16 Dragon Strike $12 Dragon Wars $19 Dragon Wars Char Edit $16 Dragons of Flame Dungeon Master $31 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira Mistress Dark S22 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $19 Eternam $19 Eye of the Beholder 1 S16 Eye of the Beholder CE $16 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of Beholder 2 CE $16 Eye of the Beholder 3 $21 Fire King $24 Flames of Freedom $12 Fountain of Dreams CE $16 Four Crystals of Trazere $19 Gateway Savage Frntier $32 Gods S26 Gryphon Masters Havlar S38 Hard Nova Char Edit $16 Immortal $17 Joan of Arc $12 Keys to Marimon S12 Knights of Legend CE $16 Lands of Lore $36 Lands Lore Char Edit $16 Legacy of Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $38 Legend S31 Legend of Valor S39 Legends of Drakka S38 Lord of the Rings V1 S32 Lord of the Rings V1 CE S16 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of the Rings V2 CE $16 Loremaster $29 Lost Tribe $29 Lure of the Temptress $37 Magic Candle 1 $19 Magic Candle 2 S12 Magic Candle 2 CE $16 Magic Candle 3 $19 Martian Dreams Martian Dream CE S16 Matrix Cubed MegaTraveller: Zhodani $6 MegaTraveller Char Edit$16 MegaTraveller 2 $12 MegaTraveller 2 CE $16 MegaTraveller 3 $39 Metal and Lace $49 Midwinter Might & Magic 3 $24 Might & Magic 3 CE $16 Might & Magic 4 $36 Might & Magic 4 CE S16 Might & Magic 5 $41 Might & Magic 5 CE $16 Mines of Titan S9 Obitus S26 Paladin:Scrolls Talmouth $16 Pirates Pirates Gold $42 Planet's Edge $34 Planet's Edge Char Ed $15 Pool of Radiance $15 DEC CGW 3 $9 $9 IBM EDUCATIONAL $31 Ace Detective $30 Ace Explorer:Sequencng$36 Ace Inquirer $40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 Auto Map $39 AutoWorks $49 Boom Box $19 Castle of Dr Brain EGA $25 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Cleo is a Dragon $30 Clock Works $19 Comic Book Maker Cuckoo Zoo $32 S6 $32 "


"the user will be forced to purchase an upgrade grade to the Mk I making it fully user prolips-head screwdriver to open the case and a chip. Also, because the WCS sends keystrokes grammable. small flathead screwdriver to remove the old to the computer, it is possible to overflow the The UPROM is a replacement chip for the chip, I installed the UPROM in less than 10 keyboard buffer on some slower computers. Standard PROM in the Mk I. Using the minutes. For example, on a 386DX-20 running Falcon accompanying software, the user can now The bad news is that the UPROM has two 3.0, pushing the throttle forward causes a program each button on the WCS without disadvantages. First, only a single keystroke series of \"=\" to be sent to the PC, and pulling removing the chip, unplugging the WCS, or can be assigned to a single button at any one the throttle back causes a string of \"-\" to be using any other specialized equipment. The time. The ability to program multiple keysent. At reasonable detail levels, the program user specifies the keys they want assigned to stroke macros to a single button would've does not poll the keyboard buffer often the buttons and the chip is programmed been nice, but according to Buzz Hoffman at enough for such a slow machine to process all through the keyboard interface without any Thrustmaster, the UPROM chip simply the data, resulting in delays between throttle special actions by the user. The upgrade also doesn't have the capacity to support this. As movements and corresponding throttle comes with a stand-alone Terminate and Stay an option, the remap TSR allows keystroke changes in the program. Sometimes on Resident (TSR) program that can be used to alternation. You can remap the \"r\" to be a \"p\" slower machines, quickly slamming the intercept keystrokes and remap them to user the first time it's pressed, but a \"b\" the second throttle will cause the keyboard buffer to specified keystrokes. For example, using the time. Repeated pressing of the WCS button overflow and lose the operative characters TSR, users could redefine the entire key would send \"pbpbpbpbpb\" to the computer. completely. When this happens, the throttle board, causing the spacebar to generate a \"g\" Second, the UPROM is a volatile memory lever may be pulled fully back, but the throtand a «g» to generate a backspace. chip. This means every time the computer is tle indicator in the program will still show powered down, the custom configuration is 100%. This is usually referred to by sim pilots lost. So, the gamer must download the WCS as \"being out of sync.\" anew each time the PC is powered on or This problem is most evident on slower whenever switching to a different game. Conmachines when the simulation in question sidering the flexibility gained by using the uses a pair of keys to increase and decrease UPROM at such a low price, most users will throttles, such as Falcon 3.0, on slower mafind this slight inconvenience perfectly acchines. Programs such as Red Baron that use ceptable. the 1 through 9 keys to step through throttle The UPROM retails for $35. stages do not have this problem since each position of the throttle lever maps to one of The WCS Mk II these keys. A slight movement of the lever will resend the key for that particular position and The latest addition to the WCS family is immediately re-synchronize the WCS with the WCS Mk II. Although it looks similar on the program. Synchronization problems disthe outside to its predecessor, the Mk II has The WCS Mk II weopons control system appear on faster machines. On the testbed substantial improvements. First, it uses nonis user configurable. 486DX-50, real-time based programs have volatile memory and, hence, retains its promore opportunities to poll the keyboard buff For example, Button 1 could be programming even after the computer is turned er, preventing overflows and character losses. grammed as the letter \"t\". The user could off. Second, it supports an advanced proIn several months of testing on the 486DXthen define up to five keyboard remaps using gramming mode that allows the user much 50, the WCS Mk I suffered no synchronizathe TSR. In the first remap, the \"t\" could be more flexibility than the earlier models. tion problems with programs such as Strike remapped to \"n\", and in the second to a \"p\". Third, it provides additional features which Commander and Falcon 3.0. The user then downloads the configuration allow programming the joystick buttons. to the WCS (which takes a few seconds), The user now plugs both the joystick and Finally, I found one other, albeit small, loads the extremely-small TSR, then executes the keyboard into the Mk II, then plugs the complaint with the WCS. I'm rather tall with the program. If the user presses Button 1, a Mk Il into the computer's keyboard and long arms and fingers, and found the actual \"\" will be sent to the computer. Then, by joystick porrs. Since the Mk II now intercepts stem upon which the WCS handle is using user-defined hot keys, the user can acboth keyboard and joystick lines. it can repromounted to be a little short. This in no way tivate any of the TSR remaps. If the user then gram either. The Mk II also has a row of five affects the operation of the device, however. presses Button I, the WCS will still generate LEDs along the top edge which toggle as The WCS Mk I retails for around $80. a \"t\", but the TSR will intercept the \"t\" and various buttons are pushed. Ever wonder translate it to an \"n\", then pass the \"n\" on to when flying in padlock view if the airbrake is the computer. In this way, the UPROM upon? Assigning the airbrake control to Button The UPROM Upgrade grade can be used to assign up to six values 6 will cause LED 3 to toggle on every time for each WCS button within a single flight The next incarnation of the WCS is the Burron 6 is pressed. If LED 3 is on, so is the simulator. I tested the UPROM and its reUPROM (User Programmable Read-Only airbrake and it doesn't require a change in mapping TSR on Falcon 3.0, Red Baron, Aces views to confirm it. Memory) upgrade for the Mk I. Despite the of the Pacific, and several other games under best efforts of Thrustmaster to assign the Using the advanced programming mode, a very complex system configuration using most effective functions to the WCS buttons, multiple keystroke macros can be assigned to SMARTDRV and many different memory it is impossible to please everyone. Additioncach button. For example, the user can promanagers without experiencing any conflicts. ally, users grew tired of buying new PROM gram Button 4 to send \"x n\" which, in Falcon chips as new products hit the shelves. So, the The good news is that the UPROM is 3.0, would radar lock a target and automatThrustmaster Skunk Works designed an upextremely simple to install. Using only a Phil. ically interrogate its IFF signal. Also, each Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Adwxed Durgconsoragons Moord CHIPS &BITS DARK SUN um caught SHATTERED LANDS \"DARK SUN: THE SHATTERED LANDS' The Dark Sun world of Athas is arid and bleak, a wasteland, ruled by thousand year kings. Your party begins as slaves in the city of Draj, destined to die as gladiators. You must find a way to escape into the hostile wildness and create a powerful rebellion $52 INNOCENT' It was a normal day for Jack T. Ladd professional thief until the Interstellar Revenue Service caught him. Jack owes several lifetimes worth of taxes and must pay it within 28 days. Join him on his journey of wheeling and dealings and help Jack strike a blow for tax delinquents. $38 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 RED CRYSTAL WORLDS DUSK S.GODS 1 . \"The Seven Secrets of Life\" W:AR \"RED CRYSTAL Seek out the seven secrets of life. Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or modem it. Features over 50 levels, breathtaking graphics and an auto mapping feature. $38 \"WORLDS AT WAR' is a game of planetary conquest. A space na val warfare based on the Solomon Campaign of 194243 naval combat on a galactic scale! Play for hours like a chess game or for a weekend with a full campaign Features a 72 page manual on \"How to Attack Neutral Planets\" S19 DUSK OF THE GODS' Become an Einherjor, one of Odin's champions, & travel throughout the lands of Norse Mythology. Battling hostile creatures will be one of many challenges you must face on your journey. Alter events so the gods may defeat the minions of Loke at the Battle of Ragnorak $24 @p. interstel IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS $25 $26 $10 $9 S6 $10 $22 S22 Ultima 7 Black Gate $46 Ultima 7 Char Edit $16 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $18 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $46 Ultima 7.5 Char Edit $16 Ultma 7.5 PI 2 Slvr Seed$20 Ultima Underworld $19 Ultima Underworld CE S15 Ultima Underworld 2 S46 Uncharted Waters S42 Unlimited Adventures $33 Veil of Darkness $37 Vengeance of Excalibur $12 War of the Lance $9 Waxworks Wizardy Trilogy (1-3) $32 Wizardry (1-3) Char Edit$16 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 4 Char Edit $16 Wizardry 5 $26 Wizardry 5 Char Edit $16 Wizardry 6 $34 Wizardry 6 Char Edit $16 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $42 Wizadry 7 Char Edit S16 $19 $19 Pool Radiance Char Ed $16 Pools of Darkness $38 Protostar $39 Quest for Glory 3 S38 Quest for Glory 4 S42 Questron 2 $12 Ragnarok $34 Realms of Arkania S37 Realms Arkania Char EdS16 Red Crystal S38 Rings of Medusa $19 Rome: Pathway Power $29 Savage Empire $34 Savage Empire Char Ed$16 Sea Rogue Secret Silver Blades $15 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Sentinel Worlds 1 CE $16 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Shadows of Mordor $19 Sleeping Gods Lie $19 Sorcerian $15 Space 1889 S12 Space 1889 Char Edit $16 Spacewrecked S19 Spellammr:Pir Rim Spc S16 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $38 Star Saga 2 $19 Star Trek:Next Genration$46 Stonekeep $52 Stronghold $39 Summoning $16 Tales Magic S16 Terran Envoy S9 Treasure Savage Frntier S12 Treas Sav Frontier CE $15 Tunnels & Trolls CE $16 Twilight 2000 VGA $24 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar$35 Ultima 5 Char Edit $16 Ultima 5 Warrior Destiny S35 Ultima 5 Char Editor S16 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 6 Char Edit $16 S16 Crazy Cars Never Ending Story 2 $9 Creepers $29 Never Mind $9 Dognapped $12 Night Breed Double Dragon 2 $15 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Double Dragon 3 $6 Ninja Rabbits Dr Doom's Revenge S9 Nova 9 $21 Drag L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Obliterator Dragon's Lair Oil's Well $12 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Pac Man $9 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Paper Boy 2 S27 Dragons Breath S27 Pick'n Pile S6 EMotion Pit Fighter Eagle's Rider S29 Power Drome S9 Eight Ball Deluxe S38 Prehistorik S29 Finale 53 Punisher S9 Fire & Forget Robocop $28 Flintstones $9 Rollerbabes S25 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs $19 Rotox $12 Galactic Conqueror $31 S.C. Out $29 Galactic Empire $27 Simp: The Arcade Game $31 Gauntlet 2 $9 Sliders $27 Gobliiins 3 $24 Space Ace $32 Gobliiins VGA Space Ace 2 $34 Gold of the Aztecs $12 Stellar 7 $21 Gremlins 2 $6 Street Ball $12 Guy Spy $24 Street Fighter 2 $39 Guy Spy Terror Deep $36 Street Fighting Man $3 Harmony S5 Super Space Invaders $25 Highway Patrol 2 Swamp Gas WIN $38 Home Alone $27 Take-A-Break CrosswordS24 Incredible Machine 2 $30 Take-A-Break Pinball S29 Incredible Toons $25 Take-A-Break Pool S29 Indy Jones Act Game $17 Taking of Beverly Hills 99 Infestation $19 Teenage MNT Man Miss $31 Innocent $38 Teenage MNT Adventure$32 Jetsons S9 Teenage MNT Arcade $24 Laffer Utilities S21 Tengen's Arcade Hits Larry's Casino S9 Terminator $34 Laura Bow Parlor Games S9 Terrorpods S24 Loopz S24 The Light Corridor S29 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 The Tinies S29 Monty Python $15 Thexder 2:Fire Hawk $15 Ms PacMan $6 Tristan Pinball $19 Mystical $27 Vaxine $12 Cirolo Pandorcel HAC 688 Attack Sub $10 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny $10 Bard's Tale 1-3 Each $10 Bargon Attack $10 Blue Force: Next of kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown$10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization S16 Codename Iceman S10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Conquests Robin Hood S10 Conquests of Camelot S10 Curse of Azure Bonds S10 Dark Queen of Krynn S10 Darklands $14 Darkspyre $10 Death Knights of Krynn S10 Dragons of Flame 58 Dungeon Master $10 DynaGreat War Planes $16 EcoQuest $10 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 S10 Fascination S10 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm$8 Gateway Savage Frntier $10 Global Conquest Strat $21 Gobliiins $10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 $16 Harpoon $16 Heart of China Hero's Quest $10 Hillstar S8 Immortal $10 Indi Jones Fate Atlantis $10 Indy Jones Grix Ady S10 Island Of Dr Brain $24 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 1-6 Each $10 Knights of Legend Laura Bow 2 $10 Leisure Suit Lary 1-5 Ea $10 Lemmings Loom Lord of the Ringa V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 56 Lost File Sherlock Holme$10 Lost in LA S10 LucasArts Adventure S16 LucasArts Air Combat S16 Magic Candle 2 or 3 S10 Manhunter N.Y. or S.F. $10 Maniac Mansion S10 Martian Dreams S13 Matrix Cubed S10 Might & Magic 1 $10 Might & Magic 2 S12 Might & Magic 3-5 Each $16 Patriot Pepper's Adventure Time $8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1-3 Each $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger S10 Protostar Quest For Clues 2-4 Ea S21 Quest For Clues 5 or 6 S16 Quest for Glory 3 or 4 $10 Quest for Glory $19 Railroad Tycoon $10 Railroad Tycoon Of Gde 10 Realms of Arkania $14 Rex Nebular $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Search for the King S10 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 S10 RECU IBM ARCADE $27 S8 Airborne Ranger $9 Aliens Ate My Babysitter$19 Amazing Spiderman S9 Arachnaphobia $12 Armor Alley $15 Artura S4 Back to the Future 2 S19 Back to the Future 3 S12 Bar Games $9 B.Simpson House Weird $31 Battle Storm $32 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv$19 Blockout $28 Cogito Windows $38 Cool Croc Twins $24 $10 "


"WCS button can be defined based on the which the sim-pilot presses the hat, one of dition of the FCS appears to have overcome position of the rocker switch. If the rocker is four resistance values are sent to the joystick these problems. up, Button I could be assigned «t 6», but if port. Fortunately, Thrustmaster's customer supthe rocker is in the middle, it could be \"u\", Whereas the WCS has to be configured to port is considered second to none. Thrustand if the rocker is down, it could be \"abc\". work with individual programs, the FCS is master's goal is to make their customers The Mk II also allows complete programdifferent. Games, either flight simulators or happy, and their support department goes to ming of the joystick buttons. If one is using other games, have to be written to read the great lengths to meet that goal. Thrustmaster for example, the Thrustmaster FCS (dissecond joystick Y-axis and buttons in order to will supply replacement potentiometers free cussed later) for a joystick, the Mk II allows fully utilize the FCS. Older games, such as of charge to customers with older FCSs, and the gamer to program all four buttons and Flight of the Intruder and Red Baron were in some cases, exchange the older unit for a each of the four positions on the coolic hat written before the FCS was created, and newer model. switch. With a little creativity, a WCS MK II therefore do not support its additional fea\"The FCS retails for around $75. configuration can be created that allows comtures. Fortunately, most quality game pubplete radar, weapons, and view control in lishers are well aware of the FCS. Current The Pro FCS Falcon 3.0, without the user ever having to products from Dynamix, MicroProse, Oriremove their hands from the stick or throttle. gin, and Spectrum HoloByte fully support The Pro FCS (PFCS) is the FCS's big Now that's HOTAS! the FCS. However, for products that do not brother. The PFCS has a metal base instead The Mk II also ships with a version of the support the FCS, it can be used in conjuncof the FCS's plastic one, and uses much higher tension springs. To push the PFCS to keyboard remap TSR mentioned above, altion with the Mk II to remap each of the the gimbal limits, one would have to apply lowing the user even more programming analog joystick buttons to keystrokes the over 20 pounds of force, giving the feel of flexibility! The WCS Mk II retails for $149. product will recognize. controlling a real aircraft. While one can WCS Summary move the standard FCS around like any other joystick, it can be a real workout to use the The WCS is an indispensable utility for PFCS. After a short initiation period, most flight simulator fans, especially modern jer PFCS users discover that the increased tencombat players. Although the original Mk I sion provides physical feedback on the posidoes have a few rough edges, it is still a better tion of the stick. This has the advantage of alternative than using the keyboard alone letting pilots \"feel\" where the stick is without and, once the UPROM upgrade is installed, taking their eyes off the screen to look. is extremely flexible and beneficial. The Mk I've flown with a lot of different joysticks, II, though, is the king of the line. Although and after using the PFCS extensively, I find more expensive, it provides programming cait provides the most accurate representation pabilities which are limited only by the user's of my experiences in flying real aircraft. Deimagination. pending on the length of their arm and the The FCS: Moving Into A New height of their computer desk, some users mount the PFCS to the desk to keep it from Market Pilots will experience more realistic feedback tipping. The height of my chair and desk with the increased tension of the Pro FCS. When Thrustmaster's resident F-16 pilot, allows my forearm to be nearly level when Buzz Hoffman, suggested they build a joysThe FCS has a non-linear response, like using the PFCS, and I have no problems with tick based on the standard B-8 grip used in that of actual aircraft controls, meaning that the unit tipping most aircraft in the 1960s and 1970s, there the farther the stick is moved in any one The Pro FCS retails for $100. was some resistance. It took some time to direction, the greater control output. For exOverall, anyone looking for additional freeconvince his partners at Thrustmaster that a ample, with only small movements near the dom from the keyboard and access to addijoystick with all four buttons and a four-pocenter of the travel, the FCS makes very small tional buttons on the ioystick should fine sition coolie hat switch was worthwhile. Buzz signals. At the limits of the travel, however, cither the FCS or the PFCS should serve succeeded, and two variants of the Flight small movements command very large sig. them well. Additionally, those looking for a Control System, or FCS, are now on the marnals. This gives a much more accurate feel of device with hefty physical feedback should ket. stick movement versus aircraft response than find that the PFCS is the device they're lookThe FCS one gleans from lincar-response joysticks. ing for. The standard FCS is a basic joystick frame The FCS has gone through some growing with a B-8 grip. The B-8 has three buttons, a pains. Thrustmaster found that users were The RCS trigger, and a four-position hat switch. The doing many things to the FCS during play Although rudder input is critical to flying FCS requires a standard game port that has that they had not expected. The potentiomethat they had not expected. The potentiomemost aircraft, few flig most aircraft, few flight simulators provided both joystick 1 and joystick 2 inputs on a ters were found to wear too quickly, so adequate rudder controls until very recently. single port (most game ports are designed this Thrustmaster replaced them with higher Even when rudder control is included, it is way). The three buttons and trigger correquality components. The grip twisted off too usually limited to the keyboard only. Comspond to the four buttons normally available easily, leading to a redesign of the grip's panies producing cutting-edge simulators to the two joystick inputs. The hat switch mounting. The shank wore our roo quickly now support rudder controls on the X-axis of mounted on top of the grip uses the Y-axis of where it met the gimbals, so a collar was the second joystick port. Joystick 2. Depending on the direction in added to protect the shank. The current renHardware-wise, there are only two rudder TERESANTER Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"4SPORTS CHIPS &BITS on m *NFL COACHES CLUB FOOTBALL gives you full 3-D views of the action on the gridiron. where the game is really decided. Us ing hundreds of real NFL plays. you make all the coaching decisions. Design your own plays to increase your own strengths. To get any closer to the NFL, you'd have to be drafted. $35 KVARTAL PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 NHLPA HOCKEY '94' brings you the real players and teams. Players will be able to track team standings and player stats. Compete for end of season awards like the Hart & Ross trophies & the Stanley Cup. Digitized ring announcer reports goal summaries & penalties. Ron Barr's voice sets up every game.542 MICROPROSE VALI .  COMPUTER THXC lomacu \"WALLS OF ROME' gives you the experience of siege warfare as the ancients knew it. Play extended campaigns of conquest and defense against an unpredictable computer. You give the orders: your troops carry them out. Buy Walls of Rome and get 1 Free! Call for Details. $39 The Exciting Game of International Intrigue *THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM MARK II' Brings the function of the keyboard into your left hand while your right hand controls the joystick. All functions are fully programmable. Plug your FCS into the back and program all its functions as well. The ultimate control! $94  DIPLOMATIE 'DIPLOMACY' is the computer version of the board game of persuasion, compromise & betrayal. Try to arrange deals that will lead you to victory. The result is diplomacy, a balance between trust and backstabbing. $12 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM BUNDLES IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Caster $14 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simcity/Simearth $20 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 Each $10 Spellcasting 101 $10 Spellcasting 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Starflight 1 $10 Strategy Plus Issue 4 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 10 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 11 S8 Strategy Plus Issue 13 $5 Strategy Plus 16-35 Each S5 Strike Commander S16 Stunt Island S16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prop Shadw$12 Time Quest Treasure Savage Frntier $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4-6 Each $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 and Underworld$16 Ultima 7.5 $16 Ultima Avatar Adventure S16 Ultima Underworld 1 or 2512 V Victory $16 Wasteland $10 Wizardry 6 $12 Wizardry 7 $16 Yeager Air Combat S16 Capstone CD Game Coll$45 Combat Classics $19 Dynamix Bundle $29 Eye of Beholder Collect $52 Land Sea Air 2 $29 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Leisure Suit Larry Bndle $39 Lost Treas Infocom 2 CD$29 Lost Treasures Infocom $39 Lost Treasure Infocom 2 $29 Lost Treas Infocom CD $39 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Marvel Trilogy S12 Max Pac $19 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Power Hits: Battletech $32 Power Hits: Kids S9 Power Hits: Movies $17 Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 Power Hits: Sports $19 Prime Time Hits $25 Prime Time Hits 2 $24 Scret Weap Luftwffe CD $42 Sierra Adventure Bundle $39 Sierra Arcade Bundle $24 Sierra Family Fun Pak $29 Space Quest Bundle 1-4$42 Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $59 Ultima Trilogy S39 Ultima Trilogy 2 S48 Wing Commander Dix S48 Wing Commandr Dix CD 548 Wizardry Trilogy $32 APBA Bowling $14 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 ML Baseball All Stars $12 APBA Col Basketball $32 John Elway Quarterback S6 ML BB Atlanta Braves S20 APBA Football $34 LH Boxing Contenders $16 ML BB Baltimore OriolesS20 APBA Micro Manager $32 LH Football 1989 Teams S16 ML BB Boston Red Sox S20 ATP Tennis $32 LH Football 1990 Teams $16 ML BB Brklyn/LA DogersS20 Action Sports Soccer $19 LH Football Go's Teams S16 ML BB California Angels $20 All American College FB $36 LH Football 70's Teams $16 ML BB Chicago Cubs $20 All Star Sports Pak $9 LH Football L Leaders $16 ML BB Chicago w Sox $20 American Gladiators $21 LH Football Utilities $16 ML BB Cincinnati Reds $20 Baseball for Windows $46 LH Pro BBall 91 Team $16 ML BB Cleveland Indian$20 Basketball Challenge $28 LH Pro Baskeball Utility $16 ML BB Detroit Tigers $20 Bball Challenge 1987 $9 LH Pro Basketball $36 ML BB Houston Astros $20 Bball Challenge 1988 $9 LH Pro Basketball 74-83$16 ML BB KC Royals $20 Bball Challenge 1989 $9 LH Pro Basketball 89-90S16 ML BB Manager's Ch $19 Bball Challenge 1990 $17 LH Pro BB L Leaders S16 ML BB Mill Brewers S20 Bo Jackson Baseball $12 LH Pro BBUtilities $16 ML BB Minnesota Twins $20 Carl Lewis Challenge 99 Lakers vs Celtics $17 ML BB Montreal Expos $20 Daily Dble Horse Race S19 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 ML BB New York Mets S20 David Robinson NBA Act$14 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 ML BB NY Yankees $20 Dirk's Baseball Encyc S19 Lance Haffner Col BBall S36 ML BB Oaklands A's $20 Face Off Lance Haffner Football S36 ML BB Philidelphia Phil S20 Fast Break S6 Lance Haffner Hockey S36 ML BB SanDiego Padre $20 Front Page Football $36 Links S29 ML BB SanFran Giants $20 Front Page Football Pro S42 Links Courses Bountiful $17 ML BB Seattle Mariners $20 Greens $34 Links Courses Firestone $17 ML BB St Louis Cardinal$20 Hardball 3 $34 Links Courses Bay Hill $17 ML BB Texas Rangers $20 Hardball 3 Collection $42 Links Courses Pinehurst$17M L BB Toronto Blue Jays20 Hardball 3 Players Disk S17 Links Courses Dorado $17 ML Football 2 $39 Hardball 3 Sladium Disk $19 Links Crse Barton Creek $9 ML Personal Pro Golf S28 Harlem Globetrotters $15 Links Crses Troon North $17 Madden Football $12 Hole In One Mini Golf S6 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Madden Football 2 S17 Hole In One Mini Golf Crs $3 Link Pro CD Mauna Kea S19 Mario Andretti Racing S17 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix $12 Links Pro CD Pinehurst S19 Michael Jordan Figh Sims38 International Sports Chal$ 12 Links Pro CD Banff Spr $19 Micro League FB DIX S39 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S6 Links Pro CD Belfry $20 Microleague 82 BB SeasS17 Jack Nicklaus Course 1 $15 Links Pro CD Insbrook $20 Microleague 83 BB Seas$17 Jack Nicklaus Course 2 $15 Links Pro Course Disk 6 S20 Microleague 84 BB SeasS17 Jack Nicklaus Course 3 $15 MUDS Microleague 85 BB Seas$17 Jack Nicklaus Course 4 $15 ML 1950s World Series $17 Microleague 86 BB Seas$17 Jack Nicklaus Course 5 $6 ML 1960s World Series $17 Microleague 87 BB Seas$17 Jack Nicklaus Sign Ed $12 ML 1970s World Series $17 Microleague 88 BB Seas$17 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 S9 ML 1980s World Series S17 Microleague 89 FB Seas$17 Jack Nicklus SE Clip Art S24 ML Baseball 4 Fan Man S25 Microleague Baseball 4 $31 Joe Montana Football $31 ML Baseball 4 Gen Mng S19 Microleague Basketball S28 Circle Reader Service #46 Microleague Football S20 Microsoft Golf Windows S39 Mike Ditka Power FootbllS34 NFL Chall Col Alumni S9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 S9 NFL Challenge S60 NFL Chal 1984 Teams $15 NFL Chal 1985 Teams $15 NFL Chal 1986 Teams $15 NFL Chal 1987 Teams $15 NFL Chal 1988 Teams $22 NFL Chal 1988 Teams $9 NFL Chal 1989 Teams $9 NFL Chal 91 Pre Season $9 NFL Chal All Star Team $9 NFL Chal All Star Teams $9 NFL Chal Dream Teams $9 NFL Chat Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club S35 NFL Coaches Club LTD $48 NFL Football S31 NFL Proleague Football $12 NFL Pro League FB 92 519 NFL Video Football NHL Hockey $39 Nascar Challenge S31 PGA Tour Golf PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Pga Tour Crs 1 WIN $17 Playmaker Football S12 Pro League Baseball S18 Pro Tennis Tour 2 S29 Pro Tennis Tour 2 S32 ProFootball Analyst 92 $19 Quarter Pole RBI 2 $9 Road to the Final Four $37 Shufflemania Sporting Triangle S3 Strat-O-Matic Comp BB $29 Summer Challenge S19 Summer Challenge $34 DEC CGW 5 S29 IBM SPORTS IBM BUNDLES S9 ADD Collector Edition 2 S46 ADD Starter Kit $39 Air Combat Classic S45 Allied Forces $12 Allied Forces $9 4D Boxing $17 4th & Inches $4 APBA Baseball S24 APBA Baseball Gen Mn S29 APBA Baseball Stat 2.0 $29 APBA Baseball Wiz 2.0 $29 APBA Basketball $34 "


"covered with red push-button switches, tailored for use with Falcon 3.0. Every function from IFF, to raising and lowering landing gear, to issuing wingman commands, to operating radar is included on either a push-button or toggle switch. For another $1,000, one can get a fiberglass F-16 fuselage for the cockpit. Assembly inStructions are provided on a floppy disk, an although cumbersome, the cockpit is not difficult to assemble. Thrustmaster recommends two people to complete assembly, but I found the task to require approximately 1.2 people; not hard enough to require that extra person, but just hard enough to be a difficult solo job. With three hours and an electric screwdriver, I converted nearly 200 pounds of particle board into a 5' long, 4' wide, and 4 tall replica of an F-16 cockpit. The only thing missing was an ejection seat and Pratt & Whitney F100-200 engine! Be advised, though, the cockpit has no stealth properties, and has had little luck evading Mk I Spousal Search Units! 5 . Using milspec, 1% tolerance components, the ACM card suffers no drifting problems due to heat buildup, even in high speed 486's. During my testing, a standard generic game card would begin suffering stick drifting on a 486DX-50 only a few minutes after starting a simulation. In sensitive products such as Falcon 3.0, the drift quickly became quite annoy The RCS rudder control system frees pilot's hands even ing and difficult to control, further from the keyboard. forcing me to recalibrate the pedals currently on the market. The Thruststick every three or four minSustem and the Marx utes. The ACM card, however, performed Rudder Pedals. Although the Maxx sell for flawlessly, suffering no visible effects. only $35, they are molded from some sort of The ACM card is also adjustable. A potenfibrous plastic, their pedals are mounted only tiometer mounted on a long cable allows a few inches apart, and they have an inadecompensation for problems with high clock quate physical frame. The Maxx pedals are speeds. Game cards read the resistance generdue to their proximity ated by the joystick and send a digital pulse to each other, and are inaccurate to fly with to the computer representing the resistance. due to the poor physical frame that allows Many programs, though, were not designed both pedals to be depressed simultaneously with high speed 486s in mind. Some of these The RCS, however, are built entirely of programs do not poll the joystick port often metal with plastic foot rests. The pedals are enough, and pulses from the game card are positioned over 12\" apart, making them commissed, leading to control problems in the fortable to use, even for 6'2\" people like game. This problem is not limited to just myself. The foot rests are mounted on parallel flight simulators, but to any product running crossbars that pivot on a center point, so on a low-end machine that uses a joystick. when one pedal is depressed the other cannot By adjusting the ACM's port, the user can be, like rudder pedals in real aircraft. The unit widen or shorten the length of the pulse has a hefty price tag, especially compared to generated by the card. By lengthening the the Maxx, but are built sturdy enough to last pulse width, the program is given more time a lifetime. to read the port and receive the pulse. By The only defect I found with the RCS I adjusting the ACM card's setting, products examined was the joystick port connectors. from the older Red Baron to the recent Strike The original RCS units were shipped with a Commander all experience no joystick probconnector plug with a long plastic rim. This lems on the testbed 486DX-50. rim interfered with the seating of the connecThe ACM card has an approximate retail tor to the game port. Although electrical conprice of $40. tacts are fine and the RCS work flawlessly, the connector will come unplugged quite easily. For The Simulator Pilot Who Has A supply of connectors without the plastic Everything... rim have been secured, and I could find no Rounding out the Thrustmaster line is the fault whatsoever with the RCS equipped with massive unit known only as \"the cockpit.\" the newer plug. This is a particle board replica of an F-16 The RCS has a retail price of around $120. cockpit. For around $700, the base package gives the sim-pilot an item to climb into, with The ACM card mounts for an FCS (or other joystick), WCS With the coming of faster machines runand RCS. The monitor can then sit on a ning at hotter temperatures, many game cards platform where the HUD would normally built for 286 and 386 class machines experibe. For around $1,200, the package comes ence problems in faster 486s. Hear buildup with the cockpit frame, plus a padded seat causes the electrical center of the joystick to with a head rest, safety harness, and a \"switch drift, and older programs can't always handle unit.\" the higher clock speeds of newer machines. The switch unit replaces six of the wooden The Thrustmaster ACM card was designed panels with plastic panels which are replicas to solve these problems. of the actual panels from an F-16, and are The Future Thrustmaster products are quality products designed to greatly enhance the fantasy world of PC flight simulators. The Thrustmaster line is impressive, but the company isn't resting on its laurels. Although they're not letting their secrets out of the bag yet, Buzz Hoffman indicates they have quite an array of new products in the works. Until the new products take flight, however, pilots are advised to remain seared in that particle board cockpit and keep those flight harnesses fastened. Cow For a mere $1900, this warbird can be vectored to your home base. Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"JAMES E DUNNIGANS CHIPS &BITS VILTUN \"VICTORY AT SEA is a WWII Pacific theater game. Plot multi legged courses from the Panama canal to Australia. Promote, demote or reassign commanders. Receive battle, intelligence, and communications reports. Features an on line Game Book with extensive his. torical background and pictures. $46 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 \"M4' 16 December 1944: Somewhere in the Ardennes. The engines roars to life. The tank pivots out of it's hiding place in the tree line. The familiar squeak of the track links lend a rhythmic note to the motor's rumble as you move slowly down the road closer to Germany. One more day to stay alive. $34 MEERWANT VICTORY AT SEA   th LIGHT BRIGADE 'THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE' during the Crimean War, was one of the bravest, & saddest incidents in British Military History. Of the 673 men who began the charge only 195 were fit for action at its end. Features a large game area, 2 player mode, animated graphics, strategic and tactical maps. \"WORLD WAR 2: BATTLES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC Wage war for the sole ownership of the South Pacific Historically correct battles challenge all, to do better than the Navy did as it happened in World War II. Create and transport armies to en. emy ports. Play as the U.S. or Japanese forces. $39 THE SOUTH PACU! \"CARRIERS AT WAR 2 offers more tension and excitement. Features eight new scenarios, some hypothetical, others controversial; an improved war room intelligence system; and tougher artificial intelligence. $42 RORKE'S DRIFT QQP IBM SPORTS IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY      $26 $19 The Games Winter Chal $34 Tie Break Tennis $9 Tom Landry Football $24 Tom Landry Football Dix S32 Tony LaRussa Baseball $16 Tony LaRussa 1901-68 S15 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $15 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $15 Tony L Fantasy Manager$15 Tony L Classic Stadiums$15 Tony L AL Stadiums $15 Tony L NL Stadiums $15 Tony LaRussa 2 $36 Tony L 2 1992 Team $16 Tony L 2 Fantasy Mngr $14 Tony L 2 Stadiums $18 Unnecessary Roughness$36 Wayne Gretzky 2 $34 Wayne Gretzky 3 $36 Wayne Gretky Leg Sim2 $29 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Weaver Commiss Disk 2$16 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Class Soccer S28 $36 $41 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blood & Iron $52 Blue and the Grey S42 Borodino Napoleon Invd $29 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 Campaign $32 Campaign Mission 1 $19 Carrier Strike S39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak S19 Charge of Light Brigade S19 Civil War No Great GloryS21 Conflict $12 Conflict in Vietnam $9 Conflict: Korea $12 Conflict: Middle East $14 Decision at Gettysburg $12 Dreadnoughts $34 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Paci War $46 G.Grigsby War in RussiaS48 German Raider Atlantis S26 Gettysburg:Turning Point$36 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet Grey Seas, Grey Skies 536 Halls of Montezuma S24 Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 S24 Harpoon Chall Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series$17 Harpoon Design Series 2$25 Harpoon Scenario Editor$27 High Command $45 In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 UMS Original $14 Line in the Sand $12 Under Fire $12 Long Lance $39 V Victory:Market Garden$44 MacArthur's War $16 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 MacArthur's War $9 V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Main Battle Tank C Germ$36 V Vict: Gold, Juno,Sword$44 Main Battle Tank Mid E $36 Victory at Sea $46 Main Battle Tank N Germ$36 War in the Falklands $26 Malta Storm $36 Warship Change History $26 Man of War S36 Waterloo $19 Mare Nostrum Western Front $21 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 White Death Midway $12 World War 2 $39 Moscow Campaign S36 Northern Fleet Operation Overlord $36 IBM STRATEGY Pac Storm Midway Cpgn$36 Pac Storm Solomon Cpn$36 A Train S34 Panzer Battles $12 A Train Construction Set S23 Patriot $23 Air Force Commander $16 Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Airbucks $36 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Ambush at Sorinor $42 Patton Strikes Back Ancient Art of War Sky $34 Prelude to Jutland $26 Archon Ultra $30 Red Sky Morning $36 Are We There Yet $17 Return to Falklands $28 Armada 2525 $29 Rising Sun $26 Ashes of Empire $48 Road Sumtr Appomattox $45 Bandit Kings Anc China $32 Rommel Battles N Africa $24 Battle Isle Rommel at El Alamein $36 Battle Isle Scenario DiskS22 Rommel at Gazala $36 Battles of Destiny $36 Second Front Bermuda Square Seventh Fleet $36 Big Business Squad Leader 94 $48 Breach 2 $12 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Storm Across Europe $12 Breach 3 $36 The Great War $36 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $39 Third Reich S34 Caesar $36 To The Rhine S36 Campaign 2 $36 Typhoon of Steel $12 Capitalist Pig WIN S19 UMS 2 $19 Carrier Command S9 UMS 2 Civil War $24 Carriers at War $19 UMS 2 Desrt Storm Scn $24 Carriers War Const Kit $29 UMS 2 Planet Editor $16 Carriers at War 2 $43 Circle Reader Service #46 Castles S18 Castles North Campaign $19 Castles 2 $36 Centurion Defende Rome$19 Civilization $32 Civilization Master Edit $42 Clash of Steel $42 Cohort 2 $19 Command HQ $19 Conquer for Windows $39 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Conquer Kingdm Scen 1 $25 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $13 Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Dark Seed $19 Dark Star $36 Defender of the Crown $12 Designasaurus 2 S28 Detroit $36 Dino Wars $6 Diplomacy S12 Discovery Stp Columbus$34 Dominion: One King Life S41 Dominus $39 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dune $12 Dune 2 $44 El Fish $34 Empire Deluxe S35 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Fantasy Empires S39 Fields of Glory S36 Fighting for Rome $12 Final Conflict $12 Fort Apache $24 Gemfire $37 Genghis Khan $37 Global Conquest S29 Global Domination S36 Global Effect $14 Gobliiins 2 $24 $17 $14 Gold of the Americas S24 Harpoon 2 $52 Heirs to the Throne Imperium Inindo Koshan Conspiracy Kye Deluxe WIN L'Empereur $37 Laser Squad $16 Lemmings $32 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings 2: The Tribes $32 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scen Disk $23 Lost Vikings $20 Maelstrom $38 Master of Orion Medieval Lords Mega Lo Mania $19 Merchant Colony Millenium S6 MoonBase S24 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $29 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Nuclear War Objection $29 Objection Enhanced $42 Ogre Operation Combat $12 OutPost WIN S42 Overlord Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $36 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General Scen 1 $21 Perfect General Scen 2 $23 Populous $17 Populous 2 $26 Populous Promise Land $14 Powermonger S34 Rags to Riches S36 DEC CGW 6 IBM WAR GAMES S9 $32 $36 $19 $21 $21 Action North Atlantic $19 Action North Atlantic $26 Action Stations Scen 1 S6 Action off River Platte S26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour S22 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Banzai $9 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $36 Battle of Austerlitz $12 Battle of the Atlantic S36 Battles of Napoleon S24 Battleship Bismark S26 "


"Scorpion's Mail Serpent Isle Lands of Lore Realms of Arkania Eye of the Beholder III Crusaders of the Dark Savant Alone in the Dark Darkside of Xeen Ultima IV Ultima Underworld II Scorpia Answers Your Questions About Adventure And Role-Playing Games A h, my time of year is here at last! It's the \"gift\" you find, and that depends on Hah! Anyway, there's a blanket solution for also Fred's favorite time of year. He which serpent eye you use to open the wall. the first problem, but the second requires a I just loves those looong winter nights, Along one path, it's a silver goblet, and along different approach. You could almost say you and he does so look forward to Christmas. the other it's a jeweled dagger. Either is satishave to give something the shaft (ouch!). Not from any kindly feelings, mind you. It's factory; you don't need both. Darkside of Xeen: Somewhat surprisingly, just that this is when he gets to hang up his Realms of Arkania: After my Arkania artia number of players are having trouble in the traditional Yuletide shrunken head garland. I cle was published, I heard from a reader in southern sphinx with the name needed to get always have ambiguous feelings about that. Florida about the sword/end game business. up the stairs. I say surprising, because by this The regulars are used to it, but it does make He reports that, while you don't absolutely time in the game, it should be evident that the newcomers a little nervous--especially if need the sword for the \"big fight,\" you still JVC is a big Star Trek fan. And with an they happen to recognize any of the faces. must have it in your inventory to reach the anagram of only five letters, the answer ought Speaking of Fred, readers do ask about him automatic sequences that end the game and to be obvious with just a little thought. sometimes: \"Who is Fred?\" and \"What is give you the opportunity to save the party). Ultima IV: Yes, an oldie but very goody Fred?\". Of course, I don't tell him about these So, yes, you do have to go out and get it after shows up again after all these many months questions. He's a very private being, and it all. Apologies to anyone who may have been (or was that years?). Maybe it's all those would upset him to know that people are misled earlier, and thanks to Carlos Casgamers who are buying the series on CDmaking inquiries about him. Anyway, Fred istaneda for telling me about this. ROM. Whatever, the format might be new, the bartender/bouncer at the Scorpion's Tale. Eye Of The Beholder III: Several people but the questions are classic, including perHe's half grue and half...well, let's just say are having trouble \"getting into the temple\" haps the most-asked (when Ultima IV was that somethings are better left unsaid! You're in N really much better off not knowing that. Ret knowing that. Reing it far too early. Only after you've gone ing it far too early. Only after you've gone herd???\" Why, in Magir herd???\" Why, in Maginicia, of course! Not, ally. Let's get to the mailbags... through the Mages Guild and had your little however, right inside the ruins. But nearby, Serpent Isle: A lot of players are having \"visit\" with the lich will a way into the temple very nearby. Think vertical instead of horitrouble getting through the Knight's Test. Most open up. So don't be in such a hurry. You'll zontal. manage to obtain the claw, but are at a loss as get there eventually. Ultima Underworld II: Folks are still havto how to get on with it and find the ashes. Of Crusaders of The Dark Savant: Rumorsing trouble with those colored paths and course, there's a secret door they've overlooked. have been getting around about A Really pyramid in the void. The idea here is simple Check nearby walls after a certain assassination Neat Item in the game. Of course, there are (even if doing it isn't). You follow the path to attempt. Another big problem for people is lots of nice weapons and other things to pick the pyramid. You jump all over it to make it obtaining water from the Temple of Tolerance up on your way, but I suspect what most the same color as the path that brought you (where you find Morregro). That's no surprise, people are asking about is the Cane of Corthere, ending at the top. Then you jump since this is the one place you don't fill your pus. This very specialized (and very potent) through the moongate. Since you have to do bucket at. Remember the little transposition weapon can be used only by a Facrie Ninja. this four separate times, the exercise is tedithat happened here? Find the missing piece and That's right, a Faerie Ninja. Not a combinaous, but it has to be done. use the bucker there. (I know it doesn't make ion that would occur to most people (heh). And that's about it for this look into the sense, but that's how it is.) And then you have to figure out where it is. mailbag. In the meantime, if you need help Lands Of Lore: Since my original article on It just so happens Blindmeis has it. As you with an adventure game, you can reach me in this game, some important information has guessed, you'll have to kill him if you want come to light, including news of a nasty bug. the Canc. Just keep in mind that he may not On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under Down in the Draracle caves you must rescue have eyes, but he's no pushover, and neither Lora and get her to the Draracle before you is the help he calls in. You're gonna carn this the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Visit the Games Round Table leave. This has to be done before you visit the one. (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). Draracle, since you only have one chance to Alone In The Dark: Some folks have see him and can't go back later. If you exit the experiencing a little difficulty in making it By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, caves with Lora in your party, the game will down the length of the picture gallery. If stamped envelope if you live in the United crash later on when Paulson tries to join you. they're not getting hacked by tomahawks in States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, Also in the Draracle caves, there are two paths the back, they're being punctured by arrows New York, NY 10028. to his lair. Which one you take determines in the chest. And they say art is good for you. Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"JY GUUU CHIPS &BITS The Software Toolworks STAR WARS. CHESS STAR WARS CHESS' Along time ago, in a galaxy far, far away, a great battle of good and evil was fought and won. Now you can rediscover the courageous characters from the Star Wars saga. Relive their struggles in one of the world's oldest games, brought to life in brilliant 3-D animation. $34 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 SIMCITY 2000 is the long awaited follow up to SimCity that takes urban plan ning into the next century. SimCity 2000 adds a new level of realism & sophisticated gameplay. New features include underground water and transportation systems 3D views & SVGA graphics. S42 OOD Ruu 'WARLORDS 2 brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system. Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. S40 10 LEMMINGS unique mind boggling game of multiple skill levels. Take command of the wackiest collection of misdirected rodents ever seen on your screen. Save the lemmings from certain doom by leading them to safety using special moves like dig. climb, parachute, block, punch, and self destruct. 519 THE 'GAME-MAKER' lets you create action adventure games as unique as your imagination. Design your own animated characters, monsters, and scenes. Create sounds & import images. No programming. Now with SB support. $49 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL BUDGET $26 S4 Strategic Forces $9 Strike Squad $41 Sub Version $36 Sword of Aragon $28 Task Force 1942 $39 Tegel's Mercenaries $19 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 $44 Theatre of War $12 Traders S15 Unnatural Selection S38 Vikings Fields Conquest S37 Visions of Aftermath Walls of Rome S39 War in the Gulf $34 Warlords Warlords 2 When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War $19 S24 $12 $12 $9 $40 $29 Siege IBM TRADITIONAL Railroad Tycoon Classic $22 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Rampart Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $16 Red Zone $32 Renegade Leg Interceptr$12 Riders of Rohan $19 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms S42 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 S42 Rules of Engagement $12 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN S34 Seven Cities Gold 2 S36 Shadow President $34 ShadowGate WIN S32 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 $12 Siege Expansion Disk $19 Siege With Exp Disk $24 Sim Ant $32 Sim Ant Windows $34 Sim City 2000 Sim City Classic $27 Sim City Classic Win $37 Sim City $27 Sim City Graphic Set 1 $18 Sim City Graphic Set 2 $23 Sim City WIN $34 Simearth $34 Simearth WIN $34 Simfarm Simlife $39 Simlife WIN $42 Space Hulk $38 Spaceward Ho! $38 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Special Forces $39 Star Control $29 Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions Starfleet 1 S17 Starfleel 2 $38 Casinos of the World S29 Checkmate Checkmate WIN $36 Chess Net WIN $9 Chess X Colossus $9 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 $39 Chessmaster 2000 $27 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $34 Classic 5 S32 Classic 5 WIN S32 Clue S12 $12 Clue Master Detective $15 Combination Lock S9 Dealer's Choice $29 Demon Blue Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong's Jacks & Video $9 Edward O'Thorpe BJ $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 FS-Pro $21 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Puz $28 Gambit $38 Game-Maker $49 Games Master WIN Game Pak 1 $19 Games People Play $21 Go Master Dix Ver 4 $89 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Go Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Go Mastr Dix Ver 5 WIN $79 Go Master Junior Ver 4 $19 Go Master Junior Ver 5 $19 Go Master Jr Ver 5 WIN $19 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Go Master Tool Kit WIN $79 Go Master Ver 4 $34 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $27 Grand Master Chess Dix $37 Grandmaster Chess $19 Home Alone 2 $26 Home Casino Spectacular$9 Hong Kong Mah Jong $32 Hoyle's Book Games V1 S21 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V4$29 Ishido S17 Jeopardy S9 Jeopardy 2 S9 Jeopardy 25th Aniv S15 Jeopardy Junior Jeopardy Sports Edition S7 Jeopardy. Super Talking $21 Jones Fast Lane S24 Joseki Genius $39 Klotski: Polish Puzzles $9 Laffer Utilities WIN $21 Lexicross $24 Lotto Gold $29 Lucky's Casino Adventre$39 Monopoly $29 Monopoly Deluxe $29 Monopoly Deluxe WIN $32 Oligopoly Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Sharif on Bridge $34 On Target $10 Origamo $39 Pictionary $12 Pool Shark $15 Positronic Bridge Price is Right $15 Prime Time Hits $25 Prime Time Hits 2 $24 Puzzle Gallery 1 $9 Puzzle Gallery 2 $9 Puzzle Master Puzznic Risk $19 Risk WIN Rodeo Games $9 Russian Six Pack $39 Sargon 4 $9 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble $19 Scrabble Deluxe Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Scribler $34 Scruples $28 Shanghaii 2 $29 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Shogi Master S34 Solitaire Royale S16 Solitaire WIN S32 Solitaire's Journey WIN S38 Solitaires Journey S34 Sorry Space Vegetables Spot Super Jeopardy $27 Super Tetris Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Terminator 2 Chess War $37 Terminator Chess $34 Tesserae WIN $16 $15 Tetris Classic $26 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Trump Castle 2 S6 Trump Castle 2 DD1 Trump Castle 2 DD2 Trump Castle 3 $29 Turn-n-Burn $9 Vegas Entrtnmnt Pak $20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Video Poker WIN $12 Video Poker by Masque $9 Virtual Reality Studio 2 549 Wayne's World $19 Welltris $15 Wheel of Fortune 1 $6 Wheel of Fortune 2 $6 Wheel of Fortune 3 $9 Word Tris World Champ Backgam $24 $42 3D Pinball $10 3 in 1 Players's Pack 59 4th & Inches Action Stations Scen 1 $6 All Star Sports Pak $9 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slim 7 Card StdS10 Armada Villa Crespo S10 Back to the Future 3 S12 Backgammon By George S9 Battle of Austerlitz $12 Bball Chal 1987 Teams $9 Bball Chal 1988 Teams S9 Bball Chal 1989 Teams $9 Blue Max Aces Great WarS6 Bo Jackson Baseball $12 Buck Rogers $12 Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Carl Lewis Challenge $9 Chess Net WINDOWS $9 Chess X Colossus Conflict in Vietnam $9 Conqueror Multi Tank S6 Crime Does Not Pay $12 Das Boot Submarine $9 Decision at Gettysburg $12 Defender of the Crown $12 Dinosoft Add & Subtract S12 Dinosoft Begin Algebra $12 Don't Go Alone S6 Double Dragon 3 $6 Double Dragon 3 $9 Dr Doom's Revenge Dr Doom's Revenge $12 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dragons of Flame $9 East vs West Berlin 1948 S9 Edward O'Thorpe BJ F15 Strike Eagle 1 S7 F19 Stealth Fighter $12 Fighting for Rome $12 Flames of Freedom S12 Games Master WIN S6 Gold of the Aztecs $12 DEC CGW 7 Tetris $9 $9 S4 S4 $30 3D Pinball $10 3 in 1 Players's Pack 3D Pool $12 Acquire Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slim 7 Card Std S 10 Armada Villa Crespo CB $10 Backgammon By George $9 Baseball Card Collector $18 Baseball Facts $9 Batle Chess 4000 SVGA$36 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $32 Battle Chess $19 Battle Chess WIN $29 Blackjack S9 Blackjack WIN $12 Bridge 7 $24 Bridgemaster $29 Caesars Palace WIN S15 Casino Craps $10 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casino Master WIN $25 $41 $G $9 $26 $12 $27 Circle Reader Service #46 "


"REVIEW A New Generation of Designers Revives the Text Adventure by Charles Ardai friend of mine who is a science Meretzky's Spellcasting series. However, the especially true when he is working with an teacher told me recently about an former is more a reanimation (stitched toextant game creation tool, as these two are. 1 incident in which one of his students, gether dead things, a la Frankenstein) and the Both games were written using High Energy's an adolescent who identified herself as a paslatter more an odd experiment (the stitches Text Adventure Development System.) sionate Star Trek fan, stunned him with the here binding multimedia gameplay to an old However, it wasn't just a matter of saving revelation that she had never seen the original fashioned text parser, a la Dr. Moreau) than money. Roberts and Leary display too much series—not even once. To commiserate, I a true resurrection of the form. affection for the genre for that to have been related an encounter I'd had with a young What Roberts and Leary are doing, on the the case. It's clear that they did it for love as (but not all that young) gamer who claimed other hand, is simply creating new text advenwell. to be an adventure game afficionado but who tures-old-fashioned, yes, and proud of it, could only muster a blank stare when I men but at the same time raw, energetic, roughTo Hell With You tioned Infocom. It turned out that what he edged and exciting. Both men are shareware meant when he had said \"I've played them Perdition's Flames is, in several senses, a authors of some repute, taking their first stabs all» was that he even played King's Quest I. departure. To begin with, it starts where most at conventional commercial success with a \"What about Zork?\" I asked. other games end, with the line, «You have new game apiece: Perdition's Flames (Roberts) died.\" The player doesn't know how or why \"Yeah,\" he said. \"I think I've heard of that.\" and Unnkulia Zero: The Search For Amanda he has died, nor is it important. All that (Leary). Both games are brimming with acmatters is that he is now on the ferry to Hell, Shall Auld Acquaintance tion and set in colorful, exotic locales, and a luxury yacht carrying a milling crowd of the Be Forgot... both might easily have been \"graphicked\" to recently deceased. Drinks are on the house, the hilt and packed full of snazzy animaIs it possible that there are people reading rions_but they're not. Both of these game the journey is swift, and when the boat docks, this magazine who have never played a text les a guide is ready and waiting. are text adventures. adventure? Might there be CGW readers who This is Hell? After don't even know what a text adventure is? It One imagines, of course, that more a fashion, yes. The is hard to believe and painful to contemthan aesthetics went into the decision to It may look silly do them as text adventures. Just as many plate—yet it is the case, more likely than not. but it's a lot cheaper than young, solo filmmakers' first efforts are a 900 hint line. Like tatting, stone-masonry, speaking shot in black-and-white due to budgetGaelic, and mummification, the creation and ary constraints as much as to artistic appreciation of text adventures is a dying art. preference, it should not surprise anyIt is only through the dedicated efforts of one when solo adventure game designers start afterlife has game designers like Mike Roberts of High with all-text games. A state-of-the-art sightstate-of-the-art sight been deregubeer Energy Software and D. A. Leary of Advenand-sound extravaganza along the lines of a lated, the tions that the text adventure is getting someKing's Ouest or a Day of the Tentacle might thing of a second lease on life. keep a few dozen artists and technicians busy plains, True, The Lost Treasures of Infocom is availfor a year, at a cost of a million dollars or which means able in two volumes, spanning seven years' more. In the world of text adventures. by that Heaven that Heaven worth of wonderful titles; and true, Legend contrast, everyone is equal: the better writer and Hell has more or less taken the baton from Infocan make the better game-period-regardnow have to com, producing text-intensive games such as less of the size of his bank account. (This is compete for Gateway and Infocom veteran Steve Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"MARIO IS MISSING! CD-ROM DELUXE CHIPS &BITS ZORK 'MARIO IS MISSING CD' Join Luigi as he searches for the kidnapped Mario from Bowser and his gang of Koopas. Explore exotic cities, master mystenous maps, thwart theiving Koopas, interrogate not so innocent bystanders, endure entertaining examinations, and rescue Mario. $44 \"RETURN TO ZORK' is the next generation in the classic Zork series. Return to Zork is an amazing interactive adventure of danger, intrigue. and low cunning. Filled with fascinating puzzles, it features a cast of Hollywood stars, a revolutionary interface, over an hour of spoken dialogue and music. $44 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 S-10006 Adiure Unsere IMPOCO MARIO'S ORLATEST ADVENTURIYETI DARK SEED CD Control the fate of Iwo worlds. The world as you know it and the dark world of an ancient and dying civilization. Unlock the secret of a sinister plot and discover the dark passage to their world. A place more terrifying than your dark est nightmare. Floppy Disk $19 CD ROM $48 *CYBERRACE CD You are Clay Shaw, forced to represent the Terran Empire on the cybertrack CyberRace utilizes voxels, the latest in landscape rendering technology, ray traced vehicles, digitized actors and dialogue, sound effects, cinematic 256-color between race sequences. Floppy Disk $42 CD ROM S48 ACCESSING CYBERJOBE memory BANKS \"LAWNMOWER MAN CD' Take the role of Dr. Angelo against the pyschopath Jobe in a virtual reality world. Pit your intellectual powers through a variety of platform and puzzle levels against Cyberjobe & his assorted cohorts. $45 CYBERDREAMS BUDGET BUDGET AMIGA MACINTOSH NEO GEO FREE GAME OFFER $19 $3 Spend the specified amount on any instock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from November 1st through December 30th or while supplies last. $29 SPEND $100 Hare Raising Havoc $12 Hole In One Mini Golf S6 Hole In One Mini Golf Crs $3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix S12 Home Casino Spectaculars Jack Nicklaus SE CD 1 $9 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $6 Jack Nicklaus CD 5 $6 Jeopardy Sports Edition $7 Joan of Arc John Elway Quarterback $6 Keys to Marimon S12 Klotski: Polish Puzzles $9 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Laura Bow Parlor Games $9 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $12 Line in the Sand $12 Links CD Barton Creek $9 MUDS ML Baseball All Stars S12 Magic Candle 2 $12 Magic Johnsn Fast Break S6 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed S12 Mines of Titan NFL Chall Col Alumni $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $9 NFL Chal 1988 Teams $9 NFL Chal 1989 Teams $9 NFL Chal 91 Pre Season $9 NFL Chal All Star Team S9 NFL Chal Dream Teams S9 NFL Chal Dream Teams $9 NFL Proleague Football $12 Never Ending Story 2 $9 New Facilities Locator $12 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Oil's Well $12 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Pirates Planet of Lust $12 Power Hits: Kids $9 Puzzle Gallery 1 S9 Puzzle Gallery 2 $9 S10 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Red Storm Rising S12 Renegade Leg Interceptr$12 Rock A Doodle Rules of Engagement S12 SDI S7 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadow Sorcerer $ 9 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Speedreader WIN DD A $12 Speedreader WIN DD B $12 Speedreader WIN DD C $12 Storm Across Europe $12 Street Fighting Man $3 Taking of Beverly Hills $9 Tengen's Arcade Hits $12 Test Drive 2:Euro Chall $6 Test Drive 2:Muscle Cars$12 Test Drive 2:Supercars $12 The Dark Half DEMO S6 Theatre of War $12 Tie Break Tennis $9 Treasure Savage Frntier $12 Trump Cast 2 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 $4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 $4 Typhoon of Steel $12 Vengeance of Excalibur $12 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Video Poker WINDOWS $12 Video Poker by Masque $9 War of the Lance Warlords $12 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Monopoly F29 Retaliator DEMO $3 Oids $6 Fast Break Omar Shariff Bridge Dix $36 Heatwave $3 Out of This World $36 HoverForce $3 Pick'n Pile S6 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S3 Reach for the Stars S19 Jack Nicklaus Course 1 $4 Risk S19 Jack Nicklaus Course 3 $6 Robo Sport $24 Jack Nicklaus Course 4 $6 Shanghaii 2 $19 Jack Nicklaus Course 5 $6 Sim Ant $35 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $9 Simcity Loom Simcity Terrain Editor $9 Mean 18 Golf Space Ace 2 $24 Night Shift Spirit of Excalibur $19 Police Quest 1 Star Trek 25th Annivrsry $24 Populous 2 Challenge $9 Starflight 1 $29 Populous World Editor $3 Super Tetris $24 RVE Honda $3 Test Drive 2 $24 Renegade Leg Interceptor $9 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge$6 Secret Monkey Island $19 Test Drive 2:Supercars $6 Shark Attack Ultimate Golf$6 Vette S24 Test Drive 2:Muscle Cars S3 Where In Europe CSD $24 Treasure Trap Where World is CSD S24 UMS 2 $19 Wordtris S24 Yeager's AFT $24 MACINTOSH NEO GEO Battle Chess Enh CD $24 Bridge 7 $24 Neo Geo Gold System $569 Dragon's Lair 2 $24 2020 Super Baseball $119 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe $24 3 Count Bout $199 Dragon's Lair S24 Alpha Mission 2 $149 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Andros Dunos $199 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $19 Art of Fighting 1 or 2 $199 Harpoon Scenario Editor 19 Baseball Stars Pro S129 Heaven & Earth $32 Baseball Stars Pro 2 $149 Jack Nicklaus Course 1 $6 Blues Journey $149 Jack Nicklaus Course 2 S6 Burning Fight $149 Jack Nicklaus Course 3 $6 Crossed Swords $149 Jack Nicklaus Course 4 $6 Cyber Lip $149 Jack Nicklaus Course 5 $6 $129 Lexicross Fatal Fury 2 $199 Life and Death S24 Football Frenzy $149 Circle Reader Service #46 Ghost Pilots $149 King of the Monsters $149 King of the Monsters 2 $179 Last Resort $149 League Bowling S149 Magician Lord S149 Mutation Nation $149 Nam 1975 $149 Ninja Combat $149 Riding Hero $149 Robo Army $149 Samurai Shodown $199 Sengoku $139 Sengoku 2 $199 Soccer Brawl $139 Super 8 Man $149 Super Sidekicks Soccer$179 Super Spy $149 Survivor $199 Thrash Rally $139 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf S139 View Point S199 World Heroes 2 S199 Backgammon by George Blackjack Blackjack for Windows Chessnet Covert Action 3.5\" Dragons of Flame 5.25\" Dragon Force 5.25\" Earth Rise 5.25\" Free D.C. 5.25\" John Elway Quartrback 5.25 MacArthur's War 5.25\" S.C. Out Trump Castie 2 5.25\" Video Poker Windows Video Poker Video Poker Ala Carte S9 JAGUAR SPEND $200 Jaguar System Alien Vs Predator Baseball Basketball Battle Zone 2000 Checkered Flag 2 Club Drive Crescent Galaxy Cyber Morph Evolution:Dino Dudes Jaguar Formula 1 Kasumi Ninja NFL Football Raiden Tempest 2000 Tiny Toon Adventures $249 $59 $59 $59 S59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 $59 AMIGA Acquire 3.5\" Amazon 3.5\" Breach 2 5.25\" Lost Admiral Magic Candle 2 5.25\" Megatraveler Zhodani 5.25\" Mercenaries 5.25 Playmaker Football Rules of Engagement 5.25\" Star Legions 5.25\" Warlords 5.25\" DEC CGWS S6 Atomino $3 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $3 Dark Queen Krynn DEMO$6 Das Boot Submarine $9 Dick Tracy $10 "


"CNUSTO? REZROV? souls. The player can choose to go to Heaven returning to the Earth as a Abbell...my miod's ground cavgonc Black. ghost; an interesting set of interat any time. erns, it could fit right into Why, then, would anyone remain in Hell? actions with a computer hacker; the Zork uniWell, they have made some improvements, and, for traditionalists, a meetsuch that the place now resembles a sorrying with a surly troll on a bridge. verse; but Leary has given it a corner of suburbia more than a nightmare out There is generally only one soflavor and a history all its own of Bosch or Dante. As for Heaven, it's never lution to any given puzzle, but and has peopled it with his own lived up to its reputation. In fact, both halves the solution is always a fair one. brand of eccentric characters. of the underworld turn out to be pretty dull Roberts prose serves the player The evil Unnkulians have kidplaces. It is the player's job to carve an exciting well, giving all necessary infornapped Amanda, the betrothed life out of this eternal banality. mation economically, conjurof the Valley King to whom the Rather lofty stuff, one might think, and ill ing up the right atmosphere, player, a hulking warrior, has suited to the medium but one would be and only occasionally lapsing sworn fealty. The King gives the wrong. Perdition's Flames is not the first game into the lugubrious drone the player his quest: find Amanda. to send the player to Hell, but it is the first to subject matter invites. The player is booted out of his offer a non-traditional portrait of the Inferno. On the downside, some of the underground home with nothRoberts posits an afterlife run by functionargame's satire is lame, such as the ing more on his person than his ies, something like the Heaven portrayed in easy digs at politicians and lawtrusty sword and a royal insignia movies such as Heaven Can Waitor Defending yers. The game would also have ring. Your Life. This makes his Hell an interesting been stronger if Roberts had put Not to worry: within 20 turns place to explore, as more thought into buildthe player will have his hands well as sufficiently ing the game's vocabufull...and unlike Roberts, Leary lary—the computer doesn't understand imposes strict limits on how many items the ... 20 miles, in the such simple words as \"break,\" \"kick,\" player can carry, making what to keep and snow, and without a fancy \"smash,\" or \"raise,\" or many of the nouns what to discard one of the player's ongoing pants user interface... Roberts uses in his descriptions. dilemmas. (In Leary's universe, the player can Still, Perdition's Flames offers a fresh also both die and back himself into dead ends take on a subject that typically gets a from which the only escape is a quick \"Rehackneyed treatment and a collection of store.\" However, like Roberts, Leary mercirule-governed interlocked puzzles that will challenge the fully eschews mazes.) to provide for lots of good hardiest adventurer. If the game's execution Leary's puzzles are deceptively tricky—a is less than perfect, Roberts makes up for it can of snake repellant may appear to solve puzzles. with his sheer originality. In how many other one's problems with a pesky python, but no In tone, Pergames is it the right move for the player to such luck. A box of egg substitute found in a dition's Flames hurl himself into a stream of lava? monk's kitchen is not, as it turns out, what most closely reone has to feed the monk (though it does sembles InfoMore Than Zero come in handy later). The problem with some com's other objects is that they are too useful: the Bureaucracy in that the player has to either If Perdition's Flames comes close to, but just handful of berries can certainly serve to subvert the system or else spend eternity misses, the quality level of an old Infocom quench the player's hunger, but if used in this standing in lines, failing tests, and losing out game, Unnkulia Zero hits the bullseye. Obviway they won't be around later when needed to more resourceful souls. It is worth noting Ously inspired by the G.U.E. saga (and mak to attract a bird of prey. that many gamers found Bureaucracy genuing an homage in its title to one of the late inely, rather than comically, frustrating, and This particular dead end is nasty but fair. In entries, Zork Zero), Unnkulia Zero is wellRoberts skates on similarly thin ice when, for some instances the game does not play fair, written, -plotted, and -designed. With its instance, he asks the player to solve a calcusuch as when it requires the player to stay in forests, trolls, lanterns, swords and underlus-based geometry problem in order to quicksand a turn longer than is intuitively qualify for a driver's license. sensible in order to find a valuable object, or However, Roberts also turns > GO NORTH when it requires one to keep typing down the pressure a notch or \"Dig in burial mound\" over and > CO SOUTH two through a number of over until the standard \"You can't concessions to the player's sanity. do that\" response is replaced with \"Fine, if One cannot die in the game, for exyou insist.\" Most of the puzzles, however, are ample, because one is already dead. not unfair, just very tough. There is no limit to how many objects The story established in the opening scene one can carry. There is no way to get does not unfold so much as evaporate: Unstuck in a no-win situation. There are nkulia Zero is all about exploring nifty locano mazes in the game. Ifall else fails, the tions and solving puzzles, and only nominally game comes with a comprehensive hint about finding Amanda. Periodically the text book and set of maps. (which, incidentally, is even Strong puzzles abound, including a > GO EAST crisper, funnier, and berrer clever set piece that involves the player's written than Roberts) rePage 102 Computer Gaming World "


"Games For The Power-Hungry Make the big decisions with four addictive strategy games from MicroProse. Sid Meier's Civilization Play entertainment software's most highly acclaimed computer game! As the guiding spirit of your own civilization, you'll build complex cities, balance economic growth with military power, and compete with history's greatest leaders. Build An Empire To Stand The Test Of Time Now Available for Windows U note that your primitive.Crization has not ashil DPorzs Darkirs trh YOM OMR arslo chini Supledge with H MICROPROSE Master Of Orion Play the all-new game of space exploration and combat from MicroProse! With a powerful fleet of space ships at your command, you'll battle, trade, and negotiate with ten alien races. Develop new technologies. And expand your colossal empire as you inhabit or exploit inhospitable worlds. Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Play the award-winning MicroProse strategy game with all-new features! Build a sprawling railroad empire across six world regions! Watch your empire unfold with enhanced VGA Sid Meier's graphics! Operate D over 40 trains, each with its own speed and cargo DELUXE capabilities! And even compete against history's legendary Rail Barons! Bar In Any MASTER TYCOON INTREGA HARUS Pre TAVU DE TOTS ET SOE ORION MP MICROPROS New Specori MICROPROSE Gotan to Uberaba 21 3T RUCHU MICROPROSE To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon.-Fri., 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST! or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive Dept. D10  Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Name: Address: SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. | State: City: Circle Reader Service #96 "


"ting. minds the player about the goal, but Amanda basically has as much to do with the game as the Wizard of Frobozz had to do with Zork II. So what does the player have to do, if not look for Amanda? Find and cook a The life of a dragon's egg; forge a Text Game Designer necklace and bestow it might he rough, but at on a nymph; travel Icast wc cat well. through time and shut down a nuclear reactor; and many other wonderful and unrelated things. Leary's descriptions of locations, objects, and events are witry and, since he has programmed the game to understand almost any word the player might reasonably want to throw at it, abundant. The game does not come with a hintbook, but the rext itself contains subtle clues for those who know how to read between the lines. From the very first scene, it is obvious that Leary has studied the Old Masters and knows what he is doing. If there is any negative at all to Unnkulia Zero, it is that it is too rich in references to earlier, shareware installthemselves to take a taste of the brew that kept ments in the Unnkulia saga, which mosta generation of gamers glued to their screens gamers will not have played. Yet even this has back in the stone age. its benefits: it makes the world in which the Perdition's Flames is available for $25 plus game takes place seem bigger and more fully realized than the typical, generic fantasy set$2 for shipping. Orders can be placed through High Energy's BBS (415) 493-2420, voice orders (415) 493-2430, or by mail at Davids and Goliath the following address: In the shadows of unmerited High Energy Software obscurity, little guys like P.O. Box 50422 Roberts and Leary are accom Palo Alto, CA 94303 plishing something that other Compuserve: 73737,417 companies, with all their videoGEnie: M.ROBERTS10 capture technology and digitInternet: support@hinrg.starconn.com ized sound effects, are unlikely to pull off: they are recapturing Unnkulia Zero: The Search For Amanda can the thrill of the original Infobe ordered by mail at the address below. Send com adventures, the ones that $25 to: were held together with spit and ADVENTIONS baling wire and seat-of-theP.O. Box 851 pants creativity. Like the first Columbia, MD 21044 Zorks, these games taste like something cooked up late at Compuserve: 76440,2671 night in the corridors and maGEnie: ADVENTIONS chine rooms at MIT. Internet: dmb@ai.mit.edu It is a flavor to be cherished. (Maryland Residents add $1.25 sales tax. Any young'uns who have not Specify MS-DOS (5.25\" or 3.5\") or Macinyet had the pleasure owe it to tosh.) CGW SOFTWARE LIQUIDATION IIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIII SIERRA SPECIALS EPYX BARGAINS SIERRA S1 $20 ea., 3 or more $15 each YOUR CHOICE $5 EACH POLICE QUEST 2, CAMELOT, QUEST FOR GLORY 1 or 2 KING'S QUEST 1, 2, 3 or 4, IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2, FINAL ASSAULT, TOWER TOPPLER, COLONEL'S BEQUEST SPACE QUEST 1, 2, 3 or 4, LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1, 2, 3 or 5. CALIFORNIA GAMES, L.A. CRACKDOWN, DIVE BOMBER, WORLD MANHUNTER NEW YORK, : LAFFER UTILITIES, HEART OF CHINA, GAMES, WINTER GAMES, DEATH SWORD, PROJECT HEPTUNE, HOYLE'S BOOK OF GAMES 2. E RISE OF THE DRAGON, ZELIARD, POLICE QUEST 1, or 3, FIREHAWK SPACE STATION OBLIVION, SUB BATTLE, TECHHO-COP. THESE SPECIALS ARE AVAILABLE ON 3.5\" DISK ONLYI! MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE, BRIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII MANHUNTER SAN FRANCISCO OIL'S WELL, THEXDER. SS SALE THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC MORE GREAT DEALS $10 EACH MICROPROSE $15 EACH SPECIAL FORCES. by Microprose $15 MEGAFORTRESS, PATRIOT RAILROAD TYCOON. by Microprose $15 $20 ea., 3 or more $15 each 3 OR MORE $10 EACH ARMOR ALLEY, BLUE MAX F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER. by Microprose $25|| SEA ROGUE, HYPERSPEED, MID WINTER, ROADWAR EUROPA, CONFLICT KOREA, $20 EACH GUNSHIP 2000, by Microprose $25 SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES, HILLSFAR BAD BLOOD -orULTIMA 6, by Origin $20 PUNISHER, DR. DOOM'S REVENGE, V FOR VICTORY: DRAGONS OF FLAME, FIRST OVER GERMANY DARKLANDS. by Microprose $25 SWORD OF THE SAMURAI, ELITE PLUS, MATRIX CUBED, HEROES OF THE LANCE, UTAH BEACH, VELIKIYE LUKI MANTIS -orGREENS, by Microprose $25 KNIGHTS OF THE SKY, FLAMES OF FREEDOM, POOL OF RADIANCE, SWORD OF ARAGON, -orMARKET GARDEN DUNE, REALMS -orCONAN, by Virgin $20 MEDIEVAL LORDS, LINE IN THE SAND, \"SLIGHTLY BLEMISHED BOXES. AMAZING SPIDERMAN, RED STORM RISING, ARKANOID 2 -orBUBBLE BOBBLE $10 GATEWAY TO THE SAVAGE FRONTIER, LIGHTSPEED, MEGATRAVELLER 1 or 2, TREASURES OF THE SAVAGE FRONTIER / VISA & MASTERCARD ORDERS CALL. COVERT ACTION, TWILIGHT 2000, TROIKA. COUNTDOWN TO DOOMSDAY, 1-800-676-6616 DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN. CREDIT CARD ORDERS ONLY!! $25 MINIMUM COMPSULT TO ORDER: SEND CHECK OR MONEY ORDER INCLUDING SHIPPING CHARGES OF $5 FOR U.S.A., $8 FOR CANADAMEXICO, $16 ALL P.O. BOX 5160 ) OTHERS. CALIFORNIANS MUST INCLUDE 7.25% SALES TAX. TO RECEIVE OUR CATALOG OF 1000's OF CLOSEOUTS FOR IBM, AMIGA SAN LUIS OBISPO, CA 93403 APPLE, ATARI, COMMODORE 64/128 & MAC, SEND $2 IN CASH OR STAMPS ALONG WITH YOUR NAME & ADDRESS & WE WILL SEND IT TO (805) 544-6616 YOU BY 1st CLASS MAIL. PLEASEI DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOG.. OF COURSE, IF YOU PLACE AN ORDER FROM THIS AD, YOU WILL RECEIVE OUR LATEST CATALOG FREE WITH YOUR ORDER TO CHECK FOR AN ITEM NOT LISTED HERE... CALL (805) 544-6616. Circle Reader Service #51 Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"PILOT THE NAYY'S FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE. FLEET DEFENDER The F-14 Tomcat Simulation! Cli Tartorell Thir entoft De Un 10. Samkati.com Een plants Actual screens may vary. It's all up to you! The skies are swarming with bandits. Only you stand between the threat and your carrier battle group. Lock on your radar and launch the Navy's advanced weapons to destroy the most sophisticated enemy targets ever developed for a MicroProse simulation. Roll, turn, climb, and dive to out-maneuver enemy aircraft using an artificial intelligence developed right out of Soviet and Third World military doctrine. A computer-controlled wingman responds to your every command. And, you'll interact with strike packages that include F/A-18 Hornets, A-6 Intruders, A-7 Corsairs and E-2C Hawkeye AWACS. Featuring the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological surveys, you'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. Fleet Defender from MicroProse. We brought you the F-15 Strike Eagle, now try the F-14 Tomcat featuring the most authentically modeled F-14 systems available anywhere outside of the Navy. MGROPROSE i to get out free catalog.call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon.-Fti. 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST I or fil out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software. Inc., 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. 10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name:ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE Address: ! City State: ZP: AAV  1993 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #97 --------------"


"THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK II GAME BLASTER COMPUTER Express User programm ble throne and weapons fune tions. Compatible with Spin key board connectors Program your loy stick for any cut rent or futuro game. Your gam ing peripherals (joystick and WCS) will be instantly compati ble with current or future games. Features LED lighting system indicates when certain func tions are activated, Screwdown connector, Handle moves fore and oft for throttle control, Sturdy seven foot cables: Allows joystick pro grammability through joystick interface, Digital/Analog mode toggle switch, Usor.pro grammable functions; One year warranty Converts the VGA output from your PC to a video signal so you can play all your favorite PC games on any TV sutDisplay online services like Prodigy. America Online, and CompuServe Includes $150 worth of FREE games Prince of Persia JetFighter II, and Spectre Challenger Supports 640x480 VGA resolution in 256 colors, outputs NTSC video in RCA composite and S-VHS super video Standards. Includes A/C Power Supply, 6 foo! RCA cable, 6 foot SVHS cable and a VGA Y cable. Supports TV Auto Blanking, Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display 800-228-7449 PUBLISHER: Thrustmaster PART #: 31258 $90 PUBLISHER: ADS PART #: 32333 $101 LINKS 386 PRO NFL COACHES FOOTBALL INDY CAR RACING OR SPEED ACER OL FOOTBALL. SPEED RACER IN THE CHALLENGE OF RACER X Take on the mys terious Racer Xin a 200MPH free for-all. You'll need everything in the Mach S's arsenal just to stay close... Autojacks to leap clear of danger, chopper blades to cul through obstacles, even o new on board CRT that allows you to receive mes soges, Roce from the cockpit and fosten your seatbelt. Go it clone or against o friend to see who's the top Formula 1 rocer Features a splitscreen 2 player mode. Cut through the competition in 6 awesome adventures Championship golf of your fingertips Featuring Harbour Town Golf Links with Super VGA 256 color graphics for breathtaking views. Over 345 different combina LINKS 385 tions of viewing windows. Features a club selection, saved shot\", and a profile view Male or female golfors with 10 different shirt colors to choose from. Statistics recorded for each player and game with optional print out Supports SoundBlaster and compatible sounds cards You've got nothing to lose, and so much golfing to gain! Realistic football simulation Full 3. D field display lets you view the oction from any anglo Player behavior and coaching strate gies designed with the assistance of NFL players and coaches. Real human physics determine how players inter oct Detailed player statistics. Instant replay feature, Save an entire gome. Create your own playbook with up to 80 offensive and 80 defensive plays Create your own NFL toam choosing from 36 players, 8 teams, and B coach characteristics Experience the thrill of racing against INDYCAR the world's best du vers, in the world's fastest race cors Gives you 800 horsepower IndyCar driving Detail even includes the point schemes and W PANYRUS decals of actual NIEM IndyCors and the skid marks through the groove of every turn. Select wing ongles, fire type and pressure, suspension stiffness, comber, gearing and much more. Adjust turbo boost, broke bics ond roll bar settings from the cockpit Custom tune your engine in the dyno room! PUBLISHER: Accolade PART #: 32189 $33 PUBLISHER: Access Software PART # 27660 S38 PUBLISHER: Microprose PART #: 32462 $34 PUBLISHER: Virgin Games PART #: 31471 $39 ONNO EDUCATION Science Adventure 20 Score RX for ACT at Home...... Score RX for GRE at Home..... Score RX for ISAT at Home Score RX for SAT at Home....... TreeHouse UFO Close Encounters Guide Where in America's Past Carmen Where in Space is Carmen Where in Time is Carmen Where in the USA Deluxe? Where in the World Deluxe Word Attack 3 World Atlas DOS 4.0....... World Atlas Windows 4.0.... RECREATION Ashes of Empite... B-17 Flying Fortress VGA........ Baseball for Windows (APBA)..... Battle Chess 4000. Super VGA Bantla Chess for Windows..... Battles of Destiny Beethoven Il Betrayal at Krondor............ Blue & the Gray.......... Blue Force: The Next of Kin...... Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space.... CD San Francisco Scenery CD-Washington DC Scenery..... Caesar Cuesars Palace Windows..... Strike RECREATION .19 PRODUCTIVITY A 10 Tank Killer Enhanced A320 Airbus: use AD&D Dark Sun AD&D:Eye of Bch AD&D:Eye of AD&D Eye ol Aces of Aces of ** 28 AMERICA ..45 CD Photo CD WWII Aircraft Calendar Creations Baseball.... Calendar Crections Dogs & Cats.... Calendar Creations Exotic Cars, Calendar Creations Impressions ....... Calendar Creations Nature... Calendar Creations Oceans.......... Coaster Screen Saver Windows... Corel Draw for Windows 4.0.. Desa View 386 2.6...... Disney Collection Screen Saver ..... DoodleMotion Windows... Drah & Print FoxPro Comp. Upg, Win 2.5.. FoxPro Ver Upg for Win. 2.5. FoxPro for Windows 2.5 Holiday Fonts Windows Holy Bible King James Version.......... Key CAD Complete....... ... Lotus 123 Window Rel 4 Upgrade Lotus 123 Windows Release 4..... Lotus Improv for Windows 20 MS DOS Upgrade 6.0.......................... Managing Your Money 10 ............... Micro Kitchen Companion Windows Microsoft Office for Windows 4.0...... Micro Wine Companion Windows ....... ...28 Morph for Windows..... Norton Utilities 7.0..... 117 Paradox for Windows 4.5....... 146 Print Shop Deluxe...... Print Shop Deluxe Windows.... Procomm Plus for Windows. 98 Publisher Windows 2.0. QEMM 386 7.01. Quattro Pro DOS 5.0......... Quattro Pro Windows 5.0.. Quicken for DOS 7.0 Quicken for Windows 3.0... Rosemary Wust's House Fortune... Winfax Pro 3.0 Windows.... Windows 3.1.... Windows NT 3.1.... Windows NT Upgrade 3.1...... 272 Windows Upgrade 3.1... WordPerfect For Windows 6.0. WordPerfect Vers Upg Windows.. Wordperfect Comp Upg DOS 6.0....... Wordpetect Version Ung DOS Wordperfect for DOS 6.0. A-Train/Construction Set.... . AJ World of Discovery Alge Blaster 3 for Windows, Bailey's Book House.... . Body Illustrated.......... DinoPark Tycoon Discover Space GMAT W/Cliff Notes....... GRE w/Cliff Notes... Kid Cad for Windows KidDesk Maps & Facts Math Blaster In Search of Spot Millie's Math House My First World Atlas.... Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA... Playroom 2.0...... SAf w/Cliff Notes RECREATION Cognito for Windows Cohort il.. Comanche: Mission Disk I... Comanche: Mission Disk Il Comanche: Maximum Overkill Command HO Classic Companions of Xanth........ Conquered Kingdoms......... Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Crosswords Deluxo Windows CyberRoce... ... D&D: Fantasy Empires... D&D: Stronghold Darklands Mint Book Darklands... Day of the Tentacle Hint Book Day of the Tentacle: Maniac Dragon Knight III... Dune... Dune Il Eco Quest II: Rainforest..... Eight Ball Deluxe.. El Fish Empire Deluxe.............. Empire Deluxe Scenario......... Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Empire Deluxe for Windows. Eternam.... Even More Incredible Mochines.... F-15 Strike Eagle Il Classic F-15 Strike Euglo III................ ... F-19 Stealth Fighter Classic .......... Falcon 3.0.... .. Falcon:Mig 29/Deadly Adversary ..... Falcon Operation Fight Tiger FlashBack... Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Paris Scenery Flight Sim: Washington D.C. Flight Simulator S.O. Forgotten Castle... Four Play .............. Freddy Phorkos..... Freddy Pharkas Hint Book Front Page Sports: Football Pro... Gabriel Knight.... Gary Grigsby's War in Russia Gateway Geolwad Gomes of the Galaxy Global Dominations Goblin Goblins II: The Prince Bulfoon Great Naval Battles Pack Great War HardBall Il HardBall Ill Big League Parks. HordBall in Player Disk Harpoon il Heirs to the Throne High Command..... Hoyles Book of Game I Classic Human's Like You've Never Seen.. Human's Insult to injury INCA... INCA Hint Book... Incredible Machine Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis..... Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 30 28 317 121 105 Request Your Free America Online Membership (Includes 10 Hours Online) Bahn Beelid With Any Purchase Betray Blue & Blue Buzz Akers CD San F CD Washingla Caesar ....... acle Hint Book Caesars Palace Windo/ untacle: Maniac II Carrier Strike... 7.ght lll Carriers at War II......... Castle of Dr. Brain VGA.............. Castles I:Slege & Conquest....... ostil Rainforest Challenge of the 5 Realms............. Deluxe Chessmaster 4 for Windows ......... Civilization... Civilization Hint Book....... luxe Scenario...... Civilization Master Player Ed... luxe Strategy Guide Clash of Steel: WWII 1939-45 Ene Deluxe for Windows A 10 Tank Killer Enhanced..... Caesars Palace Windows ...... A320 Airbus, US Edition Cartier Strike... AD&D:Dark Sun Shattered Lands Carriers at War It.... AD&D.Eye of Beholder III........... Castle of Dr. Brain VGA....... AD&D Eye of Reholder Trilogy Costles II: Siege & Conquest. AD&D:Unlimited Adventures Challenge of the 5 Realms Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Mission Chessmaster 4 for Windows Aces of the Pacific VGA Civilization Adven, of Willy Beamish... Civilization Hint Book. Air Warrior SVGA Civilization Master Player Ed. Alone in the Dark Clash of Steel WWII 1939-45 Ancient Art of War in Skios. Classic 5 Windows........ Arborea 2........ Couster Archon Ultra Cobra Mission 296 39 luxe EDUCATION RECREATION RECREATION RECREANON Circle Reader Service #50 "


"SIMCITY CLASSIC JOURNEYMAN PROJECT CD RETURN TO ZORK INNOCENT UNTIL CAUGHT SIM CITY ZORK The original city Simulator is a 'must have for any software collection and has introduced over 600,000 peo ple to the joys of designing and building the city of their dreams Challenges you to manage the basic principles of a sud cessful city. Deal with disasters, crime, pollution and public opinion as you build your way to a thriving metropolis. Now includes the SimCity Terrain Editor and supports popular sound cards. Join the world of a new low pricel Available in DOS, Windows or Macintosh The year is 2318 The unified world is finally at peace TORRED You are a member of the Temporal Protectorate, an clite group of agents whose sole purpose is to safe guard history from sabotage. A rip has been detected in the fabric of time. Only moments remain until the continuum is changed forever. Your objective jump back in time and prevent the corruption from ever happening! Photorealistic 3D worlds to explore, Integrated arcode and mind games. Macintosh version also available. PUBLISHER: Gametek PART #: 32128 MPC PART #: 30442 MAC The next genera tion of classic Zork adventures makes It's triumphant debutl Amazing Interactive edven ture of danger and intrigue. Filled with fascinating puzzles, It features a cast of Hollywood Stors, a revolution dury interface, hours of spoken dialogue and an enchanting musi cal score Have real interactive conversations with more than 20 characters. An epic adven ture in the Great Underground Empire State of the art digitized and computer generated graphics, CD-ROM version also available. It's March 1, 2168. Jack T. mocent Ladd, professional thief, was scooped up and face to face with the IRS chief collection weasel. He was given a tax bill totaling more than he could hope to earn in several lifetimes, and told that he must pay it within the next 28 days Toke Jack on an adventure through planets, cities, and bars, in pursuit of financial liquidi ty and freedom from the tax man. Integrated characters and story line allowing Jack to interact with virtually all of the objects and characters in the game PUBLISHER: Maxis PART #31410 (DOS) PART #31455 (Windows) PART 1 31456 (Mac) $22 $44 PUBLISHER: Infocom PART 2: 31630 DOS PART #: 31705 CD $44 PUBLISHER: Psygnosis PART #: 31563 $38 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES SOFT KARAOKE FOR WINDOWS SEAL TEAM BEAT THE HOUSE High quality, Full color keyboard over lays for flight simula tors will turn any AT101 keyboard into a 3-D locking control panel Includes all key com mands in a logical layout, and legend boxes for cockpildis plays. Available for MS FS 50, FAL CCN 3.0, F5 29 STRIKE COMMAN DER, ATP, X-WING, COMANCHE, F-15 III, ACES OF PACIFIC, JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS, B 17GUNSHIP, ACES OVER EUROPE, TORNA DO and morel Ask about Falcon 3.0's Keyboard & Unility bundles! Quantity Pricing: 2 @ $21.50, 3 @ $30.00 any 4 of more only 39.25 each! So much fun for the holidays! Totally amazing! Turns your KARAOKE PC or MAC into a full fledged home Karaoke machine. A breakthrough in entertainment Lyrics light up to the right boat right on your monitor Instantly access your own per sonal song bank Countless hours of fun for music lovers, and professional musicians Tompo and Key are fully adjustable. Includes five lego ly licensed top Billboard hits and hundreds of optional songs availablo Guaranteed to run on Windows 3.1 with your sound board. Compatible with a professional MIDI devices. REQUIRES A SOUND BOARD PUBLISHER: Tune 1000 PART #: 31412 WIN PART #: 32569 MAC Take command of U.S. Navy SEAL Team on a realis tic 3D battlefield A hyper realistic Simulation of U.S. Navy Seal combat operations designed in conjunction with the UDT Seal Museum. Lead a crack team of com bat specialists deep into enemy territory to complete high tisk missions of reconnaissance, ambush, res cuc and demolitions, Digitized ball sound cffects and 256 color VGA graphics for stun ning realism. The enemy lies in ambush, and you are his prey Prepare yourself for a casino gam ing experience! Includes the 160 page study guide, \"Boot the House Companion Featuring slot machines, black jack, roulette, video poker and craps Beginners will learn the rules, rituals and termi nology of cosino play. Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting techniques as well as profitable betting strategies. One to four people can play against each other, or computer players will fill the empty seats Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Beat The House PUBLISHER: Spirit of Discovery $27 PART #30343 PUBLISHER: Keyboard Commander Corp. $13 $26 PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts PART #: 30674 $35 RECREATION RECREATION EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 326 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 *0* 10-4-* ! * C FAX:0011-508-443-5645 XIX. CompuSorve ID:70007, 1534 TUH! Blu Vabt u .  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS 2S 38 .. JOYSTICKS/GAME CARDS Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Jeopardy with Alex Jet Fighter II. Jump Jel... Kasparov's Gambit Kid Pix .... King's Quest V.VGA King's Quest VI Hint Book King's Quest VI VGA FREE CD King's Ransom.......... Kingdoms of Germany Kings Table Kye Deluxe. Lands of Lore.. ... Laura Bow II VGA leather Goddesses of Phobos Il Legacy Realm of Terror ... legend of Kyrandia Legend of Kyrandia Hint book.. Legend of Kyrandia 11 Legends of Valour Legends of Valour Hint Book Leisure Suit Lorry I VGA leisure Suit Larry V. VGA leisure Suit Larry V Hint Book Lemmings.... Lemmings Il Links: Banff Springs SVGA. Links. Bellrey Course SVGA... Links: Firestone Course SVGA.. links: Innsbrook Course SVGA Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA Links: Pebble Beach Course SVGA Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA lost Treasures of Infocom ... Lost Treasures of Infocom IL. los Vikings lost in time Lure of the Temptress.. . Masters of Orion ... Mochwarrior II... Michael Jordan Flight...... Microleague Baseball/Football. Microsoft Arcade for Windows. Microsoft Space Simulator Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen .......... Might & Magic: Dark Side of Xeen ... Mike Ditka Football....... Monopoly Deluxe ........ More Incredible Machines More Vegas Games for Windows... Mortal Comtal. NHL Hockey Pacific Strike.... Pacific Strike Speech Disk... Pacific Wor Patriot Perfect General... Perfect General Great Battles Perfect General: WWII Scenario Pinball Dreams Pirates Gold Police Quest VGA Pool Shark Populous il... Power Game Pack II... Powermonger..... Prince of Persia li... Privateer Privateer Speech Pack........ Prophecy. Quarter Pale... Quest for Glory I VGA.... Quest for Glory III Quiz Show Windows.... Rags to Riches.... Railroad Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Railroad Tycoon Master Hint. Reach for the Skies Realms of Arkania Realms of Arkonia Hint Boak. Red Baron. VGA............ Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal... Red Storm Rising Classic Return of the Phantom Rex Nebular. Rex Nebulor Clue Book Road & Track Grand Prix Rome: Pathway to Power ...... Rules of Engagement Il.. . Scenery Collection USA East Scenery Collection USA West..... Secret of Monkey Island Il........... Seven Cilies of Gold Comm..... Shadow Caster.... Sid Meir's Trilogy.... . Silent Service Il Classic....... SimAnt for Windows... SimEarth Windows. Simfarm ........ Simlife for Windows Solitaire for Windows ..... Solitaire's Journey Windows Space Hulk Space Quest IV VGA Spoco Quest V............... Space Quest V Hint Book Speat of Destiny..... Spear of Destiny Hint Book.. Spectre PC................. SportsWorks... Star Trek 25th Anniv. Hint Book Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Star Trek: The Next Generation.. Storekeep Strike Commander VGA Strike Commander Players Guide Strike Commander Speech Pack Strike Commander Tactical #1 Strike Squad.... Strip Poker Pro # 1 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #2 Data Disk. Strip Poker Pro #3 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #4 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro 45 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #6 Dota Disk Strip Poker Professional Summoning... SVGA Harrier Syndicate..... Task Force 1942........ Terminator 2029 Tesserae for Windows........ Test Drive IllThe Passion.... Tetris Trio The Dig... Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro GForce Flight Yoke. GameCard III Automatic ..... GameCard III MCA Automatic Notebook Gameport...... Pilat Control Stand... Thrustmaster ACM Game Card Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Pro Flight Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals TEM LIrister edpen Thunderstick.... Virtual Pilot ANDESSUADROS 64 RECREATION The Games Winter Challenge ........ Tie Fighter Space Combat Tony CoRusso Baseball ...... Tony Larusso Il. AL&NL Stadiums.. Tony LaRussa Il Fantasy Draft Tornado.......... Ultima Underworld.................. Ultima Underworld H Hint Rook Ultima Underworld II: Latyyrinth Ultima VII Part 2: Serpentile Ultimo VII Part 2: Silver Seed... Ultima Vil: Forge Virtue Add On Ultima VII: The Black Gate... Ultrabots. Unnecessary Roughness V for Victory Market Garden.... V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Velikiye Luki Vegas Gomes for Windows. Veil of Darkness.... Vikings: Fields of Conquest.... ww2 Battles of S. Pacific Walls of Rome Warriors of Legend...... Wheel of Fortune Deluxe Win When Two Worlds War Wing Commander Academy... Wing Commander il w/Speech Wizardry: Crusader Dark Savant World Circuit Grand Prix... World War Il Bottle S Pacific ... X-Wing X-Wing Official Guide ...... X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty.... X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit........ Yserbius... 193 SPEAKERS AR Partner 22 Speaker Sys..... AR Partner 42 Speaker Sys. AR Partner 570 Speaker System AR Partner 622 Speaker System ....... Altec ACS100 Speakers Altec ACS300 Speakers...... Koss HD1 Speakers Koss HD 4 Speakers Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers....... lables CS 1000 Speakers Labloc CS-150 Speakers Labtec CS-180 Shielded Specker Labtec CS-550 Speakers..... Labtec CS 800 Speakers Labtec CS-900 Speakers... Labtec SS-100 Stereo Speakers Labtec SS 700 Speakers Pro Audio 16 Basic.... Pro Audio Studio 16 Pro Audio Studio 16XL Pro AudioSpectrum 16. 131 RECREATION RECREATION VIS Not responsible for errors or omissions Mastercard, Visa, Decover prepaid orders purchase orders wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipood. Wo check for stolen credit cards, All returns for credit, ropair, or exchange must have a retum authorization number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restock ing fee. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of sat isfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by man ufacturer's warranty Defective items replace immediately Educational govemment, and corporate purchase orders wolcome. All item numbers represent 35 floppy, except where noted Circle Reader Service #50 "


"ART OF THE KILL STAR TREK: JUDGMENT RITES BUKTIAL COMPUTER Express The 5 yeor mission continues STAR TREK Encounter strange URBET UTES adversaries in situ ations that simply defy logic True episodic for mot beams eight original missions into your computer As Captain Kirk you and your entire crow. Spock. Dr. McCoy, Uhura, Sulu, Chekov and Scott, bring the original unique TV series humor on board. Digitized, original painted backgrounds and detailed, computer rendered starships pull you into the missions. Original series' sound effects and music take you back to the action A audiovisual guide to modern air to air com bat learn the secrets of harnessing the thrust, agility and firepower of one of the world's most deadly fighter aircraft. Read oboul real heart stopping air combat situations in a series of highly entertaining experiences. Learn how the pros execute these maneuvers by watching the accompanying video of live action and computerized combat footage. Contains: 180 page book and a 72 minute videotape. 800-228-7749 X PUBLISHER: Spectrum Holobyto PART #: 32546 $24 PUBLISHER: Interplay PART #: 31772 $33 SAN FRANCISCO SCENERY AMAZON TRAIL BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA OMNI CD UPGRADE KIT WALA From San Jose to Marin County and from Napa Valley to the Golden Gate. Photo realis tic realtime ray traced images derived from actu al satellite photos and combined with low altitude enhanced polygon cybergraphics Views so remarkably detailed, so reol, it's like looking out on airplane windowl Take off and land at a wide variety of airports, all of them complete with runways, taxiways, main buildings. lighting and NAVAIDS. REQUIRES IBM 386/33MHz or higher, MS Flight Simulator 5.0, 4MB, 2MB minimum expand ed memory PUBLISHER: Mallard PART #: 31658 Journey through time from the mouth of the Amazon to its lofty sources in the Andes high coun try. Find the medic. inal plant that will save the ancient Inces from extinc tion and deliver it to the Inca king Meet as many as 30 other historic explorers, naturalists, scientists, and natives. Exercise problem solving and reading comprehension skills. Develop navigational abilities. Introduces ecosystems and provides insights into South American history from the time of the Spanish Conquistadors to present. The world's fore most horror Story drives a stake through the heart of your PC with this sequel to the blockbuster movie. Enter one of the most amazing worlds over creat ed and fight for ETCHUSS your life as you play Harker, the only man in the world who can stop Dracula in his plan to take yet another mortal soul Features a first person 3-D perspective, 256 color texture mapped graphics and heart stop ping digital sound effects and musical score Eerie atmosphere and grotesque monsters, enough to make your skin crawll Multimedia Upgrade Kit includes Double speed CD ROM CREATIVE OMNICD drive, Aldus PhotoStyler SE and QuickCD Doublo-speed CD ROM drive is multo-session photo CD compatiblo, Fully MPC level 2 compliant, CD ROM XA ready and features a 300KB/sec transfer rate. 350ms access time and a 64KB RAM buffer For use in systems with or without sound cards Motorized tray loading, doesn't require a caddy. Supports all PCs and sound cards. REQUIRES: IBM 386sx or above, 2MB, 30MB hard drive. $27 PUBLISHER: MECC PART #: 31485 $33 PUBLISHER: Psygnosis PART #: 32548 $31 PUBLISHER: Creative Labs PART #: 31809 $299 ..94 & JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS Flight Stick ......... Flight Stick Pro. GForce Flight Yoke. GameCard Ill Automatic ............ GameCard III MCA Automatic .... Notebook Gameport Pilot Control Stand ........ Thrustmaster ACM Game Card........... Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Pro Flight Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals.. Thu Thiet ke pn uPRO Thunderstick... Virtual Pilot ANSASUSAH CD-ROM TITLES CD-ROM TILES CD Eco Quest Search for Cetus..............38 CD Electronic Arts Sampler CD European Racers ... CDF 15 Strike Eogle Ill..... ...... CD Family Doctor MPC Windows.... CD Fractal Ecstasy .............. CD Global Explorer................. CD Goblijins ........ ....... CD Goblins 2........ CD Great Naval Battles Pack.. CD Guinness Disk Records '93 CD Gunship 2000 w/Scenario. CD HAM Radio ... CD-Hell Cab....... CD Hi-Tech Aircraft CD Humans... CD INCA........ CD-Indiana Fale CD Iron Helix ... CD.Just Grandma CD-Jutland.... CD Key Homo CD King CD loom CD Lord of the Rings CD Lost Treasures Infocom....... CD Lost in Time..... CD lyric language French MPC. CD Lyric language Spanish MPC CD MPC Music Mozart........................ CD-MPC Wizard Diagnostic... CD-MS Beethoven for Windows.. CD MS Encarta Multimedia Ency..... CD Macmillon Kids Dictionary CD Mantis Expertimental....... CD Map Expert.................... CD Mayo Clinic family Health CD Microsoft Golf Windows MPC lopoly Deluxe ...... .... edio Dinosaurs..... art Windows CD-ROM TILES ANNOUNS ** CD PhotoEdge Color Windows..... CD Pill Book... CD ProPhone 1993....... CD Rebel Assault .................... CD Return of the Phantom ........ CD Return to Zork.... CD Sam & Max Hit the Road.... CD-Scrabble Deluxe .............. CD Secret Weapons Luftwaffe CD Secret of Monkey Island CD Shareware Overload CD Sound Sensations.. CD Space Quest IV.......... CD Spirit of Excalibur CD Sporting News Pro Football CD-Star Trek 25th Enhanced ...... CD Street Atlos 2.0 USA........ . CD Strike Commander/Tactical..... CD-Technolools.. CD Tony Larusso Baseball il... CD Too Many Typelonts! .... CD-Total Distortion.. CD-Typecose... CD UFO Close Guide Windows..... CD-USA Today: The 90's Vol. 1 CD-Ultimal. VI....... CD Ultima Underworld I & II CD Vacation Planner Gold... CD.Where in World Deluxe.. CD-WinCD Professional 1 1 CD Wines of the World... CD Wing Il/Ultima Under Wid... CD.Wolf Pack..... CD World Atlas 4.0..... 193 AR Partner 22 Speaker Sys.... .. 64 AR Partner 42 Speaker Sys...... ........129 AR Partner 570 Speaker System ..... 252 AR Partner 622 Speaker System Alles ACS100 Speakers Altec ACS300 Speakers... 206 Koss HD 1 Speakers.... Koss HD 4 Speakers............ .. Koss HD-6 MPC Speakers.... .. Labtec CS 1000 Speakers....... Labtec CS-150 Speakers... Labtec CS 180 Shielded Speaker Labtec CS 550 Speakers Labtec CS-800 Speakers. Labtec CS 900 Speakers... .... tabtec SS-100 Stereo Speakers... Labtec SS-700 Speakers SPEAKERS CD King AMERICA 30 *** cappuces Request Your Free America Online Membership (Includes 10 Hours Online) With Any Purchase 299 399 CD-ME CDMS CDM 442 614 Frp football Sth Enhanced las 2.0 USA.......... ommander/Tactical Tools y lakussa Baseball II........ Many Typefonts! ...... Distortion ... . 1950. Close Guide Windows Juday: The 90's Vol ...............43 532 605 840 447 536 388 CD-ROM TITLES 450 CD-20th Century Video Almanae...........109 CD 7th Guest CD Adventures..... CD Adventures of Willy Beamish......... CD Air Warrior............. CD-Animals MPC VERSION CD-Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD-317 & Silent Service It..... CD-Backroad Racer CD Bare Assets CD Bottle Chess MPC & DOS CD-Berlitz Japan Alive... CD Berlitz Think & Talk French CD Better Homes Healthy.... CD Bibles & Religion....... CD Blue Force CD-Capitol Hill ............ CD Chessmaster 3000 Window CD Cinemania Movie Guido.... CD Clipart Goliath CD-Company of Whales w/Video... CD Compleat Beatles..... CD Complete Bookshop CD Complete House.......................... CD Compton's Encyclopediu Upg.. CD-Compton's Interactive Ency...... CD-Conspiracy........ CD Cookbook Heaven....... .... CD-Curse of Enchantio ......... CD Day of the Tentacle. CD Deathstar Arcade Bailles.. CD-Dictionary of Living World CD Dinosaur Adventure CD Dinosaurs! Multimedia Ency. CD Dragon's tair... CD-Dune... CD-ROM DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS 749 ( CD  CD Mayo CD Microsoft CD Monopoly CD Multimedia Dinosau CD Multimedia Mozart Winge. CD Multimedia Stravinsky....... CD Musical Instruments CD National Lampoons Chess... . CD. Newsweek Interactive #1.... CD Night Before Christmas CD Oceans Below..... CD Our Solar System ........... CD Oxford English Reference... CD Photo CD Access DOS CD Hi-Tech Aircraft CD Humans... CD INCA... CD Indiana Fate of Atlantis CD Iron Helix ..... CD.Just Grundma & Me... CD.Jutland CD Key Home Designer Windows... CD King James Clect. Bible... CD-King's Quest VI. CD lands of Lore... CD Laura Bow II.. CD Legend of Kryandra CD lightning 213 654 696 Chinon CDS-435 Int. Drive...... Chinon CDX-435 Ext. Drive...... DigitalEdge CD Muli. Kit... Discovery Int. Dbl 16 bit Kit Edutainment Ext. Dbl. 16 bit.. Edutainment Int Dbl. 16 bit... Fusion CD 16 Internal ... Fusion CD 16E External.. Fusion Double CD Internal Kit PAS 16 | Multimedia Kit........... Sony CDU 31A IL/L Mult, Kit.. Sony CDU-7305 Ext. Mult. Kit.. Texel DM3028 Int. 240ms.......... Texel DM5028 Ext. 240ms...... Texel Ext. Bare Drive.... Texel Ext. Business CD Kl. Texel Ext. Education CD Kit...... Texel Ext. Home CD Kit Texel Ext, w/PAS-16 & Cable Texel Int Bore Drive Texel Int. Business CD Kit..... Toxul Int. Education CD Kit.. Texel Int. Home Bundle Texel Int. Home CD Kit Texel Int. w/PAS 16 & Cable... AudioMan Gravis UltraSound ........ Pro Audio 16 Basic................... Pro Audio Studio 16 ... Pro Audio Studio 16XL Pro AudioSpectrum 16 Reelmagic Multimedia Playback.. Sound Blaster 16 MCD..... 667 594 558 558 No.8 558 CD-ROM TITLES CD-ROM TIMES Clima Underworld I &.......... CD Microsoft Golf Windows MPC CD Monopoly Deluxe CD Multimedia Dinosaurs...... CD Multimedia Mozart Windows CD Multimedia Stravinsky............ CD Musical Instruments ..... CD National Lampoons Chess CD Newsweek Interactive #1.... CD.Night Before Christmas...... CD-Oceans Below...... CD Our Solar System CDO.ford English Reference, CD Photo CD Access DOS..... CD Photo CD Accoss Windows... 134 134 SOUND CARDS Circle Reader Service #50 "


"STREET FIGHTER II SOUND BLASTER 16 BASIC METAL & LACE STAR WARS CHESS TOOLWORKSBE JE Sound The arcade senso tion of the decade! Grants players the powers of one of eight intensely wild street fighter chom pions for a no holds barred brawl against the other seven. Each fighter hos o unique lighting style and special attack capabilities. and features all the speed, surprise and sound effects of the original arcade hit. But the biggest battle of them all comes when players defeat their competition and earn the right to test their skills against the awesome raw power of the Grand Masters! The battle of the Robo Babes looking for a game to ploy? Something fun and exciting yet sexier than munching dots or pudgy little pointers look no further. The gore geous Robo Babes ore expecting you! You can find them on MeCHa Island soaking up the tropical sunshine. They'll give you a welcome you won't soon forget. The Robo Babes even tolkl Yeah! Hii stereo cuts. Recommended for mature game players only. Relive the struggles ME SOFTWARE of the courageous characters from the Star Wars sogo in one of the world's oldest games, brought to life in brilliant 3-D animo tion. As you craft your strategy at uach step. you instruct your forces to go forth and do battle. Then, watch as your troops carry out your play-moving into position and lighting battles for territory Distinctive sound effects and the stirring music of Star Wars. Includes 5,000 frames of hand drawn cel animation and 72 unique capture animations Professional CD quality 16 bit stereo sound at a great value Offers advanced Audio tochnology to enhance business and recreational applications True 16 bit stereo sound. 16 bit and 8 bit stereo sampling and playback-hom 4kHz to 44.1 kHz. 20 voice, 4 operator FM music synthesizer. CD ROM interface for Creative Labs CD ROM drives. Includes a joystick port, Monologue for Windows, Creative Wave Studio, Creative Soundo\"LE\" Creative Talking Scheduler and Creative Mosaic PUBLISHER: Hi Tech Expressions PART #: 30926 $33 PUBLISHER: Creative Labs PART #: 32529 $130 PUBLISHER: Megatech PART #: 31594 $27 PUBLISHER: Software Toolworks PART #: 32547 $38 ACES OVER EUROPE JOE & MAC: CAVEMAN NINJA LEMMINGS HOLIDAY WARLORDS II SEUROPE From the beaches of Normandy to the war torn ruins of +HU Berlin. Fly with the SCAR U.S. Army Air Force, the R.A.F. or the German Luftwaffe. An aceu rate and detailed Great War Planes simulation, Experience the intensity of aerial combat in the European Theater of WWII as you patrol the front lines, target supply depots and come face to face with moving ground targets and fortified artillery bunkers. Fly more than 20 aircraft in historical campaigns It's an all-new battle covering land, seas and skies. Millions of years ogo, before the \"Big Freeze cov ored our planet's deserts with ice, a caveman's life was not an easy one, Although this was the only lifestyle known to Joe and Moc, it still had its good side. There was lots of berry jvice, dinosaurs, and cave girls to amuse them Then, one moonlit night, some unfriend. ly neighbors wrecked their village and kid nopped their women They're alone in the wilderness, and Joe and Mac are the only cavemenavailable to rescue them. Includes free \"Jurassic eraser Those seasonally spirited Lemmings are on the movel Due to popular demand, Psygnosis delivers 32 levels of your favorite lemmings holiday gameplay. Bring the lemmings home safely for the holidays as you guide them through their winter won derland in an all new series of adventures The humorous and challenging gameplay and of Lemmings takes a winter vacation with the 32 levels of Santa clod Lemmings climbing. digging, and building through an animated Lemmingland winterscope. The sequel to the highly addictive, hugely successful award winning Warlords. Now you have more worlds to conquer more mighty armes to make, and more cnemies ta van quish New magi col items and abili ties. Hires graphics and backed by a full soundtrack Features include random worlds for infinite playability, mysterious hidden maps, exciting and dangerous quests and uxotic army types Contains 640x480 VGA graphics and sound board support PUBLISHER: Sierra PART #: 28445 $44 PUBUSHER: Broderbund PART #: 32401 $17 PUBLISHER: Psygnosis PART #: 32545 $13 PUBLISHER: SSG PART #: 31521 $38 MACINTOSH TITLES EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 326 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 *0## 0 -4-* 18*22 FAX:0011-508-443-5645, Xit, CompuServe ID: 70007.15340 D u b#TH. , FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS . 84 STOCKING STUFFERS ....80 HARDWARE 857 SEGA SNES TITLES Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP.... Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 ASP..... Soung Van 10.11111111111111111111111111 A-Train w/Construction Set American Civil War Ill........ American Heritage Dictionary Banle of Britain 2 BestBooks Bomber 2 Business Planner CA Cricket Draw III..... CA Cricket Graph II. CA Cricket Presents 2.1... CD 7th Guest CD A Hard Days Nighl: Beatles........... CD Better Homes Health Cooking CD Capitol Hill........ CD Dracula Unleashed CD Iron Helix CD JourneyMan Project..... CD Just Grandma & Me...... COMyst. CD Photo CD Access Macintosh CD PhotoEdge Color........... Coesor. Caesars Palace... Carriers Al War.. Check Free MAC.......... Christmas for Macintosh.. Chuck Yeager Air Combat Civilization Cogita...... ...... DinoPark Tycoon... Dinosaur Adventure....... Disney Collection Screen Saver ... Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball Falcon MC. Flight Simulator.. Freddy Pharkas. Golf Companion.. Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Key CAD Completo Kid Pix 1.2 King's Quest VI....... legend of Kyrandia... M.Y.O.B Accounting 3.0 M4 Sherman Tank ........ Mario Teaches Typing... Micro Kitchen Companion '94 Monopoly................. Morph Odell Down Under... Pathway into Darkness Pax Imperia.... Quicken 4,0... Railroad Tycoon Ready, Set, Read. Rex Nebular....... .... . Score RX for ACT of Home..... Score RX for SAT at Home Shoebox Image Manager.. . Sierra Award Winning Bundle...... SimAnt... ..... SimCity Classic... SimEarth. nos   FanCard Version II...............................30 IPS 360 GPS Navigation System.... Microsoft Bus Mouse 2.0.. Microsoft PS/2 Serial Mouse....... ..82 Practical PM14400FXMT EXT F/M... Pro Movie Studio............. .343 Sony PIX 100 CD ROM XA Player ......... Sportster 14.4 EXT Fax/Modem 199 Sportster 14.4 INT Fax/Modem.... Star LS 5 Laser Printer ..... Star NX-1040 Rainbow 180CPS Star Starjet SJ 48 Ink Jel... VGA TV Elite... 3993583994259 Sportster 14.4 EXT-MAC&FAX..... 218 Star Trek 25th Anniversary Star Trek Sereen Saver Stellar 7....... ... Strip Poker Professional .... Treasure Math Storml... Tristan MAC LC/MACII..... Uncharted Waters.... V for Victory Ill: Mkt. Garden.... V for Victory Velikiye tuki... Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White 3D Pinball.. AHS-10 Headset Sound... AM 10 Microphone Sound CD Bibles & Religion........ CD Caddy................ CD Clipart Goliath ........ CD Deathstar Arcade Battles CD-Photo CD Access Windows........... CD Shareware Overload................. CD-Too Many Typefonts! ............. Computer Cleaning & Vacuum Kit..... Dotalife 10 Pk HD 3.5\" Disks Dr. Wong's Jacks/Poker Windows ..... Drive Cleaning Kit 3.5\" #CKS..... Keyboard Calculator #KC1 Labtec AM 22 Microphone... Labtec CDR 12 CD Lens Cleaner..... Mouse Cleaning Kit #MC-1... Mouse Pad MP-1 Tool Kit 11-Piece TK#1 Betty Crocker Cookbook DOS Betty Crocker Cookbook Windows CD Night Before Christmas Calendar Creations Baseball........ Calendar Creations Dogs & Cats Calender Creations Exotic Cars... Calendar Creations Impressions Calendar Creations Nature.............. Calendar Creations Oceans.......... Dynapulse 200M Health System... Edutainment Int. 16 bit Dbl....... Flicks Front Page Sports Football Pra........ Fusion CD 16 (Internal)...... Gift Certificate $100..... .. . Gift Certificate $50.... Golf Companion for Windows ........ 24 Hardball lil Diamond Collection Micro Kitchen Companion DOS ........ Micro Kitchen Componion Window........ Mitacle Piano System MAC Miracle Piano w/FREE Song IBM.... NHL Hockey News of the Past........ ................. Print Shop Deluxo Windows....... Pro AudioSpectrum 16 168 Star LS 5 Laser Printer..... Star NX-1040 Rainbow 180CPS......... Star Starjet SJ-48 Ink Jet........... Star Trek: The Next Generation.... 4.Way Play Adopter SEGA 29 Bubsy in Claws SEGA 53 Bubsy in Claws SNES. 62 Cool Spot SEGA. Dungeon Master SNES....... Out 889 Final Fight 2 SNES....... John Modden NFL '94 SEGA.... John Madden NFL '94 SNES. Jungle Strike SEGA Jurassic Park SEGA Megadrive Adaptor SEGA Mortal Combat SNES... Mutant League Football SEGA NHL 94 SEGA NHL '94 SNES.. Shining Force SEGA.. Street Fighter I SEGA Street Fighter 11 SNES Super Off Road Baja SNES WWF Royal Rumble SNES. X-Men SEGA AD&D:Eye of Beholder Trilogy.... Air Combat Classics.............. Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPak CD Strike Commander/Tactical Comanche/Mission 1 & 2 Bundle........ Folcon 3.0/Mig 29 Bundle .............. Flight Sim 5/Paris & New York.. HardBall ll Diamond Collection MechWarrior/BattleTech I & II, Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundle DOS Micro Kitchen/Belly Bundle WIN QEMM 386 Game Pack 7.0. Power Game Pack II....... ..... Sierra Dynamics Bundle VGA Strip Poker Pro & 1-6 Dato Disk Thrustmaster Flight/Rudder................... Wing Commander II w/Speech........... X-Wing/B Wing Bundle................ 37 24 GIFT GIVING IDEAS BUNDLEMANIA VALUES PRODUCTIVITY Access Comp. Upgrade 1.1. Access Version Upgrade 1.1 Access for Windows 1.1 After Dark for DOS...... Aiter Dark for Windows 2.0..... AutoMap 3.0 AutoMap Europe Windows.... AutoMap Ski Resorts Windows........... AutoMap Upgrade 3.0..... .... AutoMap Windows Upgrade 3.0 AutoMap for Windows 3.0... Betty Crocker Cookbook Win.......... CA Clipper Comp, Upgrade 5.2. CD Photo CD Alaska... CD Photo CD Animals CD Photo CD Auto Racing....... CD Photo CD Butterflies..... CD Photo CD Fireworks CD Photo CD Japan CD Photo CD Porsche Racing..... CD Photo CD Sailboats.... CD Photo CD Underwater............ MACINTOSH TITLES ... 30 SEGA SNES 800 228-7449 Orders Only, 508 443-6125 in MA and all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday BAM till 8PM, Saturday 9AM till 5PM. All other Business Monday Friday. 9AM till 5PM. Most ordership within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs, $1 per ib. above 6 lbs. UPS Ground $3 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoulli's, tape back-ups, printers, Multimedia kits, monitors. etc. Alaska, Hawaii, outside continental U.S., APO/FPO call for information. Prices subjoct to change without notice. Some product not available outside the U.S. Please call for more information Simlile. Spectre..... 64 Circle Reader Service #50 "


"REVIEW Bumper Crop 100 (200 A Rich Harvest of Pinball Games Will Feed Flipper Fingers All Winter Long By Chris Lombardi TRACK!!!!!! Ahhh, yes. That satisfying knock on wood work. The game comes with a real flipthat signals \"Free Game.\" That, or you've won the per and ball, and an excellent manual Pinball Lotto and made a Match. Either way you know that covers general pinball technique, that Man has bested the Machine and there will be no \"Insert the specific features of the machine, and Coin\" this time around. notes from a pinball Pro. Pinball and such feelings of pinball have been around for as The main interface screen is a digitized long as most people alive today. Since their invention in the early image of \"Pinball Cafe,\" inhabited by 20s, they've endured a long, roller-coaster history. Rcaching an the Eight Ball machine and a cowgirl apex of popularity in the 50s and 60s, they were immortalized with snug Levi's and digitally enhanced in song by The Who's «rock opera» Tommy during the 70s, only lipstick. Selecting the chalkboard, one to find themselves relegated to a lonely corner when usurped by can see the top 10 scores of all time, and Asteroids and friends in the early 80s. But video games never a click on the \"backglass» of the machine quite killed off the pinball machine, and over the last few years enables one to customize the playfield they've enjoyed a small resurgence in popularity. Alongside the slant and bumper voltage. Sadly, the Street Fighters of today's arcade, one can find, or rather, can't cowgirl is not interactive. miss, the ostentatious new generation of machines that blare The machine itself is a sight to behold. sound effects and flash lights, boast multiple tiered levels, bizzare The original coin-op machine beauticontrivances, and a spaghetti-configuration of ramps and rails fully depicted a dim cowboy bar scene, second in design perversity only to an L.A. interchange. This with surly Marlboro men and nymphoverstated appearance has apparently met the market demand, like cowgirls. Amtex's digitized version as these games can once again draw a small crowd of Pinball accurately recreates the art, sounds and Wizards, cager to pump their warm, sweaty quarters into weldigitized speech of the original. \"Quit coming maws. I was talking and start chalking!\" demands the Pinball is making a comeback in the computer gaming realm Cowboy/pool shark, and the game is underway.... as well. With game companies on the hunt for light and addictive Amtex's Tristan was a full-screen machine, meaning the entire games to reach the computer-using mass market and their mass dollars, a flurry of pinball game releases is not wholly unexpected. And playfield was in view at all times. Amtex elected to use a partial, a flurry is what we have this Winter '93 with four recent pinball scrolling scrolling view for Eight Ball Deluxe, and I was initially disappointed releases and a few more on the horizon. with the choice. With a partial view, the player cannot see the targets at the top of the machine and has to guess at his shots. I learned to Player #1 — Eight Ball Deluxe live with it and eventually came to like it. After investing several hours, Eight Ball Deluxe comes to us from Amtex, a company that does one gets a feel for the shots and can get very accurate in their pinball and nothing but pinball. Their first release, Tristan, was an placement. Now that I'm accustomed to the magnified partial view excellent simulation with a very realistic feel, earning it several awards and the silky-smooth screen scrolling, the static full-screen of Tristan from the press. Eight Ball Deluxe is their second release and is a feels like a step back. licensed re-creation of Bally's arcade machine of the same name. As far as the design of Eight Ball Deluxe playfield goes, it is a fairly Upon opening the Eight Ball Deluxe package, one gets the sense that standard, meat n' potatoes set up: three flippers, three bumpers, a Eight Ball Deluxe the Amtex people truly love their Take A Break Pinball For Windows TITLE: Eight Ball Deluxe PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEMS: REQUIREMENTS: TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: IBM, Macintosh IBM: 386SX or better, 2MB RAM for sound, VGA graphics, 4MB hard drive space Sound Blaster sound card supported. Mac: Mac 1I/LC/Quadra/SE 30/Powerbook Duo/Centris, 4MB RAM, 12\" screen. System 6.0.7 or higher 1-4 Serial Number look up on installation Amtex Software Broderbund Novato, CA (800) 521-6263 Take A Break Pinball For Windows $49.95 IBM with Windows 3.1 386SX or better, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, 6MB hard drive space, Windows 3.1 1-4 None Scott Wallin Sierra/Dynamix Coarsegold, CA (800) 326-6654 # OF PLAYERS: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: # OF PLAYERS: PROTECTION: DEVELOPER: DISTRIBUTOR: Pinball Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"WINNER IN CYBERSTRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. The #1 Computer Game Magazine GAMING WORLD 1993 COMPUTER OF THE YEAR. ON-LINE GAME AND THEN DESTROYED. Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike,\" the wild new multi-player game on Genie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour.' So strap yourself inside a Pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U # = prompt, enter XKY95114,BLAST then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in non-prime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri.. all day Sat. and Sun and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. SIMUTRONICS Circle Reader Service #72 "


"Silverball Pinball Dreams TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: TUTUT! Silverball $49.95 IBM 386SX or better, VGA graphics, 2MB hard drive space; Sound Blaster (Pro) and Gravis Ultra Sound sound cards supported 1-4 None Epic Mega Games Microleague Interactive Software Newark, DE (800) 334-6572 # OF PLAYERS: PROTECTION: Pinball Dreams $49.95 Amiga, IBM IBM: 386-20MHz or better, VGA graphics, 3MB hard drive space; Adlib, Gravis Ultrasound, Sound Blaster and Roland sound cards supported 1-8 Serial number look up on installation; limit of 3 installations before disks are unusable Spidersoft Limited 21ST Century Entertainment P.O. Box 415 Webster, NY 14580 (716) 872-1200 # OF PLAYERS: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: DEVELOPER: PUBLISHER: iiiillis bunch of drop targets, and a drop hole. It's fun, but tough. The down and ferret-away the ball in its nest. Sink another ball in the skill-shots are skill-shots, and the ball has a great affinity for the side Buttes and the Sequel Police arrive, but the pterodactyl will swoop alleys. To score well, one must use the \"nudge» features often. Like down again and throw the cops off of the board. This earns a million Tristan, Eight Ball allows the player to simulate \"body english\" or the points and releases the other ball for Multiball play. The machine has pelvic bumps and side-to-side jiggling that three other objectives\" like this that generate their goes on with real machines. Tristan had one own graphic rewards. nudge option-one that simulated a simple, \"Quest For Daventry,\" is based upon the beststraight-on pelvic thrust with a jerk of the selling King's Quest V. Though it too has its graphic screen. Eight Ball adds two others, a 45-decuteness-an animated yeri will pick up the ball gree right and left nudge. These can be used and drop it into the sea, and a secret island will rise quite liberally, as the Tilt mechanism is up out of the water to expose a special target-the laughably forgiving machine is actually a bit drab. The targets are Eight Ball Deluxe is a gorgeous, playable unimaginatively placed along the sides of a wideand realistic program. Of all the programs open and empty center field. considered here, it is the connoisseur's \"Larry's Big Score» is based upon the exploits of choice. It's only weakness, when compared Rally | Leisure Suit Larry and contains the sophomoric to the other packages surveyed, is that it Eight Ball Deluxe sexual humor we've come to expect from him. In offers only one machine. You're dropping six case the player has missed them, the Silent Radio rolls of quarters for one game, while every message insist that one \"check out [Passionate] Patti's bumpers.\" other package in this survey contains four or more, and for a roll less. Patti's bumpers are exactly where one might expect them—though If you're the type who would rather enjoy one very fine bottle of wine perhaps just off-center enough to molify a Sierra exec. Taking the over four or more bottles of medium quality, Eight Ball Deluxe is your humor to yet a lower level, the large Megatron-Million light is close fine vintage. enough to Patti's «groin» to communicate the intent. But the machine holds other interest beyond the prurient kind. With its looping Player #2 — Take A Break Pinball \"Amass Class» ramp, several bumpers, and third flipper at the top, it Microsoft said \"it couldn't be done\" when Dynamix approached is a fun machine to play, even though the play is a bit \"unbalanced.» the programmers of Windows about a pinball game for that operating This imbalance is a result of the designers' humor getting away from system. Microsoft said that a pinball game them. While one has to hit the three L-U-V and would ask more of Windows than it could Sax, Spies and Videotape Targets, and then hit deliver. It took several years of hard work (a Patti's bumpers 10 times to score a million points, lor longer than they had expected), but Dyone can get the same million points each time one namix proved them wrong with Take A hits Patti's \"G-Targer\"-a not-so-subtly named Break Pinball. Take A Break is a collection spot that is (contrary to popular belief) quite easy of eight, full-screen pinball machines that to hit. draw upon the works of Sierra/Dynamix for \"Flipped Out Willy\" has the manic coloring their themes. Leisure Suit Larry, Willy scheme and general feel of an amusement park. A Beamish, Roger Wilco, King Graham, wheel lies in the dead-center of the machine that, Draxon of Nova 9—the Sierra/Dynamix when spinning, can throw a ball in unpredictable Who's Who—are all subjects of one or directions. The high scoring opportunities follow more of these games. Take A Break Pinball the plot of the Dynamix adventure game, from The machines are all colorful and occathe Escape From School under the wheezing nose sionally original in their designs, and are dressed in a panoply of of a sleeping teacher, to Giving Leona a Swirlie, exposing her evil waste animations, sounds and extra graphic pizzazz. Each machine spans the disposal plans. length of the screen and has a quarter-screen window that displays The other machines, «Draxon: Levels One and Two,\" and \"Planet graphics corresponding to the happenings on the playfield. There is Pinball: Levels Onc, Two and Three\" can't be described in detail here, also a «Silent Radio» box where text scrolls by during play. but suffice to say that they range in interest and each have special The machines' «scoring opportunities» are structured after the features, the most notable of which is in \"Draxon Two,\" where the adventures upon which they are based. «Planet Pinball: Level Two,\" player can load a ball into a gun and fire the ball into the nostrils of for example, follows the deeds of Roger Wilco in Space Quest IV. If a the Bad Guy, Gir Draxon. Two nostril shots and Draxon breathes no ball is sunk in the Burres of Estros trap hole, a Pterodactyl will swoop more, and the game is \"beaten.\" Hell. In VESI Takes Brest Pinball Game Options Help Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"INTERACTIVE HORROR MOVIE E OC E R HERE NO ONE RESTS IN PEACE. Over 90 minutes of captivating video and an original gothic soundtrack draws you into the center of the action. Dracula is back, driven by revenge and a hunger for human blood. Follow a trail of vampire brides, corpses, and wolf tracks through the streets of London. You direct the drama, suspense, and passion as you are drawn into a world of evil where every decision and action you make is inextricably tied to the fates of those you love. Over 150 riveting scenes propel you down multiple pathways toward the final confrontation. From the creators of Sherlock Holmes Consulting DetectiveTM 1900. Vacam New Media. Al Rights Reserved. Consulting Detective is a licensed trademark of Seth Production, LTD. Dracula Unleashed is a trademark of Vacon New Media Dracular Unique interactive experience that you've never encountered before. UNLEASHED VIACOM NEW MEDIA Contact your local retailer or call 1-800-877-4266. AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM FOR PC AND MAC "


"Structuring the machines like \"Odyssey\" is based in the ancient Grecian myths and has a few unique adventure games lends them features, including a miniature third flipper used to shoot the ball up charm, especially for those a ramp, and dangerous flipper ramps that make \"cradling\" the ball a who've played the adventures, touchy affair. Repeated trips through the looping ramps will build But, unfortunately, all of these and launch the hero's sky ship and eventually lead to the destruction graphic and sound extras carry a of the Minotaur. \"Blood\" carries a cyber-horror theme and has a huge CPU overhead. On even network of three \"overhead» rails. the fastest of computers, the acLike Eight Ball Deluxe, the machines in Silverball can be tweaked. tion bogs down to the point of One can both modify the playfield slant and choose between three frustration. It can be so bad as to and five ball games. be unplayable on a 386, and irriIn the final tally, Silverball ranks high for those who don't mind the tating on a 486. unrealistic ball action. At least two of the four designs should appeal Beyond this speed problem, to everyone, and the graphic effects are top notch. I did have trouble the general feel of the pinball megetting the program to recognize my Sound Blaster Pro, though chanics is realistic for the most Scorpia (our adventure games editor who is a closer Pinball Wizarpart. Dynamix does cheat a bit dress) was able to get sounds from her Gravis Ultrasound card, and Silverball with some of the special machine she speaks quite highly of the music. effects. If a ball begins up a ramp, it's going to continue up the ramp, even though one's innate physics Player #4 — Pinball Dreams sense says that the ball doesn't have enough momentum to make it. Pinball Dreams was originally released last year for the Amiga, and Like many of these pinball packages, the game offers a \"nudging it has the quality graphics and stunning sound that is standard with feature, although Dynamix' calls it \"grunching.\" You can grunch by most Amiga games. Its four machines are all of the scrolling kind, with pressing <Ctrl> and <Shift> at same time. Rather than jostling the only one-third of the machine visible at one time. Whereas Silverball's screen to simulate body english, grunching simply pulls the ball in the machines were squatty, those of Pinball Dreams are very long-over desired direction. It doesn't really give the feel of a bump, but rather three full screens long. While this gives the designers more room in feels as if one were briefly using a strong magnet on the ball. Of course, which to be creative, it also exacerbares the difficulty with making too much grunching and it's Tilt Time. Take A Break seems to have long distance shors the most sensitive Tilt mechanism of the bunch. \"Ignition\" feels like a machine from the late 70s, with its goofy The final score shows Dynamix entering its three-letters on the Top \"futuristic\" font, standard star-burst bumpers and abundance of Ten list, but only for those players with a high-end, Windows-accellighted targets. «Beat Box,\" a machine with a music industry theme erated machine. While Dynamix has proven Microsoft wrong by and cool techno-pop music, is a lesson in design overkill so much creating realistic pinball action in Windows, they have, in a fit of playfield real estate was used to create its three large ramps than there over-enthusiasm, overloaded Windows' capabilities with all of the was room for little else. \"Steel Wheel,\" with its early railroad theme, graphics and animation. Those with super-machines will appreciate is my personal favorite. It strikes the right balance of elements—a tight the abundance, but those who still compute in the 386 realm must bumper area, eight drop targets, two special sink-holes, and two seek out a DOS-based game. ramps, one of which goes around the world.\" The object is to build up a string of cars while earning «mileage\" on the ramps and rails. Player #3 — Silverball \"Nightmare,\" with a creepy graveyard theme, mixes the elements MicroLeague's brand of pinball is not necessarily realistic, but it is nicely as well. fast, colorful and high-scoring. Its four machines vary widely in style fast, colorful and high-scoring. Its four machines vary widely in style Pinball Dreams presents the worst physical model of the lot. The and mechanics. The machines are squatat about a 1:1.) ball behaves like a Ping-Pong ball more than anything, and rips length/height ratio-and the player sces about half of the machine chine around the screen gaining momentum in impossible ways. This on at a time, with the screen scrolling very smoothly with the ball. The I he would be bearable if it weren't combined with the screen scrolling and ball's action is a bit strange: it behaves more like it was made of dense the machines' extra length. A quick shot fired from the bottom of the rubber than steel, and is small compared to the rest. machine to the top can leave one's head The best machine of the bunch is «Fantasy.\" Set in spinning. Worse, the screen scrolling is the realm of role-playing, the ultimate object is to very closely tied to the ball action, so wake the dragon that lies in the center of the playfield. that if a ball gets caught between two If the game is styled after a role-playing game, then it bumpers and is fired up and down, the is a \"monty haul\" role-playing game, where the players screen will jerk back and forth with it. earn ridiculous amounts of gold and experience for After my sessions with this game I was everything they do. In «Fantasy\" one can earn a milreaching for the aspirin. Too bad, belion points without trying, and it's not rare for a good cause I really liked two of the machines. player to earn scores in the hundreds of millions. And that's the current crop of pinball On the other end of the scoring spectrum is madness for this Winter season. Each of \"Snooker Champ.\" This is a low scoring game set Pinball Dreams these games offers a little something within the realm of English billiards. Even with the different, and there's sure to be somehyper-active ball, this game plays at a casual pace and can be a tad thing for every type of gamer. So if you find that the mind is boring. But perhaps its subtlety is lost on a Yank unfamiliar with the demanding a break, and the fingers itch for fast-rwitch release, drop English (per)version of Pool. into a local PINBALL directory of choice and belly up to a keyboard. \"Blood\" and \"Odyssey\" both contain looping ramps and rails. There's never a line, and you can save the quarters for laundry. CGW COLE 1000 Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"WALLS OF ROME SAAGE AWARFARE IN CLASSICAL TIMES UrtS LLFUSSURELIS Buy Walls of Rome, Strike Squad or Bloodstone and get a Mindcraft game of your choice FREE! Call for details. UTIONIS RHONCS Ungu N1641-66L16L919191111911164645 14727144444444444446 %D9%225 ffudo-CROS 2--:i4 Dos CREUSOT AQQI 063 The grandeur that was and modify the Rome is yours to defend or conquer in Mindcraft's troops and maps in Walls of Rome. All the siege techniques of classical antiq llyriiids of wlyS. uity are in your llands. Scale the wills witli liallcr$; IDOlllbard them with boulders or flaming pitch, or undermine them and watch them collapse. Unpredictable computer strategies make each battle a new challenge. Armies from a multitude of times and places are under Built-in editor lets you create your own armies, battles your command; fortifications of many types in many turld illiDS, settings are yours to besiege or defend. & Stunning graphics, Stirring music, Play the ready scenarios, separately or in and lifelike digitized sounds. extended campaigns of conquest and defense, or use the editor to combine 2291 25rlin Sirc, Suite 301, TurriiilCc,CA 99591 Circle Reader Service #167 Actual IBV VGA screen photos lI'InOrder 1-800-525-4933 MUNERAFT GGGGGGG46666GGUGGE "


"REVIEW pohe SUDC Bono nons MicroProse and Dynamix Go One On One by Wallace Poulter In computer gaming, sports simulations page manual done in a grungy brown tone, Master of Orion, Betrayal at Krondor, Red tend to run in cycles. Last year's topics of this is a new low for MicroProse manuals. Baron, and Aces of the Pacific to their credit, choice were motor racing (World Circuit \"The screen shots, also in the grungy brown, and yet they have both produced sub-standand Road Track) and baseball (Hardball III, are hard to read and average less than one ard manuals and packaging. Fifteen yard penTony LaRussa 2, Microsports Pro League Baseevery two pages. At one point is time, Microalty and loss of down for both teams. ball). This year it seems to be hockey (NHL Prose put out the best manuals in the busiHockey, Brett Hull Hockey, Hockey League ness, bar none. Times have a changed. First Quarter Simulator II) and Football (Front Page Sports The best moni The best manual I have seen in recent years Pro, NFL Coaches Club Football, Tom Landry Many of the features in FPSP are the same, Deluxe). While Landry emphasizes strategic is that of Red Baron from Dynamix, so it is a or very similar, to FPSF. The interface retains instruction over detailed graphics, Front Page surprise to see that the FPSP manual is so its familiar four plays across the screen disand Coaches Club are pegged squarely at the mediocre. The 104-page manual gives the play, although the total number of potential high performance, simulation oriented footimpression that a 204 page manual was complays has been increased from 32 to 64. Deball fan. pressed into the space. It sports page after pending on the play option, the play may or page of never-ending text with the occasional, may not be diagrammed. This is one of the The Kickoff minute screen shot that is usually too dark primary reasons why I preferred the Standard and very hard to read. What happened to the mode in FPSF. Standard mode shows the Actually, the manuals for these products are original FPSF manual that was far superior? play graphically, allowing quick decisions on such non-events that they seem more like the The saving grace is a very complete index, screen. symbolic coin toss that opens a game than the which makes it bearable. I don't believe I'm On the other side of the ball, the Microkickoff which initiates the action. The being too harsh here. Here are two of the best Prose designers have outdone themselves in Coaches Club manual is a particularly poor companies in this industry, with titles like providing an unhelpful interface. If you want representative of its species. A limited 48World Circuit, Civilization, Railroad Tycoon, to see how to design the perfect football play Front Page Sports Pro NFL Coaches Club Football FRONTZKE SPORTS FOOTBALL TITLE: Front Page Sports Pro PRICE: $79.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz or better, 2MB of RAM (EMS). VGA graphics, 9MB hard drive space; Adlib, PAS Plus/16, Roland LAPC-1/MT-32. SoundBlaster Pro, Thunderboard sound cards supported PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNER: Patrick Cook PUBLISHER: Sierra/Dynamix Coarsegold, CA (209) 683.4468 TITLE: NFL Coaches Club Football PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, 7MB hard drive space, joystick, mouse; Adlib, General Midi PAS, Roland, SoundBlaster sound cards supported PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Ed Fletcher, Doug Whatley PUBLISHER: MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 ADCORE Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"IMAGINE A GAMING DEVICE SO INTUITIVE IT'S LIKE NOT HAVING ONE AT ALL. CYBERMAN THE MOST ADVANCED WAY TO MASTER 3-0 GAMES. Now moving in a game is as easy as thinking about it. Only CyberMan moves in three directions (x, y, and z) and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll), which cor relate directly to your moves inside a 3-D game; your intuitive movements translate literally to the screen. It's also the only controller with tactile feedback that makes you a physical part of the game. Cyber Man is avail. able now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928 LOGITECH The Senseware Company Trademarks belong to their registered owners. Circle Reader Service #90 "


"12 *** be . New York 28-23 (trust me it wasn't tendencies and therefore become an imDOWNXT 14:21 TO 60/10 that close) as Neal Anderson piled proved opponent. In reality, the AI cheats by up 275 yards on 35 carries for my creating false situations. This became painvictorious Bears. The same Basic fully obvious in a game where New England (play calling only), Standard (play faced Buffalo. To test the Al's learning capacalling and control if one wishes) bilities, I devised a strategy to confuse the and Advanced (complete control) defense. Playing the game in coach mode options from FPSFhave carried over rather than arcade style, I spent the entire first and, as then, I still prefer Standard. half only calling running plays and held BufHalf a dozen plays on each side of falo to a 6-3 half time lead. Starting the the ball are all that is needed for second half, I again ran the first series on three victory. As with real football, tenconsecutive plays and gained a first down. On Coaches Club allows the player to dencies and the strengths and weakthe subsequent first and 10, I threw a strike call audibles before the snap. nesses of your team will decide your to the TE for 41 yards. Then reverting to play calling. Chicago, for example, form, I ran off the right side for another 33 calling interface, pick up a copy of Tom Lanshould run two thirds of the time and only yards. At this point the AI started cheating. dry. Simple, smooth, obvious and so superiore use Harbaugh to throw in surprise situations. Running the same sweep around the right, to anything else on the market. In its place, One should never have Harbaugh put it up this time the running back ran into his own Coaches Club provides a screen with one play in a situation of 3rd and over 5, as he is an Quarterback and then ran backwards for a / at a time. This is tedious to use and very user intercon interception waiting to happen. In my case, yard loss, Calling the same play again created unfriendly, although the ability to call five games into a recent league, Harbaugh has the same result, the 7 yard loss. Now I can audibles is a plus. Imitation is the sincerest yet to throw an interception, specifically betake an Al \"learning\" my favorite play and form of flattery, the old saying goes. Compacause I will not throw in such a nies seem to make a habit of doing something situation. Moreover one shouldn't different just for the sake of providing their DES have one formation for passing and own look. In this case, new is definitely not this case, new is definitely not one for throwing. If all one does is one for better. run out of the T formation and Graphically, FPSP has added little beyond throw out of the Pro ser, it isn't that some additional animations such as players hard to figure out. This happens in flipping over when tackled appropriately. real life. Stanford's Blockbuster The overall graphic package remains the best Bowl defeat of Penn State was prein the business, the 3D animations flowing dicted because Penn State used a smoothly, especially in the tackles. Similarly, different TE for a pass play than for Coaches Club offers quality graphics although a running play. All Stanford had to not on the level of FPSP. The graphics are do was look at the TE to see what crisp and functional and superior to Landry type of play would be called. In The graphics in Coaches Club are excellent, or Microsports. Multiple detail settings allow FPSF one can move through their but second to Front Page Football. the user to set the graphics level based on their play book and pick passing plays that calling the correct defense, but this isn't a blitz machine's capability. In addition both games come out of the same formation as the runcoming through the line to stuff the runner. have a VCR option. Coaches Club has a more ning plays. Chicago, for example, has a nifty \"This is the program creating a negative situuser-friendly instant replay here, and the 'TE pattern down the left sideline that usually ation (which it repeated in subsequent multiple view settings in normal mode also has the TE completely uncovered, when the drives). This is complete and utter rubbish are a cut above FPSP. Linebacker bites on the expected running and extremely disappointing coming from Packaging, manual, interface, graphics. All play. MicroProsc where I would expect better. important for sure, but the play's the thing. Now if you have been counting along at Fumble home you will have added 1st and 10 plus two Going Deep 7 yard loses for a third and 24. Drew Bledsoe The original Front Page Sports Football was MicroProse has made a big deal out of the took off on a 25 yard scramble, (and I cona wonderful package as a whole. As my fact that the Al in Coaches Club will learn your firmed his one carry as a 25-yard gain in review of the time noted, I loved the play OFFENSE PLAY BOOKEREOSKINS.PBK Team REDSKINSATM.. Homes worst the game ending stats) to set up a 4th and editor, the graphics were light years ahead 1! Last time I read the rules, gaining one of anyone else, and I considered FPSFon Play Name more yard than one needs for a first down par with World Circuit as a sports game. will usually earn a first down. The unfortunare fact was, the more I Line Blockina! played the game after the review, the casAudible ier FPSF became. Scores of 70+ were not Modem play, once promised in both uncommon, and it became obvious that games, has not materialized. This still Dynamix would need to address the game leaves Microsports Football and Tom Lanplay in the next version. This they have dry as the premier football games for modone although not to the extent I would Exit dem use. However FPSP has gone part of have hoped. the way there. The biggest addition to My first game out, Chicago trounced Custom play design in Coaches Club is fast and easy. FPSP is the customized coaching profile. * Pormation commande Reverse usluge Positions Motion Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"EVEN THE BEST EQUIPMENT NEEDS SOLID SUPPORT. 333 SOUNDMAN FROM LOGITECH. THE BEST SUPPORTED SOUND BOARDS IN THE BUSINESS. SoundMan sound boards from Logitech are endowed with 7 day-o-week technical support, 2-3 yeor free replacement worranties (call for details), limited lifetime warranties and are guaranteed 100% Sound Blaster and Adlib compatible. Each sound board comes with extra-value software and the easiest sound-enhanced installation available, From our gaming card to our full 16-bit audio bundle, when you plug in a SoundMan, you're getting more than just great quality sound, you're getting the SoundMan 16 Surpack reliability of one of the world's leading peripherals manufacturers. Pick | LOCATECH one up at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2959. TH/ Trademarks belong to their respective owners. The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #91 VALG SoundMan lo "


"Fint downs Dallas Multumiti LIITUTIN Club does not offer, FPSP continues Rhett O'Hara in FPSF Cute for sure and to be incredibly slow in simulating after he went 0 for 4 against New York, league games. Dave Holt and Mifrankly I did give a damn. However, the crosports have had this right for a unsuspecting gamer is going to believe that long time with their very quick the NFLPA represents all players in the league simulation that gives full stats. Why as their name suggests. This is misleading at no one else can does this is beyond best. Maybe they should change their name me, but Coaches Club has it down to to Some National Football League Players manageable proportions. Both Association. games had eyebrow raising results in league simulation, but then a foorCrunch Time ball game can turn on just a couple Front Page Sports Pro is a nice step forward of plays and players, such as the situA new NFLPA license earns Front Page by Patrick Cook and company. But that is all Football an important first down. ation with Emmitt Smith. He is preit is; a step. If NFL player names are your sent in both games, and the first thing, then you can consider FPSP a leap The profile allows the user to specify play week of the season. Dallas was victorious by rather than a step. However for the legion of calling in different game situations. Astoundlarge margins against Washington. ingly there are over 2500 game situations per In the real NFL, of course, the lack half. This feature allows game plans to be EDW00D0B|D|328 of Emmitt Smith cost Dallas the uploaded either directly or via on-line services game. More significantly, both for use in leagues or just as an individual games had reasonable stars for both challenge. Want to play The Wol's Chicago offensive and defensive players that Bears? Maybe I'll upload a game plan to I feel is important to the credibility CompuServe. Nor is the game plan predictof the game results generated. able because three different plays are assigned to each situation with percentage values des Sending in the Signals ignated by the user. Therefore if an exact The one area in which Coaches situation repears (which is unlikely), there is Club beats FPSP is, ironically, the no guarantee that the same play will be called. area in which FPSP illustrates the League play is a strength of both products. most strength—the Play Editor. In Front Page Football is the crystal-clear LA SF.. . PUNT Coaches Club I was able to victor when it comes to graphics. design plays without having FPSFfans out there, Pro is nothing more than to look at the manual, a situation that an upgrade to a great product. If you play in did not occur with the original Front leagues via on-line services (which I recomPage Sports Football. Obviously I know that game enough to not need mend), then Pro is a good value, but as a the manual for FPSP, but a first time straight computer opponent it may be worth buyer would still need the tutorial in waiting for the next incarnation the Dynamix manual. Why Coaches NFL Coaches Club is, alas, a disappointClub could have such a great interface ment. The designer, Doug Whatley, is a perBEFORE THE SAHP AFTER THE SNAP for the Play Editor and such a bad sonal friend (and hopefully still is after this Play creation in Front Page Football is rich, interface for play calling is a mystery review)!I had hoped for great things from this but trails CC Football in ease of use. to me. In fact it is the strength of the product. Moreover, on on-line systems such Although FPSP is the winner, this time it is Play Editor that leads me to believe as Prodigy, Compuserve and GEnie, many not so clear-cut. While FPSP has the college that there is hope for Coaches Club. It is strong game players whose opinions I usually trust draft, trades, injuries and more that Coaches and well-designed, and boasts a myriad of have said great things about the product. I'm options. I particularly liked the advice on Games Too Expensive? afraid I just don't see it. There is a terrific setting up pass routes. While running a pass Consider Pre-owned Software pattern, the receiver will attempt to get open, foundation for a superb football product, that but there is no guarantee that he will go where much is obvious. The underlying concept of  Save big $$$ over new you want him to. Therefore it is suggested plays decided by the momentum and mass of Original disks and manuals IBM AMIGA C64 that the player assign a couple of way points the players, and their subsequent actions. Hard-to-find classics plus (similar to the logic boxes in FPSP) for the should be the industry standard. The Play all the latest releases receiver to run to and then issue the com Editor is something I will tinker with long Call or write for free catalog mand \"pass route\" for him to find an open after this review is written. But if a company (specify computer) space. This is exactly what receivers do when wants to compete in the sports game arena Bare Bones Software combating a zone defense. they need to either provide something that 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 Which brings us to the National Football hasn't been done, or do it better than the 1-800-638-1123 League Players Association that granted li competition. World Circuit, the previous Customer Service: 304-529-0461 censes to both products. Unlike other sports, foray into the sports arena by MicroProse BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 not all players belong to the NFLPA. Kevin accomplished both goals. Coaches Club does Butler, the Chicago Bears kicker, becomes not. CGW Circle Reader Service #43 Page 120 Computer Gaming World  "


"DEEREE CYBER DREAMS' CYBERRACE A REVOLUTIONARY 30 COMBAT AND RACING SIMULATION DESIGNED BY WORLD-FAMOUS FUTURIST SYD MEAD, WHOSE DESIGN CREDITS INCLUDE BLADE RUNNER. TRON. 2010. AND STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE. Available for the IBM PC and Compatibles (August 1993). Commodore Amiga (March 1994) and Apple Macintosh (March 1994). For further information please contact: North America (818) 348-3711  Europe (071) 328-3267 (U.K.) TITUITIT SITTINE "


"HIT the ROAD AM&MAX Porn AND WIN PALUABLE PRIZES! olorado Sar Sleuth the answers to these six questions about Sam and Max's weird road trip and win totally cool prizes! 5 First Prizes: Sam & Max framed lithographs signed by creator Steve Purcell. 20 Second Prizes: All cotton Sam & Max T-Shirts. 50 Third Prizes: Sam & Max floaty pens—the ultimate in kitsch! Fos3 Analo PHOEN TUTODOS COOOOO barak E FORT Clues to every question are on these two pages. Correct entries will be entered into a drawing to win prizes. Deadline for entry is January 31, 1994. Send your answers to CGW, Sam & Max contest; P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Don't forget to include your name, address and phone number with your entry. CGW and LucasArts are not responsible for lost or misdirected mail. One entry per person. No purchase necessary to enter. Prizes are not transferable. Illegible or incomplete entries are not eligible. Employees of CGW or LucasArts and their affiliates are ineligible to enter. CGW and LucasArts reserve the right to can cel this promotion at any time with appropriate notice. Winners names and prize information may be used by CGW or LucasArts for any promotional or advertising purposes without further compensation. "


"Join Freelance Police, Sam (don't call him a cartoon dog) and Max (a hyperkinetic, rabbity thing) as they pursue a runaway carnival Bigfoot across America's quirky underbelly. 1. Sam & Max bungee jump from what famous landmarka INNO. Grand Canyon b. Mount Rushmore 2. What carnival game gives Max a big headache? a. Wak-A-Rat b. Skeeball Grets c. Bumper Cars c. Eiffel Tower BURIRUSVILLE la fois, CLEVELAND Rookie Ditt SQUAD CITIES CITIES A g ham 3. Sam & Max cruise the U.S. in what kind of car? a. A DeSoto b. A Beamer 4. Sam & Max meet a famous singer who lives where? a. Gracelanda b. Bumpusville c. Dollywood who lives where? COLUMBUS b. Bum C. A Beetle Topeka 6. From what road side attraction do Sam & Max plummet? a. The World's Largest Ball of Twine b. Seattle's Space Needle c. The Empire State Building MEDAL 29 olding 5. What deadly metallic monster do Sam & Max encounter? a. Frankenstein b. Godzilla c. T-Rex I CAN'T THINK OF ANYTHING MORE RELAXING THAN BEING LOCKED IN A MOVING CAR WITH A DELUSIONAL PSYCHOTIC LIKE YOURSELF, LITTLE PAL! 1 BADYNEEDS DE 0 THAT'S REALLY SWEET, SAM. I MAY WEEP OPENLY HOUSTON LUCAS AVAILABLE FOR THE IBM PC. COMING SOON FOR THE IBM CD ROM. n Sam & Max Hitt Hoodang 1993 LucasArts Entertainent Company Al Rosarved cod undel Authorio San A Moria LucasArts logo is a roured IVIC matk of LucasArts Ente n t Company TEM stor of Steve Purcell LucasArts is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company The trademark of tomational Business Machines "


"cooling Sacoli Good-bye Gold Box! Dark Sun Introduces A New Line Of SSI Role-Playing Games ark Sun is the first in a new series of role-playing games from variety of spells available, they are the same spell-slingers we are Strategic Simulations, and it is about as far from their familiar with from before. previous series of games (the \"gold box» series) as you can get. Psionics have been included for the first time, along with a Psionicist While there is certainly plenty of combat here, it is not of the class. Every character comes with a limited psionic ability, chosen incessant, fight-after-fight kind that characterized Pool of Radiance, et from among kinetic, metabolic and telepathic. These powers cannot al. In fact, many times unwanted encounters can even be avoided. be added to or enhanced. Only actual Psionicists can learn new powers I mention this up front as many or increase old ones on level gain, and they can players familiar with the gold box choose from any of the three areas, as they have games may approach Dark Sun access to all of them instead of just one. with deep suspicion, thinking it The most drastic change is with the Clerics. \"more of the same.\" Happily, this is not the case; SSI is taking their They are no longer \"just\" clerics; they are now clemental clerics, and each must choose a sphere role-playing line in a new direcof influence from among earth, air, fire and tion, which is good to see. water. This choice dictares what spells a cleric The basic system is a variant of can use, as there are different ones for each Advanced Dungeons & Dragons sphere. 2nd edition rules, and you should Even worse, there is a fifth sphere, called expect some big changes here. For \"Cosmos,\" and clerics have only limited access one thing, character stats can now to it. They receive Cosmos spells only through go as high as 24. For another, the third level, and it's Cosmos spells that are along with the usual elf, half-elf, the traditional healing ones. The standard cleric, then, will never be dwarf, etc., there are some new races available: half-giants, half-dwarfs able to do better than a Cure Light Wounds. (called Muls), and, for the first time ever, Thri-Kreen, the mantis warriors. So how do you get healing? From Druids, who can use all the Cosmos spells, including such important ones as Cure Serious, Cure In another departure from the familiar, there seems to be no Critical, Neutralize Poison and Raise Dead. About the only thing a difference in stat maximums between male and female characters. For cleric can do that a Druid can't is Turn Undead, making Clerics example, a male half-giant can have a strength of 24; so can a female half-giant. virtually worthless in this system. The traditional party healer is now a liabilCharacter classes have changed in some respects, as Dark Sun ity instead of an asset. $79.95 well. Paladins have been dropped and Gladiators added. SYSTEM: It must be pointed out here that this Gladiators seem to be slightly better in combat than the REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB of RAM, VGA only Documentation look-up inanity is not the fault of SSI; they are standard fighter, and they cannot be multi-classed with Strategic Simulations, Inc. Almanor, CA just following the rules of TSR. Why another profession. Magic-users are called Preservers (408) 737-6800 TSR decided to split the clerics out here, but aside from the name change and a wider TITLE: PRICE: IBM PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"17 FD this way, which weakens them considerably, and then on top of it, than in Ultima, where a parade was always following you around, provide few decent spells for them (fire clerics seem to come off best), walking blithely into traps and other hazards. Here, you have only is a mystery. It certainly doesn't do anything good for the game. one character to maneuver and life is easier. You can split the group The armor system another TSR invention is equally bizarre and out if you want, but it serves no real purpose, as the party will split incomprehensible. First, armor comes in parts, with separate pieces automatically when combat starts. for the torso, arms and legs. This is not the problem. The problem is This also allows you to «sneak up\" on things sometimes. You can in the materials, which can be leather, bone or metal. move the party close, but not so close to be noticed, and get off a spell You might expect that bone would be better than leather, and metal before the bad guys even realize there's a threat. On some occasions, better than either, but it isn't always so. Most pieces, for whichever this tactic can be a life-saver. area of the body, generally give one point of protection, whatever the Spellcasting for mages has been improved. They no longer have to material. There is some bone and metal torso armor that gives two memorize spells, which is a terrific feature. When a Preserver casts a points. Aside from a few pieces of spell, all of the spells he or she knows for a magical armor, leg and arm pieces particular level are available. Of course, there always give one point of protection. is still a limit to the number of spells a charNow, if bone or metal provided acter can cast per experience level, but not some sort of extra protection, say having to memorize them beforehand makes against acid attacks, having these difthem much more useful. ferent materials would make sense. This is particularly advantageous because Unfortunately, there is no practical combat is much more tactical now. With a difference between wearing bone arone-size world, there is no zooming in to a mor and leather armor (and in some confined battle site. Fighting can occur over cases, even metal). Perhaps in the a wide area, where fireballs might not be as Dark Sun paper and pencil rules useful as, say, Hold Monster or Solid Fog. there are advantages to certain arFDI ) Edu Given the wide variety of both terrain and mor, but they aren't evident here. D E 6 A spells for mages, it only makes sense to allow Druids and Thri-krcen come off access to all spells known. worst in the armor department. Druids cannot On the other hand, this also your destras mirror mig al amang wear any armor, and they can't even equip a assrse. Was Ruas abeuss. presents some difficulties when a shield. It is best to multi-class a Druid with mage goes up a level and has to Fighter so the character doesn't have to run choose a spell to learn. There are around naked for most of the game. For the many of them, and they all look Thri-Kreen, there just isn't any armor, as it's all good. Compounding this probdesigned for humanoid figures. They can carry lem is the fact that there are a shields, but this reduces their fighting effectivenumber of magic scrolls from ness. (See the following Dark Sun tips article for which mages can learn spells. Of more on this.) CAFFT DO YOU SAY? course, since you don't know So the character side of the game has its weak 13 Jrs you su9993 ang & Blouba you could which scrolls they are in adder Ang. points. Most of these can be overcome by careful 3 M2 Mare SW LADEN vance, your mage could end up party selection and maximization of stats, but it's learning a spell obtainable from very annoying to have to put up with this at all. a scroll later, thereby \"wasting\" a Moving to the new engine and graphics-what might be called the spell slot. Still, this problem is better than trying to decide which spells SSI side of the game-there are some very nice features. The visual to memorize. presentation is in the Ultima style, with an overhead view and one-size One especially good change to the combat system now allows your world, but without the slanting, or three-quarter, perspective. Howcharacters to move away from combat without taking a hit in the back. ever, it is not a scrolling, one-piece world. The areas are in sections, You can retreat a severely injured character from melee, or maneuver with a new one loaded as the party moves from place to place. a character around enemies, without having to worry about them What is unique here is the vou can scroll the cursor over the entire taking extra damage. Naturally, the same holds true for the opposection to see what's around before you do any moving. In addition, nents. there is an auto-map that shows an outline of the area, and any Psi powers tend to be on the weak side. Offensive abilities generally creatures in this area will show up as slow-blinking red dots. Put the don't do more than 106 or 1d10 of damage, regardless of the psionic's cursor on them and click the mouse—the map goes away and you're level. However, there are a number of protective powers, and the seeing the actual world again, including whatever is in that spot. telepathic disciplines do have some useful non-damaging abilities. The party can also be moved in this fashion. Position the cursor As with the gold box games, you can change the level of difficulty anywhere on the screen and click. If there are no obstacles (and (i.c., number of hit points your opponents have), thereby making it nothing to fight along the path), the party will move to it automateasier or harder to get through the fights. Also as before, the easy level ically. This makes movement very quick and also allows you to give gives you less experience per combat. Even so, by the time you reach a wide berth (most of the time) to things you prefer to avoid at that the end game everyone is likely to have achieved maximum level, moment. which is 9th for all classes. Speaking of movement, most of the time the party is represented What is most surprising, perhaps, is the lack of information in the on screen by only the icon of the party leader. This is much better manual. We are all familiar with the many tables and charts in the December 1993 Page 125 "


"back of the gold box manuals. For Dark Sun, there is almost nothing. You get the experience level tables, spell progression tables, and that's about it. Nothing on min/max stats by race. Nothing on how far any race can advance in a particular profession. No chart showing which professions are open to which races (this is mentioned in the class descriptions, but a recap table would have been good to have). You aren't even told which psi powers are given to non-psionic-class characters. Okay, now that you've heard about the system, you want to know about the story. The action takes place on the world of Athas, where life isn't pleasant. Blasted in the past by magic, much of the world is wasteland. Water and metal are scarce. Cities are ruled by powerful sorcerer-kings and their assistants, the Templars. Anyone at any time can find himself sold into slavery or thrown into the arena to fight as gladiators. the arena ro fight as gladiators. That's where the game begins for you. Your party of four has been condemned to fight in the arena of Draj City, facing tougher and tougher opponents, until they lose and die. That being something to avoid, the group escapes. (It had better, or this will be a short game.) Once in the desert, your characters become involved with allying the small villages established by other escaped slaves. Alliance is necessary, as Draj is mustering an army to sweep through the deserts to destroy the villages once and for all. As you might expect, gaining allies will not be easy, and so the greater part of the game is spent doing something for each of the villages, persuading them to join. And, to round things out, there are some side quests which, while not part of the main parh, provide extra experience and occasional goodies for the group. The solution to every problem is not kill-kill-kill. You can escape from the gladiator slave pens without a fighr. You can stop the Magera from raiding the Elvish caravan without having to wipe them all out. The same goes for bringing about a rapprochement between the Dark Spiders and the Mindhome folk. Some combat is necessary, but it isn't of the mindless, genocidal slaughter variety. Saving allows for ten positions. The saves start small, but will grow to over a megabyte apiece by the time you get to the end game. You can save almost any time except in combat. However, you can load the game during combat, which is handy if your party is being trashed by superior forces. While SSI has shed most of the gold box here, they have kept one infamous feature: back-to-back combat at the finale. The first wave is composed of just \"regulars,\" who are not difficult to defeat, but they will do some damage and use up some of your spells. Then comes the second wave-elite troops with several mages and black scorpions in tow. This bunch is very tough, even with the mode on easy. There was really no need for two combats here; the elites all by themselves are quite enough, and very likely players will have to do this one several times before winning, which takes a lot of fun out of the fight. The single biggest problem with Dark Sun, however, comes at the very end, after you have won the final combat. Up to this moment, the game ran exceptionally cleanly, with nary a crash or technical glitz (except sound; see the following article). Then, as the ending animacions kicked in, the game dropped dead. Not good, because after this, you get some rewards, as well as the chance to roam around a bit more and save your team for the sequel. After much hard work on the part of SSI's top programmer, Russ Brown, the problem was isolated to the ending animation sequence, and seems to be related to a type of memory fragmentation. This fragmentation appears to be caused by certain combinations of spells used in the final battles. Unfortunately, because of the wide diversity of spells and psi powers that can be invoked, the exact combinations can't be determined. So the crash is an iffy thing; it will happen to some people and not others. There is no way of knowing in advance if it will happen to you. Fortunately, at what might be called the last minute, Russ Brown was able to come up with a fix. I am happy to report that the fix works perfectly (yes, mine was one of the games that hung), and I was finally (!) able to get past the last battle to the part beyond. The fix is available free from SSI and can also be found on many of the major modem nets, such as GEnie and CompuServe, and probably, by the time you read this, on many local BBSs as well. You may want to get it, just to be on the safe side; you really don't want to go through the final battle any more times than you have to. Overall, despite several flaws, my impression of Dark Sun is favorable. SSI is moving to a more mature form of CRPG. The completely new engine, world, rules and graphics, along with a new emphasis on story, does a lot to distance them from the gold box image. As with all new things, the first steps are apt to be a little shaky. Still, Dark Sun (with a little overhaul) shows much promise for the future, and promises a good game to play right now. CGW USES Windows 3.1* THE MOST COMPLETE ADVENTURE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE MARKET TODAY! INTRODUCING... THE TRIAD CAMPAIGN SYSTEM FOR GAMEMASTERS SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS IBM/Comp with Windows 3.11. Min. 2 megs hard drive space for install. 4 megs RAM RULES Designed to implement detailed campaign backgrounds and Scenno Alaptable to multiple campaign Lackgrounds or worlds MAPS World size to tactical Markers display key locations characters and creatures  Sizeable display windows Zoom. Applicable sound, graphics and text with map markers SPELLCASTING Adjustable parameters to create different effects. System calculates spell characteristics and appropriate level, area and range SYSTEM FEATURES Example adventure . Formula calculator Rules documented in context sensitive help files with cross-references. Encounter generator loads all data, no need to consult charts. Game clock \"Windows and calendar  Player's Guide . Gamemaster's Guide Isa registered COMBAT Microsoft Corp Damage calculated and subtracted from target. Combat results returned in text form suitable to read to your players Spell effects applied automatically to all creatures in effect area  Set character destinations and targets and let the system perform the movements and attacks CHARACTERS Character creation quick and easy or a detailed as desired Detailed skills, professions, stats and abilities trademark of ORDER NOW! Mail check or money order for $39.95. Add $4.00 for shipping and handling Call or write for more information. (904) 494-3165 Nawu Triad Institute Additional player's Guides available for 510.00 P O, Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Florida residents add Circle Reader Service #131 Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"G OF GLOBAL CONTACT Cam e ralds a new generation of War Simulations Campaign 11 heralds a new generation of War Simulatas with more depth than ever before and fabulous reale 3D action, orought his knowledge to bear on computer gaming with an end result that looks and feels more realistic than ever before. All aspects involved in the running of an army have been considered, so that now you can place yourself in command other either side, at any level in the chain of command. Over 130, templates of the most significant military forces from 56 different nations of the last 50 years have been included to gain an insight into real conflicts such as Korea, Vietnam and Operation Desert Storm enter the battlefield in one of the 152 types of military vehicles. APCs and Mobile Artillery, utilise weapons ranging from wire-guided missiles, rockets, horning missiles, and machineguns supported by laser rangefinders to tracer rangefinders, night vision, and gun stabilizers The depth to Campaign II is proved by the all new strategy. Expe Military consultant, Wilf Owen from recent conflicts has The action takes the form of fast 3D graphics if you choose to JONATHAN GRIFFITHS VISITA A Company, Platoon 2: Friendly M1 Abrams Half speed BLE LAMPAIGN YEARS OF GLOBAL CONFLICT Hom99 3 empire -0-0-0Q=0=0 3-D-0-0 Can therged as he most Satomprensivaslation with new improveden any level in the Chat TE D ) closely resembling that of a real hands-on action as youth helicopters in aly-to-ground brairair attacks. neplow the animated tear y during fierce battlefield asklon za w oproved 3 penyianment Featuring all the moderneapons systems: guided missiles rockets, homing misis laser rangefinders, gun slavilizers and night sights. CAMPAIGN WAS BIG CAMPAIGN WAS GOOD CAMPAIGN II IS BIGGER, BETTER AND QUITE SIMPLY THE MILITARY SIMULATION ON THE YEAR! V urnatus Announ 100E/ Mandiu 000 DOE Ilan Mera IRAQ Empire Software, The Spires. 677 High Road, North Finchley, London N12 ODA Telephone: 081-343 9143 Empire Software is a registered trademark of Entertainment International (UK) Lid. 1993 Empire Software Jonathan Griffiths S OF WARE "


"Dark Sun Tips Scorpia Sheds Light on SSI's Latest ince your Dark Sun party has only four Kreen and then a variety of nasty critters. reach this part). If you don't, it will show up characters, multi-classing is a must. This was as far as I went before deciding it in the final battle, and you're going to have Remember, you are not just preparing was time to get out of there. cnough headaches without this thing to for the game itself, but also the fights at the When you make it out of the slave pens, make it even tougher. Gedron is a good place end, where you'll want every bit of firepower it's better to help the Tari of the upper to visit early, though, because you get one of and fighting power you can muster. warrens, rather than the lower. Be careful in the two best weapons in the game here. For that reason, it is best to max out the the second level of the sewers: the Dagolar Don't overlook the commissions from Nostats of each character, especially in the areas slime can be deadly because their psionic taku on the red sand plateau. You will get of strength, constitution and dexterity-parpowers can stun characters and make them money, experience and items for completing ricularly dexterity. As noted in the main unable to fight. Synaptic Static from a them, at least through the «mysterial stinger\" article, armor doesn't give you much protecpsionic will prevent this, but use it sparingly. task. tion, so you have to rely on dexterity to get There are several Dagolar slime combats, There are a couple of things to watch out the AC down for a good part of the game, and you won't be able to rest and renew psifor in the Spider/Mindhome caves. After the My initial team consisted of a Half-Giant points) until Dagolar is dead. coup, you must go visit the Outcast before gladiator, Half-Elf F/Druid (fire), Dwarf Once out of the sewers and into the fields anyone else; otherwise, he won't recognize F/Cleric (earth) and an Elf F/MU. These of Draj, it is best to kill all the guards and your achievement and reward you with the worked out pretty well. Everyone could head north to Teaquetzal. This gets you silk armor. Later, when you go back over the fight, and most could cast spells. The fighter quickly into the main plot, and with a nifty wall to the castle, you must go over the one class allowed the Druid and Preserver to wear +2 sword, to boot. with the spider guard. If you go over the armor, which is important since there were Since the game is non-linear, and since you other wall, the folk with you become \"stuck\" no magic robes, bracers, etc., that I could are free to return anywhere you've previously and won't move. find in the game. I did come across some been (even the slave pens), you have a lot of Some spells you can find or buy in the magic cloaks, but these provided only spefreedom to roam around, and you aren't game: Hold Monster, Hold Undead, Moncialized protection, not AC protection. locked into the typical \"do-this-before-thatster Summoning III, Rainbow Pattern, Web, The second team was composed of a Halfbut-first-the-other-thing.\" Some places Melfs Minute Meteors (just pop em in the Dwarf F/Psionic, Half-Dwarf F/Cleric might be too tough for the current level of microwave! Sorry, bad joke), Minor Globe, (fire), Elf F/Mu and a Thri-Kreen F/Druid your team; if so, make a note and return later.Mirror Image and Spirit Armor. You can also (fire). The Thri-Kreen are pretty good. They The oasis is like that. Since it's encircled by find a staff of confusion spells, a wand of have the second best wisdom (21), and they 20+ guards, you may not want to take it on lightning bolts, and a necklace of fireballs, as can be tough fighters in the early going. A right away. Just give the oasis a wide berthwell as several items usable only by psionics. Thri-Kreen maxed in strength and fighting and come back another time. The Metal Storm Ring, which casts Ice bare-\"handed\" can fight four times for damiam. In Gedron, it is best to kill the statue before Storm spells, is noted as being usable by any age of 1d4+8 per attack (or 4x1d4+8), and and it leaves (this will make more sense when you it leaves (th they do an additional d4+9 acid attack. They can equip a shield, but it reduces their attacks MAXIMUM STATS BY RACE from four to two. This is also true for equipping weapons, although as opponents get Race ST DX CON INT WIS CHA tougher, it is better to give your Thri-Kreen Dwarf 21 1922 20 2018 20 weapons in both «hands.\" The use of weapons/shields does not affect the acid attack. Elf 20 2218 21 1920 In fact, it's best to have all your fighters go Half-Elf 20 21 19 2 0 20 20 around with weapons in each hand. They do Half-Giant 24 15 22 15 17 17 more damage that way, and the faster you 18 Halfling 22 19 20 22 1 9 kill the enemy, the less chance the enemy has of killing you. While you do give up a little Human 20 2020 2020 20 armor class for this (i.e., no shields), the Mul (Half-Dwarf) 22 20 21 21 19 19 2 0 2018 18 increased fighting ability usually makes up for it. Thri-Kreen 19 2118 How many battles you want to fight before escaping is up to you. The first couple aren't Psi Powers (for non-psionic-class characters) too bad, and will give you practice with the Kinetics: Detonate, Ballistic Attack, Control Body, Inertial Barrier system. The third combat usually features Metabolic: Life Drain, Biofeedback, Flesh Armor, Graft Weapon back-to-back fights, first with some Thri Telepathic: Superior Invisibility, Ego Whip, Intellect Fortress, Mind Blank, Psionic Blast 20 20 20 Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"2 THE Alaca-Barbera ANIMATION WORKSHOP At last! An animation package that is fun and simple to use. Now everyone can make their own cartoons. The Hanna-Barbera Animation Workshop brings the power of animation to your computer in a form that is user friendly. Using a simple yet powerful Icon Animation/ System (IAS), anyone can quickly produce impressive animations just like the professionals. Complete with Hanna-Barbera animations (The Flintstones, Scooby Doo, Yogi Bear & The Jetsons), and clip-art for you to include in your own artwork. Video input capability that allows you to import hand drawn animations and still backgrounds by using a camcorder or video camera and a digitizer.* Contains features that the professional animator couldn't do without such as onion-skinning for careful positioning of frames and an adjustable exposure sheet so that you can get the timing just right! GELE Hair  1993 Hanna-Barbera Productions Inc. Licensed by Copyright Promotions Ltd. * Requires camera and Rombo digitizer (not included). Empire Software, 4 Professional Drive, Suite 123. Jaithersburg. MD. 20 879. Voice (301) 216 9706. Fax (301) 216 0117 Empire Software is a registered trademark of Entertainment International (UK) Ltd. empire SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #66 "


"Dark Sun and Gravis Ultrasound class, but in actuality, only a Preserver can make it work. The items have limited charges, so use them sparingly; try to save them for the end of game combats. Remember, even if a spellcaster is hit and can't cast spells, he or she can still use a spell-casting item. Once you have accomplished your mission in the ruins, do not go out the way you came in. That will only involve you in unnecessary combat with a small horde of nasty critters. Just before you leave, invoke the genie and take your three wishes, and the last one should be for his help. That will get you where you want to be without a lot of fuss. The final combat is going to be rough. Try to dispose of the first wave as quickly as you can, with as little damage and spell use as possible. There is a short breather before the second group appears, so use this time to heal the injured and save the game. When the elites show up, use as many disabling/obscuring spells as you can, such as Glitterdust, Rainbow Pattern, Dust Cloud, Solid Fog, Quicksand, Stinking Cloud, Confusion and Chaos. You want to slow the troops down and prevent them from attacking. Make no mistake about it, they are accuDark Sun is the first game I've played that supports the Gravis Ultrasound card in its native mode. What a difference from SoundBlaster emulation! The music is just incredible (okay, the SSI sound team had a lot to do with it, too). Now I've been spoiled, and I don't want to go back to regular SoundBlaster (which will be necessary, alas, until more companies support this card). The Ultrasound has been panned in some magazines. It's easy to dump on a card when games that support it are few or non-existent. Having heard the Ultrasound native mode here, as well as in Return To Zork (more on this one in an upcoming issue) and Silverball (yes, pinball is my secret vice!), I am not sorry I made the Ultrasound my soundcard. However, there is a problem with the melding of sound effects and music in Dark Sw. This is most likely to show up when changing location screens. The sound effects go a little crazy, producing an annoying \"errrrrrrr» background noise. While the music is unaffected, the sound effects don't right themselves, so it's usually necessary to exit the game and reload the Ultramid. After this happened a couple of times, I finally turned the sound effects off. Sigh. This does seem to be related to the Dark Sun implementation. Silverball, with its many sound effects and fantastic background music, has so far performed flawlessly. In any case, Ultrasound owners should be aware that the sound effects may need to be turned off while playing Dark Sun. rate and hit very hard, especially the comall over, you may want to back up the save mander. Don't overlook the mages at the files to bring your party into the sequel. For back, either. They will merrily throw fireballs this, you will need at least two files. The first and ice storms your way at the first opportuone is SAVECHAR.GFF. The other is nity. whichever SAVEXX.SAV that holds your fiYou will do best if your side gets the initia nal save. For instance, if your final save is in tive. If it doesn't, you're very likely to lose, as slot six, you'd copy out SAVE06.SAV. If you the troops will close in fast, using bows until went through the game with more than one they reach melec range. Should things go team, you can copy out their final saves, too. badly for you, restore and try again. When it's CGW TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT! E BASE THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit 30 of the games listed below (including Might and Magic 1-4 Ultima 4-7, allSSI AD&D games, Bard's Tale 1-3, Wizardry 6-7 and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3, 4 or 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3), Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3,4,5,6,7 or 7 pt. 2). Savage Empire, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2), Countdown to Doomsday, Eye of the Beholder (1. 2 or 3). Darklands, Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1. 2 or 3), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Planets' Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania.  HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. MasterCard Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. STAND Thrustmaster Th Flightstick  Gravis flight control-type Most esy loystick ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick out over your lop to more accurately reflect the positioning of a real control stick. It also turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without taking your eyes off the chon. IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus $4.00 (CAN $7.00) for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 DEALERS CALL FOR DISCOUNT (503) 686-1809 GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116  (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #77 Page 130 Circle Reader Service #78 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL ELASTER 19 BES Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster\" 16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster. Sound\" BLASTER THE 16-BIT SOUND STANDARD. But like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16 And that's a Sound Blaster 16. For information, call 1-800-998-5227 BLASTER punos Sound CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. PC?. us Inquiries Creative Lab, Tre, Ten U.S. Inquiries: Creative Labs, inc. Tel: 1-800-475-5927 of 144684425-6602 International Inquiries Creative Technology and Singapore, Tel: 65-773-0031. Fanc 65-775-0353 Sound Blaster and the Sund Master and Creative logs are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders Copyright 1993 Creative Technology L. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #54 "


"REVIEW REVIEW................ Trading Spaces Origin's Wing Commander: Privateer by Jeff James everal years ago, there was one game At the onset of the game, there are two ways lutely essential to complere Privateer ; with that drew more of my attention than to make money. Players with an independent, over four dozen planets/bases scattered U any other: Firebird's Elite. In Elite, the capitalistic streak can buy inexpensive metal throughout more than 60 star systems, the player was an interstellar tradesman strugore, ship it to Helen (an agricultural planet in world of Privateer is a very big place. gling to remain profitable in a galaxy of the same star system as Achilles), sell it for a Ajump drive isn't the only component that bloodthirsty pirates, overzealous police, and profit and purchase cheap foodstuffs, then can be added to a plaver's ship. The local ship invading space aliens. Over the years, several return to Achilles and sell the food there. This dealer offers a menu flush with expensive, attempts have been made at updating the process of ferrying cargo between mining/rehigh-tech delights. Shields and engines are Elite universe, with Lightspeed and Hyperspeed finery planets and agricultural ones can be ry planets and agricultural ones can be offered in five strength levels, with scanners, hered in five stren from MicroProse and Origin's Space Rogue' used with success throughout the game. The ECM packages, and armor plating available being the most recent efforts. It's not difficult other potential for profit is in missions. There at a variety of price points. Eight different gun to pin-point the source of this genre's apare normally three ways to obtain missions: types are available, ranging from the quickpeal—it's freedom. All of these games offer the mission computer, the Mercenary's Guild firing laser cannon to the awesome plasma the gamer real choices about how to live one's and the Merchant's Guild. The mission comgun. For even more firepower, proton torpe simulated existence. The next step in the puter-located in the center of the basedoes and four missile types can be added, adventure is not scripted in these games; piserves as a clearing house for a variety of turning a passive trading rig into a potent racy or peaceful trade, assist a cause or fight money making ventures: ferrying cargo from offensive vessel. The ultimate upgrade is a against it—the player makes the call. new ship, and the player will want to upgrade With the release of Privateer, Origin SysASAP. The decrepit Tarsus that one starts tems puts their own spin on the genre, makwith gives players boxy, utilitarian view ing strides in some areas and stepping back in screens and displays with a limited field of others. Privateer is set in the tumultuous vision. It is an awful ship and should be Gemini sector of the Wing Commander uniturned into scrap metal before the unverse, situated along the edge of known space. friendlies in space do it first. True to the Wing Commander story, the Kilrathi will occasionally appear, harassing merOnce launched into space, the playing perchant vessels and threatening human spective shifts to the cockpit of the craft. In settlements. Most of the time, however, one terms of playability, Privateerplays much like will encounter the riffraff of Gemini sector: a one planet to another, patrolling nav points, its predecessors in the Wing Commander sepotpourri of criminals, pirates, thugs, mercedefending bases and the like. The Merceries. All the same keystrokes are used (\"W\" naries and religious zealots that frequent the nary's Guild specializes in gun-for-hire work, still cycles through the available missiles, space lanes of the frontier. The player is with the bulk of the missions devoted to \"Tab\" still engages the afterburners, etc.), so thrown into this fertile mix as an opportunhunting down pirates, patrolling space lanes Wing Commander aficionados should feel istic space pilot for hire, a character not at all and eliminating Kilrathi. The Merchant's right at home. Gamers should know that the unlike Star Wars 'Han Solo. Guild is the perfect organization for less dexsame joystick calibration routine used in terous gamers, with profitable commerce takStrike Commander, does not work so well The game begins with the player on the ing precedence over combat. The Achilles mining colony and in command of a guilds offer more lucrative missions Wing Commander: Privateer lowly Tarsus-class vessel, a gift from the late than the mission computer, but grandfather of the player's character. There there are two caveats: these unions are a few places to explore on Achilles, among require dues ($1000 for the Mer PRIVATEER Wing Commander: Privateer them a commodity exchange, a ship dealer chant's Guild, $5000 for the Mer$79.95 (speech pack: $19.95) and a bar. This format is used at most of the cenary's Guild) and one must REQUIREMENTS: VGA graphics, 22MB hard locations the player can visit, and cach type usually travel out of the current sysdrive space (with speech pack; Ad Lib, SoundBlaster of base (i.e., agricultural, mining, refinery, tem to complete the mission, resound cards supported pirate hide-out) looks the same. While this quiring the addition of a jump drive provides a consistent layout and interface, it to one's craft. A jump drive is abso does get a bit monotonous. TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: IBM 386 or better, 4MB RAM, PUBLISHER: Origin Systems Austin, TX (512) 335-5200 CARDIN Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"ALL WRAPPED UP AND READY TO GO FOR THE HOLIDAYS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD NG 12 Exciting Issues For only $28 No Wrapping No FIGHTING Crowds At The Malls COMPUTER COMPUTER 6 WORLD COMPUTER COMPUTER TO WAR G WORLD DOMETER BAXUD GB MPUTER DMPUTER NG WORLD 5MPUTER Bedsid A MING WORLD U Hot JMPUTER UN WORLD AUS MPUTER VING WORLD Order by December 10 and we'll send a Gift Card before Christmas! A gift subscription to CGW makes a wonderful holiday gift. No endless treks through massive malls seeking that elusive something. If someone you know plays computer games, they will cherish a subscription to the #1 computer game magazine, Computer Gaming World. A year's worth of enjoyment is less than the cost of a single game. Please call today to ensure your Gift Card will reach that special person before the holidays. To order call toll free 1-800-827-4450 -92GXG "


"here. It refused to accept my CH Product's structured plotline should find Privateer a The situation worsens when a dogfight occurs Flightstick at face value; a call to Origin's tech much more enjoyable gaming experience within the blue mist of jump points, with support provided the answer in the form of a Aseniovable as I found Privateer to be two screen updates slowing to a crawl. The ideal text file entitled «JOYB.DAT\", filled with aspects of the story were troubling to me. The aspe gaming system for Privateer is a fast 486 several \"X's\" and placed in the C:\\PRIfirst concerns Privateer's decidedly sophomachine with a specdy local bus video card VATER directory. Even when things are moric streak, first evinced when the player and 8 MB of RAM. Allocating at least 4 MB working as they should, the joystick control attempts to communicate with other spaceof RAM to Smart Drive helps smooth out in Privateer is somewhat coarse. Players used craft. During these exchanges, the player is choppy frame rates and prevent pauses for given dialogue choices such as \"Can I borrow hard drive access during gameplay. Commander may find Privateer difficult to get eerdifficult to get a donut, Lard-O?\", \"What's your sign?\", and donur. Lardo?\" \"What's your sion Although Privateer worked perfectly with a used to. \"I'm going to slow roast your nuts!\". This Sound Blaster Pro, it refused to work corPlotlines And Pirates boyish approach extends to the portrayal of rectly on a machine with the Gravis Ultrawomen in Privateer as well. The female secsound in Sound Blaster emulation mode. Whereas Wing Commander I & Il featured rerary in the Mercenary's Guild is shown Privateer would also not work with the Pro very structured storylines, Privateer sheds the filing her nails and chewing gum, while most Audio Spectrum (PAS) in native mode; it lincarity of its predecessors and gives the of the other females encountered in the game only worked when the PAS was configured player free reign to explore where and when are portrayed in a similar, stereotypical fashfor Sound Blaster emulation (although the he desires. In Privateer, the player can travel ion. In these two aspects, the scriptwriting of Privateer configuration program incorrectly to any location in the game, provided he Privateer lacks the relative sophistication of lists the Pro Audio Spectrum as a valid opdoesn't get blasted to bits in the process. The Origin's other games. tion). Sound cards compatible with the game does start the player off in the relatively MPU-401 General MIDI Interface standard docile Troy system, allowing players to get a In another aspect, the world of Privateer is feel for the game before being pounced upon up to par with Origin's Ultima series in terms will work with Privateer, although the Roland by experienced opponents. Even so, the early LAPC-1 sound card is not directly supported. of offering real moral choices. In Privateer, Privateer's incomplete sound card support is going is tough, with the player having the the player has the opportunity to smuggle very minimum of weapons and armor. Some puzzling, as robust support for a wide range drugs and sell human slaves for profit. Trafmight become frustrated with this long and ficking in either cargo is viewed as criminal of sound cards is vital to any entertainment shaky start, but those who diligently work product. by the \"good\" side of the Privareer universe their way out of the Troy system will be (i.e., the Confederacy and local planetary mirewarded. litia). Confederate and militia patrol craft often will scan the player's ship for contraband; if drugs or slaves are detected on the player's ship, they immediately attack. Unfortunately, gamers who scoop unmarked crest be cargo out of space after a fierce dogfight could unknowingly find themselves in possession of either of these illegal cargoes and be attacked immediately by the authorities. Origin should be given credit for providing these The Privateer soundtrack (by Nenad options and leaving the heavy hand of moralVugrinec) is a model of unobtrusiveness; after ity out of it. If they wish, players can go over dozens of hours of playing time, I still found Privateer does have a storyline. A loose to the \"Dark Side,\" but they must be willing myself enjoying the game music enough to backbone of missions serve to guide the player to deal with the consequences. On the other continue listening to it. Graphics are polished side, it would be nice to have the option of towards the eventual conclusion of the game. throughout, with plenty of ray-traced objects free captured slaves or carry out raids on Unlike the storyline in Wing Commander le to complete the gritty, hard-edged portrayal pirate bases trafficking in questionable cargo. 1/(which essentially led the player by the nose of life in a distant, violent future. The 64-page manual is an excellent one, complete with a through a string of rightly connected combat This Is Not Your Father's pithy quick start section to get novice players missions), Privateer lets the player proceed at Wing Commander up and gaming in a hurry. his own pace. Once one gets on the right track, an exciting storyline unfolds, beginPrivateer doesn't require quite the investPrivateer isn't for everyone. Like Strike ning with the discovery of a bizarre alien ment in hardware that Strike Commander Commander, Privateer is a deluxe, high-end artifact and culminating in an encounter with does, but potential pilots should be fore product designed for use with 486 machines an advanced alien civilization and the enigwarned: space smugglers do not fly on slow sporting fast video cards and vast hard drives. matic alien spacecraft alluded to in the Priva486s alone. Origin recommends a machine Gamers with less capable gaming hardware 1 teer introduction. Privateers treatment of with a 486 CPU running at least 25 MHz-it should look to Wing Commander Academy for should be a requirement. Privateer doesn't a less hardware-intensive slice of the Wing plot and story may be crucial to some gamers offer any controls to adjust game detail setCommander universe. Gamers able and willenjoyment of the product. Gamers who pretings, something that would allow users to ing to pay the high hardware admission ferred the connected, structured flow of match the came to the speed of their ma match the game to the speed of their maprice and patient enough to endure a slow events in the Wing Commander series may be chine. When engaging multiple bogies, start, hardware glitches and minor bugsdisappointed; on the other hand, players, like screen updates become very choppy on any should find the cash-for-game exchange rate myself, who felt constrained by the same thing less than a 486/33 with gobs of RAM. to their liking. Cow Svakansi Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"The World's First Photorealistic Interactive CD Sci-Fi Adventure THE FOURNIE MUPITI PIAULICI ENERGY 0.822.000 02.03.2185 DATE Warning Oxygen supply is critically low. 02 level: 12% Estimated time: 00:02:31 Winner! INVISION 1993 Multimedia Awards Award of Excellence plus Gold-Best Animation/Graphics Bronze-Best Production Design Bronze-Adult Games \"...the world of interactive gaming is never going to be the same.\" Mark Rhodes, Multimedia Editor, Micropublishing News Address Book BloChip. Mapping BioChip. Pegasus Osugen Tank GED 49405 ONE CALIFRATING TRIAL ABONE Mapping BioChip AV11 6 June 2318, 0651Z. Attention Temporal Protectorate: Travel through time GPAVITON TEATRE Lattico Intense arcade action A rip has been detected in the fabric of time. Only moments remain until all that mankind has accomplished is laid waste. Your objective-journey through time...from prehistoric lands to the distant future, to prevent any compromise in the established continuum. But before the game is over, quomon you must discover who...or what...is the source of this mayhem, and bring it to a halt. Photorealistic 3D modeled worlds to explore  Over 30 minutes of full motion video  Integrated arcade action and puzzles to  No set order in which the goals must be challenge any player accomplished  Intuitive interface featuring easy-to-use . More than one solution to each probinventory and movement controls lem you encounter  Original soundtrack  Also available on Macintosh CD Take a ride through time on the CD Adventure that will alter history. Available at retailers throughout the continuum or by contacting: Quadra Interactive, Inc., P.O. Box 188033, Carlsbad, CA 92009-9793 Circle Reader Service 1113 Multi-level challenges Copyright 1992,1993 Presto Studios, Inc.; MPCversionby QuadraInteractive, Inc. QUADRA PROTO INTERACTIVE "


"INTERVIEW THE CHIEF'S QUEST An Arresting Interview With Former Los Angeles Police Chief, Daryl Gates T hen Sierra On-Line decided to CGW: What was your actual involvement in Anyway, the game points out that systems publish another game in their PoPolice Quest 4: Open Season? solve crimes. You gather a lot of information lice Quest series, they decided to The Chief: I started right from the beginand clues. There are a lot of things that turn guarantee that the game illustrate proper poning looking at the script. They sent me the up that look kind of interesting and you may lice procedures and exploit the celebrity status first draft and I suggested a lot of changes, want to go off on a tangent), but an officer rcement official. particularly adapting the language they used has to stick to his focus to solve crimes. The company contacted former L.A.P.D. so that it would be more like authentic police CGW: Will the player have to use actual Chief Daryl Gates and signed him as the procedure. I originally thought the script was police procedures? celebrity designer. As the game neared coma pretty bizarre case. But then I pletion, Sierra provided an opportunity for thought back to some of the acCGW to interview the controversial police tual experiences that I'd had as a chief. Rather than trodding over the welldetective and thought of several beaten ground of past controversy, the interthat were even more bizarre. view focused on Gates involvement in Police CGW: How many cases were Quest 4: Open Season. Gates was joined in the ne you involved in as a detective? CGW offices by Tammy Dargan, the Police The Chief: That would be Quest Project Manager and former television producer with credits for America's Most hard to say since I supervised all Wanted and other television series. the detectives for eight years unCGW: So, what's a successful talk show host der (former Police Chief] Ed like you (Gates hosts an evening talk show on Davis, as well as when I was chief, of course. You know, Los Angeles radio station KFI) doing helping to develop an adventure game about the police? every chief is a detective at heart. CGW Editor Wilson deliberates whether or not to play \"bad cop\" (polite chuckle) That is something that never in CGW's interrogation of Chief Gates. leaves you. As a result, you The Chief: Well, when I retired, I told sometimes drive the detectives crazy looking \"The Chief: Essentially, yes. One of the first myself that I wouldn't do anything that over their shoulders and offering your \"sug. things I did was encourage Tammy (Dargan, wasn't fun. This has turned out to be a lot of gestions.\" the Project Manager] to go through the fun. I've learned a lot. In playing the game, L.A.P.D. manuals. I was surprised that she though, I'm not very good (laughter). I'm still CGW: So, how realistic is Police Quest 4? read them all. These are thousands of pages a novice. The Chief: I'm very happy with the realistic of fine print! The department manual comes CGW: So, what was your first reaction when aspects of the game. We made some comproin 5 parts and the homicide manual is pretty Sierra approached you about this product? mises, of course. For instance, in a shooting thick indicating 3-4\" with his fingers). After The Chief: For years, I worked with mainwhere an officer is the victim as happens in she read them, she cross-referenced them for frames, but my staff worked with PCs. The the game) we wouldn't have merely two offidirect relationships to the game. only games I had contact with were those cers, one detective and a criminologist. We'd Tammy Dargan: For example, in Homireflex-oriented games for kids. When Ken be all over the place. As it is, though, there is cide, all paperwork for each case is placed in Williams called me, I told him to send me the more burden and involvement on the player. its own blue binder called a \"murder book.\" game and I'd run it by a couple of kids to see It probably has more of the feel of the old days when you go there, the desks and shelves are if I wanted my name on it. When he actually when derectives were responsible for one case. filled with these murder books. sent the Police Quest games, I thought, \"Uh, Today, each detective is responsible for too In fact, the documentation is sectioned just oh! What have I agreed to?\" many cases. like it was an abridged version of the L.A.P.D. Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"FOR WINDOWS ! Limited time offer 3995 Incredible Value! HIGH SPEED 3D ARCADE ACTION FOR WINDOWS ! OASIUN PRETE THREE COMPLETE GAMES IN ONE ! :  INCREDIBLE PHOTOREALISTIC 3D GRAPHICS  STEREO SOUND EFFECTS AND MIDI MUSIC \"OVER 30 LEVELS OF PLAY AND 5 DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY  NOW AVAILABLE AT SOFTWARE RESELLERS THROUGHOUT AMERICA OR CALL 800-545-7677 or 310-793-0600 TO ORDER INVASION MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WHOWS A -301 PARDESIAS A Circle Reader Service #32 "


"Department Manual. It's broken down into subjects, like the officer's oath, deadly force and Sam Brown belts. I didn't know before I read these manuals, for instance, that officers can wear velcro belts. CGW: What are the other realistic elements in the game? bursts per target: two to the upper body and Tammy Dargan: Yes. Our 255th color is one to the head. gray. We get smoother lines by dithering all like this feature. The police department of the outside lines with a gray dither. runs an officer through large-screen scenarios CGW: Since you used real sites, did you have to teach them when to shoot and when not to pay extra for their use? to shoot. The game is similar and will give the Tammy Dargan: We didn't pay site fees, player some of that feel. but we did get releases from all of the building CGW: Anything you don't like about the owners. game? CGW: Were there any sites that have particuThe Chief: Well, the language seems kind lar memories associated with real cases? of unrealistic. «Bugger off\" is not representative of what you're going to hear when you knock on a person's door and they don't want to talk to you. CGW: What's different about this Police Quest? Tammy Dargan: It's the first game where we've used a digital camera [Kodak's DCS200) to capture the backgrounds, all of which are actual locations in Los Angeles, selected by Daryl. Then we video-captured the actors The Chief: Outside of Parker Center and in 236 colors (20 colors of the 256-color the Police Academy? I can say that the openpalette were reserved for Windows) and transing crime scene isn't an actual one, but I've posed them over the top using a chromakey seen crime scenes identical to that one. And process. the map that you use to go from place to place CGW: We've seen this product as it's come uses the actual map and numbering system along and the lines around the characters seem that is used by the L.A.P.D. much smoother than in earlier versions. Have Tammy Dargan: There's the Shortstop you learned a new trick in handling the radial Bar! aliasing (smoothing the outside lines)? The Chief: Right, that's a story. Sierra ACCESS Soft Tammy Dargan: One of my favorites is the shooting range. Did you know that you have to qualify once a month in real life? The range pictured in the game is the actual Police Academy shooting range for the L.A.P.D. It not only provides the player a chance to do better in the game, but also reveals the necessity of qualifying The Chief: That's right. If you don't qualify, you're suspended for a day, just like in real life. This sequence offers good evidence for why police officers want to switch from 6shooters to 9mm guns (with 15 shots per clip). They're trained to fire three round A COURSE FOR YO LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS (8:18) K NORTH BOUNTIFUL GOLF COUT LT BUTTONOREX Firestone Akron, Ohio Troon Scottsdale, AZ JACOBS Bountiful Bountiful, UT Dorado Beach Puerto Rico  Barton Creek Austin, Texas Bayhill Orlando, FL "


"wanted a bar where police officers CGW: She's a composite of all your hung out. There was this one bar that worst nightmares? I really hated when I was chief beThe Chief: You've got it. cause a lot of officers hung out there, CGW: So, what's next for Daryl drank too much and got into trouble. Gates. Are you going to consult on any When we asked for permission to use more computer games: it in the game, the owner couldn't The Chief: Well, it's just like anybelieve it. «The Chief wants to use my thing else, a lot of it is going to depend bar?\" on how this one is received. CGW: Speaking of sites and releases, Tammy Dargan: Actually, we've we're curious. Did you have to get a thought a little bit about it. Chief license to use the L.A.P.D. name? Gates instituted S.W.A.T. (Special The Chief: No, everybody does Weapons And Tactics) when he was it-good and bad. with the L.A.P.D. and this would be CGW: Did the police department an ideal opportunity to blend strategy cooperate in the game? Chief Gates chuckles as Tammy Dargan shares her real life experience in a police helicopter fly-along. and role-playing. Nothing definite has Tammy Dargan: They were very been decided, though. cooperative, thanks to Chief Gates. They thing seems irregular. It's the Officer-InThe Chief: I have took me up in a helicopter and we particivolved Shooting Team that investigates and working with Sierra, though. I really apprecipated in establishing a perimeter. I found out that is in the game. ated their allowing us to put some D.A.R.E. that police helicopters orbit to the left all the Tammy Dargan: Yes. After the ambush [Drug Abuse Resistance Education) refertime because there is always an observer on scene, the player's character is stripped of his ences in the game, and there is a public service the left. On one occasion, we saw a perpetra weapons because they've gone to the S.I.D. announcement on the CD-ROM version of tor drop a knife after a gas station robbery. for ballistics testing. the game. CGW: Are some of the more unpleasant asCGW: What about that other unpleasant CGW: We want to thank you for your time. pects of police work simulated in the game? After aspect of police work, dealing with the media? Is there anything else you want to say about the the ambush does the character have to explain to The Chief: Oh, that's in there, too. It's game? Internal Affairs that it was a good shooting another compromise in that you only have to The Chief: I think it's a tough case to solve. The Chief: Actually, Internal Affairs deal with one reporter instead of a whole CGW doesn't investigate a shooting unless some group, but she makes up for it. are brings you UR  VERY MOOD! Championship COURSES LINKS If you feel like playing 18 holes on Hawaii's Mauna Kea course on Monday and Arizona's desert spectacle Troon North that night and Akron, Ohio's Firestone course on Tuesday morning, save your airfare and just pull out your LINKS Championship Courses! ACCESS Software has beautifully digitized versions of some of the world's finest golf courses so you can play them on your computer anytime of the day or night! LINKS B o Golf PINI HURST MAUNA KEA Buff Springs LINKS Championship Courses are completely compatible with our original LINKS-The Challenge of Golf, the new LINKS 386 Pro, and Microsoft Golf for Windows! Hair Artur COURSE SAS ACCESS BE N . COURSE 23 A Banff Springs Alberta, Canada many  Pinehurst Pinehurst, NC Mauna Kea Hawaii SOFTWARE INCORPORATED 4910 W, Amelia Earhart Dr., SLC, UT 84116 (801)359-2900, (800)800-4880, FAX (801)596-9128 "


"REVIEW Under The OCCUS A Review Of Capsfone's Discoveries of the Deep OBRIRE by Allen L. Greenberg It is to the ocean we must now turn to is frequently necessary to stop at a port for fuel tedious dead-time broadcasting pleas for help satisfy our most basic needs. While food and supplies. from the on-board radio. A recreation room Land various natural resources appear While it is possible to simply hop in the is also available, which boasts a dartgame plentiful, we have no choice but to accept the boat and explore some random location, the simulation and an arcade machi fact the nearly 60 million square miles of land institute offers seven pre-defined assignments players enter a tank in order to destroy several which occupy the planet Earth are no longer from which the player may choose. While the helpless polygons. able to provide sufficient natural surroundassignments vary in complexity, they are not ings to satisfy today's population of computer ranked and need not be undertaken in any The Implements Of Instruction game players. Similarly, the surrounding skies particular order. Regrettably, there is no role Within a special instrument room, players and the galaxy in which our planet resides, playing aspect to the game, and no cumulawill learn the value of instruments somewhat once thought to be limitless, now approach tive record is kept of the player's successes or more complex than the ship's compass. An their capacity for dogfights, strategic bomb failures. A successful mission entitles the electronic map and navigation station proplayer to view an on-screen certificate that vides a greater wealth of information than any vanishes after a single showing, like a single other location, and it is from here that the drop of rain on the ocean. Finding the exact ocean location at which to submerge and explore the deep can be as challenging, though not quite as interesting, as the exploration itself. For each of the seven missions, the player is provided with a latitude and longitude. One of two ships are available for traveling there, one of which features a \"flat\" window while the other has ing and interstellar conquest. Fortunately, an angled or \"perspective» view. Steering Capstone now offers young computer users these ships can, at first, be a frustrating expean opportunity to explore humankind's nearrience. There is a lag of several seconds after \"hyperspace\" leaps are planned and initiated. the wheel is turned before a change in direcest and most evasive frontier, the sea. tion registers on the dashboard compass, so The «sonar-magnetometer\" is used to identhat oversteering is likely. Also on the dashtily large objects or high concentrations of Mucho Cousteau board is a true-time clock that is tied in with metal, while a \"depth sounder\" provides both the game's graphics so that players will see the a graphic and numeric indication of ocean Discoveries of the Deep (DOD) is an educasame day/night conditions on their computer depth at the ship's current location. While tional and entertaining piece of software that monitors as appears outside their windows. the workings of these last two machines are is designed primarily for school children. Far Due to the time involved, a less complex than a submarine battle simulareal-time voyage is clearly out of Discoveries of the Deep tion, yet in many ways more colorful, it simuthe question. Once the ship has lates deep sea exploration in portions of the cleared the institute's docks and Caribbean and Atlantic oceans. Players reDiscoveries of the Deep Disseries TITLE: moved into the open sea, players PRICE: $59.95 ceive their instructions from the Manatee SYSTEM: may make hyperspace-like REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, VGA Harbor Oceanographic Institute based in jumps of as much as 100 miles graphics, 12MB hard drive space; Adlib Gold, SoundBlaster, PAS, Miami, Florida. A ship travels from the instiat a time. Still, a miscalculation Roland MT-32 sound cards supported tute to an exploration sight where a deep-sea of fuel, supplies or the undePROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Capstone sub is then launched. These expeditions may tected presence of some shallow Miami, FL (800) 468-7226 take the player as far away as Spain, so that it waters may cost the player some IBM None Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"A Pepe Moreno Production TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE GROUP MECCAB WARNING: THIS GAME MAY BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR SOUL! ATODUCTOS TAXI \"Maximum excitement...combines interactivity with serious graphics and a moviemaker's sense Computer Graphics World of craft.\" NEW YORK TAKE THE RIDE SF YOUR LIFE! An interactive epic adventure on CD-ROM, Hell Cab is more than a game, it's a journey in the devil's time machine. Hop in! Check out the Empire State Building and get set for a hell ride og through history's most infamous periods. You'll Dazzling animated sequences, original music; lifelike sound effects; rich, 3-D graphics walk with the dinosaurs, fight to the death with . Multiple environments; complex strategies Roman gladiators, even witness infantry Realistic first-person interaction attacks in the WWI trenches of Verdun. CD-ROM for: Macintosh #14019 Windows» — #14031 Multimedia PC Available at your local computer store or call toll-free to order (800) 482-3766 Circle Reader Service #129 O PC 0311 ORP W Warm e ste raporllewee "


"Lat 26.00 Long $29.90 Hoding-90_dog PORT Miami, FLA at 2.19.14 which will often provide additional derail, although this feature may be disabled. Unlike the institute's congratulatory certificates, the photos are not erased from disk once they have been viewed. In Search Of The missions are primarily to observe and explore, with only a minimum of interaction with the undersea environment. Players will have the opportunity to study and pay their respects to the remains of the historic ocean liner \"Titanic\" which last saw daylight in 1912. Players will find this piece of sunken history in a condition similar to that in which it was actually found several decades later. Another ship, the \"Capitana,\" along with the rest of the New Spain armada, became famous for safely carrying nearly $70 million in gold and jewelry to the ocean floor near the Florida Key islands in the year 1733. In Discoveries of the Deep, players will follow the salvage project which took place over 200 years later by locating the «Capitana.» study of earth's early history. Another deep discovery took place five miles below the surface in the Romanche Gap where scientists were surprised to discover the presence of life under such high pressure. One particularly large creature caused quite a bit of interest when it appeared only as a blurred photographic image. The player is now requested to further investigate this creature. The final mission involves an attempt to control a dangerous leak from a rusted container filled with nuclear waste material. The player's job is simply to sample the radioactive stuff by extending a mechanical arm over to the defective container. This mechanical arm is also necessary elsewhere in the program and requires the player ro orient the submarine so that the arm, when extended, is able to reach out and fulfill its function. SUR LANCA ALLET 440 my obscure, proper use of the information they provide is certainly simple enough. Players may also wish to keep a journal of both their travels and their underwater experiences. For this purpose, a clipboard and notepaper is available on the ship. Anything that is typed onto this document will be preserved as a permanent record. Since the player only has a limited time to remain underwater, it is often useful to note the exact latitude and longitude of areas worthy of further exploration. Also on board is a large map of the area onto which may be posted colored flags marking the journey, as well as areas referred to in the journal. Unfortunately, it is not possible to save a mission in progress to disk. Once the player enters the hi-tech mini-sub, Discoveries of the Deep becomes far more interesting. Guiding the sub is not unlike piloting a slow-moving flight simulator, using the keyboard's directional keys to approximate the function of a joystick. Very precise readings of longitude and latitude are shown, as is a numerical display of the sub's heading and depth under the ocean's surface. The majority of the undersea display consists of a large circular window that looks out into the murky water. An external, underwater light diminishes the gloom for only a short distance beyond the window. As one might expect, movement seems sluggish at first. However, the throttle control is designed to allow the pilot to quickly build up momentum and then, when desired, bring the sub to a sudden and complete stop. The most useful underwater device is a detection system that, when reasonably close, will lead the way to any object of sufficient mass. For particularly sentimental moments, plus certain missions which require visual documentation, the sub is equipped with an on-board photographic system. At any time, the player may request that the view outside the window be saved to disk as a photograph for later viewing once the player has returned to the Oceanographic Institute. Photos are normally taken with an underwater flash, ful graphics and its underwater scenery often captivating. Were it a flight simulator, however, pilots would be quick to complain about its slow frame rate. Since it takes place underwater, one can more easily excuse its slow motion. However, slow motion need not be jerky motion, and a more fluid movement of scenery would have made the program somewhat more enjoyable. The keyboard is probably the most convenient device for issuing the various commands, although a mouse is frequently useful. The program's designers are to be complimented for including extensive on-line help. The player may instantly call up either a short list of commands or several pages of extensive information. Obviously, there is much more to oceanography than appears on this game's shimmering surface. Even the children for whom the program was designed may find themselves wishing for a more extensive or interactive experience with the creatures, fossils and other objects they find in Discoveries of the Deep's waters. However, there is a lot to enjoy here, and many young minds may find their appetites nearly as whet as their diving gear. CGW The popularized Bermuda triangle is the setting for an attempt to locate the missing \"Flight 19\" which disappeared, somewhat mysteriously, in 1945. The attempt here is not so much to explain the disappearance, but to prove that the flight did not, contrary to some questionable journalism, terminate on some other planet's runway. Years later, Flight 609, bound for London from New York, was lost midway over the Atlantic. The cause for this plane's misfortune is believed to be hidden in its black box flight recorder, somewhere in the plane's submerged wreckage. It is now up to the player to find that black box. \"The The player is further requested to augment and corroborate some dangerous and fascinating research by entering the mysterious \"Blue Hole\" of the Bahamas. This area may once have been an above-water cavern, in which case it may contain stalactites. By photographing the area and returning with one of the stalactites, the player will advance the 25.BB 79.98 ECHO_1563 181 FT HESTR Rad Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"Notebook computers are great except when Whether you fly combat, race a car, PERALLEL SAME P82T it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come maneuver a tank or wing along at 100 knots, the PGP's software features will enhance your play action. Use it to equipped with a game port. Introducing the Parallel Game Port\" from Genovation. The PGP program the joystick's keys and customize them for specific games. This enables you to take control of the game. What's more, turns your notebook into a gamebook by converting the computer's printer port into a \"virtual game port». With PGP, you also get a gender changer adapter, which lets you connect a joystick, yoke, pedals or even a PGP eliminates the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. And it's easy to install, so you can be up and running in minweapon sytems controller to your notebook or utes. Look for the Parallel Game Port in desktop DOS PC. the software section of The PGP is an indisyour nearest computer pensable accessory for STICK IT TO YOUR NOTEBOOK. dealer. Or call us at today's serious gamer. (800) 822-4333. Now compatible with more than 50 games. GENOVATION Genovation, Inc. 17741 Mitchell North Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 833-3355 FAX (714) 833-0322 Sales: (800) 822-4333 Copyright 1993 Genovation, Inc. All product names are trademarks of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #76 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW A Spectacle Not To Be Myst Brderbund's Macintosh Adventure Makes The Most Of CD-ROM by Christopher Breen T nyone who has given more than a cursory glance at the popular media h as seen that entertainment CDROM is the Next Big Thing. \"MEGABYTE UPON MEGABYTE OF GRAPHIC DELIGHTS, HOURS OF ENTHRALLING DIGITAL AUDIO, BOLD ANIMATION CAST OF THOUSANDS, SINGING WAITERS, DANCING BEARS...\" Bah! though this can be confounding at first, a quick jaunt around the island is enough to provide sufficient information to begin the game proper. One of the charms of the game is that the player experiences the freedom to make discoveries at his/her own pace in a non-threatening environment. There is no game clock, the puzzles need not be solved in any particular order, and nothing in the game will cause the player's character to meet an untimely end. That's right! The game is open enough to allow anyone to try any boneheaded thing they desire like without fear that Something Really Bad is going to happen. HyperCard Hits Hyperspeed the reader-quite literally—to fantastic lands. So adept at this skill is Atrus that he has stocked a good three shelves of Myst Island's library with these magical tomes. With horror, Atrus discovers that his books are being destroyed and his fantastic lands ransacked. The population of the island being confined to the writer and his two sons Sirrus and Achenar, suspicion for these nefarious deeds rests heavily on one of his progenies. Filled with remorse, Atrus flings himself and the book linking the outside world to Myst Island into a large fissure. Somehow this powerful book makes its way to the player, who is left to unravel its mysteries. Cracking open the book with an innocent mouse click, one is instantly transported into the adventure via an aerial tour of a hazy, tree-encrusted Myst Island. After this brief QuickTime flight over the Stunning landscape, the perspective shifts to the island's dock. From here, one must explore the island, solve puzzles that gain access to other lands, and gather clues to reveal the identity of the book-destroying perpetrator. As it turns out, this is not a particularly Myst easy task. Myst is one of those games that offers virtually no initial instruction-the information provided in this review is actually a bit more than the player will glean from the manual and the back of the box. AlMost current Mac games available on CDROM are put together with Macromedia's Director, a program that, among other things, provides developers with a highly sophisticated animation system. The drawback of Director is that the processing req ments for the animation slow down the already poky CD-ROM performance. The Millers elected to forgo this route and take another, more familiar, path. Although they have experimented extensively with Director, Rand and Robyn chose to use their old buddy HyperCard as the engine to drive Myst. The unfortunate fact is, many CD-ROM games are high on glitz and low on substance. That's why, when I began to hear the faint rumblings of an amazing new game from Rand and Robyn Miller, the creators of Cosmic Osmo and Spelunx and the Caves of Mr. Sendo, I was more than a bit skeptical. As it turns out, I was also more than a lot wrong. Myst is everything it's touted to be and is, quite simply, the best CD-ROM game currently available for the Macintosh. Myst is a game of discovery. In order not to spoil it, I will reveal only these few plor details: Atrus, a rather talented author, has picked up a magical power from his father that enables him to write books that transport TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Myst $59.95 Macintosh with CD-ROM 8-bit 256-color Macintosh, CD-ROM drive, 3MB hard drive space. 4MB RAM (2.5MB free RAM), System 7.0.1 or ligher None Rand and Robyn Miller for Cyan, Inc. Broclerbund 500 Redwood Blvd. P.O. Box 6121 Novato, CA 94948 (415) 382-4400 The arratis Adeolu Til De Yo VI Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"A rift in the fabric of time and space, a deadly foe from the past and the judgment of all humanity await the crew of the Starship Enterprise ... the five year mission continues. JUDGMENT RITES Join Captain James T. Kirk and the crew of the U.S.S. Enterprise in all new episodes that place you in command. Beam down to alien worlds, communicate with new life forms and take the helm as you join the legendary crew of the Starship Enterprise in their continuing five year mission to explore the final frontier. E Inende Software  1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. Star Trek\", and  1993 Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. Star Trek is a registered trademark of Paramount Pictures. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Circle Reader Service #85 "


"a fair piece across the island in order to return to the spot where the game was saved. This occurs more often than would be expected, because much of the information needed to complete a task is contained in books stored on Myst Island, and the only other way to retain that information is to scribble it down. For lazy sods like me who are unwilling to Because Myst is HyperCard-based, it has a different look than games created with Direcrector. Each scene is presented as a 3-D rendered, stationary backdrop. Any animation that may occur is contained within QuickTime windows that are seamlessly integrated into that backdrop. Navigation is controlled by clicking on the screen in the direction desired. Likewise, objects are activated by clicking or, in the case of levers, clicking and dragging. When one moves from one location to another, each scene cross-fades to the next. If these fades seem too slow, it is possible to opt for fast transitions that fling one directly into the next scene. Although it may seem as if the Millers are not taking advantage of the latest and greatest whiz-bang technology, working within the animation, over 40 minutes of original music, megabytes of digital-audio sound effects, and 2,500 ray-traced images that will, on occasion, cause one's jaw to drop in admiration. The difference between Myst and some other CD-ROM games is that the technology is not the star of the show. Yes, the graphics are mesmerizing, the live-action QuickTime sequences are stunning, and the musical score, cinematic in its scope, enhances the feel of the game without being intrusive, but Myst is more than just a collection of sparkly graphics and stirring sound. The substance of the game is every bit as good as the package is every bit as good as the package. The danger inherent in fantasy/adventure games is that, all too often, plot lines become convoluted and farfetched. Not so here. Mysts narrative is straightforward and simple enough to be believable, given the surreal nature of the surroundings. In addition, information that drives the plot is released at an even pace-the gamer's pace. One doesn't feel as if someone tacked on a harebrained ending simply to ric up loose ends. The puzzles, like all good puzzles, are tough but fair. One need only pay attention to everything going on within the immediate vicinity (well, perhaps a little musical training and a compass would help too). Observation, both aural and visual, is the key. There's not an unjust trick in the bunch, and once the puzzles are figured out, players are likely to smite their forehead mightily and wonder why they didn't get it hours earlier. transcribe page after page of text, this means restoring a game saved from Myst Island, looking something up, re-restoring to the first location, and then tramping back to where this all began. Fortunately, it is possible to ameliorate this situation somewhat by switching into Lip Mode, an option that allows paths to be traversed in a few leaps rather than several steps. An Instant CD Classic Along with the CD-ROM (which, in addition to the game, contains a 14-minute QuickTime movie of the making of Myst), the game package includes a notebook for jotting down observations and three game hints to get the gamer started. Should these hints be insufficient, Brderbund offers the Myst Official Game Secrets hint book for $14.95. Personally, though, I can't understand why anyone would want to rush through the game by getting an easy answer; with Myst's graphic beauty, lush sound, and compelling plot line and puzzles, it's over all too soon, CGW The Complaint Box I hate to knock a product that is bound to set a new standard in Macintosh CDROM games, but I do have two small complaints. First: When one clicks the cursor to the left or right side of the screen, the perspective turns either 90 or limitations of HyperCard actually enhances 180 degrees, depending on whether the dethe game. Myst isn't a shoot-'em-up, so there signers thought it important for the player to isn't a pacing problem. Besides, a good deal see what is to the side. I understand that of the player's time is spent staring at the some of these views might seem extranescreen and tapping thoughtfully on the ol' ous, but in some areas the scenery is so noggin. There's really no need for fully anisimilar that one can become too easily mated Director sequences when one has such disoriented. This results in extra clicks pleasant scenery, along with Chris Brandkamp's soothing environmental sounds, and between one scene and another to deterthe delightfully diverting toys scattered mine the exact location. throughout the game. Complaint Two: When a game in proDon't get me wrong: Myst doesn't ignore gress is saved and later restored, the player the elements that make CD-ROM the Next is transported to the opening location of Big Thing. Like any worthwhile 462-megathe scenario. Although everything acbyte game, Myst plays to the strengths of the complished up to the point of the save is medium. It boasts 66 minutes of QuickTime still intact, the player may have to travel Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"A Note From The Editor KIDS COMPUTERS By Peter Scisco Kelly Freas hange is in the air. We hear that phrase a lot from Washington. We read the same words in papers and magazines. But as we move through our lives day by day nothing much seems different. Not so at Kids & Computers. Change is a reality. Recently, technology publishing giant Ziff-Davis acquired Golden Empire Publications, the publisher of Kids & Computers and the magazine you hold in your hands, Computer Gaming World. If you're a CGW subscriber, this may be your first introduction to Kids & Computers. Briefly, we are dedicated to helping parents and kids harness today's technology for their benefit now and in the future. In this special section, you'll find reviews of some of the latest educational, creativity, and entertainment programs geared toward kids. If you're a Kids & Computers subscriber, you might well wonder what has happened to your magazine. That's where the change comes in. We have decided to revamp Kids & Computers. We look forward to a more responsive, assertive, informative, and attractive magazine in 1994. That requires us to step back and regroup, to assess our goals and determine how best to achieve them. But it also requires something of you, our faithful and enthusiastic readers. It will require some amount of patience as you wait for Kids & Computers to reemerge. Don't let this time go idle. Use it to communicate your needs and wishes for a new Kids & Computers. (I'll give you an address at the end of this column.) Not everything has changed here. In the most important elements, the song remains the same. Kids & Computers, along with its new publisher, remains committed to presenting timely reviews, opinions, and reporting to parents who are concerned that their kids be prepared for the information age. Now let's turn our eyes to this special section of CGW. Inside, you'll find the latest crop of kids software reviewed by our educators and writers-people who make it their job to know kids, know teaching, and know technology. When you step into the computer stores this holiday season, or when you go thumbing through the software catalog looking for just the right piece of software for that special child in your life, you're likely to be swamped by the sheer number of titles available. The Software Publisher's Association marks educational software as the fastest growing area of the software publishing business. I can attest that the number of programs crossing my welcome mat is astonishing. New ideas and new approaches to learning are evident everywhere. As the editor of Kids & Computers, as a father, and as a volunteer in the public schools, I think it's more important than ever that all kids have access to these new technologies. Equally important, adults and kids need to share the possibilities and opportunities made available by new technology so that they can build a path together into the next century. It occurs to me as I write this that the kids in the elementary school half-amile away will be leaving high school at the start of the next century. What we do now, as parents, friends, guardians, and teachers, will make a big difference when the numbers spin round to 2001. I only need to see the faces of those kids light up when I enter the classroom to understand the potential of computers and software to influence their learning. And I hope that in the coming few years we will learn better how to harness this technology so that it can be integrated into classrooms and into lessons. It's one thing for a parent to buy a program for the computer at home, when scheduling isn't so much a problem, when the needs of a child are clearly defined. It's another thing altogether when computers are seen in school as just another subject to teach, rather than accepted as a tool to enable learning. Reviewed This Month The Amazon Trail, 20th Century Video Almanac, Amy's Fun-2-3 Adventure!, Slater and Charlie Go Camping, Sir AddaLot's Math Adventure, Mighty Draw, Stickybear's Early Learning Activities, A.J.'s World of Discovery, Kid CAD, EZLanguage for Windows, The San Diego Zoo Presents: The Animals!, Discover Space, Bailey's Book House, My Own Stories, Ready, Set, Read, Mayo Clinic's Family Health Book, The Deluxe American Heritage Dictionary, 3rd Edition, Wayne's World, From the letters I have received in the last year, it's evident that many families and teachers have come to the same conclusion. And it's evident from their comments that they need a magazine like Kids & Computers because they simply can't find enough of the information they need anywhere else. I ask that those writers, and the many others who read our magazine and look forward to it arriving in their mailbox, remain patient during this change. I also ask that you write. Let us know what you need and what you'd like to see in Kids & Computers. Address your correspondence to Editor, Kids & Computers, PO. Box 730, Yorba Linda CA 92686-9963. We'll be listening. In the meantime, I wish you a joyous and peaceful Holiday Season. K&C December 1993 Page 147 "


"\"With Peter Pan, EA*Kids is doing something absolutely new with storytelling and giving real meaning to the phrase 'interactive adventure!\" Peter Scisco, Kids and Computers "


"emember the sense of wonder you felt as you watched Peter Pan discover he could really fly? Well, in Peter Pan, A Story Painting Adventure from EA-Kids,\" it's your child's imagination that really soars. Boys and girls ages Teter la 5-9 become the \"hands of the animator,\" to help Peter save Wendy from the evil Captain Hook. Along with the Paintbox JAZZ WINSTOR GROCK (Actual computer screen shot) Pals, children actually change events in the story, expanding their reading, problem-solving and decision-making skills like never before. It's the kind of fun your children will return to again and again. Unless of course, you're playing it yourself. To order a FREE EA*Kids demo disk or videotape call 1 800 KID-XPRT. For IBM compatibles, Macintosh and 3D0. . Available on floppy disk and CD-ROM. EA * Kids. Circle Reader Service #145 THE KIDS SOFTWARE EXPERTS  Novotrade International, Inc. All rights reserved. EA-Kids, Electronic Arts, Story Painting and Paintbox Pals are trademarks of Electronic Arts. IBM, Macintosh and 300 are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp.. Apple Computer, Inc. and The 3D0 Company respectively. "


"KIDS & COMPUTERS Holiday T i mes als alle Software Guide Gary Rogers / Core The Amazon Trail sharpen reference and research skills. And they get all of this in the form of an entertaining adventure that's sure to keep their interest. Jeff Kingston An invitation to the sights and sounds of the Amazon jungle awaits every child who savors exploration, discovery and danger. This educational adventure game sends kids into the wilds of South America, with splendid animation and authentic native music. Kids see and hear the mammals, birds, fish, and insects of the rain forest from the relative safety of their computer canoe. All the while, they are looking for a medicinal plant that can save the ancient Incas. 20th Century Video Almanac Take a compendium of the most important and intriguing events of this century and present them with more than 100 video clips, 2000 photos, text, music and narration. What you have is an excellent introduction to a fine series of CD-ROM discs. QOOQODOGRODUDOGODODUOVODORO  DOLDOOOOOOOOOO Where are we? Wow are we doing Toks turn around. OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO LO The Amazon Trail Price: $59.95 In Brief: An interactive science/geography/history simulation centering around the flora and fauna of the Amazon River basin. Requirements: IBM or compatible with 1 MB RAM; VGA display: hard disk with 7.5MB free space; mouse; DOS 5.0 or higher. Audio Support: Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, and compatible sound devices. For ages: 10 to 16 Other Versions: Macintosh ($59.95) bows with Henry Ford. They contact Theodore Roosevelt. Historical figures and events find their way into the game and into the minds of young players. Strategy is important, as explorers must evaluate their progress throughout the game and make crucial decisions. Rationing the food to fit the pace is paramount to the success of the expedition, as is navigating the 11 rivers of the Amazon basin. A health meter displays the fitness of the party. Should sickness befall the expedition, resting a day or so might be a good idea. Trading with the local villagers entails making even more decisions. The arcade portion of the game occurs both on land (investigate and survey) and in the water (navigate and fish). Each brings with it a real sense of environmental consciousness. On land, players use a camera instead of a gun to shoot animals, birds and bugs. The skill and fun are still high pitched: Kids must observe with a keen eye and target their quarry with the camera. When fishing, players are given the option of releasing the fish after classifying it. Pictures of captured land and aquatic specimens are then referenced in the Amazon Guidebook and identified. On sound-equipped computers, proper pronunciation of the species can be played. All information goes into a scrapbook for evaluation at the end of the game. A shield garnered with jewels representing the animals and plants identified attests to the success of each expedition. The use of sound and the animated sequences make severe demands on computer hardware. Computers designed for today's multimedia software shouldn't have any trouble running the game, but older computer models may suffer from slower performance. With The Amazon Trail, kids learn critical planning skills, gain a sense of historical development along this important river, and have the opportunity to 20th Century Video Almanac Price: $99.95; entire series of five CDROM discs sells for $199.95 In Brief: A multimedia examination of the important events and people of the Twentieth Century first in a five-disc series. Requirements: IBM compatible 386SX or better with 1 MB RAM; SVGA display; hard disk. Audio Support: Pro Audio Spectrum, Sound Blaster, or compatible devices. MECC 6160 Summit Drive North Minneapolis, MN 55430-4003 (612) 569-1500 Circle Inquiry #180 The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (415) 883-3000 Circle Inquiry #181 Pirhana, headhunters, and greedy Conquistadors stand in the way of success. But the oddest and most compelling obstacle is the eerie blue mist that occasionally descends upon the player and transports him or her to another time. In this way, kids are exposed not just to the geography and ecology of the region, but to its history as well. They rub el In this introductory collection, students can tap into this information base of Twentieth Century history from a timeline, which shows eight pictures of events as if they were frames on a film strip. Starting in 1890 with early motion pictures and the development of the automobile, the timeline moves forward Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"For a IBM-PC or Color Macintosh Call (206) 485-1212* FREE Demo *Offer good while supplies last Birthday Surprise Fatty Bear and his friends have a lot to do before Kayla wakes up. Matilda Rabbit's busy with the cake. Gretchen's working on the decorations. The puppy's getting into mischief, and the garage door opener has disappeared. Fatty Bear's Birthday SurpriseTM is an adventure game designed especially for children. Children enhance their problem-solving skills, while happily exploring Fatty Bear's world; the goals even vary in response to your child's actions. So, what are you waiting for? Morning's almost here, and a bear can only do so much alone. Ages HS-E379 3-11 H22 TALKS! Circle Reader Service #150 TM Humongous Entertainment Creating software that doesn't underestimate your child. Available on Disk or CD-ROM for Macintosh and IBM PC systems. SRP $49.95 Disk/$54.95 CD-ROM. To purchase, visit your favorite software retailer or order direct from Humonmous Tuntertainment 13110 NE 1777th PL Boy 180 Woodinville Wa 98079 (206) 485-1212 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS to 1990 and such subjects as the sentencing of Michael Milken and the decline of American cities. Along the timeline, it's possible to move back and forth, even to leap to the end or beginning of the timeline. Photos are clear and of high quality. The video clips are equally impressive and effective. Old film clips look and sound old, while newer clips show the advances in audio and video technology. The major drawback is that the information can't be printed. The program's search feature can be accessed through the Library icon. Kids or parents can search for a particular word, view the information by category, or investigate the subject index. From Babe Ruth to the Beatles, from Benny Goodman to Thomas Edison, from Presidents to princesses, this program covers them all. It's an excellent reference for kids and parents alike — and fun to boot. Joel Schwartz, M.D. Amy's Fun-2-3 Adventure! Price: $39.99 In Brief: This engaging early-learning program teaches counting, number recognition, and comparison skills. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display, hard disk. Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster, and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 2 to 6 Once the page has played out, the great big white hand that signals wait changes to a big black cursor arrow. That gives kids a clear indication of when they're free to mouse around the screen looking for hot spots. When they find one, they'll be regaled with another cartoon treat. These tidbits expand upon the main illustration which, in turn, amplifies the text. The overall effect is a remarkably smooth blend of children's storybooks with Saturday morning cartoons — and the kids are in charge of the action. That action is exactly what we've all learned to expect from cartoons: an irreverent blend of slapstick, pratfalls, and cheerfully gratuitous but silly violence. Slater and Charlie themselves are so sweet, and their antics so good-natured, that even the most timid children will enjoy their adventures without feeling threatened. And even politically correct adults will have trouble containing their laughter. Slater and Charlie Go Camping is the sort of program that kids will want to run Devasoft P.O. Box 41250 San Jose, CA 95160 (408) 927-9645 Circle Inquiry #182 Amy's Fun-2-3 Adventure! challenging than the first two games, as there are no verbal cues. Kids need to tally Amy's count themselves, then locate the correct number in order to place the brick An additional segment allows kids to play a variety of familiar children's songs on Amy's xylophone, which has numbered keys. The notes are cued by the program; kids can also play their own compositions. The program's animation runs smoothly with bright, attractive graphics and crisp, engaging sound. The manual is helpful and straightforward, Overall, Amy's Fun-2-3 Adventure is well done, and should appeal to eager young minds. Dennis McCauley Slater helped Charlie with the tent. What better way for children to learn counting and numbers, than assisted by a lovable puppy? Amy, star of Devasoft's Amy's Fun-2-3 Adventure, leads kids through four progressively challenging episodes that help beginners grasp what numbers are all about. Younger players will want to start out in Amy's doghouse literally! After clicking on any of the numbers above the doghouse, the child is rewarded with an animated example of the number. The program also provides verbal cues, as a pleasant female voice repeats the number, and then counts up to it. Next, kids help Amy check out a friendly computer named Marty, who plays a matching game. Marty displays a random number, and then offers two sets of objects, one of which adds up to the number shown. To make a match, children must recognize the number Marty has generated, and be able to count the objects in the sets. This teaches comparison skills, as well as number recognition and counting The game also offers a journey to Cookie Castle, where Amy is helping with a repair project. Children are prompted to drop a brick into a numbered position, dictated by Amy's silent counting on her paws. This is a bit more Slater and Charlie Go Camping Price: $49.95 In Brief: A pair of lovable dinosaurs take children on a hilarious camping trip in this interactive storybook. Requirements: IBM or compatible with 2MB RAM; VGA display, hard disk; mouse; sound device. Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster, Pro Audio Spectrum, Disney Sound Source, Roland MT-32, and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 3 to 8 Slater and Charlie Go Camping Sierra On-Line P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 326-6654 Circle Inquiry #183 Camping trips can supply a family with anecdotes for a lifetime. But no matter how exciting that last campout was, it probably couldn't hold a candle to the outrageous adventures of the cartoon protagonists in this interactive storybook. Like most good storybooks, this one is all fun. There's no pressure on the kids to learn to count, pronounce carefully selected diphthongs, or identify the color purple. Each passage is read aloud; some are followed by a brief animated sequence. over and over again, but for those times when they can't use the computer, Sierra has packaged a working compass and a genuine picture book version with the software. Kids won't have to leave Slater and Charlie behind even when they go camping. Virginia Soper Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"Perm Pures Everyone's favorite little car is back, and this time he's playing games. ck, FUN PACK CF3KL NOPSTU V X Y Z Select from four different skill levels Practice matching and pattern recognition Sharpen letter and spelling skills Develop logic and spatial relationship abilities Designed for ages 3 8  Have a lot of fun! HAMBURGER! Whether an advanced speller, or just learning the ABC's, this game has a level for everyone. Relax and play a game of Tic-Tac-Toe. Putt-Putt's a whiz at the hardest level. Step right up! Six different circus puzzles are just a click away. 2 ??|?| ? @?121 1201 22121212 0 ?? 0 21?1/ 60 Create your own pinball machine, and play away! King me! Putt-Putt's a patient teacher who's always ready to play again. Practice memory and pattern recognition skills. Putt-Putt provides plenty of support and encouragement. Humongous Entertainment Creating software that doesn't underestimate your child. Available on Disk or CD-ROM for Macintosh and IBM PC systems. SRP $39.95. To purchase, visit your favorite software retailer or order direct from Humongous Entertainment, 13110 NE 177th Pl. Box 180, Woodinville, Wa. 98072. (206) 485-1212. Circle Reader Service #166 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS Sir AddaLot's Math Adventure Younger players will need assistance. The Options Menu controls the speed, sound, high score display and mouse. Game settings also control the difficulty level. These range from practice to level five, the hardest. While not as glamorous or as technically stable as some other math programs, Sir AddaLot's under $20 price tag makes it appealing to parents looking for a basic math drill program. Jack Germain 110 Mighty Draw 9111 744 Under the guise of battling dragons, this educational game helps students master number skills and basic math equations. Each of the game's levels displays 16 squares, each with an addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division problem. The player must solve the equations to advance inside each of 25 castles to save them from Scorch, the dragon. An added incentive is a picturesque moat, which players create as they successfully progress through the levels. At the end of each level, players select an item to place in the moat. It can be a fish, plant, sea creature or treasure, depending on the level. Animated sequences, such as swimming fish, enliven the moat. Sir AddaLot's Math Adventure includes an activity book keyed to the game that players can use without being at the computer. The activities include coloring, word searches and puzzles. Answers are in the back of the book. Parents and older children can easily set up the game using the Options Menu. Sir AddaLot's Math Adventure Price: $19.95 In Brief: A simple math drill program for basic number skills, Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or better) with 640K RAM; VGA display: hard disk with 2.1 MB free space; DOS 3.3 or higher Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster; Disney Sound Source; Audio Pro, Roland MT32; and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 6 to 12 From the time they start teething on car keys to the day they drive off to college, kids get a special sense of satisfaction from mastering adult tools. A good paint and draw program can put them in the driver's seat when it comes to using the computer. Abracadata has designed Mighty Draw with the whole family in mind. Steady-handed preschoolers can use the line and sketch tools to scribble in one color and watch while a second color fills in the outlines they've drawn. Since choices of colors and line breadth must be preset from the menu bar at the top of the screen, they'll need some help from their parents. Young kids will also enjoy Landmark Solutions P.O. Box 80520 Fort Wayne, IN 46898-0520 (800) 543-7947 Circle Inquiry #184 I like the blue ones. How can you at any mom the earth just Pachycephald I like the red ones. "


"typing with the program's text feature, especially in 30 point boldface. School-age children will enjoy exploring Mighty Draw's symbol libraries, choosing images to embellish their creations. These older kids can also make more sophisticated use of the line and IRELLI shape tools. They may enjoy making their own sets of flash cards for school and matching games just for fun. Adolescents should be able to master all the functions that Mighty Draw can perform. The scholars among them will appreciate the professional touch that pie charts, bar graphs, and column charts can give their science reports. Come Valentine's Day, young lovers can turn the computer into a private printing press, creating personalized greeting cards. If they're asked nicely, the teens might even help Dad lay out those genealogy charts he promised for the family reunion. While Mighty Draw is certainly not ideal for very young children or professional artists, it's a good all-purpose art program that should serve kids for many years. Virginia Soper Cat And what do big kids have that little kids covet? An education — believe it or not. Stickybear has a new program for those young learners. In Stickybear's Early Learning Activities, he'll guide them through a clutch of pre-math and pre-reading activities that will hone their cognitive skills. All six games have free play and directed activities in English and Spanish. That's 24 ways to learn and have fun. For each game, the screen is divided into two parts. The upper register is a picture window into Stickybear's animated world. The lower third always displays the buttons that allow the kids to navigate the game. In the Alphabet and Counting activities and the free play mode of the Opposites game, this register contains the buttons children use to indicate their choices. In the Shapes game, this panel has a shapes scorecard that shows which shapes have been located and which are yet to be found. In the Colors and Shapes games and the structured mode of the Opposites activity, children click on the pictures to make their choices. At the top of the screen is a small box kids can select to Mighty Draw Price: $49.95 In Brief: A general purpose graphics and drawing program for kids and adults. Requirements: IBM or compatible with 640K RAM; Hercules monochrome, CGA, EGA or VGA display; hard disk Other Versions: Windows ($59.95); Macintosh ($49.95) Stickybear's Early Learning Activities Abracadata P.O. Box 2440 Eugene, OR 97402 (503) 342-3030 Circle Inquiry #185 What do little kids want to be when they grow up? Bigger kids, of course. two bother with such trivial matters when nt an asteroid the size of Cleveland could hit like the one that is said to have eliminated the saurus species of the late Cretaceous period. OSKA Deep beneath surface pleasures like throwing dirt and eating paste, in every child there lurks a desire to find out the function of those vertical tailplates on a Stegosaurus. That's where Knowledge Adventure comes in. With our fullmotion video, lifelike illustrations, and stunning sounds and music, your child can find out how and where dinosaurs lived, ate, fought, and disappeared. And it's available on disks or CD-ROM for the PC or Mac. Your child may find this so inspirational that he'll stop eating paste. And switch to catfood. For more info call Knowledge (800) 4-MY-DINO Em Adventure KIDS WILL BE KIDS. YOURS WILL BE THE SMART ONES.\" Circle Reader Service #153 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS A.J.'s World of Discovery exercises entertaining. Most of the program's educational content comes on the Lesson Disks. Parents seeking to help their kids develop these skills should choose a Lesson Disk carefully, and plan on purchasing it soon. Tommi A. Troia-Griffin switch from free play to structured games and back again. Stickybear is at his very best in the Counting activity, during free play. Kids can choose a number for the program to count out. Then they can raise or lower the ante by clicking the up or down buttons. Three bunnies can add up to nine even faster than, well, bunnies. To add to the fun, there's no telling which cartoon Sticky will choose to represent the chosen numeral. Youngsters have an added incentive to play longer and explore more numbers, hoping to catch their favorite characters in action. Kid CAD Any parent looking for a way to sneak a few basic math or reading skills in with their child's standard fare of video games will be pleased to discover A.J.'s World of Discovery, where candy rewards grow on trees and a character named A.J. provides all the mechanical guidance most four to seven-year-olds will need. But don't wander too far from the computer, as A.J.'s no substitute for an observant parent. The main program consists of ten activities, two of which are designed to build early reading skills. The Writing Game is a simple typing tutorial reinforcing spelling and sentence completion skills, and the Picture-Maker involves matching words to pictures to create either a country landscape or a scene from outer space. Imagine your kids building a house, castle or fort with electronic building blocks, decorating it with bubble gum or ice cream cone wallpaper, supplying furniture and pets (dinosaurs are optional) all in three dimensions on the computer screen. Then imagine them demolishing what they've built with lasers, bubbles or lawnmowers. And think of no mess or clutter to clean up afterward! Kid CAD is the real thing, not imaginary. It's an electronic building kit with all the features and capabilities of a real CAD (computer-aided design) program, but scaled for kids. Stickybear's Early Learning Activities Price: $59.95 In Brief: Very young learners can explore six pre-math and pre-reading concepts in either English or Spanish. Requirements: Macintosh with 2MB RAM (System 6.0.7) or 4MB RAM (System 7); 256 color display: hard disk. Audio Support: Optional recording capability with System 7. For Ages: 2 to 6 DOLINA WEBO JEUGEESTELE Optimum Resource 5 Hiltech Lane Hilton Head Island, SC 29926 (800) 327-8008 Circle Inquiry #186 A.J.'s World of Discovery Price: $49.95; Lesson Disks: $19.95 each In Brief: An interactive series of gameoriented exercises designed to build early math and language skills. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display: hard disk with 6MB free space; mouse. Audio Support: AdLib, Pro Audio Spectrum; Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunderboard and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 4-7 Kid CAD Price: $49.95 In Brief: A 3-D building kit with grownup features and just-for-kids fun. Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or better) with 4MB RAM; VGA or SVGA display; hard disk with 10MB free space; mouse; Windows 3.1. Audio Support: Sound Blaster and compatible sound devices For Ages: 7 and up Bright Star/Sierra On-Line P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 326-6654 Circle Inquiry #187 Davidson & Associates P.O. Box 2961 Torrance, CA 90509 (800) 545-7677 Circle Inquiry #188 The weakest game is Opposites. The concept itself is hard to illustrate, and the problem is compounded, in free play, by the mouse. Impatient clickers aren't going to appreciate the difference between go and stop, for instance. And with the inevitable time lag that occurs while the computer loads animated scenes, a quick clicking youngster may end up believing that a bajo means up high. Stickybear gives youngsters broad control over the pace and responsiveness of the program. The exception is the choice between English and Spanish Mom or dad will have to help out there. No matter which language the kids are using, Stickybear's right at home. In the world of early learning software, it's difficult to find anyone who does it better. — Virginia Soper The remaining activities include a computerized version of Mr. Potato Head, a racetrack, an electronic coloring book, a paddle ball game, and a jigsaw puzzle. There are also examples from four Math and Language Lesson Disks, which are sold separately. These additional Lesson Disks each contain 15 activities similar in format to the Writing Game and the Picture-Maker. A.J.'s World can help to build math and language skills if the child finds the The program opens to an animated panorama of a farm, town or city setting. Kids will enjoy clicking on horses that whinny and windmills that spin, as well as discovering the many other interactive features of these first screens. They can then choose whether to build in a city, town or farm. First-time engineers may want to look at one of the sample files, which include houses, mazes, tenPage 156 Computer Gaming World "


"PAINT UP A STORM Or a stork Or a stallion Or stretch your imagination with PaintPower. This easy-to-use graphics tool gives you the versatility and creative latitude of programs costing 2 or 3 times more. You can modify you work as you go-manipulating the image with powerful tools that let you cut and paste; fill areas with colors or patterns; shade and blend; or zoom in for detailed touch-up. When you're ready to look at a hard copy of your work, you can print it in screen-size, larger or smaller. If you've ever considered painting or drawing with your PC, PaintPower is the program you've been waiting for. It gives you the power to paint, color, sketch and trace-adding textures, shadings, patterns and other \"special effects\" previously found only in the most expensive paint programs. One Up On The Cave Man Paint Power also contains an extensive library of clip art, background art, curves, geometric shapes and type styles for text. You can import images from other programs, including most popular graphics files (PCX, GIF, TIFF. And export to other graphics programs, such as our new PrintPower Pro Plus. PaintPower was designed for easy access by aspiring artists of all ages. It's a creative playground for the younger set and an electronic \"studio\" for the art student or at-home artist. Learning By Doing From the moment you install PaintPower, the program's on-screen Help windows explain every option in clear, jargon-free language. Right from the start you learn by doing-choosing and using the many creative tools at your fingertips. Every artist since the cave man has developed artistic skills by constantly experimenting. The beauty of PaintPower is the way it lets you try different brushstrokes, colors, shadings and Paint patterns-until you arrive at your Power best creative expression. So before you know it, you're painting up a storm. Start by selecting from a palette of 256 colors. Then choose a brush tool or line-creating tool from the Tool Bar and begin freehand painting. As you proceed, the screen displays your drawing board, painting tools and Color Palette. HI TECH EXPRESSIONS Available at your local Software Retailer to order call 1 (800) 447 6543 MCNISA/AMEX Circle Reader Service #149 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS rival, Eating Out, Shopping, Sightseeing, Hotel, Public Services, and Sports. Each lesson starts with panels of simple words, shown with a drawing that suggests the word. The English word is written below the picture, the target language word is above. Either can be hidden with the click of the mouse. Click on the picture or the written words to hear a native speaker pronounce the word. A good strategy for students is to hide the target language word, read the English equivalent, then listen to the native speaker say the word. Then, display the words in the target language to complete the learning process. The EZLanguage recording option is a boon for studying. Using a microphone, the computer records the learner's pronunciation of the words and phrases. Matching the student's version with the native speaker's version quickly reveals differences, allowing the student to mimic the correct accent. Kids will enjoy the challenge of remembering the words and phrases; adults will enjoy the useful knowledge they're picking up. As long as your family is interested only in words and phrases, and can leave the formal grammar for more structured study, the EZLanguage series offer a quick path to a useful vocabulary. Richard O. Mann nis courts, checkerboards and other layouts and creations. Each of the samples can be modified. Kids can start their buildings from the ground up, or chose from a set of ten prefab structures (houses, mansions, farm buildings, apartment buildings). They can select from complete foundations or use building blocks that snap into place. Windows, doors, yards, and other objects are available simply by clicking on the item and dragging it to the building site. Once the outside is built, kids can zoom in to work on the interior. The program supplies a huge variety of paints, textures, people, plants and animals, all geared toward kids. Building tools allow kids to easily erase, move, copy, link, unlink, rotate or hide objects with the simple click of a button. With the program's multiview capabilities, pint-sized engineers can also pan the entire scene in four different directions, zoom out, rotate the camera 180 degrees or tilt the camera to see the design from a bird's-eye or ground-level view. These are all important components in grasping the concept of spatial relationships. Kid CAD is a very sophisticated program, and demands a lot from the computer. A complex drawing may take a few minutes to redraw, but it is well worth the wait. Small changes (like switching pets from dogs to dinosaurs) are handled immediately. Davidson has put a tremendous amount of thought into designing a product that not only spurs creativity, but is sophisticated enough to meet the demands of budding architects or engineers. Felicia Donovan The San Diego Zoo Presents: The Animals! 2200 The San Diego Zoo and its companion facility, the Wild Animal Park, are renowned as one of the world's finest zoo complexes, due in part to their innovative ways of displaying and teaching about animals. Now that unique style combines with computer technology to produce a multimedia zoo. EZLanguage for Windows Price: $49.95 each In Brief: This enjoyable multimedia drill program teaches common Spanish, French, German, Italian, Russian, or Japanese words and phrases. (Each language sold separately.) Requirements: IBM compatible with 2MB RAM; VGA display: hard disk; Windows 3.1 or higher. Audio Support: MPC-compliant sound card required for speech, but is optional; microphone required for recording responses, also optional. Other Versions: Windows CD-ROM All six languages on a single CDROM disc that sells for $99.95. REGRE 290 COOOOOOO Future Trends Software 1508 Osprey Dr., Suite 103 DeSoto, TX 75115 (214) 224-3288 Circle Inquiry #189 EZLanguage for Windows: Spanish and Japanese Both parents and kids will have a blast learning foreign languages with these programs that will replace those headphones and language lab tapes. The programs do not teach language basics, such as verb tenses and conjugations, but rather teach the vocabulary and phrases needed for travel to foreign countries. The EZLanguage series is designed as multimedia software, but doesn't require a CD-ROM drive. Each program will occupy about 8MB of hard disk space. The introductory menu screen offers eight areas of study: Basic Phrases, ArAfter a few eight-word panels comes a phrase drill, offering typical guidebook phrases in both languages. The phrases start with the simple (yes, no, thank you) and move to the more complex (Do you take credit cards?). The native speaker's renditions become increasingly important in this more taxing territory. After a dozen or more drills, the program tests the student on the nouns and phrases covered in the previous lessons. The colorful drawings and sounds denoting correct and incorrect answers make the tests fun. The San Diego Zoo Presents: The Animals! Price: $99.95 In Brief: A multimedia visit with the San Diego Zoo's mammals, birds, and reptiles Requirements: IBM compatible with 1 MB RAM; VGA display CD-ROM drive; hard disk with 2MB free space, MS-DOS 3.3 or higher, MSCDEX 2.1 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Pro AudioSpectrum, or AdLib Gold 1000/2000 Other Versions: Windows CD-ROM (MPC compatibile) — $99.95; Macintosh CD-ROM $99.95. The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (415) 883-3000 Circle Inquiry #190 Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"1993 2 Memorandum: December Reading club morning Monday Don't Art Show The Artistas Etnondant of Cester City High School April 22 Mays Beibition in the School Library Congratulations on the new addition! & The Phone Guys Ve can fix or install Toucan Designs, Inc. nything involoing plecommunications. on Bob al 595-7277 bdwenga Meeting PTA Wicate of Merit D  This ratifinte heret declare that #irially rp> eng for all 3+2-? 2323232233 Little Leagues Softball Whor: Saturday, September 19 Whoro: The Johnsons' house 7:00pm REMINDER: Schedule 09 SEEEEEE6999 1.we Win Dragons . Falco 2.) 13 10 2. ex Wasse Dag 4 ) Tak Drilgan 5 10 Widot 17 Falcon Days kas 1. 121 fakt A 3032292302 BEERSESHE bliss M Date: Wed, May 23, 2:00 Place: Parkway Conference Center New Printpower Pro Plus gives you more print power per dollar than any other graphic design program. It's as easy to use as it is to afford. With Printpower Pro Plus, you can tap into a user-friendly Help system for step-by-step instructions on every option. Soon you're designing and printing graphics like a pro. (The program supports virtually any popular b&w or color printer made.) M O RE Les Afternoon free for sports, POWER TO YOU Print Power Signs, Banners, Cards etc. Every PC user can find dozens of creative and practical uses for Printpower Pro Plus. You'll learn quickly how to combine graphics, headline, border and text into an attractive professional poster up to 3 1/2 x 4 feet. designer. Select from 100 prepared Signs, banners and invitations are also a graphics in the program's clip-art breeze to produce. Calendars-weekly, library. Or import your own from monthly or daily-can be customized with other graphic files (PCX, LBM, personal dates. Greeting cards can be BMP, or GIF. Use your mouse designed to include individual names or arrow keys to \"click and drag\" (and inserted automatically from the images to the desired size, program's Database as they are printed). shape and position. Then use You can edit, modify and add to your \"click lines\" like a T-square to work as you go, and save it in the align the elements of your capacious Memory Manager. design. When you're shopping for a graphics program, it's easy to Why Pay More For Less? pay more for less. But if you stop to New Printpower Pro Plus turns your compare, you'll get more for less with computer screen into a versatile drawing Printpower Pro Plus. board, where you will soon be matching the work of a trained graphic Available at your local Software Retailer or to order call 1 (800) 447-6543 MCNISA/AMEX FLOOR HI TECH Circle Reader Service #148 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS known corners of the facility—without getting bitten. Richard O. Mann Discover Space This computerized astronomy book and star chart lets kids and their parents set up star charts, probe the sun or the planets, retrace the history of space exploration, view deep sky objects, and fly along with comets and asteroids. The program makes good use of graphically superb animated sequences. The Sun section also includes some interesting animation, although the solar eclipse demonstrator is flawed. During this review, the moon eclipsed the sun, then moved off in reverse. Deep Sky Objects includes photos and text, but avoids an animated stellar evolution sequence. Missing is any discussion of variable or binary stars. The program's asteroid-collision lets kids program the size and speed of an asteroid, then displays the collision's crater over a comparably sized city or state. The program's remaining sections consist mostly of photographs and text. The Space Exploration section covers almost all planetary probes, even rarely mentioned ones like the Ranger and Surveyor from the sixties. Soviet, European and Chinese rockets, probes and manned space programs are covered, in addition to America's program. Despite some flaws, kids can discover a great deal about space with Discover Space. Even when the rest of the program loses its glamour, the star charts will remain useful for years to come. Larry Krumenaker Using more than 120 video sequences, 1,300 color photos, two hours of audio, and more than 1000 written pages, The Animals delivers an encyclopedic knowledge of the animal kingdom in an entertaining way. Animal lovers young and old will visit this virtual zoo over and over again with delight. The program begins with an aerial view of the zoo park. The mouse cursor highlights program choices, which in clude the world's ten biomes (tundra, savanna, tropical rain forest, and seven more) and the specialty areas, which include the Kids' Corner, Tour Bus, Story Theater, and others. Each biome exhibits the animals found in that environment, including related special exhibits. Working through the list of animals invariably leads to related topics, presentations, and exhibits that'll keep zoo visitors endlessly entertained and enlightened. Not everything in the zoo is narrated; only selected special exhibits, movies, and introductory items are read aloud. The developers have chosen to include more animal sounds and movies than simple expository readings. This decision allows for more written material. Special features provide thematic ways to attack the zoo's information. Kids' Corner, for example, includes a quick tour of baby animals, an animal sound quiz, and even a dinosaur exhibit. The Tour Bus offers nine tours, including Animals in Disguise (a series about protective coloration) and Jaws, Claws, and Creature Features (a series about horns, claws, antlers, and other distinctive animal parts). The Nursery teaches, with movies and text, about caring for newborn animals in captivity. Storybook Theater tells detailed true stories about zoo happenings, such as the birth and nurturing of Gordy the Gorilla. The Center for Reproduction of Endangered Species shows an extensive series of exhibits and movies explaining the Center's work in preserving near-extinct species. A visit to the Library provides lists of all multimedia elements in the zoo. Pictures, sounds, movies, maps, and so forth are listed for quick access. Visitors to the San Diego Zoo and Wild Animal Park never have enough time to experience everything they'd like to see. This CD-ROM title lets animal lovers revisit the Zoo time and again, to explore the far-flung, lesserDiscover Space Price: $39.95 In Brief: An animated database of cosmological information, with a review of super power space programs. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA or Super VGA display; hard disk with 7MB free space. Audio Support: Sound Blaster and compatible sound devices Bailey's Book House Broderbund 500 Redwood Blvd. Novato, CA 94948-6121 (415) 382-4639 Circle Inquiry #191 This entertaining pre-reading program combines five different activities into an integrated and charming whole. Everything starts and ends at Bailey's combiThe best part of Discover Space is the section on star maps. Kids can examine the heavens with or without a skyline, set the horizon with city or country landscapes, even adjust sky brightness for light pollution. Adjustments to the view help to find objects and to zoom in or out. When kids print star charts, they can add star names and their choice of constellation outlines or mythological pictures. The planets are also plotted on the charts. The program's section on planets lets kids and parents watch any body of our solar system rotate on its axis. The mouse can be used to fly over a planetary map to identify features. Vital statistics and unique features can be examined; wait until kids start making comparisons between the planets — the animated astronaut is a treat to watch. Bailey's Book House Price: $64.95 In Brief: An engaging literacy program for pre-readers. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; EGA or VGA display: hard disk; mouse. Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster, Disney Sound Source, and compatible devices For Ages: 2-6 Other Versions: Macintosh ($64.95) Edmark P.O. Box 3218 Redmond, WA 98073-3218 (800) 426 0856 (206) 556 8484 Circle Inquiry #192 Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"Get your kids the Hottest New MATH game! Sir AddaLol's MATH Adventure View Moat Moat But with a retail price of only $29.95 it won't burn a hole in your pocketbook! Sir AddaLor's Ages 6-12 MATH Adventure Start Level Graphics! VGA To Level 1 OPTIONS Each of the five levels have new and exciting castles to explore. EXIT 15 6x0 1x6 3X6 18 3x2 3x5 14 ly BX0 Help Sir Addalot defend the Castle! IBM & Compatibles 3:5 Tardigrad 6.26 Disks Included Activity Book Included Freel Landmark Lighting the way to brighter futures the Text, A found aan TO Attention Kids o Face the fierce Dragon, Scorch . Help Sir Addalot break the Castle's spell  Create your own moat  Track high scores for comparing with friends  Experience 256 color animations Great sound effects and music Match the equations while dodging the fireballs in this dazzling arcade style game. Our fun filled demo is available for just $4.00 by calling 1-800-543-7947 Attention Parents Helps kids improve addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division skills . Separate equation and dexterity controls allow kids of all abilities to enjoy the game . Provides positive reinforcement  Low price, high quality game by Landmark Visit your local Retailer or Call 1-800-543-7947 and Landmark receive $10 off retail price! Dealer Inquiries Welcome. Lighting the way to brighter futures. Requires VGA, 386SX or better, hard drive, 640K RAM. Circle Reader Service #154 "


"Expanding Educational Frontiers Through Technology NOWA YOU'VE SEEN'EM IN COMPUTER SH FutureVision .. STARRING THE EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANTS HAUF CD-ROM Aesop's Fables .................32.00 All About Science ............395.00 Arthur's Teacher Troubles .......41.00 Audubon's Mammals..........35.00 Composer Quest.............64.50 Electronic Home Library.......38.50 Family Choice .................32.50 Grollier's Living Encyc.........239.00 Just Grandma and Me..........33.00 McMillan Dict. for Children ....47.00 Mixed Up Mother Goose...35.00 Shakespeare....................13.00 Time Table of Hist/Science ...52.95 Where in the World is CSD...29.00 WRITING Children's Writ/Pub ...........40.00 English Vocabulary 1 or 2......32.00 Grammar Gremlins.................30.00 Kid Works 2..................35.00 Stickybear Word Scramble.....32.00 Storybook Weaver ............32.00 Writer Rabbit......... ......30.00 Writing Made Easy. ...32.00 ann in w SPELLINGNVOCAB Alphablocks... ........... ...32.50 Berenstain Bears: Len Letters...26.00 SuperSolvers SpellBound......30.00 Talking Spell it Plus ............30.00 Talking Word Attack Plus.......30.00 Word Munchers................20.00 Zug's Spelling Adventure ......22.50 ..26.00 Trezor ....35.00 INTERDISCIPLINARY MATH Amazon Trail ...............32.00 AlgeBlaster 3................30 Bmstain Bears:Ling Essntls...24.00 Algebra........................55 Castle/sland of Dr. Brain.......29.00 Berenstain Bears: Counting....25 Cuckoo Zoo......................30.00 30.00 Calculus........ Discovering America ............28.00 Math and Me.. Eagle Eye Mysteries. ..... ..30.00 Math Rabbit 2.0............. Easy Street.... ...............32.00 MathBlaster Mystery ... Eco Quest 1 .. .............21.00 MathBlaster Plus EcoQuest 2 ........... ..30.00 Math Magic................. Fatty Bear's B-day Surprise...30.00 Mathology ........... Fatty Bear's World Pack ....30.00 Millie's Math House. . ...18.00 Operation Neptune ........ Kid Cuts.......................26.00 Principles of Calc/Stal........2 Kid Desk.. .......................... Treasure Mathstorm.........3 Kid Pix ...... ..35.00 Treasure Mountain.......... Kid Pix Companion........... .25.00 What's My Angle Geometry...30 McGee at the Fun Fair..........32.00 Metrgnome Music............30.00 REFERENCE Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzle ........21.00 American Heritage Dict........7 Mixed Up Mother Goose......29.00 BannerMania Mixed Up Fairy Tales ..............29.00 Elementary Grade Builder .......19 Mosaic Magic................. ..27.00 Elements of Style............ Playroom.........................30.00 Fisher Price Picture Dict.......22 Putt Putt Joins the Parade......30.00 Grade Quick.. Putt Putt's Fun Pack...........25.00 Hebrew/Greek Bible ........ Scooter's Magic Castle........30.00 Junior High Grade Builder. Secret Island/Dr. Quandry.....30.00 Key Dictionary............. SimAnt.......... Mario Teaches Typing ..... SimCity ..................................27.UU PL Bible Atlas................ PC Bible Atlas....................45 ...39.00 PC Globe 5.0.. Snap Dragon...... ..........30.00 ....30.00 Print Shop Print Shop Companion..........2 Snoopy's Game Club ............26.00 Print Shop Deluxe ...............4 StoryBook Weaver ............ ...30.00 Random House Encyclopedia ..6 Super Munchers............27.00 Studyware: ACT. CBEST Think Quick ...30.00 GMAT, GRE, LSAT, SAT...3 Treasure Cove...................37.00 Test Quick Treehouse........ .......37.00 U.S Atlas 3.0 ....... .... ALL PRODUCTS SOLD CARRY MANUFAC Ennlich/ READING Mickey's ABC's.............21.00 Mickey's Follow the Reader ..30.00 Read-n-Roll. ...............30.00 Reader Rabbit 1....... Reader Rabbit 2. Reader Rabbit Rdy for Ltrs.....35.00 Reading Adventures in 0........35.00 Ready. Set. Read ................30.00 Speed Reader .......................30.00 StickyBear Reading Comp.......29.00 SuperSolvers: Midnight Resc...30.00 dnia.................... FORIEGN LANGUAGE English/Second Language.....79.00 French ...................................CALL .........CALL Italian ............ Japanese ...................... ...CALL Latin ..................119.00 Russian .................. ..CALL Spanish .... ......CALL German....... ...CALL ......... ...37.00 SimLife..... I'M PROFESSOR PINPOINT, YOUR ESTEE MED GUIDE TO THE WORLD OF FUTURE VISION... WHERE LEARNING IS MORE EXCITING! LIKE WITH KIDWORKS 2, WHICH WILL MAKE WRITING YOUR PAPER FUN BY LETTING YOU DRAW OCTURES AND READING YOUR STORY BACK TO YOU!! ORDERING  Phone orders accepted M-F from 8:00am 5:00pm PST  Fax orders accepted 24 hours a day 7 days a week.  Ask for a free catalog of our complete software selections.  Orders rece shipped sa $5.00 shipp FutureVision 644 N Santa Cruz Ave Suite 12. Los Gatos CA 95030 CALL YOUR PERSONAL EDUCATION "


"APPROVED . We future Mision, in order to form a more perfect union with our corporate. institutional, reseller and end-user customers do hereby dedicate ourselves to ensuring your right to: 1. Hassle-free service IL A dedicates educational software specialist III. Che largest sclection of Mac. Windows. DOG, and CD-ROM based education software iv. The best price. V. Complete satisfaction with your product and service. VI. Receive your order when you expect it. VII. Be free from automated teleplione attendants EARING! YOU'VE SEEN'EM IN PC SOURCES! FOR AN EXTENDED ENGAGEMENT CAST OF THOUSANDS OF BLOCKBUSTER SOFTWARE TITLES! QUALITY GAMES SAME DAY 3 SHIPPING -34.00 ..39.00 ..32.50 MONEY BACK 30.00 ....... ..... ...30.00 SCIENCE WINDOWS mdy Works. ....47.00 Aces Over Europe .........42.00 Alge-Blaster 3.............32.50 Omar Sherif on Bridge ........31.00 inosaur Adventure..........30.00 AD&D Unlimited Adventure ...36.00 Alpha Blocks ...............28.75 Picture it French............ ..45.50 inoquest..................32.50 Alone in the Dark ...........36.00 American Heritage Dict........72.00 Picture it German ............ ..45.50 Fish ... ............36.00 36.00 Betrayal at Krondor..............39.00 Battle Chess ................31.00 Picture it Italian ............. ...45.50 credible Machine............30.00 Caesar... ...............39.00 Calculus ....... ..........58.50 Picture it Spanish............45.50 nowledge Adventure...........36.00 Capitalist Pig ...................36.00 Prince of Persia 2..............41.00 fe And Death 1.............25.00 Clash of Steel ...38.00 Casino Game Pack ............ 30.00 Random House Encyclopedia ..59.00 fe and Death 2 ..............30.00 Conquered Kingdoms........36.00 Chessmaster 3000.............36.00 Ready, Set Read ............32.50 peration Wildlife........30.00 Dark Side of Xeen... ...41.00 Conquer & Divide ...............42.00 Risk ...........30.00 Tinciples of Biology Day of the Tentacle........... ...36.00 Freddy Pharkas........ ...41.00 Scrabble Deluxe ............30.00 Chemistry, Physics...........25.00 Empire Deluxe... 35.00 French German Hebrew Second Conflict......... cience Adventure..............36.00 Eric the Unready.............. 35.00 Italian Japanese Russian ....45.50 Shadowgate ............... ..32.00 Dace Adventure...............36.00 Eye of the Beholder II......... .45.00 Hoyle's Classic Card Games....31.00 SimAnt ........... urbo Science........................29.00 Flashback .............. .32.00 Incredible Machine............32.00 SimCity......... ............. There in Space is CSD...........46.00 Frontpage Football ............ ..39.00 Kid CAD ...................32.50 SimEarthi ......... ...46.75 o Keeper...............37.00 37.00 Goblins II........................ Goblins II .25.00 Kid Pix ..................35.00 SimLife ............ .45.50 Iron Helix... .49.00 Knowledge Adventure.........47.00 Solitaire ... SOCIAL STUDIES Lemmings II. .35.00 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0.....39.00 Spaceward Ho ........... ...38.00 arthQuest... Pirates Gold.... . ..42.00 Monopoly Deluxe .............36.00 Spanish ............ ..45.50 est Secret/Rainforest.........32.00 Police Quest IV...................40.00 New A+ English Grammar 1...29.25 Super Tetris ................ st Tribe .............26.00 Populus II.................. ..36.00 New A+ English Grammar 2...29.25 Take a Break Crussword......30.00 Egel's World Geography......25.00 Powremonger.................32.00 New A+ English Vocab 1....29.25 Take a Break Pinball .............30.00 egon Trail Deluxe .. . 36.00 Privateer... .................. ....52.00 New A+ English Vocab 2 .....29.25 Tetris Classic ..............27.00 epper's Adventure in Time ...32.00 Protostar..........................36.00 New A+ Science 1...............29.25 U.S. Atlas 3.0...................52.00 ee the U.S. A. New Quiz....26.00 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe.........49.00 New A+ Science 2.... ....29.25 Vacubuleam .....................45.50 me Riders/Amer. History .....36.00 Rome .................32.00 New A+ Science 3............29.25 Where in Space is CSD .........46.00 me Treks......... Seven Cities of Gold 2..........38.00 New Math Blaster Plus.........39.00 Word Finder Thesaurus.......42.00 S. Government...............15.00 Space Quest 5............ .39.50 S. History 1 & 2..... ....22.00 Star Control 2................34.50 I'LL MEET OR BEAT ANY NATIONALLY S. Presidents........ ...32.00 Star Trek 25th .............. .35.00 ADVERTISED PRICE! TRANSPORT here in America's Past .......34.00 Strike Commander. ..47.00 YOURSELF TO MY PALS AT FUTUREThere in Europe CSD.........29.00 Stronghold.................42.00 VISION BY DIALLING 800-995-4661.) There in Time CSD..............29.00 Syndicate ...... ........37.00 \"There in USA CSD ..............29.00 Tornado... There in USA CSD Dlx......45.00 Ultima VII (Part 1 of 2)......47.00 here in World CSD............29.00 Ultrabots.. -35.00 here in World CSD Dlx .....45.00 X-Wing. ..39.50 LL WARRANTIES AND DOCUMENTATION! PAYMENT 2:00PM will be  No surcharge for Visa or MasterCard orders. oduct in stock. .C.O.D. orders welcome with a $5.00 charge. order  School, government and corporate purchase orders accepted. GUARANTEE SUD . ... KNOWLEDGE SELECTION INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMERS: Voice-408-370-4650 Fax-408-370-9466 1.800.995.4661 Circle Reader Service #70 CURRICULUM CONSULTANT TODAY! FAX-1.800.995.4669 "


"KIDSS COMPUTERS of the keyboard in the Typewriter game to the kind of printout Make-A-Story produces. Bailey's Book House combines the best of educational theory with a loving attention to detail and an engaging presentation. Kids will be completely enchanted by the warm voice and attractive graphics. This one is a real winner. Leslie Elser just text, or an illustration with a few lines of writing below. Creating the illustrations is an especially motivating experience for children. Scenery is made by mixing or matching background and foreground 7 Fle ER Goodies The My Own Stories TCL W ces began to od across the iky The wind blew and the thunder began to umble. Game.\" veled the mate as the rain nation living room, library and workroom. Kids start by clicking on Bailey, who is quietly sitting in his favorite chair reading a book. He introduces himself, then invites kids to play in his book house. The program's typewriter game introduces the keyboard to very young users. In the divergent (many correct answers) mode, a click on any letter will result in a cute animation. In the convergent mode, kids must find a particular letter on the keyboard. Tabitha the giraffe will help if kids have trouble finding the right key. The Edmo & Houdini activity invites youngsters to play with position words like in, behind and on. In the Read-ARhyme game, kids get to finish five different Mother Goose rhymes in silly ways. There are also two printer related activities: Kid Cards and Make-A-Story. Children use Kid Cards to create cards (what else?); in Make-A-Story, kids can design a storybook with multiple-choice endings, using their own illustrations. Adults can modify the program to suit individual children. Just about everything can be controlled, from the layout My Own Stories is an excellent way to motivate reluctant writers or introduce children to the magic of desktop publishing. It features an extremely easy to use interface consisting of menus, buttons and icons. Even children with reading difficulties can use the program. All the stories are based on real experiences, and set in real locales that kids can identify with. To make a personal storybook, kids first create a Title Page, which can contain information like the story title and author, and be decorated with a colorful border. Next, kids put together the pages of the story. Each page can contain My Own Stories Price: $49.95 In Brief: Children can create their own illustrated story books. Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or better) with 1MB RAM; VGA display: hard disk; mouse. Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 8 to 14 Other Versions: Macintosh ($49.95) MECC 6160 Summit Drive North Minneapolis, MN 55430-4003 (612) 569-1500 Circle Inquiry #193 Memoirs for Windows Mother's Little Helper for Windows Memoirs is an electronic diary with a twist. Of course, you can make daily entries into your diary (throw away all those you have stacked in the closet, and store it on a single disk.) There is also a Photo Gallery where you can view your favorite pictures, print the gallery, even store information pertaining to the person or add a funny caption just below. With Memoirs you can search for a key word, name or date and print a specific entry or all entries. An electronic baby book from the time you find out that you're expecting through age 4. Featuring a 9 month term calendar which advises you of the trimester, symptoms and even displays beautiful photos to show you how the baby is developing. In addition, it also contains a family tree, Nanny Application, Shower Guest List, Shower Registry, Medical Records for Mom and Baby. Birth Announcements, Family Photo Album, over 2,000 baby names and their meanings, plus much much more... Coming Soon, Mother's Little Helper The School Years. Forget about buying a new diary each year, Memoirs stores up to 5 years. The whole family can use Memoirs, each person can enter their information and it will be password protected. Memoirs graphical no fuss interface makes the program easy and fun to use. Memoirs: Retail Price: Mother's Little Helper: Retail Price: Due Date: June 1st, 1993 $34.95 $44.95 We're expecting!! Join us in welcoming a new addition to our family of products..... Athena Software, Inc. 986 NE 79th Street Tele: (305) 861-6356 Miami, Florida 33138 FAX: (305) 758-1803 Microsoft Windows 3.1 Educational Home Entertainment Productivity Tools Compatible Products Circle Reader Service #140 Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"ADSTER! Aid _ BE og Explore the depths of Fribbulus Xax Journey through dangerous, yet Discover the secrets of the alien Battle horrible aliens and elude in search of your baby sitter! beautiful alien territory! machinery to aid you in your quest! clever traps on the alien base! The arcade adventure hit of the year! 360° VGA Full Screen Smooth \"The best game I've seen on a PC!\" Aliens Ate My Baby Sitter features breakthrough graphics technology that Scrolling \"Amazing graphics...\" beats anything you've seen before! Original Sound Track and Sound Effects for Sound Blaster & Adlib \"This game is positively addictive!\" Travel through beautiful, but dangerous alien territory, discovering Multiple Play Levels Fun for the \"Great puzzles... terrific humor...\" weird and wonderful new creatures. Whole Family Can you solve the puzzles and locate Arcade Quality Action & Cinematic the treasure that leads to Molly? Sequences Fantastic animation and breathtaking Special Challenges for Advanced music make this fun and exciting Players adventure the best in its class. Circle Reader Service #147 FormGen Corporation P.O. Box 279 North Andover MA USA 01845-0279 (416) 857-4141 (800) 263-2390 FormGen CORPORATION "


"KIDSG COMPUTERS \"COMPUTER TOOTER\" Pal T-SHIRTS APPLE ve M wile, the Worm \" the Floppy Floppy Disk 61 Love Addons scenes. For example, children can choose a highway picture for the foreground and mountain peaks for the background. The computer automatically combines the two images to create a landscape. Once the scenery has been selected, children can place objects on top (more than 500 different objects are available in several categories). Objects can be edited in several ways, including changing the skin and clothing color on the child and adult figures. Objects can be resized, flipped horizontally, and placed on top of each other. Once the scenery is complete, the writing begins. The lower portion of the screen can contain several lines of text. Kids can switch between font styles to enliven their publishing efforts. The entire book can be edited by inserting, deleting, copying, and swapping pages. An excellent feature of the program provides proper spelling for each of the objects in the scene. For example, when a child is writing a story, he or she can select the object and click on a spell button. The software inserts the name of the object into the story. Integrated music and sound capabilities add life to electronic storybooks. Books can also be published in traditional fashion, on paper. My Own Stories is a powerful learning tool allowing children to write about their own experiences. The illustrations make wonderful story-starters for reluctant writers, and can help any youngster with the writing process. -Gerald Crisci CODE #001 APPLE CODE #002 FLOPP Computer sendlies User Fria Nasty,» ang sa Chome Champ Chomp orano OF jo  CODE #003 UFEE CODE N004 NAST «Tex File99 Ready, Set, Read The \"Quotations\" Uhukan AM CODE 2005 TEX CODE #006 QUOT ORDER FORM SIZES CODE CHILD M ADULT L CHILD T-SHIRT $12.95 EA. $12.95 EA. ADULT T-SHIRT $14.95 EA. SUBTOTALS S L M XL QTY There once was a princess who turned to her toy chimpanzee and jack-in-the-box for help in learning to read. Jack and Bananas succeeded so well that now they're applying for tutoring work on your home computer. Parents might remember the pair's first effort, called Alphabet Blocks. In their latest appearance, Ready, Set, Read, this whimsical teaching team preReady, Set, Read sents six drill-andpractice exercises that Price: $49.95 In Brief: Bananas the chimp and his sharpen skills in pal Jack-in-the-Box coach youngsters sound, letter, and through six phonics games. word recognition, Requirements: IBM compatible (386SX or better) with 4MB RAM; give practice in alpha VGA display, hard disk; Windows 3.1 betizing and rhyming, or higher and teach syntax. Jack Audio Support: Sound Blaster and compatible sound devices. and Bananas greet For Ages: 4 to 7 kids right at the start, Other Versions: Macintosh ($49.95) in a hallway, in front Brightstar/Sierra On-Line of six doors. The asP.O. Box 485 piring reader chooses Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 326-6654 any door, and the Circle Inquiry #194 game begins. 001 APPLE 002 FLOPP 003 UFEE 004 NAST 005 TEX 008 QUOT Add QTY TOTALS NYS TAX_ % $ POSTAS NAME TOTAL S ADDRESS POSTAGE & HANDLING Totals of Up to $25 00 $2.50 CITY/TOWN STATE $25.01 to $50.00... $3.50 $50.01 to $75.00 PHONE Over $75.00.... CKSO Send check or money order for the total amount to: \"COMPUTER TOOTERO\" Pals, East Market St., P.O. Box 2030, Hyde Park, N.Y. 12538-2034, Tel. 1-800-358-3646. EACH CARTOON CHARACTER IS PAINTED IN FULL COLOR. 1993. Dr. E.R.L. Circle Reader Service #142 Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"The Continents ALLIE'S PLAYHOUSE MAKES LEARNING FUN! Your Child Will Love Allie's Playhouse.\" Kids learn about continents and how to identify them. How Many in All? Written in conjunction with a team of educators from both the Montessori and Public School Systems, Allie's Playhouse adheres to important early learning curriculum guidelines. No more of the old computer \"blip\" sounds and \"robot\" voices... Allie's Playhouse fully utilizes multimedia-rich voices of actual children as narrators and characters, CD quality music, singing and more... LAS 0 23 Mr. CIPERI 12345678910 Allie's Playhouse Children learn about counting with 4 different activities. Mr. Clock and \"Digi' teach children how to tell time The Anatomy Gillar I+2-3 Anatomy Puzzle LO UNDE Children will Icarn to identify certain parts of their bodies. SIETI Children learn about animals and hear and identify them. MOZA Twinkle, twinkle, little star, how I wonder what you are. A \"multimedia\" coloring book, especially designed for kids. 16 nursery rhymes for kids to join in and sing along with Your child will love to learn and explore with Allie, the cute little alien friend who serves as the guide to countless hours of valuable educational activities. Instromon construction 1 SUD 17 LA Kids love to construct and play their own musical \"instrument.\" In the kitchen, kids build sound and object recognition skills. Ouse abang Opa Os Du VW ya Our Solar System Kids learn the alphabet and spelling and hear letters and words pronounced. Kids can play and record their own music. tum Allie's Playhouse is a comprehensive collection of 16 different educational activities designed to stimulate young minds, including: Math/counting Alphabet /spelling Anatomy Telling time y Astronomy «Problem solving Geography Music and singing Art and creativity Perception skills And much, much more... Kids learn about our solar system and how to identify the planets. OPCODEJ UITERACTIVE To order visit your favorite software dealer or call Opcode Interactive PC Multimedia PC Opcode InteractiveTM 3950 Fabian Way. Suite 100 Palo Alto, CA 94303 415-494-1112 A division of Opcode Systems Inc Copyright 1933 Opcode Interactive. All rights reserved. Alle's Playhouse is a trademark of Oncode Interactive Other brand names and product names are trademarks of tegistered trademarks of their respective companies Circle Reader Service #159 A Windows CD-ROM Product "


"KIDS COMPUTERS Mayo Clinic's Family Health Book Each room contains, besides one of the tutors, a chalkboard, a wall border with a decorative frieze, game equipment, and a light switch. Either Jack or Bananas explains the game, displays the game pieces, and challenges the children to click on the appropriate answer. There's no fooling around in Banana's and Jack's classes. They put their students to work immediately, and each exercise is timed. Within this framework, the program offers lavish rewards and encouragement. Each correct answer earns praise and a banana or jack-in-the-box from the classroom frieze. Incorrect or slow responses cause options to disappear, limiting potential mistakes. Jack and Bananas are as enthusiastic about the choice of the last remaining option as they are about the quickest picks. The only way to miss out on a reward is to refuse to answer at all. If that happens, the program moves to the next problem. After each right answer, a cartoon figure trundles across the screen. Eight right answers, each accompanied by praise, popping Jacks, zipping bananas, and cartoon antics, earns a brass band fanfare, a fireworks display, and an invitation to play again. A click on the light switch sends kids back to the hallway to choose another game. They can exit by clicking on the stop sign. One of the nicest things about this program is that kids keep most of their rewards. Once they've earned an icon from the frieze, it's theirs to play with at the click of a mouse. The animation rewards respond to the child as well, changing their shapes and antics at the child's whim. This feature compensates for the program's single-minded focus and the absence of any free-form discovery options. Parents, particularly those whose children have a hearing deficiency, will want to keep the tempo slow to maximize the amount of time their children can spend questioning Bananas and Jack. It is, after all, the program's faultless realism in speech that sets Ready, Set, Read apart from other early reading programs. The Mayo Clinic Family Health Book is a multimedia version of the health reference book of the same name. But this isn't merely a book copied to a CDROM disc. The creators spent quite a bit of time developing the interface, and bringing the pictures and sounds into a seamless reference package. Be prepared to devote quite a bit of time to exploring the nooks and crannies of this software behemoth. As a comprehensive medical index for the general public, parents can use it for reference, or let their children use the fantastic anatomy section to learn about the human body. The program's anatomy section shows a diagram of a person. A \"slider\" bar allows the user to \"peel away» layers — from the skin, to the muscles and organs, to the bones. At any time, point-and-click on a body part for a detailed description of the part, its function and its relationship to the body as a whole. Virginia Soper Not Just Another Roll Of The Dice 59-BE HYPER-BACKGAMMONTM is an exciting, new, fast-paced, CD-ROM game that just might be the antidote for all those \"other\" video games that are turning your kids' brains to mush. Because, unlike any other game on the market, HYPER-BACKGAMMON was programmed to calculate over 32 million different playing scenarios and is accurate to +1%. Not only does this make your opponent a formidable three checker backgammon expert, it can also teach your kids a thing or two about about mathematics, probability theory, and risk management! HYPER BACKGAMMON The Mayo Clinic Family Health Book Price: $59.95 In Brief: A multimedia reference to health and body information, and to first aid tips. Requirements: Macintosh with 4MB RAM; color display; CD-ROM drive; System 6.0.8 or higher; QuickTime extensions 1.5 or higher. Other Versions: Windows CD-ROM ($59.95) HYPER-BACKGAMMON\" uses only three playing pieces a side which makes the game faster, more exciting, and much more fun than original . . backgammon. It also makes it a lot easier for kids (and parents!) to understand the basic mathematics behind the game, like the probability that double sixes are going to save them from a crushing defeat, or the odds that doubling the computer will lead to an unexpected increase in your score. Who knows...this game could actually help improve your kids' interest in mathematics. Heck, they might even become a World Backgammon champion. Available at CompUSA and your local software store, or call 1-310-659-6707. Interactive Ventures 1380 Corporate Center Curve #305 Eagan, MN 55121 (612) 686-0779 Circle Inquiry #195 Most items in the book feature a written entry, as well as some combination of photographs or drawings, QuickTime movies and audio. As a bonus for children, the computer narrator can read aloud just about any text, be it a chapter entry or a picture caption. The narration is rendered in an easy to understand computer voice. Audio levels do vary System Requirements:  PC or PS/2 compatible computer, CD-ROM drive that supports the ISO-9660 standard, with interface card. cable. and software, minimum 640K of RAM with 400K available, DOS 3.1 or later, VGA card and VGA color monitor HYPER-BACKGAMMON 1992 ARCTO, INC. All rights reserved. Distributed by ROMTIME, a division of ARCTG, INC. HYPER. BACKGAMMON and ROMTIME are trademarks of ARCTG, INC. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #160 Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"Ro. 11 Downing Street pS A DYSTERY STORE Ninja The Adventures oi Ihiaran Sherrloch Shellie Take your new CD-ROM drive for an incredible test ride !!! Interactive fiction for the gifted child in us all, with the DictioPedia NinjaNannica, a National Enquirer for knowledge culled from university libraries, enhanced with video, music and museur-quality clip art. Double-Spin Version $69.95 + s/h-requires 486 with 8MB ram & Windows 5:1 110+ Videos & Delightful Animations !! Single-Spin Version (no video) $34.95 + s/n requires 386 with 4MB ram & Windows 3.1 Hundreds of things to click on !!! Silicon Alleyim VISA silicon Alley = American Express Cards Welcome 2 MasterCard To order, call (415) 921-0409 Copyright 1993 Interactive Novels on the Computer Circle Reader Service #162 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS KidArt an Children's Creativity Software Instead of typing in a word to see its meaning, type in a definition to find words. This is a great way to build an eager student's vocabulary. By typing in two related words with parameters like \"and,\" \"not\" or \"or,\" WordHunter will find other words that have that meaning. For example, entering trip OR tour will produce junket. typefaces Hot Fonts for Cool Kids! The LER OPTARET Browse o from segment to segment, which can be slightly irritating The program's Image Index features a glossary of medical terms, diseases and parts of the body. Click on a glossary item athlete's foot, heart pacemaker, vasectomy, for example — and you'll clearly see (sometimes grotesque) pictures (or diagrams where appropriate.) The computer narrator explains what you're seeing The disc also contains a first aid reference; however, don't count on consulting it in a real emergency. By the time the program loads, the victim is likely to be long past the need for first aid. Installing the Macintosh version, reviewed here, is fairly simple. For best results, copy the main program to your hard disk. The program requires the QuickTime extensions, but those utilities are not on the CD-ROM itself. Parents can get the extensions, free, from an on-line service or from an Apple dealer. No medical reference is without omissions, including this one. For instance, although there is information about AIDS, there isn't an illustration of HIV. the AIDS virus. But even if the Image Index, which contains a wide variety of obscure and common ailments, is not complete, the program as a whole is genuinely useful for study and reference. Kevin Savetz The Deluxe American Heritage Dictionary, 3rd Edition Price: $129 In Brief: This on-line reference tool has more than 200,000 words and a peppy search engine for alternative spellings. synonyms and definitions. Requirements: IBM or compatible with 4MB RAM; EGA or VGA display: 15MB hard disk space: Windows 3.1 or higher Other Versions: A smaller Standard Edition requires 6MB of hard disk space. It sells for $59.95. For Windows & Mac Kid Pix/Kid Works 2 Enhancers Star Press/WordStar International 201 Alameda del Prado P.O. Box 6113 Novato, CA 94948 (800) 227-5609; (415) 382-8000 Circle Inquiry #196 The Deluxe American Heritage Dictionary, 3rd Edition If you like y KID PIX or KID WORKS 2, you'll love 'em with KIDART! Several other features give this program advantages over the print edition. One is abbreviations. Type in, for example, CPU to find its relationship to a computer. The biographical and geographical dictionaries are also fantastic sources. Students just type in a historical name or place to get an identification. Curious highschoolers can type in a college name to get its location. Wild card searches let students and parents use a question mark or asterisk for unknown letters — the program will compile a list of possible words. Like the excellent print edition, the computer version includes details about a word's Indo-European roots. The Deluxe Edition also has information on word etymologies, usage notes, regional notes, world history and antonyms. The last word on this dictionary: an excellent resource for the entire family. Jack Germain Students and adults—think that using dictionaries is a pain. The American Heritage dictionary on disk relieves the agony of searching for that exact entry. The program is ideal for high school and college level work. It should be in anyone's computer who writes reports or has to use the English language intensively for work. This electronic word database, which includes Roget's Il Thesaurus, makes it easy to become an expert wordsmith The combination is unbeatable. The program makes it quick and simple to look up multiple words, confirm alternate spellings, read multiple meanings and find synonyms for each alternative. It even provides a pronunciation key for each word. One very useful feature is WordHunter. It's a reverse dictionary of sorts. For DOS & Mac For a free brochure or the dealer nearest you, call: IMAGER INC Westfield, New Jersey 1-800-374-2614 (In NJ: 908-233-9155) Circle Reader Service #151 Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"BINARY ZO ** 3 * Don't just learn to play, play to learn! Music Exploration Science Exploration Smithsonian MUSEU the Museums SOG.SW STUDIO SOG-SW Wild Gence \"Arcade MS-DOS Mystery at the Museums Repeal the law of gravity! Create your own music video! Search for the treasures of the Smithsonian Museums!... Welcome to the Binary Zoo, The Binary Zoo lives in every child's imagination. Everyone who dreams about new ideas, who loves to explore and discover, has a home in the Binary Zoo. It's a place to play, learn and just have fun. The Binary Zoo gives kids innovative tools to explore and expand their horizons: Wild Science Arcade is a fascinating program of scientific exploration. While playing a challenging arcade game, kids gain hands-on experience with gravity, mass, friction and other scientific phenomena. Rock and Bach Studio lets children of all ages learn about music. Kids compose songs, discover music history and explore harmony, Circle Reader Service #141 rhythm and sound. Kids can assemble their own band and make a music video. Mystery at the Museums brings home the excitement and discovery of the Smithsonian Museums, while encouraging problem solving and creative thinking. Over 16 games, puzzles and activities cover a wide variety of topics including art, history, astronomy and much more. The best way to experience the power of our software is to watch children as they explore and discover with the Binary Zoo you'll see the magic of learning in action. Distributed by Available now for IBM and 100% compatibles. Binary Zoo 518-298-2740 Box 3210 Champlain NY 12919-3210 1993 Binary Zoo Sottware Inc. All rights reserved. All copyrights and trademarks are the property of their respective corporations. Broderbund "


"WANNA Crab your pea-shooter --Mr. Wilson needs our help! It all started at Mr. Wilson's party when my pet turtle;-George, dove into the punch bowl. Everyone went nuts: Mrs. Bloopie jumped on Mr. Campbell's... back... Mr. Campbell dropped his plate on Mrs. : Melarky's toe... Mrs. Melarky spilled her chicken wings. on Mr. Botsworth's lap... Mr. Botsworth poured his soup on Mrs. Gaylord's canary...! * Then, when no one was looking, Switchblade Sam made off with Mr. Wilson's prize coin collection. Now I gotta track down Sam and those coins...or ol' Mr. Wilson's gonna make furtle soup out of poors, George!!! Based on the 1993 Summer Blockbuster by John Hughes! 94..6 With Ruff by your side, and your trusty squirt-gun in hand, Switchblade Sam doesn't stand a chance! The search for Sam is on! Try the park, the school, Mr. Wilson's house and, of course, the deep, dark forest. Copyright 1993 Ocean of America Inc Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. DENNIS THEMENAÇE  1993 Warner Bros. DENNIS THE MENACE is a tra "


"MR RECEIVE A S REBATE When you purchase Warner's Home Video and the Video Game See packages for details Nintendo SUPER NINTENDO forget Four Sling-shot.Pour crazy And GAME BOY Load up on the ammo and don't forget your sling-shot... Your crazy gym teacher likes to play rough! Ocean of Amend, Inc. cicle Reader Services#1589 18550 idole Avenue San Jose, CA 95131-13 13 4081954-0201 k Ketcham Enterprises, Inc. All Rights Reserved Game Boy, Super Nintendo Entertainment System and the Official Sealare segistered trademarks nt Nintend nf America h meinsa ile aligha ridered on "


"KIDSC COMPUTERS Wayne's World Towa And they can be creative, taking players on flights of fancy. But while some Wayne and Garth fans will find Wayne's World truly excellent, the rest of us will think it's bogus. Jack Germain LET'S STOR THE COURTHOUT LET'S P ER THE MAYOR'E VERD LET'S GO GET PIZZA AND THEN ABOUT IT Autoworks This is one of the most educationally sound, creatively designed computer programs ever designed-not! The TV comedy sketch spawned the movie, which in turn has spawned this computer game for diehard Wayne and Garth fans. True to the sketch and the movie, the game is an unpredictable odyssey that doesn't seem to have any rules. What passes for a plot concerns the mayor, who is cutting funds for Community Access Television. If Wayne doesn't get $50,000 in private donations in three days, his zany TV world will go off the air forever. Players must help the duo save their show. Wayne's World resembles an interactive video arcade. The screens are recreations of scenes from the movie. Players watch a series of comments and retorts from Wayne and Garth that are spelled out on the screen. To advance to a new panel, players must select the correct response. The game increases in intensity as players solve bits and pieces of the puzzle and wind up in more elaborate mazes. Game sessions can be saved and Wayne's World Price: $49.95 In Brief: More of a novelty than a creative adventure game. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640KB RAM; VGA display; hard disk with 6MB free space. Audio Support: Ad Lib, Roland LAPC1. Sound Blaster, and compatible devices. Capstone 7200 Corporate Center Dr. Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800-468-7226): (305) 591-5900 Circle Inquiry #197 Autoworks is a great way for mechanically inclined kids to explore the automotive world without rolling up their sleeves and getting their hands covered with grime. The program isn't limited to kids-parents can also learn about the inner workings of the family car, too. And it's much easier than reading technical manuals. But, like driving, once kids get past the basics they will want something more. Autoworks is an interactive information system that uses text and pictures, Users work at their own pace. They start with a full view of an automobile and work their through its major systems. The program doesn't insist on a set sequence. Users can start with any part of the car and move to another as interests direct. reloaded. There is no quick solution, and very little help. For an introduction to computer adventure games, there are more compelling programs available. Adventure games can be educational, as they draw on creative problem solving techniques. Learning to count has just gotten a lot ruffer. NEW ATTITUDE LY nave un 2.3 $32 Amy's Fun-2-3 Adventure! For IBM/MS-DOS or AMIGA 39 24 EARLY CHILDHOOD Alphabet Blocks (Win) Just Grandma and M CD-ROM Kid Desk Kid Pix Mickey's 1-2-3's Mickey's ABC'S Mille's Math House Playroom v1.1 Puti-Putt Joins Parade Putt-Putt's Fun Pack Render Rabbit 1 Ready For Letters MATH Algeblaster Plus Island of Dr Brain Mental Math Games New Math Blaster Plus Nurnbur Munichers Operation Neptune Super Solvers Outriunted Treasure Cove Treasure Mathstorm $57 34 \"Outstanding...\" -AmigaWorld GEOGRAPHY AutoMap USA Carmen Sandiego-Time Carmen SD-USA Std/Dix Carmen Sandiego World Sid/Dix PC Globe PC USA LANGUAGE ARTS Reader Rabbit 2 Reading Adventures In Oz Word Attack Plus 34/49 34/49 Only $39.95 60 33 Fantastic graphics, animation, and sound effects insure your child* will have a Fun-2-3 time! \"Ages 2-6 +$2.95 S&H. (Outside U.S. $5.00) CA residents please add sales tax. \"... Melissa absolutely loves Please specify IBM or Amiga version. the game and plays it as often Send check or money order to: as she can. The improvement Devasoft in her recognition of numbers P.O. Box 41250 has been excellent.\" San Jose, CA 95160 -Ross & Leslie Kestin, CA (408)927-9645 \"My 3 year old loves it!\" IBM version requires VGA card, 286 -Arthur Asin, N.J. or better, 640K, high density disk drive. Amiga requires 1 MB ram. Amy's Play-B-C Time is coming soon! Try it for 30 days. Your money back if not satisfied! Page 174 Circle Reader Service #143 FOREIGN LANGUAGE GENERAL LEARNING French Assistant Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD ROM $45 French Word Turture BodyWorks Gurman Assistant Chemistry Works German Word Tortute Compton's Family Encyclo CD-ROM 189 Learn to Speak Spanish CD ROM Dinosaur Adventure Spanish Assistant Family Tree Maker Spanish Word Torture Kid Works 2 Word Attack Plus French Mario Teachus Typing Word Attack Plus Spanish Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing v2.0 Mystery at the Museum CREATIVITY Oregon Trail Dix A-Train $43 Space Adventure Miracle Piano Teacher 349 Time Riders in Arnerican History San Ant Treehouse Sim City 32 Your Personal Trainer SAT Software and Hardware for IBM Compatible PC's Call For Titles Not Listed! New Attitude 1407 Foothill Blvd., Suite 236 LaVerne, California 91750  MC/Visa, Money Order. Personal Check OK Shipping & Handling $5 first order. $1 each additional order COD $5 charge: M.O., cashiers check only Price/Availability subject to change wlo notice. CA residents add appropriate sales tax. All sales final. Contact manufacturer for defective product. 800/896-KIDS (800/896-5437) MON-FRI, 9-5 PDT 24 Hour Fax: 909/392-4596 Customer Service: 909/392-4595 Circle Reader Service #157 Computer Gaming World "


"demast presents CRTOONMANIA JemmaSoft presents CARTOON MANTE Cance Manila JONAS . Migle Can you think of a software that is loads of fun, encourages creativity and \"Our 8th grade students thoroughly enjoyed working with CartoonMania. produces a useful print-out? Probably not. However, this description does apply They were able to express their to a new program called CartoonMania. creativity with this software. I am impressed with the straightforward CartoonMania is an easy to use software that lets you design and write your approach of this program, it's ease of application, and the finished product. own cartoons. It contains a gallery of over 200 pieces of clip art from which you Gary Nicholson, Principal can choose sceneries, props and characters. The special graphics feature of Tavares Middle School CartoonMania enables the characters to change facial expression and body posture. To add a dimensional look to your scene, arrange and re-size the characters and props. Finish off your piece of work by writing your own dialogue. This program allows you to print your art work or save it as a TIFF, BMP or PCX file. CartoonMania offers an endless source of entertainment by stimulating the creative side of both children and adults. Younger kids get a kick out of arranging and coloring their art work, making their own story or coloring book. Teenagers and adults will enjoy designing unique letters, greetings, invitations and posters. CartoonMania requires a PC with DOS 3.0 or higher, VGA or EGA monitor, and a hard disk. The suggested retail price is only $39.95. Registered users will have the opportunity to purchase additional clip art at extremely reasonable price. Visit your local software dealer today or call (904) 483-2934 and mention CODE 20 to receive a special discount. CARTOON MANIA CARTOON MANIA Cat Christi 12505 Pine Glen Drive Leesburg, FL 34788 Screens taken from a VGA monitor. JemmaSoft and Cartoon Mania are trademarks of JemmaSoft Circle Reader Service #152 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS Shareware for Kids! Lunar Command Call today for our FREE colorful & animated disk catalog containing over 800 IBM compatible programs JUST FOR KIDS! The screen is divided into four main parts. A picture shows the selected system. As each part's name in a list on the right side of the screen is clicked, a line jumps to show that part on the picture. A row of menu options sits atop the screen. Each menu item offers further choices. Under this menu row is another row of icon buttons. Each button selects another mechanical system. Or ask for our sample pack Send $6.00 for an HD 5.25 or 3.5 floppy filled with shareware for ages 3-14 AND a copy of our catalog! The moon is a harsh place. There's no atmosphere, no water. Harmful solar and cosmic radiation constantly zaps the surface. Temperature goes from above boiling for two weeks to hundreds of degrees below zero for two more. But, then again, there's no place like home. Lunar Command is a computer simulation that allows kids to manage a lunar colony. What they don't bring to the moon, they have to make. As base commander of this colony, the player decides what kinds of buildings are needed and how many. What labs are needed for scientific research? What about manufacturing plants? What about the fuel to power the buildings and the staff to run them? Where will those people live? They can't exactly park an RV on the lunar plains. Familyware PO Box 82747 Tampa, FL 33612 Autoworks: Key to the Mechanical Mystery Price: $69.95 In Brief: Explore the world under the hood without getting your hands greasy. Requirements: IBM and compatibles with 640KRAM; VGA display: hard disk. 1-800-827-KIDS 1-813-933-6625 Software Marketing 9830 South 51st Street Building A-131 Phoenix, Arizona 85044 (602) 893-3377 Circle Inquiry #198 Circle Reader Service #146 Trick Your Kid In Adventure Learning Warem Treasure Hunt Math presents Lunar Command Price: $59.95 In Brief: Manage a lunar colony in this colorful simulation. Requirements: IBM compatible 386 or better with 2MB RAM; VGA display: hard disk Audio Support: Sound Blaster or compatible Mallard Software 3207 Justin Road Flower Mound, TX 75028 PHONE TK Circle Inquiry #199 00 \"Treasure Hunt Math is a good example of how educational software can be downright fun for kids.\" -Shareware Magazine. \"This is a great game, my 6-year old can multiply, level 2; my 9-year old will actually sit and do fractions!\" J. Stevenson, MD. Includes Math Tris\", the addictive, o falling-blocks style math game! Perfect for your kid; makes a thoughtful gift too. *Non-stop action game featuring colorful, animated graphics and sound presents elementary math for grades 1 through 6. Over 1000 math facts covering addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, decimals and percents. *Record keeping to track the student's progress and identify weak areas. A math problem editor to customize or add to the existing problems; this is a program your child won't outgrow. *High score list and printing of certificates. School lab packs & site licenses available. Requires IBM PC or compatible with EGA or VGA graphics, $39.25 Suggested List Price. Now, through this direct offer Only $19.95 + $2.95 postage (Califomia residents add $1.65 sales tax) 5-user lab pack S159-25. Only $79.95 Order with Visa/MC: (800) 829-5519, 7 days a week. Fax (408) 224-4455. Inquiries (408) 224-5519. Or, send check or money order to: Adventure Leaming Ware 5667 Snell Ave, #236. San Jose, CA 95123 Our 30 day money back guarantee: Your complete satisfaction or your money back. The program shows each automotive system in a dual view: profile and overhead. This makes it easier to view the car's working parts in perspective. A zoom-in button enlarges the picture. As the user moves the cursor across the picture, the name of the automotive part beneath the cursor appears at the bottom of the screen. Some of the menu items provide brief historical glimpses of the automotive industry. Other options provide animated sequences of the car's working parts and a game module—essentially a quiz. The testing portion of Autoworks is the most educationally useful, as it reinforces knowledge of car parts. However, the quiz game is limited to testing memory-not very challenging. All things considered, Autoworks is a well-designed program that does what it sets out to do. It won't turn kids into backyard mechanics or explain the rules of the road. Those limitations give it a potentially short life span. Jack Germain Kids can build houses easily enough. But what about food? It costs money to import food—about $3000 a pound. It takes money and time to build a greenhouse and grow food. Greenhouses need water. A player can get that from a mining or manufacturing operation. But that needs more power. Tradeoffs and planning are the key to maintaining a lunar colony-strategic and creative thinking combined with careful management. In Lunar Command, kids have to weigh the checks and balances of management. Players have 10 years of funding to find the right combination of buildings, cut expenses, and increase Circle Reader Service #139 Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"5 6 7 NO Help Kids Key Into Computers. The Computer Learning Foundation. We're here to help you. Kids are the key to America's future. And computers are the tools of their times. By the year 2010, virtually every job in America will require some use of technology. That means we must prepare all of our youth today to take on technology tomorrow. The Computer Learning Foundation is here to help parents and educators The Computer Learning Foundation is an international non-profit foundation taking the lead in computer literacy efforts. We are here to help parents and educators with the information and resources they need to help our children. We have involved millions in discovering the benefits of technology. Our lesson plan and resource guides help parents and educators use technology with children. Our Computer Learning Month each October is a focus for thousands of community and school programs. And we award thousands of dollars in technology products each year in our Computer Learning Month contests. Computers benefit children today. Computers can enhance children's learning and unlock their creativity. They can help children be more productive and develop better communication skills. Computers make learning come alive and create learning experiences that weren't possible before. Plus, children love using computers, so children maintain a positive attitude toward learning. The Computer Learning Foundation is helping schools obtain more computers. In our new Computer Learning Dollars program, schools can earn free computers, software and other technology products by saving Tetra Pak Tetra Brik aseptic symbols from fruit, juice, milk and other non-carbonated drink boxes and by saving receipts from North Carolina Office Depot stores. Write to us today. We're here to help you. Help kids key into computers. You Won't Believe What You'll Achieve! For more information, write to: FOTO: Computer Learning Foundation P.O. Box 60007, Dept KC Palo Alto, CA 94306-0007 *Available only in Massachusetts, New Jersey and North Carolina during the 1993-1994 school year. The Computer Learning Foundation is a non-profit educational foundation funded by corporations.Corporate Partners: Sega Youth Foundation Principal Sponsors: Tetra Pak Inc. Kids & Computers Teaching K-8 Office Depot, Inc. Microsoft Corporation Curriculum Product News T.H.E. Journal Media & Methods Corporate Associate: IBM/EduQuest MAC Home Journal Technology & Learning "


"CECECECEC monica than Grandma revenues from lunar products and tourism. Lunar citizens can die from mistakes. After 10 years, the money stops--the colony can only survive if it's self-sufficient. But managing a static colony isn't the real challenge. Dealing with the unexpected is. A lunar lander crashes. A meEnvironmental Computer Game In Recyclemania you balance between use and abuse. Action varies with your habits, casy to difficult. Send $19.95 to: Handyman Computing-K3, Box 91521, Portland, OR 97291. EGA/VGA PCs. teor hits a power plant. A labor strike is called. The program provides all the information needed to make decisions. Data regarding market conditions, power use and generation, heat, budget-all are available in graph or table form whenever needed. But the software can't call the shots—that's up to the player. A short, direct user's manual is complimented by a decent 80-page space novella. The story lets players see how things can be done, or ought to be done—or how things should not be done. The story is so good one wishes it were longer. Lunar Command is suited for kids in middle school and older. And though it's a simulation now, there may come a time when kids will need these skills for real. In the meantime, creative thinking and strategic planning are always in demand. So are worthwhile computer games. This is one. Larry Krumenaker Reader Rabbit's Ready for Letters Price: $49.95 In Brief: A delightful program that teaches pre-schoolers to identify objects, letters and shapes, early language skills, and other concepts. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM, VGA display: hard disk. Audio Support: AdLib and Sound Blaster compatible sound devices. For Ages: 2 to 5 midhty Drar The Learning Company 6493 Kaiser Dr. Fremont, CA 94555 (800) 852-2255 Circle Inquiry #200 This easy-to-use computer graphics program provides drawing and painting fun for all ages! WINDOWS..$59.95 DOS.........$49.95 800-451-4871 MAC........ $19.95 shipping extra) Call for a Abracadata FREE catalog! SINCE 1985 the source of plan making software Hos 2010 Karme, OR 97007 Ready for Letters work at grandpa's workshop matching shapes and colors. The bedroom engages the player in a more self-directed goal. The youngster can decorate the room with different combination of colors, patterns and designs. In the bathroom and the picture parlor, the player is exposed to letters and simple words that communicate abstract relationships and comparative terms, such as more, less, between, and beside. Ready for Letters is even more fun and effective when played on a computer equipped with an audio card. The sound effects and narration exercise the child's listening comprehension. Parents interested in helping their kids develop early language skills should hop right out to pick this one up. Jasmin Toroussian DANIEL DINOSAUR SAME DIFFERENT teaches Make learning letters a fun and meaningful experience for pre-readers and first-time computer users with this earlylearning program. Ready for Letters follows the popular Reader Rabbit to his grandparents' cottage, where kids join in six entertaining activities that have been carefully constructed to develop critical pre-reading skills. The program provides a delightful environment with all the intriguing elements for learning and exploration. There are many wonderful surprises waiting to be unveiled. Clicking the mouse on anything and everything guarantees success. The player is enticed to explore freely, while learning to identify objects, letters and shapes by sorting through or investigating their similarities and differences with respect to color, pattern, and size. At the Hoppy Hollow pond, for example, children can prompt the animated animals to pop out of hiding and play musical instruments (this element is comparable to a game of hide and seek, a favorite of this age group). Inside the cottage are five rooms. The kitchen and the workshop engage the player in goal-oriented tasks. The child can help grandma find the ingredients necessary to prepare a delicious snack or Happy Holidays Play and Learn with a talking, dancing dinosaur named Daniel. FINALLY... a learning game for toddl sianed to present material the way young children learn CALL 503-645-6760 Software Enterprise Limited P.O. Box 91370, Portland, Oregon U.S.A. 97291-7370 PROMOTING SCHOOL READINESS David Ross/Corel Circle Reader Service #163 Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"Zero's & One's Order's Call (800) 788-2193 Information Call (702) 897-2797 Chemistry 29.95 31.95 94.95 29.95 Sample Listing of Titles Estimated ages shown after titles Alcorn Enterprises ASTRONOMY GRAMMAR, SPELLING, ADVANCED MATH WRITING, VOCABULARY Amazing Universe-CDR $49.95 Algebra-1 st Year 14+ $51.95 Carmen San Diego Space Dix. 47.95 Alge-Blaster Plus 12+ 129.95 29.95 Dance of the Planets Algebra Plus V.1 13+ Distant Suns-CDR Child Write/Pub Center 7-14 29.95 83.95 $39.95 Calculus: Prin. 14+ Grammar Gremlins 8-11 Mars Explorer-CDR 24.95 43.95 29.95 Mission 'UFO Mutanoid Word Challenge 7+ 24.95 24.95 24.95 Spell it Plus 9-Adult 29.95 Orbits Chemistry Works 41.95 29.95 Spell-A-Saurus 6-13 29.95 Mastering Math-CD Rom 129.95 Spellbound! 6-12 Physics: Prin. 15+ 24.95 Writer Rabbit 7-10 BIOLOGY 29.95 What's My Angle (Geom) 12+ 29.95 Word Attack Plus! 9+ 29.95 GENERAL HISTORY Space Adventure $49.95 Animals in Motion-CDR 39.95 Animals MM Encyclopdia-CDR 47.95 Biology 24.95 Career Opportunities-CDR $34.95 Atlas US Presidents-CDR $24.95 Body Illustrated 47.95 Compser's Quest-CDR 54.95 Desert Storm w/Coalition-CDR 29.95 Bodyworks 29.95 Crossword Magic 8+ 31.95 History of Art/Entrtanment-CDR 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo 3-6 Eagle Eye Mysteries 8+ 31.95 History of Science/Innvtion-CDR 36.95 Mammals (Natinal Geog)-CDR 24.95 Fun School: Teddy Bear 4-7 19.95 Knowledge Adventure 8+ San Diego Zoo: Animals-CDR 37.95 Greatest Book Collection-CDR 29.95 North Amrican Indans-CDR 12+ 34.95 Jazz MM History-CDR 54.95 Oregon Trail Deluxe 10+ 35.95 Just Grandma & Me-CDR FOREIGN LANGUAGES 38.95 Prsident:Start w/Grge-CDR 14+ Knowledge Adv. 5-105 39.95 Time Rdrs Amricn History 10+ Library of Future 1 st-CDR 59.95 Time Treks 9+ Lost Tribes 8+ 24.95 12 Roads to Gttysbrg-CDR 12+ French-Berlitz-CDR $119.95 Mavis Beacon Typing-CDR 24.95 US History-CDR French-Learn to Speak-CD 49.95 Mario Teaches Typing-CDR 24.95 Sports Adventure All Levels German-Berlitz-CDR 119.95 Metrognomes (Music) 4-7 29.95 USA War:Civil War-CDR 12+ 51.95 Italian-Berlitz-CDR 119.95 Monarch Notes-CDR 61.95 Play w/Lang German-CDR 29.95 Mozart-CDR 29.95 Play w/Lang French-CDR GEOGRAPHY 29.95 Musical Instruments-CDR 54.95 Play w/Lang Italian-CDR 29.95 MM Beethoven-CDR 54.95 Play w/Lang Japanese-CDR 29.95 Mystery at Museums 7-14 34.95 Play w/Lang Spanish-CDR 29.95 Playroom preschool 29.95 American Vista-CD Rom 10+ $47.95 Spanish-Berlitz-CDR 119.95 Putt-Putt Joins Parade 2-5 29.95 Automap 11+ 54.95 Spanish-Learn to Speak-CDR 49.95 Reasoning Skills-CDR 57.95 Bushbuck Glbal Trsure Hunt 12+ 24.95 Word Attach Plus-Spanish 29.95 Rock & Bash 7-14 34.95 Crmn San Diego:Ameri Past 11+ 34.95 Rodney's Funscreen 2-5 29.95 Crmn San Diego:World Dix 10+ 47.95 LANGUAGE ARTS Scooter's Magic Castle 5-8 31.95 Crmn San Diego:USA DIX 9+ Shakespeare Mlus Works-CDR PC Globe 5.0°12+ Thinking Games 2-8 14.95 PC USA 2.0 12+ 32.95 World Vista-CDR 10+ Aesop's Fables-CDR 10+ $32.95 Annabels Dream-CDR 11+ 59.95 ELEMENTARY MATH REFERENCE WORKS Berenst Bears-Letters 3-7 24.95 Don Quixote-CDR 10+ 32.95 Kid Works 2 2-10 34.95 Berenst Bears-Count 4-7 Phonics + (Talks) 5-8 29.95 $19.95 19.95 Compton Intrctive Encyc-CDR $249.95 Clock/Money Works 6-8 Play w/Lang-English-CDR 29.95 \"Upgrade-CDR 99.95 Read 'N Roll 8-13 29.95 15.95 Market Place 8-14 Encarta MM Encyco-CDR 244.95 Mental Math Games 6-12 Reader Rabbit 1 2-6 34.95 35.95 Macmillan's Child. Dict.-CDR 31.95 Math Blaster+-NEW 6-11 Reader Rabbit 2 5-8 34.95 29.95 Reference Library-CDR 37.95 Math Rabbit-NEW 29.95 2-7 Ready for Letters 2-5 34.95 Millie's Math House 2-6 35.95 Reading Adventure Oz 229.95 Midnight Rescue 7-10 Mutanoid Math Challenge 7+ 29.95 29.95 Stickybear Reading 5-8 24.95 Number Munchers 8+ 19.95 SOUND BOARDS Storybook Weaver 5-8 29.95 Operation Neptune All Levels 34.95 MULTIMEDIA UPGRADES Talk Classics-CDR 7-11 54.95 Path Tactics 5-11 15.95 2nd Math 6-11 FLIGHT STICKS Word Attach Plus English 29.95 29.95 MICE Stickybear Math 6-9 29.95 19.95 Word Munchers 6-11 GAMES UAWAWNOWw 47.95 41.95 29.95 47.95 WE ALSO CARRY: ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 3315 EAST RUSSELL RD. SUITE H-177 LAS VEGAS, NV 89120 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatibility. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturers defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game $5, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game; addi games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $4.50. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT MASTERCARD AND VISA. "


"REVIEW They Came from The Ancient Past Microsoft's Arcade Pack by Neil Harris Neil Harris is a former editor of the in-house coms on Nickelodeon: they may be corny and If It Moves, Kill It magazine, Atari Explorer. In this article, he technologically inferior, but they also have a Tempest was the hardest game in the pack takes CGW readers back to the days when Atari somewhat perverse pleasure to offer. to get used to. The original arcade machines ruled the coin-op world via Microsoft's latest for this reason, the package will sell like used a controller that included a round knob package of entertainment titles. mad. I am convinced that there is a huge audience of players for these ZILO icrosoft Arcade is quite a trip down games, just like there was for the AA memory lane. Microsoft has series of Microsofi Entertainment I turned five classic Atari quarterPacks that preceded them. It's hard suckers from days of arcades past into amazto imagine, though, that the readingly faithful Windows renditions. Missile ers of CGWare the intended audiCommand, Asteroids, Centipede, Tempest and ence. We might be altogether too Battlezone ingested billions of quarters in jaded to appreciate the experience. their heyday, and it's hard to imagine that any gamer over 25 years old doesn't remember at And Battlezone Begat lcast one of these games fondly. Spectre... Memories can be deceiving, though. There Battlezone was my personal fais nothing inherently wrong with these varite in this bar vorite in this batch. It was one of games, taken in context. Unfortunately, their the great vector graphic arcade macontext is 1980, not today, and the accurate chines, with wire-frame tanks and port from arcades of yore onto my modern UFOs rendered in bright monoAsteroids: That graphic and sound extravaganza. Windows system left me feeling displaced in chrome. It was the first game I chrome time. To a great extent, these games have been fired up in this package. Yes, it certainly is that spun freely, allowing the player to posimade obsolete by technology. Yet, as one of Battlezone. The sound effects, the play action, tion shots around the perimeter of the screen. the CGW editors said, playing them today is everything is nearly identical to my memories Microsoft's designers use the mouse to simulike watching reruns of your favorite old sitof the original. It's possible to quibble that it's late this. Moving the mouse side to side positions shots clockwise or counterclockwise a bit harder in the computer ver149010000 sion to avoid oncoming missiles, around the playing field. I found a trackball but that could be a mistake in my to make this a bit easier, and eventually I had recollections and not a design mis berrer luck with the computer version. cue. Missile Command is the game that holds up The thing is, it's been done betthe best out of the batch. It adapts naturally ter since. You would exto mouse or trackball control. Three keys on pect that. In these days of high-speed 486s with Microsoft Arcade digital stereo sound and super VGA graphics, Microsoft Arcade $39.95 simulating vector graphIBM with Windows 3.1 ics and one channel sound REQUIREMENTS: 386SX-20MHz or better, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics.. is a bit strange. People PROTECTION: who like this kind of game Dima Pavlovsky PUBLISHER: have no doubt graduated Missile Command: Nuclear holocaust for the entire family. to games like Spectre by now. TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: | mou None DEVELOPER: Microsool Corporation Redmond, CA (800) 426-9400 Page 780 Computer Gaming World "


"GATEWAY II HOMEWORLD SPECTACULAR ANIMATIONS! Experience the chilling reality of 22nd century Earth Fue une thousan.vears ago, technologically advanced race called She likes oled the dataky Then they vanished San Francisco 2112 AD. A fanatic cult of terrorists plans to bring the Heechee's ancient enemy to Earth and purify humanity in a bath of cleansing fire. You must stop them, but you can't do it alone. The race to stop these madmen catapults you on a joumen to nen worlds and new adventures and ultimately across the event homm a black hole where you discover mankind's last remaining hope fo survival — the Heechee homeworld. Battle murderous robots, carnivorous dinosaurs and spearcarrying humanoids Based on Frederik Pohl's Hugo and Nebula award-winning Heechee saga. Rescue a prospector marooned in a robot-controlled Heechee starship BE A PART OF THE ACTION! Te the out this Ochesion Field GATEWAY II Tell me about this Gravity Lent Te me about in NN. Data che A do Stand back and watch Meet the Heechee face to face. Hold conversations via new intelligent dialogue system, operate alien technology, pilot a starship! Available Now In Stores! Escape a frozen planet where crystalline beings metabolize electricity LEGEND KALEGEND ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY P.O. Box 10810 14200 Park Meadow Drive Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744 1993, Legend Entertainment Company. Gateway 1: HOMEWORLD is a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Actual VGA graphics shown. Circle Reader Service #88 Cross the event horizon and explore the Heechee planets hidden in the core of a massive black hole "


"the keyboard replace the firing buttons for the three bases. I've seen a number of shareware knockoffs of this game over the years, but this adaptation works considerably better. What Happened to the Dinosaurs? Asteroids is the oldest arcade game in this batch, and it shows. There is not much to it. The strategy for racking up points is to shoot all the asteroids until there is only one small fragment remaining, then avoid it while shooting the flying saucers. This makes for a high scoring bur ultimately dull game. Out of all the games in the pack, this one held the least play value. Perhaps there is a reason why the dinosaurs died out. Finally, there is Centipede. I was never very good at this game. Perhaps it's because I never properly studied it. Most of the very best game strategy tips back in those days came from a typical arcade denizen, ten years old or so, with very short nerve pathways which yielded blindingly fast reflexes. (Surely the little punks couldn't have any other advantages. With Centipede, I never found anything that worked. Help for the Hopeless ARCADE 15465 687 VADER DE BARCA ARCADE Microsoft's «Help» system for ARCADE ADES AR Windows came to the rescue. AccuDE O ARCA ARCADE mulating the lost lore of those same ARCADE MADE BAR ARCADE ten-year-olds (doubtless now slaving ARCADE SADEBAR away on a campus in Redmond, WA), there is much game strategy ARCADE ADEBAR wisdom available for the touch of a DE BARCA ARCADE function key. Reading through the ARCADE ADEAR bal help file for this game resulted in DE ARCA ARCADE . ARCADE ADE AR markedly improved scores. DE BARCA BARCADE After discovering this mother lode, ARCADE VADE AR it became clear that this is a major DE BARCA BARCADE feature for this game pack. All the ARCADE TADAR games are loaded with tips that reveal Centipede: The buggiest game on the market. the most important tactics for each. Another nice touch is the \"boss ETTY IN RANDE SCORE Sot key,\" which minimizes the game by O h anda simply hitting escape-although explaining why that spreadsheet was generating all those strange noises is an exercise left for the player (maybe it was the musical spreadsheet invented by a character in a Douglas Adams' novel?). All the games offer the player a number of customizing options. Adjust the number of lives, remove displays that slow down each game, and speed up or slow down play according to taste. Baitlezone: Can it be the same without the view-scope? Overall, the implementations of They figured out all the rules fast enough. these arcade chestnuts is nearly They jusr didn't see the point. The concluflawless. They play with the right sion is that the only people who will go for speed even running inside Winthis package are those of us who were part of dows, although it's a bit prettier the original arcade era, particularly those who playing without them. The design didn't keep up with the state of the art. It's work in adapting the original conkind of like my sister-in-law who still buys trollers to the mouse and keyboard Simon and Garfunkel records, even though is well-considered. they're on CD now. 64645445 Tempest: One of Shakespeare's classic designs. Jurassic Park-Ware na kated window long Help ollis Microsoft Excel AMORTIZE XLS Elle Edit Formula Format Data Options Macro Window OBOE Molec Missile Command Game Options Help 67510000 Amor A sim 1) To 2) To. 5 Initia 6. LOAN DA pisteet defined 8 Ant Software for the Nineties? After taking a good look at all five games, I wondered if this wasn't just a generation gap issue. I'm a lot grayer now than I was when these games were created the first time around. Maybe it's just that I don't like this kind of game any more. So, as an experiment, I brought in a panel of experts, my two children, ages ten and seven. I know their nerve pathways are just right for these, and I've seen them glom onto the latest video games to the point where I had to beg to ger the computer back. They didn't get it. It's not that they didn't understand how the games worked. 10 Po 11 F 12 PERIODIC I predict that this package will be an instant best seller. In a way that's a shame. This is almost an example of Jurassic Park-ware. The programmers have managed to recreate the dinosaurs in all their original glory. Like the lizards on the page and silver screen, these games are out of their own time. I have to think that there is a lot more game play available on the market today. What might be nice is to apply the awesome brain power that went into porting these old games toward bringing them up to date. I'd like to see more than \"museum-ware.\" I'd like to see Battlezone 1994 with texture-mapped graphics, UFOs swooping down and kidnapping our women! Wouldn't that be something to see? CGW . 13 14 Calc 15 CALCULA 16 20 000 000 0001 17 18 Table Ready NUMISCALE Playing an Arcade game over a spreadsheet allows for emergency exits. Page 182 Computer Gaming World "


"Deseto | OF STEEL The Ultimate in Classical Fantasy Role-Playing... LISIHUTTLER Help save a richly detailed land from self-destruction. Unite the people of this ancient land and together you can defeat the evil horde that is gathering... growing... waiting... OG 11 VKINS + VALOR NIMELE PICKARD Animated and detailed VGA graphics  3D\"first person\" view of dark dungeons and musty towers . Turn based overhead tactical combat Original musical compositions and sound effects to get your heart pounding! Open ended non-linear game play Elght disciples to control and develop  Over a hundred quests to complete .Conquer towns and cities, tax the people and raise vast armies. Available for IBM PC and compatibles (VGA, 80386 or better, 2 MB of Ram or more, sound support for Sound Blaster and compatibles.) M MEGASOFT ENTERTAINMENT 137 West Bay Area Webster, TX 77598 1-713-554-7137 Circle Reader Service #95 Des Wood IMENSE BORN THE ONARD 'VEUR IZVKINS GEW WILOR MEHELE PICKARD "


"Functe Book Aladdin SEBA Hem A California Yankee Sen Queen Elizabeth's FOTO Court PINBALLO HULK SIONI CATATIVE BTTNT TITI CGWS Editor Visits The European Computer Trade Show by Johnny L. Wilson Then I left New York, it was early puter game community than in the U.S. inthe evil Al's robots before the whole robotic evening. When I arrived in Londustry. Employees tend to be younger and population can run amok. There is some nice VV don, it was early morning. Yet, I more enthusiastic about their products than table-based Al in the game, and there are had experienced more than a time change and their counterparts over here. There seem to some awesome cinematic sequences leading a dose of jet lag in that Atlantic crossing; I had be more titles available per company, and to the main game play. Alas, the game play is crossed a cultural divide. All my life I had each stand (their term for show booth) tends the same horizontal scrolling \"beat-'em-up\" simply viewed the British (little realizing how to be more concentrated in terms of people we've seen a thousand times before. Rise of the artificial that term sounds to those of English, and product than the equivalent booth at Robots is for 486s with 4MB only. A VGA Scottish and Irish ancestry) as an acculturated CES. amalgam of proto-American culture. Upon Why? It appears that the Euroarriving in England, I soon discovered that pean community wants more even with the similarity in language, it was a games on more subjects, regardless foreign country of how engaging the games may be At first, I was amused by the minor differover the long haul. Further, it apences between the U.S. and England. How pears that the European game quaint that we drive on opposite sides of the player wants all the flash and rechroad! How marvelous that buildings from the nological sizzle up front. That's 16th century stand amidst those of the 20th why U.S.game players often get the century! How neat to see a pub on every feeling that European games are corner! How delightful to read the names of unfinished. So, as a result, Eurothe traditional villages which make up metpean games tend to be heavy on ropolitan London! How superb to be passed action sequences (the easiest kind by those double-decker buses! of game play to implement), The European Community offers US companies many Then I was struck by the presence of news graphic sizzle (the latest technologiWindows of opportunity. agents everywhere I turned. The English (as cal gee whiz, regardless of whether version will be available for 386 owners, as the Irish and Scottish) must be a voracious it actually fits the game or not), and features well as a 32-color version for Amiga owners. nation of readers. Alas, as I began to read their upon features (whether they do anything for newspapers and periodicals, a reality sudoverall game play or not). With these reserva Ocean is a company that is well-known in denly struck me. There seem to be more tions in mind and my personal bias on the the U.S. Their latest stateside venture is to English magazines and newspapers per capita record, here is a Yank s-eye view of ECTS. bundle a Jurassic Park arcade game with than there are in the States. Within those Packard Bell's new line of 486-based comEnglish magazines and newspapers, there Graphic Sizzle puters. Graphically, their most impressive tend to be more and shorter stories than in product at ECTS was an arcade game called Mirage is a company that has no presence those in the States, and they tend to be filled 2000 AD. The game comes complete with in the U.S., as yer. Since they have a pending with lots more pictures. What does that imthe graphic novel upon which the characters ply? To me it suggests that the English read a distribution deal in the works, I was delighted and universe are based. Game play looked lot of stories on a lot of subjects, but they to take a look at their upcoming SVGA game, typical for a \"shooter,\" but the game features don't require a lot of information. While this Rise of the Robots. Anyone who follows Japanivery impressive animation with full-screen may be a generalization, it is important for mation in the least would get chills just lookfigures. this discussion, and relevant in terms of coming at the 3-D Studio robots they rendered for this game, and this is combined with threeCoktel Vision, the French publisher, unputer games. It explains, in part, some of the features of European software in general. dimensional rooms and tunnels which were veiled three products at ECTS. Two of the constructed by an interior designer. In the three were graphically intense. Inca 2, the Can You Spell Plethora? game's background story, a robotics consequel to their original action/adventure, struction plant has been taken over by an AI promises different-looking cockpits and texThere is more energy in the European comgone awry, and the player's job is to deactivate ture-mapped vessels, more cut scenes, Return Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"CD-ROMIX! TM Today's Hottest Comic Books On CD-ROM! ART: NORM BREYFOGLE SEE! Your favorite comic books from Malibu's best-selling ULTRAVERSE series in dazzling 256-color, high-resolution graphics with dramatic light and color effects! YEAR! ART: NORM BREYFOGLE Explosive sound effects and original musical scores in a stateof-the-art digital soundtrack. Real actors provide exciting character voices. IT WAJUTA SAP-NTIT COGT NEM TEM AND FLATIDED MY NOSE OVER MALMACENA HE WHGOW STREET FEEL The excitement as the adventure unfolds before your very eyes! Stories appear just as they were originally published, complete and unabridged. ART: JIM CALLAHAN & NORM BREYFOGLE PUT THOR YOU'RE GOALS GUNE DOWNLOS JUN. 1972 PLUS! A special segment gives you a behind-the-scenes look at the making of CD-ROMIX! WABOOM COITION COLLECTOR NEMEC.ROMIX! COLLECT ALL OF THESE EXCITING CD-ROMIX! TITLES!  PRIME\" #1  HARDCASE #1  FREEX #1 Available for DOS MPC CD-ROM MALIBU COMICSTM, ULTRAVERSET and all ULTRAVERSE characters are trademarks of and copyright  1993 Malibu Comics Entertainment Inc. CARWOXI Sugg Retait Price Available at Babbage's, Best Buy, CompUSA, Computer City, Egghead Software, Electronics Boutique, Software Etc., and other fine retailers. Circle Reader Service #137 Today's Hottest Comic Books On CD-ROM! $24.95 EACH CD-ROMIX!TM  1993 "


"ELECTRONIC ARTS wares (Three-Sixty Pacific and recruiting tool for the Royal Navy and may Origin, in particular), as well as a end up being a value-added feature on TorSPORTS new data disk for Bullfrog's Syndinado CD-ROM. It's too short to be released cate, and a work in progress that as a boxed game, but it is extremely interestwill present an entirely different ing nonetheless. More importantly, however, look for Bullfrog, essentially movthe company was displaying Operation Desert ing from the dark future of SyndiStorm, an add-on war zone for Tornado with cate to a light, frothy world of different graphics to reflect different terrain, sweetness and light. architecture and vehicles than those in the original product. Action Reaction Gametek plans to unveil Valkyrie in the Action games still rule the roost U.S. next year, a chopper simulation from in Europe. In addition to those Don Hall (Fokker Triplane), as well as both mentioned above with regard to an Air Warrior II and a new Air Warrior for EA draws a rowdy crowd with their latest 'footsy game. graphics, there are numerous action World War I aficionados. Of course, it will titles being released. Electronic come as no great surprise that Microsoft was to Zork style video-overlays with synchroArts unveiled its entry into the touting their Flight Simulator 5 and Activinized speech, and four or five new cultures to footsy sweepstakes with a large-screen display sion was demonstrating its upcoming 1994 enrich the scenarios. Inca 2 feels much more of its licensed soccer game, and U.S. Gold release, MechWarrior II. Both of these have like Wine Commander than the original and announced its Winter Olympics game. They already been discussed in CGW and were features many more weapons than the origiwill definitely publish it world-wide on the receiving an excellent response in Europe. nal game. Amiga and the Atari ST, but a computer The other Coktel Vision game is Lost In manufacturer may actually bundle the DOS Feature This version in the States. Accolade used ECTS as Time. Published as two separate games in Finally, the most hotly contested field of an opportunity to unveil their line of sports France, the game will come to the U.S. as one battle in Europe is expected to be the hybrid games, including Brett Hull Hockey and Speed space game. Interestingly enough, the game feapilot/merchant/pirate/mercenary Racer to the European audience. tures three completely different graphic genre. Not only was Origin demonstrating looks. In the first part of the game (set in In addition, U.S. Gold has high hopes for their just-released Privateer, but MicroProse 1840), the female protagonist is trapped on a Imagitek's new Evolution: Lost In Time, an UK unveiled Starlord and Gametek displayed IBMand Amiga-based acElite II. Both the former and latrer ship which features 3-D first-person polygontion/puzzler in The Humans trafilled graphics that look vaguely like Alone in are primarily arcade games with dition. Their biggest action hit the Dark. The next phase of the game, howan economic/role-playing wrapmay well be Raider, however. ping. Starlord is based on Mike ever, is presented as taking place in the modThis is a coin-op conversion of Singleton's Play-By-Mail game of ern era. All of the graphics are digitized a flying game where player-pithe same name. It can be played photographs and video clips (inset movies). lors simply shoot everything in as a pure strategy game as the Finally, there is an island sequence which was ei sight. Not only was this a popuplayer strives to become John drawn by a well-known French cartoonist. lar coin-op in Europe, but the Gotti in space, or as an arcade The company says they chose those graphics company is hedging its bets by game with a strategy wrapping. It to suggest a dream-like state. To American putting an editor in the prohas a host of features that appear audiences, this will no doubt seem schizoudiences, this will no doubt seem schizogram so that computer gamers to be user-customizable (gender, phrenic. To European audiences, this may can build their own levels. rank, difficulty, star system, facial vell serve to provide some of the graphic On a more sophisticated level, appearance, etc.), but we are not variery and frenetic pace they seem to like in Ocean was touting their upo positive how much they affect the both their printed and digitized media. coming TEX as a real flight sim. game play. Appearance wise, it Finally, Electronic Arts used the show as an I was skeptical at first, believing looks like sim graphics in a stratopportunity to show off some of its affiliates that the company was only in the shapes of things to egy game. come? terested in doing simple arcade CAPE COD CONNECTION Are We Cosmo, Yet? games. I was pleasantly surprised to discover YOUR SOURCE FOR that the gamer can choose between three All in all, attending ECTS provided a more Competitively priced used & new entertainment difficulty levels: arcade, realistic and military cosmopolitan perspective for me. I learned by software. A Consignment Shop through which specification (based on the Eurofighter 2000 sight and sound what I had been told by you can sell your used software call 1-508-457specs). The latter even requires an intricate dozens: Europe and the U.S. are different 0738 for info or a used software for SALE listing! mid-air refueling routine and offers a U.N. markets. I discovered partly why their games Tabletop war & role playing games & sports apparel FIVE (5) years of good, reliable & honest Commander campaign game where each suctend not to appeal as much to me: European customer service. cessful mission makes the successive one easgamers want a short passionate fling with a S&H flat $5 in cont. U.S. Other areas adjusted according to game, while U.S.gamers tend to want a satactual weight. Detective replacement only: sales final. ier, and vice-versa. isfying long-term relationship. I'm glad we Overseas dealers welcome! Digital Integration, developers of Spec. 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 have the cross-pollination, though. I can't 24Hr Ordering 1-800-729-6733 trum HoloByte's Tornado, displayed their help but feel that this industry would be a Info 1-508-457-0738 Merlin Challenge, a helicopter landing simupoorer environment without Populous, Alone Fax 1-508-457-4558 lation that was originally programmed as a in the Dark and Lemmings. Cow Circle reader Service #45 Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"YOU THOUGHT YOU LOVED COMPUTER GAMES. BUT... SO90 Gente 224 146 OU O 350 Shut FLEE TL RTE UN Block # 27 «DESHE DONE PREV HERD HELP! Create links between worlds.. Draw pictures of characters, monsters, and scenes by creating picture blocks SIOUX 125 Charalar Touches Book Ghana 2014 LEI MIE points to Hext Les Hay position Relative to Monster Lives bu be Cher Chewy LO Current Le Monster every Go TOSSR Speed Orot Tours 1 GID SIDE VER A55L IF TISSA CEERD HETE Empower Picture Blocks Import Graphics Animate Monsters Plan Movement UNTIL YOU PLAY WITH GAME MAKER YOU'VE ONLY BEEN PLAYING AROUND. Create action adventure games, as wild and unique as your imagination. With Game.Maker's game design tools, you can design 256 color VGA computer games without Available at your local retailer programming.  Design unlimited numbers of animated monsters and good guys. or from: Animated characters walk, run, fly, hop, pop from scene to scene.  Design PC sounds or use SB compatible sound clips. KD SOFTWARE * Play Sound Blaster compatible music. Characters respond to joystick or keyboard. Great Falls Avenue, Box 448 Full screen scrolling scenes Rochester, NH 03867  Design multi-level professional quality games. Mouse driven and graphics based, GAME MAKER is VISA/MC Orders: 1-800-533-6772 Computer Aided Game Design at its best. Is a game too Call Toll Free for latest price. easy? Increase the speed. Too boring? Add danger, sounds, and monsters. Too plain? Dress up the graphics, add Information: 603-332-8164 FAX: 603-332-8125 animation. Too short? Add new levels. Call the Frontline BBS 207-967-0618 and download GAME.MAKER includes lots of extras: hundreds of pictures, games created by GameMaker. monsters, objects, good gals and guys, and detailed scenes and worlds. Use or modify these extras in creating your Game Maker requires an IBM AT compatible 386 or better, with a color VGA monitor own games. Plus you'll enjoy the sample games includand mouse. Joystick optional. GAME.MAKER is designed and produced by Recreational ed with GAME.MAKER. Software Designs. Circle Reader Service #115 "


"5. Over There at the rest Money, Sex, And Violence With A European Flair hadde   * T of The Patrician could have been fairly easily avoided, but as the design stands it is difficult to become immersed in the setting and in the game as a whole. Patriarchal Games: As you sail the seven seas, pirate attacks can occur and are resolved using a simplistic arcade-like game. This combat feature looks as if it has been inserted as an afterthought and does little to add to the game. The trading is on the mundane side and, although the political machinations are initially interesting, they do start to wear thin. The long term appeal of this game, except to bank managers and chartered accountants, is therefore questionable. To put it in the verby Robin Matthews nacular of the time, thou willst not findst ye Hund a medieval Civilization herewith. Sometimes in this column, European computer leisure software is criticized as being t the recent CES show in Chicago, your way to a successful and profitable finanparochial--too British or too French in outGuido Henkel, German designer of cial empire. look and approach. The Patrician is an interR ealms of Arkania, was asked about Wealth is only part of the story_social esting game that is challenging but could be the apparent lack of good games from Gerstatus was all in Medieval Europe. The Mayconsidered as too Germanic in appearance, man authors. Guido responded by saying that ordom of your town and, ultimately, the perhaps needing a bit of British innovation, there were some quality games, but that most position of Alderman of the League are your are your some French savoir faire, or maybe some never make it outside of the country. He also real goals. In the best European tradition of Stateside polish. It is nonetheless refreshing forecast that this was about to change. A the time, this involves well-publicized donato see quality output from Germany, and this couple of weeks later, and almost before you tions, less overt bribes, arranged marriages, arriages is surely a sign of things to come. could say «Brandenburg Gate,\" a plain brown and all manner of methodology in the pure Back in blighty, that lot at Impressions is and total pursuit of absolute power. This at it again; each month this prolific software means clashes with the church, despotic company seems to release yet another new or kings, decaying kingdoms and a creaking upgraded product. Now its ever growing class system. The Patrician is not a game product list is swollen with a raft of new titles: for those who are averse to compromisan enhanced version of Airbucks, Caesar Deing high moral ideals. All is fair in love luxe, and newcomers in Detroit and Global and computer strategy games; blackmail, Domination. Caesar Deluxe is a full blown greed, corruption are all stock in trade re-write of their well-received Roman strategy with the occasional clash of force. game and now boasts detailed on-line help The core of the game is successful trading, and you visit ports all over the medieval world. The gaming inThe Patrician from Daze Marketing terface is straightforward. Unfortunately, every town looks exactly the envelope arrived with a brand new game from same and has the same three main the Fatherland locations. The shipyard repairs and The Patrician from Daze Marketing is set builds ships, the town square is the poin 15th century Germany and is a detailed litical center, and the waterfront is where maritime trading game based on the Hansebusiness is conducted. In the latter, you atic League. This League was a medieval forecan buy and sell cargo, pay the crew, and LUTPAT ER V ORES 201.4198 runner of the present day Common Market initiate voyages. These three areas con(but without wine lakes, burrer mountains, or tain shops, inns and provisioners which Impressions' Detroit an Exchange Rate Mechanism), and its activimay be visited on a regular basis. Unforties stretched across Northern Europe. The tunately, the shipyard in London looks idenand many other features to improve presenLeague was a group of highly organized and tical to its counterpart in Novgorod and the tation and smooth out the learning curve. forward-looking traders who substantially Inn looks pretty familiar as well. This sameDetroit is a 100 year simulation in which controlled all international trading in the ness is a real hindrance to the atmosphere and you design and build the car of your dreams. Middle Ages. In The Patrician, you take your pace of the game. In this time period, these You have to handle all the decisions from place as a member of this social elite, albeit as ports were teeming, vibrant dynamos of ecodesigning the vehicle to recruiting a work a lowly merchant. You begin with a single nomic and social activity, each with its own force, and then to site, build and manage the small ship and little money, and must trade character and identity. The generic approach factories and assembly lines. The aim is to 152 HIRIKIETIS Jan . 43 Page 188 Computer Gaming World "


"A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away). Min de familia SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS\" WARS. CHESS Now available in this galaxy for IBM PC and compatibles and MPC CD-ROM MARCA THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR WARS. Combine Star Wars characters with one It's your turn of the oldest strategy games in the world to pit yourself and you get The Software Toolworks' against the CHESS Star Wars Chess Dark Side... the most thrilling Up to 72 animated 3-D capture sequences! and may animated chess It's like making your own Star Wars movie on the Force game in the galaxy! a chessboard! Through dazzling animation, be with you! Leia, Luke, C-3PO, Darth Vader and other The Force is with you Relive battles characters you love come to life in brilliant between the Rebel 3-D sequences. Up to 72 unique capture THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS Alliance and the evil Empire through moves and authentic Star Wars music and For the dealer nearest you or to buy, call astounding original artwork and a powerful sound effects make this a chess program chess program like no other in the universe. 1-800-234-3088 TIIE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR WARS CHESS game copyright 1993 LucasArts Entertainment Company. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. STAR WARS is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Lud. Underline computer code 1993 The Software Toolworks, Inc. All Rights Reserved. The Software Toolworks is a registered trademark of The Software Toolworks, Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation Circle Reader Service #124 *** "


"S successfully produce and marker your own automotive masterpiece. Starting in 1908 you have until 2008 to invest in research and technology, decide on advertising, open up sales offices, diversify your product range with sports cars, sedans and trucks. Detroit should allow competitive play from three human or computer opponents and may support modem play. This sounds like a compulsory purchase for all major auto industry executives and amateur auto-philes. probably cross the stage of history without a mention. That is, it will pass without mention unless it is held up as a classic example of how not to produce a game. D-Day is divided into segments, the first of which lets you give orders to your invasion force on a campaign level, and the second leads you into crude simulations of various parts of the subsequent action. The modules are a B-17 bomber, a M-4 Sherman tank, and a paratroop drop simulation, and a stick-men platoon arcade game. Each of the simulations looks very dated, with the tank one being about the best of the lot. The paradrop module is extremely tacky and should not be shown to anyone who wears, or who knows somebody who wears, a red or green beret. The product as a whole looks as if it wouldn't have been out of place in 1944, and consists of a series of sub-games that are supposed to give a flavor of the complicated multi-service nature of the largest sea-borne invasion. All it really does is leave a pretty bad taste in the mouth. It is definitely one to be avoided if it should happer pen to make the transatlantic crossing, but with a bit of luck the container ship will be torpedoed by a rogue U-boat in transit. torpedoca by a rogue U-boa THIS REFRESHERSEES. Impressions' Global Domination t CREDIT: WIDE WORLD PHOTOS The mind's eye is never blind. QEGANCE Futura's D-Day Global Domination is not a home knitting program, but a strategy wargame similar to the boardgame Risk. Adopting the simple but appealing approach of that classic game, Global Domination can be played at one of two levels. At the easiest level, play is basically \"strategic» with large scale units moved by the players, but all combat and calculations being resolved by the computer. At the second level, the more demanding warlords can decide to be involved at a tactical level. When combat occurs, players can then zoom into the particular battlefields and command their forces in smaller units and in real time. This macro/micro approach is a very much simplified version of the system used by Impressions in Caesar/Cohort II, and if correctly implemented could have a wide appeal. Additional features include having to defend key installations and resources, plus possible modem support. Global Domination will not be limited to just one globe. A random planet generator will provide an infinite number of brave new worlds for conquest, and some of the readymade ones will allow you to take on the mantle of famous world conquerors from the past. Global Domination will have a combination of strong graphics and full sound effects, and should be launching its first strike as you read this. Speaking of war, even though D-Day was a memorable event, Futura's recently released English version of their D-Day game will It burns brightly for account executive John Moore, who writes marketing proposals on his computer, reads his favorite novels on talking books, and refinishes furniture in his spare time. The above games and any of the other games mentioned in past columns can be obtained from: Computer Gaming World (not affiliated with CGW magazine) 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY. Tel: 01144-51-263-6306 Help other blind and visually impaired persons lead fulfilling lives. Support the American Foundation for the Blind's education and literacy initiatives today. Call 1-800-AFB-LIND. In New York, call (212) 620-2147. Strategic Plus Software 28 D&E The Courtyard, High Street, Hampton Hill, Middlesex, TW12 IPD Tel: 01144-81-977-8088, Fax 0114481-977-4822, or on CompuServe on 1000014,3466 Robin Matthews can be contacted on CompuServe at 76004,3456. CGW Page 190 Computer Gaming World "


"COMDEX! See us at 616-Bit Sound Explosion!\" Booth A928, South Annex you greater software and CD-ROM drive compatibility than either Creative Labs or Media Vision: Aztech Labs opens your window to the multimedia revolution like no one else can! Everything is Crystal Clear! Earth shaking, bone rattling, crystal cracking 16-bit, 44.1 KHz stereo audio. From sonic booms as you devour Mach 1, to the hottest guitar licks that rock the house, Aztech Labs delivers and delivers BIG! The Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 audio card leads the multimedia revolution with the widest sound stan dard compatibility in the market today. Bundled with the finest multimedia and business audio soft. ware, headphones, and a microphone, buy Sound Galaxy, and get the most flexible, compatible, and affordable sound performance available for your PC! Your Multimedia Leader! With over 700,000 boards shipped, a strong commitment to R&D, and a host of exciting products scheduled for release, Aztech Labs leads the Multimedia industry into the future. Sound Galaxy's Wave-Power Digital WaveTable Synthesizer and new Double Speed CD-ROM Multimedia Upgrade Kit are a glimpse of the future available now. Get the Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 from Aztech Labs, the difference is crystal clear! Visit your local computer dealer & insist on Sound Galaxy! For information call 800-886-8859 today. The Compatibility Advantage! Aztech's Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 audio card owns the compatibility advantage. Only Sound Galaxy is compatible with Microsoft Windows Sound System, Sound Blaster PRO, AdLib, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And only THE OBEY 16 HT STEREO SOUND CHO THAT SPORTS 5 SOUND STAND US Sound Galaxy gives you the DUNIE widest choice of CD-ROM interfaces, and a SCSI and Wave Table Synthesis upgrade Aztech products give SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16 SOUND BLASTER 16 ASP MEDIA VISION PRO AUDIO SPECTRUM 16 SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16 OUTPERFORMS THE COMPETITION: EASILY! COMPATIBLE WITH: SOUND BLASTER SOUND BLASTER PRO MICROSOFT WINDOWS SOUND SYSTEM COVOX SPEECH IHING DISNEY SOUND SOURCE ADUB NO NO NO MULTIPLE CD-ROM INTERFACES (AT-BUSI PANASONIC MIISUMI SAINY todopter required Look for the Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 undiocandal your local dealer today YES YES YES YES CD-ROM INTERFACE (SCSI) OPTION TO UPGRADE! NO YES OPTION FOR UPGRADE TO 16-BIT WAVE-TABLE SYNTHESIS YES YES NO: SOUND WinDOS TOP *PRODUKT SPC TOP PRODUCT AWARD BY WINDOS MAGAZINE (GERMANY) MICROSOFT WINDOWS.M \"Pioneering the Multimedia Explosion!\" COMPATIBLE Multimedia PC A product of Aztech Labs, Inc. 46707 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 AZTECH 46707 Fremont Bly 1993 Aztech Labs, Inc. Aztech, the Aztech logo, and Sound Galaxy are trademarks or registered trademarks of Aztech Labs, Inc. All other names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. Specifications, terms, and services subject to changes without notice. Circle Reader Service #42 "


"REVIEW THROUGH The CORRIDORSE OF TIME Electronic Arts' The Labyrinth of Time by Charles Ardai LETICI Afring Tt is probably too much to ask of a game by compelling the spirit of Daedalus to concalled The Labyrinth of Time that it not struct a supernatural labyrinth that will give .conrain any mazes-tempting, but too him access to all eras of human history. The much to ask. It may even be asking too much player is the mortal chosen to destroy the to request that such a game limit itself to a labyrinth and free humanity from Minos single maze, or even to two. Is it too much to tyranny... ask, though, that there be something more to Don't be fooled. There are no characters in an adventure game than a series of mazes, one the game; the storyline is just an excuse for after another, each distinguished from the In a control room, facing west the designers to sew together a patchwork of next only by the designs on its walls? visual non sequiturs; the game contains fewer By all appearances, Electronic Arts feels than three dozen portable objects, almost half there's no getting away from the fact that it's that the answer is yes, since The Labyrinth of of which cannot be used for anything; and one empty room after another. Time offers almost nothing but mazes, linked while there are puzzles, after a fashion, they end to end in a complex, irritating chain. are a weak bunch, often of the \"find the right Aside from the matter of boredom, there is Now, I do not doubt that there are players also the question of whether the visual opukey to open this door\" variety. The game out there who love navigating mazes, though lence makes sense in the context of the stocomes on CD-ROM, but there is no speech. I am not one of them; why else would almost There is a point-and-click interface, but it is ryline. These are tunnels by Gucci, ziggurats by I.M. Pei, Daedalus as history's greatest every major adventure game feature a maze a sham: most screens contain nothing with sequence? Still, there has to be a limit, and I which the player can interact, and most obinterior designer. The labyrinth is supposed jects only function in a single mode. (When to intersect every moment in history, so the e player is treated to some Victoriana, some you find a book, you can't throw it down the 1950s chrome, some 1880s Wild West laundry chute, or drop it, or car it, or put it shtick, some ionic columns, some Mayan relunder the wobbly leg of a table. The only ics, some mild futurism, and a hearty dollop thing you can do is read it.) of the present day, all stylized to the hilt. The There is one thing that the game has in effect is not so much surreal (as it is clearly abundance-space. One wanders through ugh intended to be) as cluttered, confused and into room after opulent room, each beautifully disorient Inaminormaze, facing east color-coordinated and furnished in impeccaWalking through the game feels like a tour ble taste. The relentlessly stylish visuals feaof an abandoned movie studio backlor: here ture all sorts of intricate art can hardly imagine a player so enamored of deco designs, high-contrast mazes that he would not be permanently The Labyrinth Of Time lighting, and photographiccured of the taste after slogging through the quality illustrations. Since The Labyrinth Of Time meandering hallways, corridors, tunnels, the game uses a pivoting PRICE: $59.95 rooms, hedgerows and stairwells of this game. SYSTEM: IBM with CD-ROM first-person perspective, REQUIREMENTS: 386-16Mhz or better, 2MB RAM (XMS), VGA graphics, CD-ROM drive It would not be so bad if Labyrinth billed there are four gorgeous Sound Blaster compatible sound cards, itself openly as a maze game. Instead, the views of each gorgeous locaVESA compatible video cards, supported; double speed CD-ROM recommended game pretends to be a piece of interactive tion. Still, it's all just eyePROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Bradley W. Schenck, Michal Todorovic fiction. It even has an elaborare storyline, candy and boring eye-candy PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts some pungent blather about the spirit of King at that; no matter how at(415) 571-7171 Minos trying to conquer all of time and space tractive the game gets, TITLE: None San Mateo, CA Page 192 Computer Gaming World "


"In a museum, facing non Adding to the agony is the Return To Zork(a detective's office labeled \"Slade and ish movement system, which has four sepaBarcher,\" a poster that says \"Wanted Fred or rate pictures for each location, one for each Alive\"), while most of the rest seem to be primary compass direction. Each 90 degree in-jokes about, and apparently intended for pivot requires the computer to access the CD, the amusement of the designers themselves. sometimes at a cost of two or three seconds. The plotting is similarly misguided. Some This may not sound like a long time, but strings of puzzles lead nowhere: one has to picture waiting two or three seconds every In a subway car, lacingwest find a key to open an office, to get a key, to time you want to turn your head to the side open a jail cell, to get a gun which one never and you will appreciate the discomfort of the has to use. Other puzzles lead somewhere but is where they filmed their Westerns, you can arrangement. not in a very exciting way. In addition to the almost hear a tour guide saying; there's the Since one never knows when the fourth always delightful act of key collection (brass Roman amphitheater, there is the Midwestview of a room will contain something that key, iron key, silver key, gold key, card key) ern diner, and over there, next to the teepee, the other three views did not, a diligent player is our rocketship. It's not eerie or exciting will pivot four times at every location before (despite the game's use of an alternately cerie moving on. Each forward step also requires and exciting soundtrack to spice things up). disk access, so a trip down a long hallway can It's just a comely curiosity. be an excruciating affair, with the player lurching about like a man on crutches. One Time and Time Again craves a fluid first-person movement system One of the things that makes the game as in Ultima Underworld, or at least smooth particularly frustrating, especially for experithird-person animation as in Alone In The enced adventure gamers, is that almost every Dark. The system of discrete hops, bad MUIO86BE room contains apparent (as opposed to genuine) objects with which one has no choice but there is a sliding tile puzzle, a lever puzzle or to waste one's time. The difference between two, and a combination lock to open. In other an apparent object and a genuine one is that words, Labyrinth contains all the boring the former doesn't really exist. One can take \"filler\" puzzles that enlightened designers a closer look at such objects (Labyrinth has a gave up years ago. close-up shot of just about everything in the A final example of bad writing comes right game), but one cannot do anything with at the start of the game, which has the drearithem. The problem is that it is not obvious to In a subway car facing west est, most depressing opening sequence I have the player which objects are real and which VOLM 860 ever seen. Until Daedalus shows up, the enough in Return To Zork (where it wasn't so player's character is practically suicidal. slow and where each screen contained someIs there anything the game does right? Yes. ing to do), here is simply abhorrent. The soundtrack, though a bit over-earnest in The final insult is that even after one has its use of Epic Themes, tries very hard to make successfully explored a region, one isn't donc a silk purse out of the material at hand; the with it since the game requires a good deal of animations and sound effects, though brief backtracking, sometimes through 50-room and parceled out like a miser's gold, are good Inamuseum. facing south mazes and once through three mazes in a row. when they come. The visuals are often stunMOLDOSSIAPA True, the game offers an automapping feature ning it would be dishonest to deny that. so that one does not have to trot out the graph are not, so one spends an inexcusable amount paper and pencils, but this is a minor concesStill, a book of art deco posters is equally of time trying to interact with objects that are sion. The fact is that even someone who likes stunning and much less arduous to get essentially non-existent. mazes will not enjoy going through the same through; a Tangerine Dream CD offers simiFor example, the CD contains a close-up of maze, backward and forward, several times. lar, and just as good, music; and better puzzles every lamp in the game, and it is only after can be had in almost any other game. Frankly, one tries to take, move, open, and close a Time Lines if I were Electronic Arts, I would dismantle number of them that one realizes that the The Labyrinth of Time and sell it cut-rate for lamps are just there as decoration. One room It is worth mentioning that its physical clip art. Cow contains two paintings, a bed, and a phono structure and movement system are not the graph. all merely decorative. The mirror maze only areas in which Labyrinth fails to shine. is crammed full of weird circus props, none Writing is another big problem, both in terms of which have a function, but all of which of the game's text and its plot. invite the player's scrutiny by offering closeAs far as text goes, the general lack of things up views when one clicks the \"eye\" icon on to do leads to any number of \"you can't do them. One spends hours trying to solve puzthat\" lines, but none of them are as funny as zles that do not exist and hours afterward the designers must have thought they were. In a retonpalace, racing soun trying to get one's blood pressure down to There are also a number of tepid jokes scatmanageable levels. tered about; some are pointless bits of silliness MUTOSEADE December 1993 Page 193 "


"VIKING ))) SOFTWARE, INC. SAME DAY SHIPPING UNTIL 8:00 PM EASTERN TIME! . Adventure/Role-Playing Past Present Future Hint Books Hardware November Specials Battletech Powerhits Bloodnet IBM Mac 20. 38 Civilization/Rome 640k Clouds of Xeen 42. RED CRISTAL IBM Mac AD&D Dragonlance Kit 43. AD&D Starter Kit 31 AD&D Stronghold 38. AD&D Unlimited Adven. 38 38 Betrayal at Krondor Challenge of 5 Realms Darklands Darkside of Xeen Dark Sun Grey Isles Camp Daughter of Serpents Eric the Unready Eye of Beholder 1 Eye of Beholder 2 19 . Eye of Beholder 3 Gryphon Master Havlar Inca Kings Quest 4 Kings Quest 5 42 42 Kings Quest 6 47 Kings Ransom Legacy IBM Mac Alone in the Dark 38 Amazon 38 Batman Returns Blue Force:Next of Kin 42. Carmen San Diego Series Where in Past Where in Europe Where in Space Where in Time Where in USA Where in World Where in World Dix. 49 The Beecret ... . Assawes express .. Red Crystal Seek out the seven secrets of life! You forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, ominous castle towers and the savage country side. Modem Play IBM Mac CH-Flightstick 40 CH-Flightstick Pro 54 CH-Virtual Pilot 66 . Gravis Eliminator Card 29. Gravis Joystick Pro 39. Mitsumi Internal CD Rom Drive w/350 ms Seek 189. Pilot Control Stand 26 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 199 Pro Audio Spctrm Plus 145 Soundblaster ASP 16 235 Soundblaster Pro Delx 130 ThrustMaster Series Flight Stick 66 Flight Stick Pro 102 Game Card 29. Rudder Pedals 109 TSR'S 12eaWeapons Control 69. MASTER 19 Champions IBM $38 Nov IBM Ami B-17 Flying Fortress Command HQ Crisis in the Kremlin Eye of the Beholder 1 Eye of the Beholder 2 Global Effect Leisure Suit Larry 5 M-1 Tank Platoon Meglomania No Greater Glory Paladin 2 Siege & Dogs of War Silent Service 2 Space Quest 4 Summoning Wizardry 6 Masters of Orion This sci-fi strategy program surpasses any other in its class in both size and scope. Features ten different alien races and up to five differ ent computer oppo nents. Dagger of Amon Ra Day of the Tentacle Deja Vu 1 & 2 Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Indy Jones/Fate Atlants 39 37 Leisure Suit Larry 5 42 42 Lost File Shrick Himes 26. Lost Treasures Infcom 33 42 39 GO 37 API Dunia ID 17 AD&D Gold Box Series All SSI Gold Box titles are now on for $19! Ex.:Pool of Radiance, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Champions of Krynn, Treasure of the Savage Frontier, and many more! Cyberspace Dominion Dune Dune 2 Flashback Gateway Gateway 2 Homeworld Masters of Orion Mechwarrior 2 Out of this World Privateer 49 Speech Pack Protostar.War Frontier 42 Ringworld: Revenge Patr 37 Space Hulk Star Control 2 37 Star Trek 25th Anniv Star Trek:Next Gen. Strike Commander Speech Pack Syndicate Terminator/Rampage Ultrabots Wing Commander 2 pec Ops 1 & 2 15eaSpeech Pack 15 Wing Commdr Acdmy 33 X-Wing Imperial Pursuit 19 . B-Wing 19 . 39 Darkside of Xeen Eye of Beholder 3 F-15 III Falcon 3.0 Legends of Valor Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 11 Might & Magic Off. Guide 12 Might & Magic 3 or 4 13 ea Quest for Clues Series Book of Orbs Manual of Swords Books 3 or 4 Railroad Tycoon Realms of Arkania Ringworld Run 5 Magazines SIMEarth: Strategy Guide SIMLife: Strategy Guide Star Control 2 Strike Commander Ultima: Official Book Ultima 7 10 Ultima 7 Part 2 Ultima 7/Underworld 1 Ultima Underworld 1 or 2 11ea V for Victory: Battle Book 12 Windows Shopper Guide 30 Wing Commander 1 & 2 Bk 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) ON MORO IBM $39 IBM $19 HG2 Viking Ratings 37 . 43 42 11 Maniac Mansion 2 Police Quest 3 Return of the Phantom Sam & Max Hit Road Savage Empire Seal Team Street Fighter 2 Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness COMPANIONS OF Betrayal at Krondor A Clash of Steel A Day of the Tentacle A Pax Imperia Pirates! Gold B Privateer Space Hulk Stronghold Syndicate V for Victory Series A War in Russia Warlords 2 mmmm A A CD-ROM TITLES IBMMac IBMMac 42. 35 Legend of Kyrandia 33 Legends of Drakka Nov. Legends of Valor 37 . Lost Vikings Magic Candle 3 Might & Magic 3 39 39 Might & Magic 4 Clouds 44 Might & Magic 5 Darksid 44 Pirates! Gold Quest for Glory 3 Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork Secret Monkey Island 1 37 Secret Monkey Island 2 39 Shadowcaster Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) 38 Summoning. The Ultima 4 Ultima 5 Ultima 6 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7 Part 2 The Silver Seed Ultima Trilogy 1 Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld 1 Ultima Underworld 2 Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) 39 39 Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) 42 42 IBMMac 57. 42 42 Dec 47 47 57 42 56 39 Dec 57 Dec 59 47 47 47 47 7th Guest 12 Rds to Gettusburg Aegis: Guardian Fleet Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Bloodnet Buzz Aldrin Race/Space Challenge 5 Realms Chessmaster 3000 Chopper Pack Conquest of Longbow Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun IBM $37 Companions of Xanth Explore Piers Anthony's magical world of mythic wonders and become a player in a game where the stakes are the existence of magic. Intuitive design. Day of the Tentacle Dune F-15 III Great Naval Battles Iron Helix It's a Wonderful Life Jet Pack Kings Quest 5 Kings Quest 6 Kings Ransom Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Tresurs Infocom 1 Lost Tresurs Infocom 2 Mad Dog McCree Myst Prince of Persia Privateer Sherlock Holmes Series Consulting Det. #1 Consulting Det. #2 Consulting Det. #3 Star Trek 25th Annivers Tony Larussa 2 Underworld 1/Wing Co2 Ultima 1-6 Bundle Ultima Underworld 1&2 Wing Commander 2 Dix Oct57. 33 42.  Oct 42 Dec 47 . 47 47 37 37 Circle Reader Service #134 "


"For information and release dates Shipping Rates/Hours To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax 1 404) 840-7925 2980 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 3, Norcross GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5. SAME DAY SHIPPING UNTIL 8:00 PM EASTERN TIME! Strategy/Simulations/Sports UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day air. $6.00 2-day air. 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD add: 5.00 Overseas Call Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6,00 Overseas: Call Prices subject to change, so call first! Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-8pm(EST) 7am-5pm(Pacific) Pre-WWII World War II Modern Sci-Fi General Sports IBM Mac A-10 Warthog A Line in the Sand IBM Mac 94' 19. Armour Geddon Armored Fists 16 31 44 38 ..... 38 IBM Mac AD&D Stronghold 38. Air Duel Ambush at Sorinor Ancient Art War Skies 37 Archon Ultra Bloodstone Blue & the Gray Caesar Cohort 2 Castles 36 Oct Northern Camp Castles 2 37 Oct Centurion 16 . Civilization Civilization Master Edit 45 Civilization Windows Cohort 2 Command H.Q. Classic 22 Conquered Kingdoms 37 Add on Disk #1 25 Conquest of Japan 38. D&D Fantasy Empires 38 IBM Mac Aces of the Pacific WWII:1946 Aces Over Europe Campaign Dsk #1 Oct. B-17 Flying Fortress Battle of South Pacific 37 Baltletank Barbarossa Carriers at War Construction Kit Carrier Strike Expansion Dsk #1 Clash of Steel Fleet Commander Fleet Med Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Super Ships/Atlantic 19. Scenario Builder 25. America/Atlantic 19 . Bundle 49 Grigsby's War in Russia 47 High Command 44 Victory at Sea Designed by Jim Dunnigan, Victory at Sea will be the pre miere grand strategy Pacific Theater game on the market due to it's game depth and ease of play. .... IBM Mac A-Train 42 42 Const. Set 24 24 Air Bucks Battles of Destiny 37 Battlechess 22 32 Battlechess (Windows) 32. Battlechess 4000 VGA 32. Battlechess 4000 SVGA 37 Buzz Aldrin Race Space 42 Civilization 38 38 Civilization Windows 42 42 Civilization MPE Command HQ Classic 22. Design Your Own R.R. El-Fish Empire Deluxe Flight Sim 5.0 Global Conquest Goblins Grand Slam Bridge 2 34 . Grandest Admiral DecHong Kong Majong Pro 32. IBM Mac 4-D Boxing APBA Basball/WIN ATP Tennis All Amer Coll Ftbil 92 Andretti's Race Chall 16 Bill Elliot Nascar Car and Driver Front Page Football Pro 48 Grand Prix Hardball 3 MLBPA Players Disk 15. Stadium Disk Hockey League Sim2 29. John Madden Football 2 31 . Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro Banff Springs 19 Belfry Innisbruck Mauna Kea Pinehurst Microleague Baseball 4 33 38 38 IBM $45 ... Speed Racer Fiery crashes, icy mountain roads, and high speed leaps over rocky chasms. Drive the MACH 5 versus Racer X or Snake Oiler and the car acrobatic team. 9069 & !!!!!!! Battle Chess 4K (VGA) 32 Battle Chess 4K (SVGA)37 Battle Cruiser 2400 A.DTBA Bld. Manknd Fut.Space Dec Cyber Empires 32 Global Effect Global Conquest Lunar Command Maelstrom Mantis Speech Pack Masters of Orion Mechamander Mechwarrior 2 Meglomania Mercenaries Mercenaries 2 Pax Imperia Privateer Speech Pack 17 Reach for the Stars 26 28 Rules of Engagement 2 38 Spaceward HOI(WIN) 37. Spaceward HOIDOS) 37. Spectre Star Control 2 Pax Imperia The ultimate mulitplayer strategy adventure casts you as the leader on an expanding empire. You must lead your people into the vast frontiers of space. IBM $37 MAC $43 26 32 39 Incredible Machine 32. Incredible Machine 2 32 Lemmings 2 Lost Admiral 38 Sep Lost Admiral Enhanced Dec. 26 32 .. 20 . Pdoan. Buzz Aldrs Race/Sace 42 Commnche:Max Ovrkll 43. Expansion Dsk #1 25 . Expansion Dsk. #2 25 Conflict Korea Conflict Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin Empire Deluxe Scenario Disk Empire Deluxe (WIN) F-117A Nighthawk F-14 Fleet Defender F-15 2 Classic F-15 III Voice Commander Falcon 3.0 Mig-29 Op. Fighting Tiger Falcon MC Flight Sim 5.0 Grandest Admiral Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk #1 Halls of Montezuma 26 29 Harpoon 28 39 Battleset 2 or 3 19. Battleset 4 23 26 Harpoon Dsgnr Sries 16 32 Harpoon Dsgnr Sries 2 26 26 Harpoon Signature Edit 49 49 Harpoon 2 Hartier Assault Jet Fighter 2 Jump Jet M1 Tank Platoon MacArthur's War Patriot Perfect General WWII Scenario Great Battls 20th Cen25 Red Sky at Morning 39 Red Storm Rsng Classic22 Seal Team Warlords 2 Play the sequel to the highly addictive, award winning, Warlords! Now, Warlords 2 gives you more lands and races to conquer, a random map gen erator, and more! .. NCAA Road to Fnal 4 38 NFL Challenge NFL Coaches Football 33 NFL Video Pro Football 47 Pro League Baseball 37 Stratomatic Baseball 42 Tony Larussa Basball 2 37 92 Stats Disk ALINL Stadium's Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky 3 Hockey Lega Sim Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit 35 . Pacific War Panzer Battles 28 29 Red Sky at Morning Rommel North Africa 26 29 Secret Wepons Luftwaf 44. DO-335 20. HE-162 P-38 10 . P-80 30. Silent Service 2 Classic 22 . Task Force 1942 V for Victory Series Gold, Juno, Sword 39 39 Kasserine Pass DecDec Market Garden 43 43 Stalingrad DecDec Utah Beach 43 43 Velikiye Luki 43 43 Victory Pack 44 44 Victory at Sea 43 43 Western Front WWII:Battles of Pacific . D&D Stronghold 38 Battles of Civil War Series Vol.1 Vol.2 Vol.3 Dominion Gettysburg Gold of Americas Great War, The Inindo Jagged Alliance L'Emperuer Liberty or Death Man of War Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Paladin 2 Pirates! Gold Populous 1 World Editor Populous 2 Powermonger 31. Prelude to Jutland Railroad Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Deluxe 42 Rampart Red Baron Mission Builder 19 Seven Cities of Gold 32 Sid Meir Civil War 94 Siege & Dogs of War 19 Spoils of War 37 Uncharted Waters Vikings Fields Conquest 37 Warlords Warlords 2 .... Paladin II The long awaited sequel is no dis counted for the holi days! As an appren tice in the Order of Paladin you must earn the title of Paladin by undertak ing perilous quests. .. IBM $25 Keyboard Overlays 16 . 38 . 20 37 Legions 2 38 Strike Commander 49 Speech Pack Tactical Disk #1 Strike Squad 38 When Two World's War 38 Wing Commander 1 19 . Secr. Mssn 1 & 2 19. Wing Commander 1 Dlx 49 Wing Commander 2 49 Spec Ops.Disk 1 & 219eaSpeech Pack 13 Wing Commander Acad 33 X-Wing Add on Disk 20 . B-Wing 19. Perfect General WWII Disk Great Batt. 20th Cen 25. Perfect General EnhancDec. R.R. Tycoon Classic 22. R.R. Tycoon Deluxe 38 . SIMCity Supreme SIMCity Supreme 2 . 47 SIMCity 2000 SIMEarth SIMEarth (Windows) SIMFarm SIMLife 42 42 SIMLife (Windows) Socrates V3.0 Chess Dec Solitaires Journey 38. A-10 Tank Killer Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress Chuck Yeager Flight Commanche:Max Ovrkl F-15 Strike Eagle 3 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.01 Falcon 3.0 Pro Flight Simulator 4.0 Gunship 2000 Secret Weapons Luftwaf X-Wing eeeeeeeeeeee 32 42 . . 42 IBM $42 . "


"REVIEW LL AN EXTRA LOAD OF LANDRY fense from scoring on big plays? Like Landry himself, the game is not flashy. It comes with one high-density disk (3.5\" version) and a well-written 50-page manual. It's so elegant that installation takes only about one minute on a 486-based machine. TLSF includes on-line \"documentation\" (an encyclopedia of terms used in the game that turns out to be invaluable) and uses a simple mouse-driven basic interface with windows and click boxes, mostly in the gray, white and blue Cowboy colors. While there isn't a lot of complexity in the package, it's refreshing to see a game which does not contain major programming bugs. The Deluxe version is the same engine that drove the first version. League play was added, as was the ability to edit player ratings and print rosters and other information. Some new formations and pass patterns were added. Merit Software Updates Tom Landry's Strategy Football Exes and Ohs NADEL IS VARDS TO RICHARD TOUOHDOHRILL This is not an action game, so most of the by Jim Gindin product is centered around football strategy. Rather than providing a playbook, TLSF offers a set of formations and options. A typical Then Tom Landry coached the outs of defensive formations and allow fancy play might involve selecting the «power-I\" Dallas Cowboys, he was known pass patterns, but TLSF Deluxe provides the formation,\"right side\" as the \"strong\" side of V as a master strategist. He stood next step. Before any offensive or defensive the formation, \"inside run,\" \"counter left\" as calmly on the sidelines during games, dressed the running play and \"halfback\" as the ball like a professional on his way to the office. He carrier. With these options, thousands of never called attention to himself, and he 7701 plays are available, though only a subset make humbly passed on the credit for his success to a lot of sense. his Maker. While he was doing this, of course, he Defense is provided in a similar manner, simply coached the jocks off countless oppowith would-be coaches choosing from several nents. He constantly devised new defenses to formations, three types of pass coverage, and confound the complex offenses of the 1960s, available options for individual blitzing, key70s and 80s, and he tailored his offenses to ing on runners, or double-teaming receivers. make the most of the specific skills of the men Once offensive and defensive serups are who played for him. When fans think about play, the gamer can click the \"Landry\" butchosen, TLSF simulates the play. There is a strategy football, they think about Tom Lanton. This generates a screen full of informa graphics option available, which shows the dry. tion amounting to Landry's assessment of the result of the play, but impatient gamers are And that's clearly whar Merit Software had game situation, the expectations of the oppolikely to turn it off by the end of the first in mind when they hired Landry to help put nent, and a recommended plan of action. quarter of their first game. The graphics are rogether Tom Landry's Strategy Football, and \"Landry\" will even suggest a play. reminiscent of the early action football their latest release, TLSF Deluxe Edition. UnUsing this interface, players learn more games, with the result of the play often having fortunately, Merit Software ran into the same about game specifics. A football fan can unlittle to do with what is depicted on the screen. Ball carriers run through defenders as problem all artificial intelligence programderstand the dilemma inmers meer: it is impossible to shrink wrap the herent in coaching Tom Landry's Strategy Football human brain. It is impossible to take Tom against a team with an exLandry and his football vision and package cellent running back. them off to the nearest software store—at Should he constantly key TITLE: Tom Landry's Strategy Football Deluxe Edition PRICE: $49.95 least not in the 3.1 megabytes of hard disk the defense to follow that SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 286-12 Mhz or better (386 recommended), space TLSF Deluxe requires. back and risk having the 1MB RAM, VGA graphics, TLSF Deluxe was designed to meet a spe3.1 MB hard disc space, mouse. defense shredded by the # OF PLAYERS: 1 or 2, (modem to modem option) PROTECTION: passing game? Or should cific need within the football simulation Documentation look-up DESIGNER: Kerry Batts genre: teaching the strategy of football. Plenty he ler the runner get his PUBLISHER: Merit Software of games allow users to design playbooks, and hundred-yard Dallas, TX output (800) 238-4277 many of these same games explain the ins and and try to keep the ofIBM ISTILATEGY FOOTBALL Page 196 Computer Gaming World "


"Introducing FLIGHTSTICK PRO Flying The Best... . Just Gof Better Look for CH Products' VIRTUAL PILOT, FLIGHTSTICK, GAMECARD 3 AUTOMATIC, and our MACH series where you buy FLIGHTSTICK PRO. Fly The Best! 2 FLIGHTSTICK PRO is the ultimate combat stick for total command of the skies. Made to endure the toughest missions, FLIGHTSTICK PRO gives you the winning edge to take on even the worst enemy. With top gun precision, you can view your surroundings, activate radar, blast missiles, thrust into mach speed ... all at your fingertips. FLIGHTSTICK PRO includes a four-way switch to control weapons, radar, and viewing for more advanced games plus all the best features of FLIGHTSTICK. Great with flight simulation, auto racing, and any game that uses a joystick. For all IBM compatible computers. FLIGHTSTICK PRO. The most intense joystick you'll ever fly. PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619 598-2518 . FAX: 619-598-2524 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"INFRACTIOFREY CLIPPING LFGAINSTEG NEW YORK OPTION LOS ANGELES ACCEPT POSSESSIONTLINEW YORK NEW YORK DOL I STITOUCHDOWNT Merit Software did not ger permission to use NFL team names, logos or player names, the teams only mirror the NFL in terms of cities, divisions and approximate strengths. True to form, Dallas is nearly unbeatable. Individual players are ranked from one to nine in several categories. Dallas, for instance, has players with nine ratings in most categories. New England, the worst team in the league last year, has a lot of «fours» in many key individual categories. The ratings make a difference, but it is possible to field a team of \"ones\" in every category on defense and still win an occasional game. So the difference between a \"six» and an \"eight\" is very, very small. TLSF allows users to edit team and player ratings and create leagues with a variety of structures. (Just remember to use the return key when saving lineups or any customized changes will mysteriously disappear.) Only 32 players are provided with each team, including four special teams return men. No individual linemen exist on either offense or defense, which greatly limits the variety and enjoyment of putting together a good running attack. NEW YORK POSSESSION GOING RULES BLOWING PRECIP Month dan SMD Branlar olej ATOS if they weren't there and passes disappear into crowds of coverage without resolution. In PENALTY! some cases, nine defenders surround a receiver 30 yards downfield on a long pass play, five defenders standing in line like some helmeted version of the Rockettes. TLSF provides the now-standard VCR interface so users can replay, frame-by-frame, the graphic equivalent of the play. It's kind of like standing too close to an Impressionist painting at the National Gallery: the more defense was guessing \"run\" on most plays, but detail you see, the less you understand. Still, the counter play kept getting its four yards. aside from the graphical limitations, TLSF The same held true for the passing game. One receiver caught more than 560 yards' ITCH LADY STRATEGY FOOTBALL SCENARIO TIXE 15:00 O V NEW YORK OOO O QIR 10 TO GO worth of long passes in one game. Another LOS ANGELES D OOOOL DYOLUTE NEL YORK85 made 66 short receptions in another game. NEW YORK 10 TIME IS 300 D N 8185 Every single pass is thrown to the primary LOS ANGELES TO TO 60 110 receiver, except for long passes when a \"hot YARDLINE NEL YORK 35 receiver\" is allowed. Yet, this secondary receiver is rarely the quarterback's target. No matter how many times the same play is run, the computer \"Landry\" only provides a vague warning about mixing up play selection and kond Saare m aa using different receivers. does provide a realistic outcome for individual plays. Runs against run defenses don't A League Option Of Its Own gain a lot of yardage. Completion percentages League play is possible with TLSF. The decline against pass defenses. game comes with a good scheduling algoAs a tutorial, TLSF stops with the outcome rithm, and is designed for single-season reof the play. There is no \"Landry post-morplay. Computer versus computer game play tem\" button to provide an explanation of allows simulation of an entire week's worth what went right or wrong with the play. That of games in about two minutes on a 486would be a welcome addition, providing the based machine. The game even understands user with additional insight into how football the NFL's complex formulae for determining is played, but even Landry's advice before the playoff entry. play isn't terribly complere. There are only a When left on its own, results are fairly few advice screens available when the human realistic, with individual season totals a little coach is doing well and there's no mention of high due to the fact that injuries and fatigue the individual strengths of any player. are rare. Alas, the game only tracks a few The game is strongest on single-play simustatistics, with no mention at all of defensive lation, providing a scenario editor complete players, so statistics buffs will be disapwith weather options so users can try, for pointed. instance, repeated attempts to convert a The computer's Al provides balanced, unthird-and-seven against a pass defense while inspired play selection. A knowledgeable hubehind three points on a windy, snowy day man coach should garner more wins than late in the fourth quarter. The game as a losses against the Al. For the most part, the whole, however, is not as strong. Al will stay within the realm of accepted In the manual, the writers claim that the football strategy and won't recognize many unusual situations. game keeps track of user play selection. Unfortunately, this only means that the program TLSF Deluxe comes with 1992 teams. Since will use the data to determine the percentage Nurterback T SHREDDER of plays in which it will use a \"run\" defense INITTALIZE ALL VALUES TO 5 versus a \"pass\" defense. Even with the \"player Str 6 Qck Spd [2 fatigue\" option turned on, it was possible to Foc uind dura run the same running back on the same counter play with the same formation on every single offensive play in the game. One Leadership game featured a strong halfback running 87 Read Defenses 1 times for more than 460 yards and eight rouchdowns. Sure, by the fourth quarter the MVLSE ERREDDER 12 VARDSTO PETTIT TO THE ME Because TLSF can't use real player names, Racine TI SE can't nee real plaver names the the programmers made up their own. Many names are based on real players. «R. Peery\" and «B. Where\" quarterback for Detroit, where Rodney Peete and Andre Ware share duties in real life. Philadelphia features \"Travolta,\" \"Stallone\" and \"Hoffman\" on defense. In a form of political commentary rare in the sports game industry, \"B. Clinton\" and \"A. Gore\" quarterback the pitiful New England squad. LOS HEELES 081 SREEMAN H52 FBI MILLER The Post-Game Rap In the on-line documentation, Merit's programmers write, \"No game could ever be big enough to encompass all of his (Landry's] knowledge.\" That's certainly true, but if they had managed to digitized even half of his persona, this game could have had some of the feel of coaching in the NFL. As it is, TLSF's use of Tom Landry's picture on the box is a lot like Hallmark marketing itself with the image of William Shakespeare. CGW PORTED MCGEE ORIENI Short Medite Long COMPAvoid Ints 16 6 S FLI LES Page 198 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 12-93 Since 1982 fomputAbility_ Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm. Sat 11am-5pm FAX: (414) 357-7814 P.O. Box 17882 Milwaukee, WI 53217 IBM SOUND CARDS CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. SOUND SOUND BLASTER.16 BLASTER.16 Multi-CD SCSI-2 $ 159 $179 Tales of Magic: Proph. Shadow .. 24.95 Task Force 1942 ......... ....39.95 Task Force Admirals Pack ..... .. 44.95 Terminator Chess 31.95 The Dig 39.95 The Fighter 39.95 Tom Landry Deluxe Edition ....... 27.95 Tony La Russa Baseball ll ......... Tornado ............................. 47.95 Tornado Limited Edition ........... 56.95 Ultima Trilogy Il... ..49.95 ultima Undreworld II ......... 47.95 Ultima VII. . 47.95 Ultima VII Part 2: Silver Seed ... 20.95 Ultima VIII Pagan .................. 47.95 Ultrabots 3.5 ........................ 37.95 Undersea Adventure ............... 34.95 Uninvited Windows 3.5............25.95 Unnecessary Roughness .......... V for Victory #4: Gold Juno Sands 42.95 Vehicle Care .... 34.95 Vell of Darkness 17.95 Victory at Sea ... 42.95 Victory Pack 42.95 Video Jam 31.95 Walls of Rome 37.95 War in Russia ......... . 44.95 Warlords Il..... ..... 39.95 Wayne Greiske 3 . 34.95 When Two Worlds War ............ 34.95 Where...Carmen Past ............. 29.95 Where...Carmen SanDiego. Each 29.95 Where... Carmen Space ........... 39.95 Where... Carmen Space Deluxe .. 44.95 Where...Carmen USA Deluxe ... 39.95 Where... Carmen World Deluxe ..39.95 Winball for Windows .............. 25,95 Wing Commander Academy ...... 31.95 Wing Commander Deluxe Secret Missions Bundle ......... 20.95 Wing Commander Il..... 20.95 Special Operations 1...... 14.95 Special Operations 2 .... 14.95 Wizardry Trilogy II 34.95 World Atlas 4.0 windows ... 44.95 WWII Battles of the South Pacific 34.95 X Wing ....... X Wing Mission 1 19.95 Yserbius 24.95 with Advanced Processor $195 with Advanced Processor $209 MEDIA VISION Software available only on 3.5\" disk or premium packs. No individual 5.25\" disks are available PRO AUDIO Multimedia IC VIDEO BOARDS DIAMOND 6 $155 S115 S155/S155 NEW NEW NEW Pro Audio Studio 16XL $325 ........199 Speedstar Pro 1Mo, 24bit, 1280x1024..... Stealth 24 ISA/VLB ...... Stealth 1MG, 32,000 col. 1024x768... Stealth Pro SVGA ISA, 1280x1024, 16 color 1MB / 2MB... Stealth Pro VLB 1MB/2MB... Viper VLB 2MB. $235/5329 $245/$329 $399 beheeranda MODEMS Number Nine 9GXE, 1230 x 1024 NI, SVGA: LVL 10, 1MB LVL 11.2MB LVL 12.3 MB ......... M w Prodigy Starter Kit ith purchase of any Zoom Modeml Lemmings Il.. 31.95 Lengend of Kyrandia 2 37.95 Lenny's Music Toons. 39.95 Links 386 Pro... 39.95 Links Banll Springs for 386 Pro .. 19.95 Links Malina Kea for 386 Pre..... 19.95 Links Pebble Beach for 386 Pro.. 24.95 Lord of the Rings II: Two Towers 34.95 Lost in Time........ ... 34.95 Magic Candle Ill.... 37.95 Mario is Missing 34.95 Mario is Missing City Disk .... .. 17.95 Master of Orion 34.95 Math Magic 25.95 Mechwarrior II: The Clans .... 44.95 Metal and Lace ..... 29.95 Monopoly Deluxe Windows...... 27,95 More Incred. Machines for Win .. 29.95 More Incredible Machines ........ 34.95 Mortal Combat ...... 34.95 MS Entertainment Pak 1.2 or 3 .. 28.95 MS Golf for Windows. 42.95 National Lamp. Chess Maniac ... 41.95 NFL Coaches Club 34.95 NHL Hockey ................... 42.95 No Greater Glory ... ...... 19.95 Nomad .24.95 Operation Neplune ....... 34.95 Origin FX: Screen Saver 25.95 Pacilic Strike 49.95 Pacific Strike Speech Pack 17.95 Pacific War.. 44.95 Pacific Wars 44.95 Perfect General 34.95 Perfect General Greatest Battles 21st Century ..21.95 WWII Scenario Disk............ 21.95 Peter Pan: Story Painting ......... 31.95 PGA Tour Golf Course Disk for Win 17.95 PGA Tour Golf for Windows .... 37.95 Limited Ed. Course Disk ........ 17.95 Pinball for Windows 29.95 Plavram 20 29.95 Police Quest lll or IV ............... 39.95 Pool Shark .... ... 19.95 Postitronic Bridge .......... 48.95 Prince of Persia ll. ... 39.95 Print Shop Deluxe Comic Char... 27.95 Printshop Deluxe 1.2 DOS or Win 44.95 Privateer . . 47.95 Privateer Speech Pack ............ 17.95 Proto Star: War on the Frontier ..39.95 Putt Pult Goes to the Moon ....... 31.95 Putt Pult Joins the Parade ........ 31.95 Quarky Turbo Science .......... 29.95 Quarter Pole.... 29.95 Quest for Glory 3 of 4 ..... 39.95 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe 39.95 Reach for the Skies ... 19.95 Reader Rabbit 2 34.95 Realms of Arkania ....... 34.95 Red Baron ...... 39.95 Red Crystal .............. .. 34.95 Return of the Phantom . 34.95 Rex Nobular ......... . 39.95 RingWorld: Patriarch's Revenge . 34.95 Risky Woods .. 23.95 Romance of the 3 Kingoms II ..... 39.95 Royal Flush 29.95 Rules of Engagement Il ...........39.95 Science Adventure 2.0 ............ 34.95 Scrabbla Deluxe Edition for Win. 17.95 Seal Team ......... Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe 39.95 Serpent Isle (U7 Part 2) .... Seven Cities of Gold .. 31.95 Shadow Caster... Shadowgate for Windows ......... 31.95 Sharif on Bridge for Windows .... 29.95 Sharif on the Bridge Enhanced ... 44.95 Sim Ant DOS/Windows .... 29.95/34.95 Sim City 2000 ....................... 39.95 Sim City Classic ....... ... 24.95 Sim City DOS/Windows .... 29.95/34.95 Sim Earth / Windows ....... 29.95/29.95 Sim Farm ... 29.95 Sim Life.... 29.95 Slater and Charlie Go Camping .. 29.95 Smoking Gun Windows 25.95 Solitaire's Journey 34.95 Speed Racer ... 34.95 SpellCasting 301 ... 34.95 Sportsworks .... 29.95 SSNM-21 Seawoll 42.95 Star Trek: Judgement Rites .. 34.95 Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary 34.95 Slonekeep ... .44.95 Strategy Game .......... 29.95 Street Fighter II ... Strike Commander 36.95 Speech Accessory Pak 17.95 Tactical Special Operations 1..20.95 Strike Squad 37.95 Strip Poker 3 ........................ 29.95 Strip Poker Data Disks 2.46, ea 17.95 Strip Poker Pro Data Disks 11-6, ca.. 17.95 Strip Poker Pro SVGA 29.95 Strong Hold .. 37.95 Super-VGA Hartier 47.95 Syndicate ... 36.95 TA Break Pinball ....... 29.95 TA Break Pool ...... 29.95 5239 $349 $429 A320 Airbus ........ . ... 43.95 Aces of the Pacific ............ .. 44.95 Aces of the Pacific WWII 1946 ... 19.95 Aces Over Europe .................. 39.95 Alone in the Dark ................. 34.95 ... 34.95 Ambush at Sorinor ... .37.95 Archon Ultra..... 37.95 Bane of the Cosmic Forge... Betrayal at Krondor ........ 39.95 Bloodstone ....... ... 25.95 Blue and the Gray ............ 39.95 Bridge 7.0 29.95 Busytown -34.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific ...... 39.95 Carriors al War .... ..... 39.95 Carriers at War Construction Kit 34.95 Carriers at War Il... Castles il. 34.95 Challenge of the Five Realis 39.95 Civilization 44.95 Clouds of Xeon ............. 39.95 Coman. M.O.K. & Disk 11 Bndl .. 42.95 Coman. M.O.K. Mis. Disk 1 or 2.25.95 Companians of Xanth .............. 34.95 Conquered Kingdoms .............. 34.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant ....39.95 Cyber Race ... 39.95 D&D Fantasy Empires. 37.95 Dagger of Amonra...... 39.95 Dark Side of Xeen ...... 41.95 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands ... 47.95 Day of the Tentacle ....... 34.95 Detroit ......... .34.95 Dino Park Tycoon .............. Dinosaur Adventure..... 29.95 Dominion ... 37.95 Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys .... 24.95 Dr. Quandary..... 29.95 Dune II 31.95 Dungeon Hack ...... ..37.95 Dyno Quest 25.95 Earthquest Explorer ..... . ... 34.95 Ecoquest ll ...... . ..29.95 El-Fish/Electronic Aquarium..... 34.95 Elite 2 ...... 39.95 Empire Deluxe 34.95 Eric the Unready ........ 34.95 Eye of the Beholder Trilogy ....... 47.95 F-15 Strike Eagle Il Limited Ed. 51.95 Falcon 3.0 ....................... 44.95 Falcon Disk 1 Oper. Fighting Tiger24.95 Fantasy Empires .................... 37.95 Flashback ............. 31.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force ..... 39.95 Flight Sim, Aircraft Scenery Designer .. 29.95 Flight Sim. Pilot's Power Tools .. 24.95 Flight Sim. Scenery Collection Great Britain ......... 34.95 Flight Sim. Toolkit ............ ... 58.95 Flight Simulator 5, 0 3 9.95 Forgotten Castle ............ 47.95 Freddy Pharkas .. 39.95 Front Page Sports Football Pro .. 44.95 Gabrial Knight 39.95 Gambil 37.95 Gateway Tor ll .... 34.95 Geekwad Games of the Galaxy ... 21.95 Global Domination 34.95 Grand Slam Bridge II ............. 31.95 Great Naval Battles Admirals Pack48.95 Great Naval Balttes America In the Atlantic ........ . 20.95 Great Naval Battles Super Ships in the Atlanlic ..... 20.95 Grent Navel Battles Scenario Bullder ................. 25.95 Great War: 1914-1918 .............39.95 Greg Lemonds Bicycle ............. 31.95 Gunship 2000 VGA ................. 31.95 Gunship Scenario & Miss. Builder24.95 Hand of Fate. ..... .........36.95 Hard Ball lll Diamond Collection 39.95 Harpoon Designers' Series Il..... 25.95 Harrier Assull ...................... 34.95 34.95 Heirs to the Throne............ 34.95 High Command ................... 41.95 ... 41.95 Hired Guns ...... 34.95 Hayles Book of Games 3 .......... 29.95 Hunan Calculator ................ 34.95 Indy Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis..... 34,95 Innoecent Until Caught ..... 34.95 J. Nicklaus Signature Goll .. 39.95 Jordan in Flight ... 20.95 Jurassic Art ....... 48.95 Kasparov's Gambit .. .... 37.95 Kid Pix Companion .... 24.95 Kid Pix for Windows .... 36.95 Kid Works 2 34,95 Kin's Ransom............. 31.95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced ..... .39.95 King's Quest G 44.95 Kings Table ... .24.95 Kronolog .39,95 Kye Deluxe .............. 24.95 Lands of Lore .... 33.95 Legacy. The .. 39.95 Legends of Valor ... .... 17.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5/6... 24.95 / 39.95 Lemmings ... 19.95 O ATI Technologies GRAPHICS ULTRA. V.32 bis Send/Receive 14.400 for DOS or Windows Int. / Ext.............$125/$155 V.Fast Class 24.4 bis VFX25K Int/VFX24K Ext..$169/$195 Supra Corporation Sd Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal Fax Software, DOS/Windows ....S135 SupraFaxModem V.32 bis, Ext. alone$225 Fax Software, DOS/Win ...........$235 Graphics Ultra Plus No compromise Graphics for Windows & Multimedia Video! 1 MB / 2MB.........$209 / $229 Graphics Ultra Pro 2MB Professional Graphics & Multimedia Video for the Uncompromising User! VLB/EISA............$349 / $375 * 37.95 an 2) .. .... 47.95 JOYSTICKS 800-554-9925 ......$32 .................. Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick ..... Eliminator Game Card .................... S30 PC MouseStick.... .. $75 CH Products: Virtual Pilot / Virtual Pilot Pro$69/889 Flight Stick......... ......... $39 Hi Speed Adaptor $19 Gamecard 3-Aut/Gamecard 3-PS/ $49 MACH 3 Joystick ............... $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke.. VIANA Flight Yoke ........................... $65 MAXX Pedal..... ................. Kraft: Kraft KG3. $17 Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler ....S55 Kraft Thunderstick .. Thrustmaster: Flight Control ..... $75 Weapons Control Mark II ........ $99 Rudder Pedals $119 Thrustmater Pro bude pro........................ $119 .. 34.95 $39  One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses.  All Products Sold . Corporate Government & Carry Manufacturers' School POS Welcome. Full Warranties & Documentation. VISA Mastercard  APO. FPO HI. AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards orders welcome: 6%. Most Orders Shipped Min. S6. International within 48 Hours. Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: S5 per order, not per title. 15%-Min. SIS. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. $5. exceeds calculated amount .C.O.D orders welcome. you'll be billed additional with only a $6.00 Charge.  Call for Free Catalog  We Ship Latest Version & Items Not Listed Personal or company check allow 14 working days to clear prices fluctuate beyond our control may change for better or worse. Tefective telun must have Return Authorization number. Call our ! XIX to obtain a Return Authorization or your return will not be accepted. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. All les are final. All retums are subject to a restocking fee. ................... Circle Reader Service #52 "


"REVIEW MEN OF COWAR     HTC Electronic Arts' Kasparov's Gambit ing straightforward, with the Glossary functions, the Tutorials are an excelIGAMBIT directory taking up lent way to start from square one. a maximum of 11 MB of hard drive space. The only difficulty Hypermodern Opening I encountered during installaGambit certainly qualifies as a multimedia rion was configuring Gambit's chess game. Using digitized video clips of sound drivers to suit my Pro Kasparov, the World Champion can provide Audio Spectrum 16. However, the player with real-time coaching during a experience with the PAS16 game. Execute a bad move and Kasparov leads me to believe that Gambit shakes his head saying, «I don't think you're was being victimized by a stubon the right track, now...\" An eccentric move born sound card, instead of causes the puzzled Kasparov to remark \"I had vice versa. New gamers will not considered this move!\" While a number find the manuals clear and of different clips are present, they began to concise, explaining installagrate within a day or two and were turned off tion, possible technical probaccordingly. For players in a pinch for hardlems, and the game's NOTE numerous features well. A brief explanation of the rules of chess is provided, in addition to an enlightening history of the game itself. The story of Garry Kasparov's rapid rise to the World Championship, and the suspicious maneuvers that sought to block it, certainly make interesting readdrive space, the 3MB video subdirectory can by Bryan Walker be deleted with no effect on the game, proBook Openings vided the Video option is turned off in the Coaching Setup panel. Some gamers will With computer chess being To other game in recorded history has N ood likely follow my lead and deactivate the video attained the global appeal and enplayed on home systems for some 15 years, truly original features are becoming scarcer during elegance of chess. Unfortuoption, but this feature could be just the nately, the electronic glitter of today's gaming ticket to keep a youngster's attention. than hen's teeth. Due to this, owners of prevenues has made the engrossing subtlety of vious titles such as Chessmaster 3000 will find While on the subject of player attention, chess easy to lose sight of. Luckily for chess a number of familiar features in Gambit. Even few are going to be able to resist the SVGA fans of all skill levels, Heuristic Software has though it's a DOS-based program. Gambit graphics mode Gambit offers. The 3-D playhas an attractive window-based graphic interractive window-based graphic interteamed with the energetic and charismatic ing boards are absolutely stunning in SVGA, face that allows individual windows to be with the pieces sliding and scaling with inFIDE World Champion chess player, Garry sized and moved about the screen. Much like Kasparov, to produce the next step in PC credible smoothness. Each of the three differa true Windows application, the player has a ent 3-D sets are great show-off items when chess games: Kasparov's Gambit (Gambit). great deal of flexibility in designing his own visitors ask to see what a PC can really do. Garry Kasparov has been aware that a void \"environment.\" Moving pieces and selecting has existed in the computer chess industry for J'Adoube options is also a simple point-and-click affair. some time. The \"artificial intelligence\" of The VCR-style control panel allows the While other chess programs also have the chess programs has been getting stronger, but player to scroll through a game's move list, ability to customize computer opponents, little has been done to help the human intelpause a game in progress, ask for hints, or Gambit offers a unique and effective apligence on the other side of the board become force the computer opponent to move immeproach. The Aggressiveness, Creativity, Ata stronger player. It's a sure ber that most hat most diately. Like some earl diately. Like some earlier titles, Gambit also tentiveness, Orthodoxy and Strength of each readers have already had a chess program has tutorials, famous games, and various play computer opponent can be modified using a thrash them repeatedly. For the accoming boards to select from. The 121 clear and simple graphic sliding scale. In addition, the plished player, this level of challenge is fine. logical tutorials opponent's Opening PreferHowever, those trying to learn and enjoy the cover the full Kasparov's Gambit game can be frustrated by a chess program range of chess funwhose primary concern is victory alone, with damentals for the Kasparov's Gambit PRICE: no real emphasis on teaching better chess. beginning player, REQUIREMENTS: 386SX-16MHz, 2 MB RAM (EMS), VGA graphics, Opposing this philosophy, Gambit's ambiand can be sorted 11 meg bytes of hard disk space, DOS 5.0 or higher: tious goal is to challenge a Master chess and viewed by Roland sound cards supported. (486DX, mouse, player, while dramatically improving the casColor, Theme or 512K SVGA card recommended.) PROTECTION: ual gamer's play with powerful coaching feaDESIGNERS: Opening criteria. Julio Kaplan, Ralph Nagel, with Garry Kasparov PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts tures. San Mateo, CA Along with the (415) 571-7171 The installation of Gambit is simple and on-line Help and TITLE: $59.95 IBM SYSTEM: Adlib, SoundBlaster, Pro Audio Spectrum and None Page 200 Computer Gaming World "


"Fulfill The Ancient Prophesy Forgotten Castle The Awakening 8888 Your Father, the last king of Alonia, failed his quest to liberate the realm from inhuman tyrants. Now it's your turn. As Tris, the last heir to the throne, it's your destiny to match sword and sorcery against the foul Ruzakian Hord. Seek incredible magicks to augment your power as you delve into the conquered city of Hedburg. A virtual 3-D fantasy world awaits your next command Explore the dangers of the Old City, pit your awesome might against horrible creatures in a dark dungeon. Fight well and you may free the kingdom. Discover the Forgotten Castle and you may learn of your father's fate...  Cinematic animation sequences unfold stories of mystery.  Fully digitized musical score and sound effects.  Combat system has adjustable skill levels. Monsters, characters, magic items and props are rendered with full 3-D effects.  A smooth scrolling virtual world, complete with unparelled realism for die-hard fantasy role playing enthusiasts! TWIN DOLPHIN Circle Reader Service #132 GAMES, INC. 1993. Twin Dolphin Games Inc. Forgotten Castle and Twin Dolphin Games are trademarks of Twin Dolphin Games, Inc. IBM Is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"ence can be changed from Tournament/Best, Classical, Hypermodern, Aggressive or the beginner's Starter Book lines with a click of the mouse. Choosing the «Player Preference» option allows the computer opponent to choose the opening strategy suited to its chosen playing-strength values. D22 schoice. In Games, La players the enli TOORWOOR Find the best move for While move for Okay) Ouomet Sparing Lady Godiva Ben Arnold SP Another new feature lies in the animated Analysis Board option. Using this, the player can peek into the problem-solving processes of the game, observing the moves and combinations as they're played out in rapid \"what if\" fashion. The text portion of this feature displays a number of variables, including the astonishing number of positions per second the computer is calculating. A very significant new feature Gambit brings to the board is the ability to rate the gamer's play using the Elo system. When activated, this feature makes note of the player's strengths and weaknesses, and provides a rating between 800 and 2800. While the ratings seemed to be inflated by 200-400 points, this feature is still very useful to players of all skill levels, becoming increasingly more accurate after 40-50 games have been played. In addition, the game presents a brief text description of the player's tendencies, as well as the strengths and weaknesses of the computer opponents. each time it's called upon. The first hint will option windows quite cumbersome, at times. be very general, such as «Move your Knight.» Saving a game preserves only the move list, the second hint might say «Move your leaving the player to manually reselect the Knight at F3.» The third Hint will make the opponent, and tediously scroll through the move automatically, allowing the player to moves to restart the game at the next session. see what the program thinks is the best The Coach is also prone to \"crying wolf,\" choice. In replaying the huge library of 500 suddenly claiming that a perfectly safe piece Famous Games, Kasparov's anecdotes and ETUDE CONOCOTORROR 19802 analysis will help players understand the unique flavor of each game. The enlightening commentary on the Famous Games alone is worth the price of admission, as it presents Kasparov's views and alternate strategies in thought-provoking style. Like the Tutorials, the Famous Games can be sorted by Color, Theme or Opening, helping the player follow a particular learning point through several games. Many of the important terms and is in danger. Usually, the program retracts concepts in Kasparov's comments are highthese mysterious outbursts within a few seclighted in green, indicating that the player onds, but they can still be disruptive. The need only click on that word for a full definiCoach has also taken a cue from the Departtion from the Help/Glossary feature. The ment of Redundancy Department, occasionQuiz option is another entertaining and edually giving hints and tips two or even three cational feature which can pounce upon an times in rapid succession. unwary player while viewing a Famous Game. Gambit might suddenly ask the player In the bug-infested world of PC games, I to find the best move at the game's critical uncovered only one glitch in the game that juncture, patiently prompting until the coraffected play. While chasing down the opposrect choice is made. It's a bit of a thrill to ing king during an endgame, Gambit simply suddenly be thrust into the middle of a hisrefused to move in the allotted time, but the toric game, with the World Champion asking game did not crash. Discussions with Nawhat to do next! tional Master Hal Bogner of Electronic Arts ODZE Carnivorous Kasparov For the one percent of players who can actually beat a modern chess program on cqual terms, Gambit is more than willing to 444 take the kid gloves off. In fact, the \"Socrates II\" engine at the heart of Gambit won the 1993 International Chess Championship of the Association of Computing Machinery. Incredibly, Gambit's engine took on the supercomputer-powered \"Cray Blitz\" program revealed that this glitch was thought to have and fought to a draw! With such established been ironed out during development. His performance, I wasn't surprised to find Gamopinion was that the program knew that debit soundly defeating the other chess pro feat was inevitable, and was getting conflictgrams I tested it against in informal ing flags on how to move. I figured that, like competition. With the «Kasparov\" computer Joshua\" in the movie Wargames, the proopponent playing in the full-bore «Serious\" gram may have discovered the only way to mode, the program can play at an Elo rating win was not to play... of around 2400. I found the Aggressive and Hypermodern opening books playing such En Passant ruthless lines in \"Serious\" mode that I began While there's only so much that can be to wonder if Gambit might need to be fed a done with a game older than most nations, digital watch every few days. Kasparov's Gambit deserves a serious look Poisoned Pawns from any gamer interested in learning chess, or learning to play better chess. The superior Being a DOS-based program trying to coaching features, huge game library, beautiemulate a Windows-type environment, ful SVGA graphics, and powerful engine Gambit's interface can be a tad awkward. The place it above any PC game on the market. mouse response wasn't particularly crisp, It's now the only chess game on my system, with the movement and sizing of the different and I can't seem to find my watch... CGW TETERSONE COLOR Put Me In, Coach! Without question, many players are going to find Gambit's greatest strengths lie in the Coaching, Hint, Quiz and Famous Game Famous Game features. The Coaching option provides tactical tips, insights, suggestions and warnings during play, pointing out contingencies that the player may not have considered. The Hint option is a three-stage function that provides increased assistance for a position JURE SYSTEM DE COACH PELA Page 202 Computer Gaming World "


"TWO REASONS WHY FLIGHT SIMULATORS WILL NEVER BE THE SAME... "


"THE FIRST SUPER-VGA FLIGHT SIMULATOR SUPER-VGA HARRIER ADVANCED visual world, where objects are sharper, cleaner and can be seen for miles. Drom the flight fanatics at Domark I comes the first-ever strategic flight simulator designed for full-screen SVGA graphics technology. This is not a typical flight sim. SUPER-VGA HARRIER blows the competition out of the sky with super-fast, silky smooth screen update at twice the resolution! Now you can experience a much larger \"Harrier receives extremely high marks for graphics which are the best I've ever seen BETTER THAN FALCON. The explosions and ground detail are really great.\" PC SOURCES MAGAZINE \"After playing Harrier in SVGA, all other flight-sims look like they are being played through a telescope... Not so long ago, a few glimpses at multimillion dollar serious flight simulators produced memories of images not far from those present in Harrier; very simply, it's that good.\" STRATEGY PLUS MAGAZINE Screens shown: 640 x 480 256-color SVGA resolution DISTRIBUTED BY Spectrum IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available October 1993 HoloByte DOMARK Visa/MC orders: call 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) Super-VGA Harrier  Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Lid. Graphics by the Kremlin, Sound by Martin Walker. Produced by Jim Tripp. Falcon is a trademark of Spectrum HoloByte. 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite, 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #57 "


"FIRST-EVER COMPREHENSIVE FLIGHT MODELING SOFTWARE FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT Heboh ADVANCED Sim-Serie CREATE YOUR OWN PLANES. FST is revolutionary. It's powerful, sophisticated, and OBJECTS & BATTLEFIELDS easy to use. Technophiles will IN SUPER-VGA! appreciate the attention to detail-cockpits include modDomark set the standard the first 3-D flight modeling e rn instrumentation, such as with SUPER-VGA HARRIER, the software ever produced for your OBI, DME, and Glidescope first-ever SVGA strategic flight PC, is Domark's second offeras well as the ability to build simulator. Now, we're pushing ing in its ADVANCED SIM-SERIES\" every detail of their sim world. that standard to new heights! state-of-the-art flight simula In a hurry? Not interested FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT, tor product line. in building every last plane, tree, truck, valley or skyscraper? No problem. Just check out the extensive library of clip-art imagery: aircraft, ground targets, landscapes and objects. You'll be streaking through the heavens in no time! FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT. YOUR AIRCRAFT. YOUR LANDSCAPES. YOUR MISSIONS YOUR WORLD. DISTRIBUTED BY Screens shown: IBM 256-color SVGA displays. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available November 1993 Requires Windows 3.1 Flight Simulator Toolkit 1993 Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin. DO MARK Spectrum HoloByte Holobyte todo como Visa/MC orders call 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite, 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #70 "


"Letters From Paradise ESPANA Frying Our Canadian Bacon The article, \"Atlantic Breakout,\" by H.E. Dille, shows your magazine has sacrificed editorial integrity for vindictive irresponsible journalism. You took a \"real world\" event, convoy ON 115, and surrounded it with a completely fabricated scenario (by your magazine's own admission) that claims the Canadian navy is responsible for a cataclysmic maritime disaster which, in reality, never took place. Moreover, the article states that because \"the Canadians had botched it,\" the American naval services had to step in and assume Canadian escort duties in the North Atlantic. Such an implication is utter malicious nonsense. The truth is: during World War Two, the USN, superior to the Canadian navy in virtually every capacity, performed with such mediocrity in the North Atlantic as to exasperate the Royal Navy. At the end of 1942, A. V. Alexander, First Lord of the Admiralty, recommended to Prime Minister Winston Churchill that all Canadian and American escorts be removed from the North Atlantic for training because of gross inadequacies in both navies' conduct of anti-submarine warfare. Example: protection of convoy ONS 92 by an American-led Mid-Ocean Escort Force (MOEF) was such a failure, Commander J.B. Heffernan, USN the Senior Officer Escort was removed from command. Later, in 1943, that same MOEF group lost 27 ships in backto-back convoys, in exchange for only one U-boat sunk. Compare that to ON 115 (the real one). Two ships were sunk and another damaged under Canadian escort, but the Germans lost U-558 while two others suffered such a hammering they sailed straight back to port for repairs. Withour question, general USN and US Coast Guard performance in WW2 was outstanding, and the Canadian navy was woefully lacking in many areas, but in North explanation. ON 115 retains the historical sigAtlantic escort duties they achieved the same nificance of being one of the first concerted degree of success. Each had its victories and U-boat efforts of the campaign, wherein eight to its disasters. More pointedly, the escort sailors its disasters More pointedly nine members of the wolf pack converged and of both countries-often working togetherharassed the convoy for five days straight. I fought with unbridled tenacity and tireless concur with your assessment of the Canadians valour against a superior foe who sometimes valeur actual performance during this engagement, outnumbered the escorts by as much as four which reflected professional screening and counto one. terattacking, but the actual engagement did not Your article is a spiteful insult to these contain surface actions against the Kriegsmasailors. As for the Canadian navy, the article rine, either. is a stupid, unprovoked, unjustified misrepresentation of facts. How would your AmeriNumerous historians have contended that, if can readers feel if a Canadian magazine Hitler had used his surface raiders in conjuncpublished a scenario such as \"because the tion with U-boat actions, the entire complexion USN was incompetent, the Royal Canadian of the Atlantic conflict would have changed. Navy had to step in and save American ass at With this firmly in mind, it seemed logical and Guadalcanal\"? Your article is inexcusable justified, within the context of historical fiction, R.D. Newman, Captain, Canadian Forces Canadian Forces to alter the events of ON ID to alter the events of ON 115 to introduce to introduce Hornell Heights, Ontario, CANADA Scharnhorst and Tirpitz to the tactical hypothesis, much as the programs under review do. Such H.E. Dille responds: an appearance might have resulted in the debacle alluded to in the fictional introduction, as Captain Newman, I believe the umbrage you none of the escort ships in service at that time, have taken with the article in question is a either Canadian or USN, had equivalent firereflection of several separate elements being power. taken out of context with the theme of the complete work. \"Atlantic Breakout\" reviewed Finally, the comment which seems to have three expansion sets for SSI's Great Naval Batgenerated your greatest consternation, \"...the tles: North Atlantic product line. The overall Canadians had botched it,\" is nothing more goal of these products was to allow users to than a speculative appraisal of what a Raymond explore alternative history. In fiction, as well as Spruance might have thought, bitterly, if Admigaming, the alteration of historical events to ral King had been successful in snatching him illustrate a theme or explore alternative develop away from the command that he truly desired in ments is a widespread practice. the Pacific. Again, the practice of stepping inside As the major theme of two of the add-on sets the minds of characters in a work of fiction is involved expanded American presence in the also widely accepted, and is not a reflection of North Atlantic Conflict, the inclusion of some my personal beliefs, nor those of my publisher. fictional background to justify the diversion of As a brother Naval Officer of fifteen years expeUSN assets away from the Pacific Theater ofrience, operating in conjunction with many dif Operations was appropriate. Raymond ferent NATO Navies, including the Canadians, Spruance was a natural choice as the center piece I admire the professionalism I have had the of the fiction, as Admiral Ernest King's desire to benefit of witneecing I reoretan misconcentions have him in the Atlantic was well documented, ted, that may have been generated by the blend of but the motivation for his presence still required he motivation for his presence still requirea fact and fiction which was purposefully conPage 206 Computer Gaming World "


"WELL, HERE WE ARE IN ASANTASLEAU. NICE TABLEAU INSIDE YOUR BODY FOR WARMTH I SMELL WET PUPPY DOGS! Not ME. SAMA DISTURBANCE IN MY AYRA TOLLS ME WERE NEARING AN OUTPOST OF THE UNSAVORY EMPIRE OF MALEVOLENCE CHEEZY. STORMTROOPING LOWER, SAM AIM AT THE BIG PINK ROUND PART MAYBE THEY'RE COOKING PORK RINDS SHOULD WE INTERROGATE THEM SAMY OR JUST START BREAKING UP THE FURNITURE? THIS 15 THE ONLY LANGUAGE THOSE COLD-EYED SCUMBUBBLES CAN UNDERSTAND MABULLYS FOOLS! THEY WERE DECEIVED BY OUR ! STOP WHINING, SAM YOU'LL GET HIM NEXT TIME. AP 9 ceyou Ever AD About SUOTING AN ELES HAT BUT YOU DON'T MIND KICKINGA HOUSELOAD OF THEM INTO THE STRATOSPHERE. ONCE I WEPT LIKE A WOMAN, MAXI REALIZED NOTHING COULD BE MORE RE FRESHINO THAN A SENSELESS ACT OF VIOLENCE I GOLOVE SWORN IT WAS Beste GSINS THEY WERE USI depends on time played. Some gamers spend more than $100 per month; FREELANCE TM &  1992 BY STEVE FRIUL some keep their charges below $20. POLICE LETTERED BY: L. LOIS BUHALIS The question with regard to children is a way of monitoring our readers' needs with regard to coverage of children's software. If you have no children, you have no need to circle any letter in that area. PLEASE Exercising The Damon As an avid WWII historian, I bought my personal computer in anticipation of Aces Over Europe. What's taking so long? I thought they had the basic engine laid out from the excellent Aces of the Pacific simulation. Isn't it just a matter of changing a few shapes and markings on the planes and PRESTO? Matt Zimmerman San Francisco, CA Yes. Yes it is. It's hand painting each box that is taking the time. NON FONTORETS OF Seriously, some of the code was reused, but there is new AI to reflect the different tactics used in Europe, and all the new data and art were input. Since the planes have significantly more detail than those in Pacific, the frame rate runs about the Mphlg9! same as the earlier game unless the gamer reduces the detail level to that of Pacific. In the latter case, it runs faster than the earlier game. As of press For those who haven't had the pleasure of meeting Steve Purcell's pals, Sam & Max, CGW is pleased to present a series of their cartoons, originally appearing in LucasArt's in-house magazine, The Adventurer. Sam & Max will soon time, the final bug hunt was on, and be starring in a feature-length game, Sam & Max Hit The Road, scheduled for a holiday season release. the game was expected to be complete by the time this issue hit the stands. structed for this work and hope that my response Two more things. One, when you put Buzz stands. to your inquiry alleviates your concerns. Aldrin's Race Into Space from Interplay on your Top 100 list, put down an «A» for me. Id Infinitum Modem Times It is one of the most entertaining, yet educarional, games I've played in a long time and I Do you have any new information I am looking into the possibility of actually await the CD-ROM version (if and when I on Apogee/ld 3-D games? using my fax/modem I bought a year ago, but get a CD-ROM drive, that is). Two, in your Brandon Lackey know little about the various services (i.e. free Reader Inquiry Service card, which letter Bakersfield, CA CompuServe, GEnie, etc.). I would apprecido you circle if you have no children? Id Software became so caught up in the proate some information as to what exactly they Brian Czaja duction of the Super Nintendo version of can do (besides tell me the weather) and name Massapequa Park, NY Wolfenstein 3-D (where the dogs have become some which you recommend most highly for rats and the Gestapo have become almost extraboth general use and price. terrestrial aliens) that the ship date for Doom listing of all the games of which we were aware has been rescheduled for early December of this Your August article, \"The Great Underon commercial telecommunications networks. year: ground Empire,» has piqued my interest in That issue of the magazine may still be purthe world of multi-player role-playing. Howchased as a back issue and would be the best A Ziff In Time ever, Mr. Brassil left out one important facsource of that information until the September tor: price. Two questions: first, what would a 1994 issue (#122), when we will once again Congratulations on your team-up with well-seasoned veteran in the world of rolefeature a special section on games via telecomZiff-Davis—I think. Was this a hostile takeplaying games expect to pay on the average, munications networks. The May coverage listed over? I hope the new boss will not change the per day (hour, year, ...), and secondly, in prices for all of the games, but the Multi-Player friendly and irreverent nature of CGW. I also general, which onc(s) do you recommend Games Network has reduced its pricing since hope the bean counters don't redo the postmost highly, including the price factor. that issue went to press. As for the price, it age paid CGW Poll cards: a trademark of this LEAD PAINT ON THOSE TOYS S PEAU. SAM YOU'RE REALLY A CARING December 1993 Page 207 "


"magazine and emblematic of CGW's cooperative outlook toward its readers. While I look forward to the changes, don't get too glitzy on us! 1. Madden St. Louis, MO I'm sorry to hear that you've been bought by Ziff-Davis. I guess this means that CGW will become nothing more than another voice for Microsoft. I will not be subscribing. Patrick Sklenar Coventry, CT Actually, the Ziff-Davis deal was a hospitable spitable takeover. As for getting too glitzy, it is our intent to make sure that the design reflects the content and vice-versa. Ziff Davis purchased us because they liked what we were doing and believed that our editorial philosophy was compatible to their philosophy. As for other Ziff publications providing Microsoft propaganda, I can only say that I believe this would come as a great shock to Microsoft. A lot of people think Bill Machrone (PC Week and PC Magazine) and John Dvorak (PC Magazine) have an anti-Microsoft bias. When columnists are shot at from both sides, it is often a good sign that they have some sort of objectivity. Sounding Off amplified speakers or your music system. Another option would include the use of a low cost Great article on Sound Cards in the new mixing board from Radio Shack. Output from issue. However, both cards would run into the mixing board 1) it looks as though part of the concluding ding where a single output would run into your single remarks didn't get printed; 2) since the authors mentioned that one set of speakers. This is a handy way to have option is to have a SB card for digital sounds precise volume control at your fingertips. and then add a Roland for General Midi, I. You would select the Sound Blaster card for would like to see a follow-up article on how your speech and your Roland for the music this would be donc. (How do you hook up separately in a given game's hardware installaboth cards to the same set of speakers and tion. which card do you select when installing the Both cards would require separate IRQS. A game. Would both cards use the same IRQ?): and standard configuration is to have the Sound 3) in 3) since they mentioned CD-ROM interBlaster on IRQ (interrupt)7, I/O at 220. The faces on a (sound) card, I need to know if you Roland (or most wavetable cards) default at IRO need one on a sound card for a CD-ROM 2, I/O 330. program to work with it or if a normal SCSI 3) Depending upon which CD-ROM vou controller will do. bave, games may run with both configuraChristions-a CD-ROM drive will run either off of Prodigy your sound card, such as the 50 pin SCSI host Mike Moondawg Weksler responds: on the Pro AudioStudio card or, the proprietary 1) That comma at the end of the article should 1) That comma at the end of the article should 40 pin Panasonic host on the Sound Blaster Pro have been a period. Our editor inserted a sencards. A CD-ROM drive may also run off of a tence rambling on about how inadequate home dedicated SCSI host card. Games don't seem to theater is in its current incarnation, but it really care one way or the other, although it would be didn't matter. in your best interest to get the fastest CD-ROM 2) With regard to hooking up speakers when interface for your computer. An example would running digital audio out of one card and wave be one of the 16-bit SCSI host cards which have table synthesis out of the other, you have a few some RAM on them to speed things up a bit. One options. One would be to run the Line Out from small point worth mentioning is that the CDthe wave table synthesis card (ie, the Roland) ROM host on the sound card should be disabled into the Line In on your digital sound card (i.e. when running a stand-alone SCSI host so the the Pro AudioStudio). Then, you can run a Line two cards do not conflict with each other. We Out from your digital sound card to either your hope these tips help. Cow PSYCHOLOGY ON A DISK MS-DOS Personal Edition The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant ORIENT Psychology is a challenge. Are you up to it? Can you fool the lie detector? Will you be able to design a test to find the missing psychiatric patient? Can you create a super-strong rat by winning the Shaping Game? Will you be able to beat the computer in the Three-Word competition? The thirteen games and simulations on this disk were designed by psychologists at a major university. Has your gaming given you the psychology skills you will need for this new kind of challenge? Or will psychology help you to sharpen your gaming skills? PSYCHOLOGY ON A DISK is available for only $24.95 plus $4.00 shipping and handling. Send check or money order to CMS Academic Software, P. O. Box 5777, Dept. CGW, Santa Fe, NM 87502-5777. Please specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk. MD residents add 5% sales tax; NM residents add 6.125% sales tax. SO POORLY DOCUMENTED IS THE SOFTWARE THAT ROY IS BETA TESTING THAT HE FAILS TO NOTICE THAT THE GAME RULES TO \"TWISTER\" HAVE ACCIDENTALLY BEEN INCLUDED. Circle Reader Service #48 Page 208 Computer Gaming World "


"The Book Store CGW Presents... WCHUCKYCAQERS AIR COMBAT CIVILIZATION EMPIRE URUESIN Empire Deluxe, The Official Strategy Guide by CGW On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Prima $19.95 This indispensable companion to Empire Deluxe offers: explanations of troop movement through exploration, discovery and battle; tables for every combat situation; secrets of waging economic warfare; and information on engaging other players by modem. The Official Guide To Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE Books $12.95 U.S. The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game; learn to defeat each of the tycoons; manipulate the stock market to your advantage; and learn optimal building and survey techniques. Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by CGW On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Prima $24.95 Special features: floppy disk with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. The PC Games Bible by Paul Rigby and Robin Matthews Sigma $20.00 CGW's British correspondents describe over 2,000 computer games in short \"Taking A Peek\"-size tidbits. Sid Meier's Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. -Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements; 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as 17 ways to cheat and more than 20 ways to win. Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler Prima $18.95 U.S. Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MiG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Falcon 3.0 Air Combat Pete Bonanni and Bernard Yee Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Bonanni provides the insights of a trained Falcon pilot; Yee provides the perspective of an experienced game reviewer; and CGW's own Mike Weksler tells gamers how to maximize their computer systems in this useful book of tactics and campaign management for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0. The Official Lucasfilm Games Air Combat Strategies by Rusel DeMaria and George Fontaine Prima Publishing $18.95 History, tactics and programming insights are blended together into this compendium of strategies for Larry Holland's best-selling WWII air combat series. The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 I salute Jobuny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. -James Lovelock The SimEarth Bible is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Each time we read this book we learned something, because it explains the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three hints. START Magazine Wing Commander I & II: The Ultimate Strategy Guide by Mike Harrison Prima Publishing $18.95 Filtered through the viewpoint of Lt. Col. Carl T. LaFong, a fictional pilot, Harrison's book assists gamers in mastering the game in a logical, lincar fashion. The Harpoon Battlebook by James De Goey Prima Publishing $18.95 In addition to providing a solid guide to Harpoon tactics, The Harpoon Battlebook offers new scenarios, additional information on weapons platforms and handy reference tables. THE OITIGIL Cut To THE MAIL HORD YWOUS THE SIMEARTH BIBLE TYCOON GAMES BIBLE Use order form bound into this magazine to order books. "


"REVIEW Plant The Silver Seed And Watch Britannia Grow Origin's Add-in Disk Expands The Serpent Isle by Scorpia Though the Avatar has often stood packs to try keys one at a time or becoming newly-found Amuler of Balance, which he alone against the forces of evil in the confused over look-alike keys. hands to the Avatar and says, in essence, Ultima universe, Origin's Silver Seed The second is the Ring of Endless Reagents. \"figure out what it does, because we don't cannot. It is an add-in disk for Ultima VII, With this nifty item in hand you can kiss your know.» As it turns out, the amulet is used on Part Two: Serpent Isle which requires that bag of reagents good-bye. No more reagents a serpent gate to transport the party back to a serpent gate to tu Serpent Isle reside on your hard drive in order to buy, ever again. The spells you can cast are the past, to the time when the war between to play. There is little point in buying this limited only by magic points. It's nice to look Order and Chaos was in full swing. add-in disk if you have already finished Serat the spell book and see the numpent Isle, unless you plan on playing it again. bers under the spells replaced by The new adventures in Silver Seed are selfinfinity symbols. contained, and the main reason for their exThe other items are a powerful istence is to provide certain items and updates updates (but non-throwable) magic axe, for Serpent Isle that make playing the game the Helm of Light, the Belt of less of a hassle. Strength, and the Gauntlets of On the other hand, these changes really Dexterity. The belt and gloves give make Silver Seed worth getting if you haven't +10 to strength and dex, but there played Serpent Isle, or haven't gone too far is a little problem associated with into it. What it provides are six new items and these that we'll come to these that we'll come to a bit later. three new hot-keys. Two of these items in particular are especially notable. Picking locks becomes less trouble with a new 'P' hot-key. The first is the magic key ring that works in Hitting 'P' brings up a target curconjunction with a new 'K' hor-key. All of The ostensible goal is for the Avatar to find sor to position over the lock. You no longer your keys go onto the ring, after which you and plant the silver seed, which will grow into have to rummage through your entire invencan forget about them. When you come to a the Tree of Balance and help in some mystitory to try a door. cal, undefined way) to restore Balance to the Finally, feeding the party has land. (And I thought this was what we were been made easier with a new 'F' doing in Serpent Isle by reuniting the three hor-key. Whenever someone Great Serpents.) starts whining about an empty stomach, just hit 'F' for a target In actuality, you're just there to pick up the cursor. Position it over the peckish goo goodies (and get the new hot-keys installed), character and zap those since planting the seed has no effect on the tummy grumbles away. The Silver Seed As long as anyone in the party is carrying food, the person will be fed. This TITLE: The Silver Seed PRICE: $29.95 one feature is almost SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: Ultima VII, Part Two: Serpent worth the price of admisIsle, 4MB additional hard drive space locked door, hitting 'K' brings up a cursor sion all by itself. DESIGNERS: Brian Adams, Bruce Adams, SILVER David Beyer, Lisa Smith, which you must position over the lock. If you The storyline of the game doesn't Phil Sulak PUBLISHER: Origin Systems have the right key on your ring, the door will amount to much. Karnax, head of (512) 335-5200 be unlocked. No more rooting through backthe Xenkan monks, pops up with the CONGRES Austin, TX Page 210 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best for less Legends  PAST\" «...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) «... no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. New Lower Rates: $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dialups. No surcharge for connecting at 9600 baud or during daytime hours. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support.  All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink. American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. ...and you can try it free! Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. NovaLink. MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info P.O. Box 11, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 Circle Reader Service #84 "


"Hard Drive Special Seagate 130meg drive $186 Seagate 261meg drive $260 Samsung 252meg drive $236 Seagate 341meg drive $337 Western Digital 340meg $321 main game-at least none that anyone has been able to find to date. Nothing really changes when you return to your own time. If you were hoping to undo some of the Banes' nasty handiwork, you'll be disappointed. Mother Boards 486/33 Vesa 128k Cache $462 486/33 DLC $197 386/40 128k Cache $151 Sound & Video Cards Sound Blaster Mono $97 Sound Blaster Pro DX $146 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $243 Video Blaster $398 CD-ROM Systems SB CD-ROM Upgrade $361 SB Multimedia Upgrade Kit $662 Aztec CD-ROM 16bit Kit $543 CD-ROM 16bit Business Kit $511 Sound Galaxy 46 CD-ROM Kit $443 Tape Backup Colorado Jumbo 250 $199 Software and other Hardware Large Inventory Order Toll-Free Computer System Solutions 1-800-666-5590 ing with the abandoned outpost. A body (with an important item) is noted as being at location 10, when it's really at location 11. The secret door in the west wall of the north/south entry passage is actually further north than is shown on the map. The real toothgrinder, though, is the rubble-blocked corridor. The manual suggests using gunpowder to clear it. Even cight or nine kegs exploding in concert weren't enough to do the job, no matter how they were placed. An Origin on-line rep suggested putting a keg at «the thinnest point of the debris,\" which was the first thing I had tried. Perhaps my idea of \"thinnest\" didn't coincide with theirs, or possibly the game is very position-sensitive, and I didn't get the exact right spot. Whatever, the kegs don't work, but plain muscle does. Just put the Avatar in combat mode and smack away at the debris a few times. I found a Juggernaut Hammer works nicely, and two blows were enough to clear a passage to the stairs. Other weapons may take a little longer, but it can be done. lurglass at fald Circle Reader Service #53 PAPER MAYHEM \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 While Silver Seed fixes some problems (or at least annoyances) in Serpent Isle, the game brings a few of its own. The gauntlets and belt do not appear to work properly. For instance, after finding the gloves, naturally I put them on at once, only to see no change in the dex stat. The dexterity of the character was the same, no matter who wore them. My initial thought was that, as stars don't go above 30, and everyone had better than 20 dex, the gloves wouldn't work for them. However, on rebooting the game, I noticed that Shamino (who was wearing the gloves) now had a dex of 30! Had I been mistaken? Not quite. When I took the gloves off him, his dex dropped to normal, but putting them back on made no change in his dex, or anyone else's who wore them. So it would seem that, to get the benefit of the belt and gloves, you should save the game after they've been equipped, restore, and not take these items off again. Another nasty situation reared up with the maze. Only the Avatar can go in there; party members refuse and voluntarily unjoin themselves from the group. Unfortunately, they unjoin themselves a little too late. The Avatar must go in sans armor and equipment; these are taken away upon entry and given back after exiting the maze. The same thing happens to anyone in the group when the Avatar goes to enter, only their stuff doesn't come back. Ouch! Make sure that everyone is out of the group before you go near the maze entrance. The manual that comes with Silver Seed contains a small walk-through in the back. Obviously, Origin wants you to finish this e quickly so you can bring your new toys over to the main event, which isn't a bad idea. After all, that's why they're giving you this stuff. Unfortunately, the walk-through contains some inaccuracies, mainly in the section dealInstallation of the add-in makes some changes in the operation and save games of Serpent Isle in order to accommodate the new items and hot-keys. Since it is also adding a new physical location to the Britannia landscape, some saves from Serpent Isle may have to be deleted. This is clearly explained in the manual. I lost three or four saves myself, but these were mostly from near the end of the game, in the Temple of Balance. Earlier positions made the transition nicely. However, users of DRDOS 6 should be careful. Serpent Isle is known to be incompatible with this DOS, and Origin has a patch out for it. Unfortunately, early reports indicate that installing Silver Seed undoes the patch, rendering the game unplayable. If you use DRDOS 6, check with Origin before installing the add-in. By the time you read this, they may have an upgrade or other workaround for the difficulty. Overall, while Silver Seed isn't a terrific game in itself and has a few problems, it will certainly make playing Serpent Isle a little more enjoyable. Anyone who is playing, or plans on playing, Serpent Isle, should make their lives easier and pick it up. CGW US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe $51.00; 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #107 Page 212 Computer Gaming World "


"BEWARE, THE SOUL OF YOUR MACHINE IS IN MORTAL DANGER! BRA M S T O KE RS ASSA Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 If you can't find this game at your favorite retailer call: (800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. Bram Stoker's Draculais a trademark of Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. 1992 Columbia Picturos industries Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #171 "


"TRAVEL TO EXOTIC LANDS, MEET STRANGE CREATURES AND BLOW THEM AWAY! If you can't find this game at your favorite retailer call: (800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. You've always considered yourself a soldier of fortune with a knack for survival and a thirst for green. Your mission? Anything for a price. But this time it's different. The stakes are a little bit greater and the danger is all too real. You and your team are on a desolate moon, surrounded by less than friendlies, with only one goal besides the mission itself; stay alive long enough to enjoy your newfound wealth. Hired Guns is an adventure that can accommodate up to four players simultaneously. It features furious nonstop action, first person 3-D view and auto-mapping of the 1.7 million cubic meters of play area. Choose from 12 different richly developed characters to suit your needs for the mission at hand. Journey through this desolate land, all the while testing your survival skills And remember: TAKE NO PRISONERS! KOSI Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Hired Guns is available on IBM compatible and Amiga formats. Circle Reader Service #172 "


"SEE JACK RUN. SEE JACK PLAY. SEE JACK WHEEL. SEE JACK DEAL. SEE JACK STEAL. SEE JACK PAY TAXES. OR NEVER SEE JACK AGAIN. W orcev the taught Meet Jack Ladd, a jack of all trades, most of them illegal. Jack's in big trouble. You see this is the future and now the IRS has the right to use deadly force to collect taxes. Guess what Jack, the tax man commeth, and they're looking for the gazillion bucks you owe them. Now you have only 28 days to get them the money, how you do it is up to you. Join Jack as he cons and coerces his way through the backstreets and alleys on the seedy side of the galaxy. Eight-way scrolling. full perspective scaling and Hypertextstyle interaction give this game a colorful and realistic edge. This unusual adventure captures your imagination and thrusts you right into the heart of Jack Ladd's bizarre world. If you can't find this game at your favorite retailer call: (800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. SPACEPORTE ESI Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Innocent is available on IBM compatible and Amiga formats. Circle Reader Service #173 "


"STRATEGY SEAL'D WITH A FIST Delivering An Effective Blow With SEAL Team by Jeff James tories of young lieutenants greener than elephant grass leading boys into the U dense undergrowth of Vietnam and getting chewed up are legion. The dangers included not only an NVA encounter, but also falling into pits with sharpened punji sticks arrayed like bayonets, or tripping a \"bouncing berty\" mine with a shaped charge designed to maim, not kill. Learning effective ways to prevent and deal with such hazards was an ongoing challenge squad leaders faced. In Electronic Arts' SEAL Team, the player controls a squad of U.S. Navy SEALS through up to four years of the Vietnam War. After spending a few weeks coaxing SEALs through the pixelated Mekong delta in SEAL Team, I've learned a few things that may help SEAL commanders overcome the obstacles I faced in my early duty. Here are the tactics and procedures that helped keep Lt. \"Lunchmeat\" and his squad alive through many harrowing combat missions. SEML ICOM v1.u 03:16:34 1 Feb 1966 Als objectivenes 2nd objective: Patrol 11. SEAL TEAM 2.tact support unit SCHOT Nelicopter TCAN POS SP4 N49 Weapon U Begin planning the operation; Arrange for the combat area. Once they were gone, I reconnaissance; Make the reconnaissance; moved my SEALs into position to take the Complete a plan of action; Issue the combat objective. Unless a player's SEALs are under order; then Supervise the ongoing operation fire, moving towards an objective or leaving to guarantee that the objective is reached the combat area, it's usually a good idea to sit, When using BAMCIS with SEAL Team, the watch and wait. first three procedures should be performed even before the SEALs hit the combat zone. 3. Mix It Up Studying the information presented in the In combat, being predictable will get your Intel Briefing and Mission Briefing screens men killed. Insertion points, avenues of apwill give the player enough information to proach and exit routes can and should be plan the operation, while the intelligence proaltered often to confuse the enemy. Moving vided should be considered a preliminary recon report. After a tentative tactical plan of action has been devised, the combat order (i.c., moving the soldiers toward the objective) should be issued once the SEALs hit the combat zone. Finally, the player must supervise the movement and actions of the team en route to the objective. Using BAMCIS should be a continuous process; as events unfold during combat, the player should be Pictamen usman ready to alter his plan of action to successfully complete the mission. down clearly marked trails is almost always a bad idea, as most will be booby trapped with 2. Patience Is A Virtue pits or trip wires. Players should try something slightly out of the ordinary in every being patient is possibly the single most iminele most immission. Here are a few suggestions: create a portant skill a SEAL commander can possess. diversion by using a grenade launcher to lob Since a SEAL team will almost always be a grenade some distance from the enemy's outnumbered, outgunned, and far from position; split your team into two squads and home, biding time until the perfect opportu attack from two directions; insert the squad a nity to strike is vital. In several missions, considerable distance from the original inserenemy soldiers would walk within just a few tion point; use your fire support teams to meters of my hidden SEALs. Instead of open draw enemy troops away from your objective. ing fire when they came into range, I patiently Players should be reasonable; don't try somewaited until they passed my position and left thing too creative to be tactically sound. Medic PP Regr DO ] 269 HAGA TERM ORDERS In field of Fire Fire at Torget Fire et Holt COLUND In Line Dignond verhede Pictatap usnavy SCALE 11250 Mtrs ZOO Expand SPlit 1. BAMCIS A mnemonic device used by the U.S. Marine Corps to aid commanders when leading troops, BAMCIS can be effectively applied for use with SEAL Team. BAMCIS is an abbreviation for the following tactical steps: Page 216 Computer Gaming World "


"BLAST COMPUTER GAMES INTO ANOTHER DIMENSION FOR ONLY $169! GAME BLASTER ir BLASTS COMPUTER GAMES FROM PCS TO BIG-SCREEN TVs! m BRONORER DIMENSIONI CORITUR MES QYRTI FIGUTERUS GAME BLASTER turns your living room into a virtual reality SPECIAL OFFER! FREE GAMES-a $150 valueINSIDE EVERY GAME BLASTER PACKAGE! gameroom by boosting your favorite These sensational computer games are FREE with every package! PC games from your VGA monitor Prince of Persia JetFighter II Spectre Challenger\" onto your big-screen TV. GAME BLASTER converts your PC's VGA output to a video signal and supports 640x480 VGA resolution. So take off today with GAME BLASTER -and blast your by Brderbund by Velocity by Velocity computer into the next dimension. Circle Reader Service #167 ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS 20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (310)865-1432 (310809-6144 (Fax) (800)888-5244 Available from leading computer prolucts suppliers, suckins: Babbages. Best Buy CumpUSA. Computability Computer City Computer Express Escwad Software Insight PC Zone. Tiger Software. USA Flex ME BLASTEK HILLI GRERATER "


"Keeping the enemy guessing will keep SEALs alive. 4. Know Your Gear A plethora of weapon and tool types are available to a SEAL commander; knowing which equipment to take can mean the difference between victory and defeat. SEAL commanders should learn the weapon specialries of each SEAL and equip them accordand then hover some distance away from the target area, on the opposite side of the objective as my SEALs. Any enemy soldiers in the area would often follow the helicopter, leaving the objective unguarded. Remember that supporting fire from helicopters and other aircraft can often stray quite a distance from the target area-players should keep SEALs a healthy distance away from any ground targets. 9. Use The Views 6. Conserve Ammo Conserving ammunition is of paramount importance to any SEAL commander. The motto «One shot, one kill\" is a wise one to follow. Wait until the last possible minute to engage the enemy. In most cases, I found that holding my fire until an enemy was close enough for the targeting reticle to turn yellow or red was enough to ensure a high probability of success. Frugal use of ammunition has other benefits besides the increased probability of a kill. It also translates into less ammunition being carried, resulting in faster moving, less-encumbered SEALs. It also attracts less attention: a SEAL who fires one shot is far less likely to be noticed than one that empties an entire magazine. One casy way to limit the amount of ammo expended during a firefight is to change the rate of fire (ROF) of a currently selected weapon. Pressing the 'R' key will cycle through the ROF options available for the current weapon. In almost all cases, keeping weapons on \"semi\" or \"single\" will yield the best results. One of the many viewing options available to a SEAL Team player is the use of the enemy view, accessed by pressing the F9 key. When an enemy soldier has been seen and targeted by the point man, a targeting reticle will appear on the enemy soldier. Pressing the F9 key will shift the player's viewing position to the enemy's position. Holding the right mouse button down (or pressing button 2 on the joystick, if selected) and moving the mouse allows the player to peek around buildings, foliage and other obstacles for other threats. It's like having an invisible scoutstanding right next to the enemy. Pressing the F2 key will display a third person view of the point man and other SEALs, which is useful for viewing the surrounding terrain while the team is moving towards an objective. ingly. The mission should dictate the weaponry carried: an M72A2 LAW (light ant-tank weapon) may be perfect for taking out hardened enemy positions, but would be excess baggage during a rescue mission. The more equipment a SEAL carries, the slower he moves, making him a more vulnerable target. Keep in mind that SEALs tending captured enemy soldiers move slowly. SEALs already weighed down by 100 pounds of rocker launchers, grenades and ammunition will be scarcely able to move when moving captured enemy soldiers. Keep an eye on weapon ranges, too. A squad equipped with nothing but shotguns and pistols is in for a very bad day if forced to engage in a long-distance firefight. 7. Silence Is Golden Next to cover and concealment, keeping SEALs quiet is key to avoiding the enemy. Players can accomplish this by moving slowly in prone position with a cease fire order. It's also a good idea to stop occasionally and scan the area. Turning off the game music (ALTM) and keeping on the game sounds will give players aural cues to the combat situation, with the noise of insects and birds changing when an enemy is approaching. Move slowly, keep low and fire controlled bursts. 10. Practice Makes Perfect 5. Cover And Concealment 8. Use Your Fire Support In almost every mission, fire support teams are just a key press away. When SEALs are pinned down by enemy fire, bailing them out with the fire support vehicle is a viable an highly recommended course of action. Fire support vehicles also work wonderfully as moving distractions. One tactic which worked well for me was to have a support helicopter fly over a heavily guarded objective RESUL 03:10: 0 1 Feb 1966 In basic training, many U.S. infantry are taught the maxim: \"I'm up, he sees me, I'm down.\" This brief sentence summarizes the importance of cover and concealment. As in real life, keeping soldiers out of harms way requires that they be seen as little as possible by the enemy. SEALs advancing towards a heavily defended target in an upright position won't live long; keeping them in a prone or crouched position will make them harder to spot by the enemy. When planning a mission, it's a good idea to plor a course through areas with plenty of ground cover, using any manmade structures for cover and concealment as well. Keep low, stay clear of wide open areas and utilize any available foliage to keep SEALs hidden from view. Finally, SEAL commanders should make frequent use of the Practice Missions program option, accessible from the main menu. Each of the 80 individual missions in SEAL Team are available for practice, allowing gamers to scope out mission areas before a real mission takes place. Practicing missions will save lives, minimize time spent in the mission zone, and ensure that cach mission is a success. In addition to the suggestions listed here, SEAL Team players may want to obtain a few books on the SEALs in Vietnam and the tactics they used. A wide selection of reference books are listed in the bibliography of the SEAL Team manual. From that list, I found the following books to be especially useful: John Pimlott. Vietnam: The History and the Tactics. Crescent Books, New York. 1983 Michael Lee Lanning and Dan Cragg. Inside the VC and the NVA. Ballantine Books, New York. 1992. (The author would like to thank Sgt. Kevin N. Lawson U.S.M.C. for his assistance in preparing this article.) CGW TE DO i Weterattack Citrost Pictuftap ustawy SCELE 1:500 trs Zoom Expand Page 218 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest delivered prices with greatcustomer service, DLICOV Card MasterCard __0 VISA 800-448-6658 r service. 15 READER e DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE COMPUT MONTHLY READERS 2995 45% 39 39 49 31% 34\" 34 373 375 32 lask Force ady Set Read Red Baron Arcadia 354 Terminal Edit\" 105 Pool Shark 1995 Bookca Family Chosg Return on a Time 2 sas An 3795 Grand 39 Scrable Magic Casti32 3095 Midnight Rescue 49 44 35 EFSELLE 4595 NO SURCHARGE SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM-8 PM SAT 10 AM3 PM EST ITEM JE ODLIK PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 HARDWARE INCLUDEDIII CD ROM Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 SOFTWARE Comanche 425 Great Britian 37 Lord of Rings 2 37 Pult Putt Fun Pack 26 Stronghold 37\" Loom 39 A Train 39 25% Mission Disk Hawaii 19 Aesops Fables Lost File Sherlock 27\" 33 Quarter Pole 29% Studyware for ACTAircraft Encyclopda 45 Lost Treasure 49 Construction Set 22 29 Comic Bk Creator Comic bk Creator of 17 Instant Facit Loc. 19 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Quest for Glory 1 22 GMAT,GRE,SAT 30 MacMillian Child Dict49 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Across the Rhine 47% Compan of Xanth 35% Japan Scenery Lost Treasures 2 29 19% Quest for Glory 3 39 Studyware Biology. Manhole 49 2995 Lost Tribe New York Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Computer Works 46% 25 Aces Over Europe 44% 35% Rags to Riches Calc.,Chem., Econ... Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Maniac Mansion 39% Aces of the Pacific42 Cohort 2 19 Paris Lunar Command 35% Reach for Skies 19% Physics, Statistic 25 Mantis Mission Disk Pilots Pwer Tools 24% 29% 19% Conquest of Japan 35° Lost Vikings Reader Rabbit Autodesk Explorer 119 35% Studyware LSAT 37 Mario is Missing 47% 42% AD&D Collect 2 Contraption Zak 25% Rescue Air 911 17 Maelstom Reader Rabbit 2 Barney Bear Goes 35% Syndicate Mavis Beacon Crusader Drk Savnt39 AD&D Starter Kit 42% San Fransisco 29% Magic Candle 3 37% Ready for Letter 35% to School Take a break X-Word29 Mayo Clinic Cuckoo Zoo AD&D Unlimited Maniac Mansion 1.35% 3795 Scenery St A or B 37 Ready Set Read 29\" into Space Pinball Mixed Up Moth Gs 37 Cyber Space Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Adibou&Junior #1 346 Mantis 39 Reading Adv in Oz 36 Task Force 1942 37\" Battlechess Monarch Notes 75 35° Daemonsgate 48 Sound & Graphic 25 Air Bucks Speech Disk 17 Reading Comp 32 Beauty & Beast 49 Admiral Edit Monkey Island 39 Darklands Air Bus A320 Tahiti 45 19 35% Mario is Missing teady Sel Head 29 Beethoven Ninth 59 Terminator 2029 399 MM Music: Mozart 33 Air Duel Darkseed 33% 39 Washington DC 29 Mario Teach Type 25 Berlitz Think & Talk Realms of Arcadia 35\" Tesserae MM Music: Vivaldi 33 Darkside of Xeen 39% West USA Scnry 39% Air Warrior SVGA 35 Master of Orion 37\" Red Baron French 39 Tmnt 2 Cybrchess 35 105 Our Solar System 29 Dark Sun AJ World Discvry 29, 47% West Europe 19 Math Blaster Plus 29 Mission Disk 17 Tetris Classic Spanish 31 Daughter of Serpnt31\" Freddy Pharkas 39 30 29% AlgeBlaster Plus Mystery Retum Of Phantm 33\" Bloodnet 4195 Time Riders Amer. 35 Prcision Map 84% Deja Vu 1 & 2 37% Front Page Pro 45% Alone in The Dark 35% Search of Spot 35\" Rex Nebular Blue Force 37 Tony LaRussa Base.17 39% 39% Protostar Design your Railrd. 35 Math Blaster Wind 36 Fun School:Fred Frog Ring World 34% Tony LaRussa II 37 Bookshelf Alphabet Blocks 2976 129 Publish it! 69 Diet Pro DOS/Win25/36 Sam Spy Teddy Br 17 389 Math Rabbit 29\" Robosports Wind 25% Britanica Family Cho49 Reference Library Expansion Disk 19 Amazon 59 Dino Park 1995 35 Mathology G-Force Rock & Bach Studo35\" Top Class Series ea 16 Amazon Trail Buzz Aldrin Race 3456 59 Return of Phantom 37% Dino Quest 379 31% 35% Gateway. Il Mavis Beacon 29% Ambush Rodney Fun Screen31 Tornado Carmen World Dixe 65 Rotor/Airbal Time 25 45° Dinosaur Adventure 34 Gearworks 29% Mega Lo Mania 29 Rome 29\" Ancient Art War Sky 35 Treasure Cove Cautious Condor 35 45 San Diego Zoo 49 Discovering Amer 35% Mental Math Games 37 Ancient Empires Geekwad Games 22.95 30 Treasur Math Storm 35 Rule Engagment 2 39\" CD Game Pack 55 Secret Weapons 59 Distant Sun 39% Gobblins 1 or 2 22 Michl Jordon Fight 37\" Science Adventure 42 Treasure Mountain 35 Animal Adventure 47% CD Speedway 57 Seventh Guest 59 75 Dog Fight Grand Slam Bridg II 32 Micro Cookbook 4. 31 Scooter Magic Castl32 Treehouse Animation Studio Chess Maniac 3495 Sherlock Holmes 39 29% Dr Floyd Desktop 1995 Great Naval Admrl 48% Microsoft Golf Scrable Delx 32 Tristan Pinball Arcade for Wind Christmas Carol 33 Sherlock Holmes 2 42 Dr Jam Window' 59\" 37% Super Ships 20\" Midnight Rescue 35 Seal Team 37\" Turbo Science CIA World Fact Armored Fist 39 Sherlock Holmes 3 49 31 Great Works Dr. Quandry 30% Might & Magic 4 40 Sort Weapn Luftwt 29\" Turtle Tools Clipart Goliath Ashes of Empire 35 30 Sleeping Beauty 37 Dragon Sphere 29% Might & Magc5 Gunship 2000 35 39 Tour of Duty ea. A.T.A.C. 20 Ultima 7 Conan Cimerion 36 Sound Works 35 39% Dragon Lair 3 Scenario Disk Millies Math House 31 Seven Cities Gold 38 Forge of Virtue Creative Kids 365 Auto Insight Space Quest 4 37 40% Dreadnoughts Hardball 3 Mind Castle 35 Shadow President 39\" Silver Seed Automap Curse of Enchantia25% Space Series Apollo49 36 Dune 21 Data Disk (ea.) 17% Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 Shadowcaster 47 Ultima 7 Part 2 Deathstar Arcade 30 Automap Wind 59 29\" Space Shutle Harrier Assault Dungeon Master 29% 34\" Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Shadowlands 29\" Ultima Trilogy Dictionaries & Lang 30 Spirit of Excalibur Automap Europe 74 37 Dynamix Bundle 37 Money/Clocks Wrk 19 42 Headline Harry Sierra Action Five 25 Ultima Trilogy 2 47 Autoworks Dune 39\" Slellar 7 Eagle Eye Mystery 31% Health & Diet Pro 26 Monkey Island 1/2 23 Sierra Award Winner 47 Ultima Underworld 47\" B-17 Flying Fortress 19 Education Master 32 Strange Deadfellow 39 Monopoly Deluxe High Command 42 34 Sierra Family Fun 32 Part 2 Electronic Cookbk 75 Bailey's Bookhouse29% Eco-Quest 1 or 2 29\" Star Trek Enhanced49 Eight Ball Delx 35% More Vegas Game 19 Hong Kong Mahjong32 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Sierra Starter Bndl 39% Ultrabots Elect. Home Library 49 Street Atlas 99 Voy Ei Fish 35 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Mutanoid Challenge31 Silent Service 2 19\" Batman Returns 39\" Uninvited Window 37\" Eict Traveler:Call 33 Talking Classic Tale75 VGA36 Empire Deluxe 35\" Humans 25 Mystery at Museum 35 Sim Ant 34% Battlechess 4000 SVGA36Emgre Deluxe Unnecessry Rough35 Encarta Encyclpd249 Talkng Jungle Salari75 35 Scenario Disk 19\" Inca NFL Challenge 59 Sim Ant French 35 U.S. Atlas DOS Battle of Destiny 3 1 European Monarchs49 tim Time Table Science 59 2016 Entrmt Pak Win (ea.)28 Incredible Machine 29\" Sim City Classic Beat the House NFL Coaches Club 33 25\" Utopia 29 399 Ultimate Shareware 59 Eric the Unready 35% Indiana Jones 4 37 Nigel's World 31 Windows 25% V for Victory (ea) Betrayal of Krondor39 F-117A 43% US Atlas Eternam No Greater Glory 20% Inspector Gadget 35% Sim Earth 39% Betty Crocker Cook Call Vista Pro Family Doctor 39 US Atlas w/Automap49 Eye of Beholder Island of Dr. Brain 29 20 Omar Shariff Bridge 37 Sim Life Dos/Wind 39 Vocabulary Devl Black Crypt Fatty Bear 39 Eye Beholder 2 Jetfighter 2 38 3 9 Open Dialog 44% Sing a Long Wind 31\" Wacky Funsters 199 Bloodnet Font Master 39 US Presidents 49 Eye of Beholder 3 42 Ady Mission Disk 19 Operation Neptune 35 Snap Dragon 32 War in Gulf G Force 19\" Blue & Gray USA Wars:Civil War49 399 EZ Cosmos 42 John Madden 2 31% Orbits Snoopy Game Club 29 War in Russia Gateway 11 Bluefore 35\" USA Wars:Korea 49 47% Ez Language Series Johnny Quest Oregon Trail Delx 345 Solitaire Window Body Illustrated 29% Warrior of Legend 19 Gettysburg:MM Hist43 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Fr. Gr. II.Sp.Jp.Rs 31\" Jump Jet Origin FX .. 25 Solitaires Journey 35 Wayne Gretzky 3 35 Bodyworks Goler Winkles Ady 33 USA Wars: WW II 49 F14 Fleet Delend 44% MPE Version 48% Out of This World 36 Space Ace 2:Borl 36 Waynes World 29\" Golden Immortal Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 28 Voyage Planet ea 69 39% 30% 44 Kye Deluxe Outnumbered 30 Space Adventure 42 What's My Angle Buzz Aldrin 30 Great Cities Vol 1 49 Who Killd Sam Rup 25 Master Edition 49% kid Cad Pacific Wars 47 Space Hulk 37 When2Worlds War35\" Gunship 2000 Caesar 37\" Willy Beamish 37 F117a Stealth 29 Kid Cuts 359 Paladin 2 35 Space Quest 5 Where Crmn San Diego Guy Spy Car and Driver 32 Win CD 45 Falcon 3.0 Kid Desk 24\" Spear of Destiny 39 America Past 34\" Carrier Strike Humans 39 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Kid Pictures PC Study Bible 42 Special Forces 29 Europe Expansion Disk 19% Inca Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Mig 29 Data Disk 34% Kid Pix Peppers Adventure 29 Space Carriers at War 2 42% 57 Wing Comm 2 inspector Ga:Aet Sr Family Tree Maker 42 Kid Pix Companion 25 31 Perfect General 36 Spellbound Time 31% Cash for Kids Interactive Old Test 52 WC 2 Ulti. Undrwid 57 42\" Kid Works 2 Fantasy Empire Pinball Dreams 29' Spellcasting 301 USA Castle 2 35 Interactive Storytime45 World Atlas 42 Farm Creativity Kit 18 Kids Zoo Pirate's Gold 38% Spell-it Plus USA Deluxe Castle of Dr. Brain 30 44 Intro Games Fr Sp 79 World War II Pak 37% Fatty Bear Birthday 31 Kings Ransom Playroom 2.0 SpellJammer 37 World Deluxe Center Court Ten. 12% 449 Its a Wonderful Life 48 Adults Only Must be 21 Fields of Glory 33% King's Quest 6 45 Police Quest 3 39% Sports Adventure Challnge 5 Realm 33% 33 Wild Science Arcad 35% Jazz Multimedia Hist69 Animation Fantasy 65 Flashback 32\" Land Of Lore Pool Shark 19\" Star Control 2 35 35\" Ween:Prophecy 34 Champions Jets & Props 55 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Flight Simul ATP 28\" 39 Legacy Prince of Persia 2 39 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Wing Comandr2 47* Jones in Fast Lane 37 38 Chemistry Works Porkware Legacy Necromncr19% Print Shop Deluxe 45 Flight Simulator 5 43\" Star Trek AudioClip 34% Wing Com Acadm 31% Chessmaster Just Grandma & Me36 29% Private Collection 65 Air Tric Cntrlr 349 Legion's of Krella Children Writ & Publ 39 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 37 Next Generation 38% World Circuit 34% Jutland Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Arctt/Scen Dsgn Lemmings 28 Print Shop, New 35 Star Trek Screen Sav37 44% MPE Edition City Streets Kings Quest 5 42 Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 Graphics (ea) 22 Aircraft Adv Factry 25 Lemmings 2 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 World Tour Tennis32\" Civilization King Quest 6 Up 26 37 65 Storm 1 or 2 Lethal Weapon #685 35% Print Shp Compion 31 Stickybr Pre-School 30 World War II 35% Land Of Lore 34 Civilization Deluxe 45 Visual Fantasy ... 65 17 # 701 Links 25 Privateer 47% Stickybr Read Tutor 30 X Wing Languages of World99 Caddies 7.95éa. 3/$ 19 s 41% 39\" Civilization Win Airport Facty Loc 17 39 Links 386 Pro Prophecy 25% Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 39% Clash of Steel Mission Disk 19\" Learn to Speak Spn59 California 37 Course Disk ea 16 Protostar 39% Storybook Weaver299 Yobi Spelling Trick29% Leisure Suit Larry 42 Coaster Cobra Mission agus 13.9% East USA Scen 39% 386 Courses ea 19\" Putt Putt Parade 32 Zodiac Signs Strike Commander 45 39\" Speech Disk 17 Zoo Keeper Sound Cards SB CDROM Intel 369 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Joysticks Multimedia Strip Poker 3 32 Zug's Spelling Adv 22 ATIStereo Fix 139 SB Portblaster 149 Ballade Windows 797 Toshiba CH Flightstick 37\" Aitech Data Disk (ea) 17 Ady of Eco Island 22 StereoFIX CD 1476 SB Video Blaster 349 Band in a Box 69 3041 Internal 489\" CH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show 369 Covox Voice Bistr 64 SB Video Spigot 419 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Ratway N.J. Cadenza 125 3041 External 59425 CH Mach 3 28% Pro 256 280 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 SB Waveblaster 234 Cakewalk 95 Texcel America CH Virtual Pilot 65 Pro Color Plus 529 CD-ROM Kit 2999 Roland RAP-10 459% TERMS AND CONDITIONS Cakewalk Win 129 3021 Internal 375 349 ProVGA TV SCC-1 GS Eliminator Card 459 26 Media Vision C-7 Cakewalk Pro 315 169 3024 Dbl Spd 390 Gravis Analog Pro 39 AUDIO POR Pro PC/TV Plus 249 Master Card, Visa, American Express & 3024 Business 679 Cakewalk Win Pro 240 32 Pro VGA TV + Gravis Joystick 659 Discover Accepted. No 959 Surcharge on SC-55 3024 Education 604 Encore 379 VideoSurge 659 Gravis PC GamePad21 Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. 1159 BOX CDPCXL 3. MA-12C ea 3024 Home Jammer Pro 569 Pro Audio 16 179 SPEAKERS VideoSurg SVHS 729 Carteret, N.J. 07008. All sales ATC Kidz Mouse 30% Pro Audio Studio 224\" CS-150 Shielded Laser Music Proces 79 3024 Multimeda844 Kraft KC3 Joystick 28 | Wave Watcher 419 Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective 28 Pro 16 Multimedia Master Tracks Pro 249 5024 Dbl Spd 495 CS-550 Shielded TV/GRX TV Maxx Flight Yoke 69 269 merchandise with the same item only. No 35 Upgrade Kit 2 935 MCS Stereo W/3 band Equilizer 45 exceptions. All Products are now from 55 5024 Business 769 Maxx Pedal 39 Skins & Pads Pro Movie Audio 339 Midiscan 269% 5024 Education 729 Quickshot Game Cd14 manufacturer. All claims and quarantees 8 4 CS-1000 Midisoft Studio Logitech Audioport 134 159 5024 Multimed 969 15 Quickshot Warrior 18 | Dust Covers are from the manufacturer. Call for 1306 Soundman Altec Lansing 200 219 current price and availability. GOVERMENT 132 Music Bytes Vol 1 65 ACS 300 Modem & Fax Grounded Wrist Strp 9 Suncom Command19 For your Sound Blaster 299 Music Mentor AND SCHOOL. P.O.S WELCOMED. 79 Keyboard Skins 15 Thaustmaster MIDI Interface SB Midi Kit 59° US Robotic Sportster protection, we will only ship to the Music Printer Plus 419 69 FCS Sttic Pads 2400 Int. Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Midiator 101 Serial 95 99% address the credit card company has on Music Time 169 Large System FCS Pro 15 Sound Blaster Delx 132 PC Midi Card 14.4 v.42bs file, therefore shipping to Ak.. Hi.. 79 162 Piano Works 29% Game Card 183\" Wrist Pads W/S/R Fax PR., P.O. SB Pro 16 Boxes. APO/FPO 16442 Port SE extra. 149 Quick Score Deluxe99 Stax (Dust Repellent)5 SB Pro16 ASP 95% Weapons 2 209 Hai International orders call for shipping 14.4 v.42bis Ext 1839 Hello Music 277% Songwright 5 89% Statx Complete Rudder Pedal 109 charges. N.J. Resident add 6 sales tax. SB Discovery 161 459 W/S/R Fax 213% The Miracle 325 Trax for Windows 60 UPROM Chip 29\" Se Edutanmn 16 5496 Cleaning System 15 20% restocking fee for all refused items. 43\" US History 318 37% 35% 29% 299 38% 42 29\" 35% 279 An 39\" 32 ver Patriot PCures 35% 35% 35% 35 Pinha 33% 34\" 30% 349 29\" 3333333 35% 139 CDPC 549\" 105 125 99 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"STRATEGY CHIEF EXECUTION OFFICER T A Guide To Corporate Culture In The Syndicate by Jeff \"Do These Ties Come In Kevlar?\" James Date: 07 October 2097 1.2: The cyborg tax man cometh agents can run as fast as the fastest ground TO: CyberCorp Field Executive Taxes are the lifeblood of CyberCorp. cars. Trainee, Western European Territory Without the timely collection of funds from Arms: Arm enhancements will increase the From: CyberCorp Internal Secu our willing citizenry, it would be impossible carrying ability of agents, allowing them to rity (CCIS) to maintain CyberCorp's aggressive marketcarry more and heavier objects. You should RE: CyberCorp Field Executive ing efforts. Most territories will start out at 30 have the arms of your agents upgraded evenOperations Manual percent taxation and can be easily increased tually, but you should consider this a fairly h e position of Field Executive for the to 40 percent. It's a good idea to keep your low priority. CyberCorp Syndicate is a challengtax rates fairly low until you've conquered ing but rewarding position. As leader Eyes: Our research has shown that bionic large tracts of territory. As the CyberCorp of a squad of Field Agents, your tasks are empire grows, be sure to tax your territories eye implants are highly overrared. Agents will many and varied: you must simultaneously identify enemy agents sooner and shoor berappropriately. As we become stronger, it is serve as a territorial administrator, tax collecter at a distance with implants, but these only fair that our citizens are taxed to reflect tor, strategic planner and tactical field comthe privileges they enjoy under our leaderfeatures are superfluous in the toughest scenarios. Extensive analysis of agent combat ship. actions reveals that more than 75% of tactical 1.3: Agent management encounters are decided between short and Our cyborg agents are our bionic eyes, cars, middle range. hands and fists. It is through our agents that 1.4: Arms control you will accomplish all of your goals as a CyberCorp executive. Upgrading agents is While waging war with enemy Syndicates essential: without timely enhancement, our you'll find that some weapons are undoubtagents will become next to useless against the cdly more useful than others. For all practical more advanced minions of our rival Syndipurposes, the pistol, shotgun and even the cates. Following is a list of physical enhanceUzi should be considered weapons for the mander. Due to the complexity of your misments ranked from highest to lowest priority. uninitiated. They're cheap and available from sion, we at CyberCorp Internal Security the outset, but are woefully inadequate for Brains: Enhanced artificial intelligence en(CCIS) have prepared this document to aid most missions. By far the most popular ables agents to recognize and respond to enyou. This material will give you the informaweapon in the CyberCorp armory is the emy actions more quickly. Reaction time and tion you need to embark on a lucrative career minigun. A powerful short-to medium-range initiative are essential in the tougher territowith The Company and increase CyberCorp weapon with incredible stopping power, the ries where a few second of delay can mean life market share at the expense of our rival Synor death. The Syndicate that strikes first will minigun packs an impressive amount of ammunition. The flame-thrower is another usedicates. often win the battle. ful weapon; nothing seems to destroy SECTION 1.0: Administration Chest: Consider the chest upgrade as gloristructures and vehicles with as much visceral fied armor. The better the armor, the more 1.1: Choose or lose punishment an agent will be able to endure. One of the first challenges you will face as An agent attempting the Atlantic Accelerator a CyberCorp executive will be that of choosterritory without a Level 3 chest enhanceing which territory to invade. Keep in mind ment is destined for the reusable waste hcap. that regions with large populations will conLegs/Heart: Both of these upgrades are imtain the toughest opposition. If your agents portant. Improved legs increase the moveare relatively inexperienced and lack ad ment speed of your agents, while enhanced vanced weaponry, choose a less populous terhearts boost health and increase regenerative ritory. ability. With Level 3 legs, lightly-equipped Page 220 Computer Gaming World "


"They can also provide a quick reload in the heat of combat. SALCIAL ACTRESS OSCARCE impact as a few flares from one of these. The more powerful weapons than we have. This gauss gun (rocket launcher) and the laser are is especially troublesome if the enemy owns also worthy of note: both are extremely powlong-range weaponry, able to strike your erful weapons, but the limited amount of agents from afar with impunity. The solution ammunition makes them less effective than to this dilemma is a simple one: move your they initially appear to be. Trust your agents around the corner of a building or miniguns in the heat of battle and they will place them inside one, and wait. Let the see you through ro victory. enemy come to you. SECTION 2.0: Combat 2.4: Stagger your ammo 2.1: Choose your position well An oft overlooked problem of weapon use As CyberCorp management is so fond of is simultaneous reload periods. If all of your saying, there are three important rules when agents are given fully-loaded magazines at the supplying product to a consumer: location, start of a mission, they may run out of ammo location, location. This maxim also holds true at roughly the same time and be forced to in combat. Before a mission, study the layout switch weapons, creating a window of opporof the mission area. If your mission is to tunity for the enemy. In a furious firefight, eradicate enemy agents, find a defensible, se nothing is worse than having your agents all cure area with only one or two access routes, vulnerable at once. Allow one or two agents then let the enemy come to you. Secondly, to fire a few rounds of a new magazine to keep your agents in view of your command insure that you will have at least one agent ready to respond while other agents reload. 0123-BMC TEAM SELECTION 2.5: Collateral damage is an agent's best friend Nothing beats area effect weapons (gauss guns and time bombs) for mass destruction. A gauss gun round fired into a pack of enemy agents will disable most of them. Placing a time bomb or two along the expected approach routes of enemy agents can yield results, too; simply shoot the time bombs when ship at all times. Due to the unique viewing the enemy runs past them. Finally, nothing angle afforded by the hovership, your view of seems to explode as nicely as a moving ground your agents may be blocked by buildings. car. Pin the enemy next to a vehicle with Trying to direct the actions of agents hidden minigun fire, then hit the car with a gauss within structures or behind walls is a recipe gun. The resulting explosion will eliminate for disaster-keep them in sight at all times. most enemy agents (and civilians, police and even your agents—keep your distance!) in the 2.2: Drivers education for androids surrounding area. Nothing is more seductive to a squad of exhausted agents than a fast ground car. Per2.6: Panic mode fect for covering vast distances of territory Perhaps the most useful feature of our latest quickly, ground cars unfortunately have a tely, have a production run of cubores is the panic mode production run of cyborgs is the panic mode. darker, more deadly flip side. Ground cars are Activated when both buttons are depressed extremely flimsy vehicles, prone to burst into on your control device, panic mode places flames after receiving just a few bursts from a each agent in an autonomous state with minigun or flame-thrower. You should use heightened senses and reflexes. When in ground cars only in areas free of enemy activpanic mode, agents will automatically fire on ity. Obtaining a vehicle is simple: a quick all burst from an Uzi or minigun is understood move ar nearly twice their normal ratc. Placby our citizens to mean that you wish to ing just one agent into panic mode will give borrow their vehicle for official business. you a valuable sentry, while an entire squad Also, note that even the best armored cyin panic mode turns into a hyperactive deathborg needs to look both ways before crossing machine that is frighteningly ferocious in its any thoroughfare. A surprising number of our frenetic flailings. agents have been damaged or eliminated in collisions with ground cars. Remember: stop, 2.7: Find an Uzi, pick it up, and all look and listen. that day... When an enemy agent, guard or police 2.3: When outgunned, head for cover officer is slain, he will usually leave behind his In some territories, our enemies will have weapon. These weapons are as good as cash. SECTION 3.0: The Atlantic Accelerator As an informed CyberCorp executive, you're undoubtedly aware of the importance of the territory commonly referred to as the \"Atlantic Accelerator.» Several teams of our agents have attempted to overtake this territory, but all have met with little success. These failed missions were not entirely fruitless, as our knowledge of the territory is now much greater. One successful strategy involves equipping each of your four agents with four miniguns, two gauss guns, one medikit and one force field. Once you arrive in the mission area, immediately engage panic mode and move as quickly as possible to an area in which you are better able to protect your agents. Limit the enemy's avenues of approach, use your gauss guns for maximum collateral damage, and expend your munitions frugally-our research shows that 73 percent of failed missions are due to the squad running out of ammunition. Remember, a squad without ammo can do nothing but await a cruel piecemeal dismantling. We at CCIS sincerely hope this information will be useful to you. The ongoing battle with our enemy Syndicates requires that we with our enemy Syndica demand the utmost from our employees; we don't take failure lightly. And rememberwhatever you do, we'll be watching. The CCIS would like to thank special agent James \"Vorpal»Joule III of the Syndicate \"Rogue America\" for his invaluable assistance in the creation of this briefing. Cow 230MISSIAN BALEF TAGACCARS CAND. ASSASSINATI AVELLOENG. ACookte hocerco CARAACE . ROVECOTES OISTUACES CAUSED 69 TH00 ACCEDE ARD December 1993 Page 221 "


"REVIEW VIKINGS JUST WANNA HAVE FUN Interplay's The Lost Vikings by David M. Wilson That do you get when you cross little bit more. He fires, but the arrow will not little bit more. He fires, but the arrow will not arm and hand bounci arm and hand bouncing a rubber ball. The The Mario Brothers. The Three hit the target, no matter where the player arm would stop and throw the ball, striking VV Srooves. Yosemite Sam and Hapositions Baleog, unless Eric is placed in a our heroic Vikings and moving closer for ar the Horrible? The answer is something position to see the arrow fly true to its mark. more attacks. This imaginative enemy had close to Interplay's The Lost Vikings. The title The player must shoot the arrow and then me laughing out loud, until he attacked the may sound something like a new role playing quickly switch to the Eric character or the first time game, but it is really a clever blend of comedy arrow will not hit the target. It doesn't make Another imaginative concept was introand puzzle solving. sense, but that's the way the game works. duced in the game. If the player returns to The fiction behind this multiple level cutEach Viking can hold up to four objects in up is like something out of The National his inventory. The most important objects are replay a level too often, the Vikings begin to Tattler. An evil alien with the less-than-imbombs, keys and food. Bombs can be placed grumble among themselves. If the player repressive name of Tomator kidnaps three Vito destroy walls or enemies. Beyond their peats a level 15 times, he gets a nasty message kings and imprisons them aboard his obvious function, keys will be needed to turn from Thor, who proceeds to declare that in spaceship. Naturally, they attempt to escape off some laser beams, activate ceiling fans, and \"his day\" Vikings always made it through a and, in so doing, travel through various time topple walls. Food can heal damaged health. level the first time. These messages, along warps and dimensions in a whimsical attempt Sadly, there is no treasure to plunder. with the messages at the end of each level, add to find their way home. to the comedic environment of the game. The object of the game is to progress Too bad the replay messages are the same through 37 levels and defeat the alien boss throughout the entire game. After awhile monster on the last level. Each level is chockthey just get in the way of a good game and full of traps and tricks to prevent our boys' one tends to key right through them without escape and, to make it equally daunting, all reading them. three Vikings must make it to the exit of each The musical soundtrack adds to the game's level in order for the player to advance. ambiance as well, since it provides melodic Each of the three barbarian champions is STRASSE variations for each time/dimension frame beunique. Eric looks like a Nordic version of ing played. Fortunately, though, there is a Yosemite Sam and specializes in running and toggle, because as good as it is, it gets really jumping. He can also head-butt his way STA Y annoying after awhile. through some walls. Baleog is the troupe's While the plot of the game is simplistic and fighter. He is not only the sole Viking capable While some might try to compare this game carly levels are easily solved, the levels graduof destroying monsters, but his bow and arto Lemmings or Mario Brothers, it really holds ally develop into quite a test of puzzle solving ally develop into quite a test of puzzle solvir rows can also be used to flip switches and prowess. Most of the game consists of knowprowess. Most of the game consists of knowonly a slight similarity to either. The puzzles buttons in otherwise inaccessible places. Olaf ing where to take the Vikings in order to solve ing wher aren't quite as intricate as those in the former the Stout carries a wooden shield to be used the puzzle, but parts of it require a bit more nor the reflex challenges as intense as the in blocking enemy attacks. He is also some manual dexterity and hand-to-eye coordinalatter. The game is a unique puzzle solving thing of a Viking visionary, having discovered tion. Nevertheless, it is not a typical joystick adventure, great for people who enjoy using a sport from the future—hang-gliding. Using busting game because there are plenty of their cerebral cortex along with their eye to his shield, Olaf can hang-glide into areas into areas plac places to stop and breathe without any dan hand coordination, and play-balanced well where Erik and Baleog cannot go. Naturally, ger. enough to make it worth their while. CGW having Olaf properly deployed means that his The bad guys were cleverly d can protect all three, while Balcog can presented, whether they were The Lost Vikings shoot arrows at the threatening enemy. mummies who walked with hands outstretched to convert At various points in the game, Baleog will The Lost Vikings need to shoot arrows in order to trip switches our heroes into the walking Amiga, IBM, Super Nintendo or punch buttons. However, if the player undead; a villain who was a doesn't have one of the other Vikings propBaleog look alike; or the boss Roland MT-32 (SCC-1) sound cards GHE LOST erly placed to supervise the process, the arrow alien, Tomator (a giant green VIRINGS Silicon & Synapse, Ronald Miller Interplay simply disappears. For example, at one point guy). The most ingenious en(714) 553-6678 Baleog needs to shoot a screen's width plus a emy, however, was a simple TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: $29.95 IBM: 386SX or better, VGA graphics, 1.7MB hard drive space; supports Ad Lib (Gold), Sound Blaster (Pro) Documention look up (on installation) PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Irvine, CA Page 222 Computer Gaming World "


"SMART MOVES! Looking for inside strategies so you can play your best? Tune into Planet Kidz on CNBC Saturday at 4:30 (est) November 27th for radical new games for Super Nintendo Entertainment System and the best in computer software. MATH BLASTER: In Search of Spot NEW TWOALS BEST SELLING MATH PROGRAM Math Blaster from Davidson. Make learning fun with the world's best-selling math program. Four all new activities cover addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, fractions, decimals, percents and more. With over 50,000 different problems possible, you'll boost your problem solving skills into the stratosphere. AGES. TO 11 Davidson Sharpen your skills with exciting games for the super NES and SEGA CD from LUCUSARTSTM and JVC. Join Luke Skywalker, Han Solo and Chewbacca in a continuation of their epic action/adventure in Super Empire Strikes BackTM. Test your skills in the fast paced action packed SEGA CD Thunderstrike. SEGA JVC THUNDERSTRIKE Remember to watch Planet Kidz for smart stratagies and computer tips on November 27th. SEGA CD LICENSE STANDARD PRATEN ACEST PAID PROGRAMMING 305-427-9655 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD «I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Winter (No) Quarters Empire Deluxe Tournament Heads for Finals by Alan Emrich Art by Rotiyer MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics WARGAMING INORLT QQP's Battle of the South Pacific by M. Evan Brooks ....228 Koei's PTO by H. E. Dille....... 234 SSG's Warlords II Strategy Tips by Robert Hayes, .... 237 Roger Keating on Warlords II ...... 241 Gold-Juno-Sword A Final Review Of The V for Victory Series by Terry Coleman .... 244 SSI's War in Russia Review M. Evan Brooks Meets Gary Grigsby at Stalingrad ........ 248 Opponents Wanted ....251 The Great War: Passing Mustard Gas by H. E. Dille ....... 252 Another Look At Three-Sixty's Patriot by M. Evan Brooks.... 254 C ure, the holiday season is a time for peace, launched an all out retaliatory campaign, taking family and long winter's nights. But one four cites from Ray by rurn 44. Henry had only can only be so civilized. At some point, to remain patient and, when the time was right, encountering one more Christmas carol, movie, simply march in and pick up the pieces from the decoration or glass of eggnog during these dark vicious red-blue campaign. It was all over on days of December will drive a person to scream. turn 68, with Henry coming back from a 3-1 If you are among these Yuletide curmudgeons, deficit to win the march 4-3. relax. Just whip out a wargame and peaceably Well, gentlemen, on to the finals! It is my take out your frustrations through simulated understanding that at press time our two titans mayhem and destruction. It will keep you on were preparing to grapple and were making Santa's \"nice\" list, and you will be much more further play balance suggestions. It looks as fun to be around. though they're up for a best of five match, and What has been very fun to be around this past we'll bring you the results next issue. month is our Empire Deluxe Tournament, cosponsored by New World Computing. The On Top of the (Avalon Hill semi-finals are over and an eastern and western The rose (Jim Rose, to be precise) is starting champion have emerged. Next month, we'll have our grand prize winner and runner up. Our to bloom at Avalon Hill. After signing up two defeated semi-finalists, however, in addiAtomic Games for two projects (Operation Crution to their cool Empire Deluxe hat provided to sader--their redesign of the V For Victory game all contestants by New World, will receive a one engine and Beyond Squad Leader), they've moved year subscription/extension to CGW. Hopebeyond their past reputation in computer gamfully, lifting these new, heavier issues will proing by announcing that they were \"back with a vide them the exercise they need to triumph in vengeance.\" With an ambitious schedule of future war and strategy games that are enhanced, their next tournament! computerized versions of their boardgame clasMark Conder vs. Mike Koln sics Third Reich, Civilization, 5th Fleet and Blackbeard, «The Hill\" is certainly making a In the western regional finals, a best of three major commitment to computer gaming. match went to Mark Conder who won games 1 When asked why their next release, Computer and 3. Each player won their first game as Green Third Reich has been delayed, Jim Rose in(after the scenario modifications put in place as formed me that he has been keeping close tabs described last issue), so they agreed that neither on what the grognards have been saying about plaver could be Green in the last game. In the Hieb Command and Clash of Steel on the comrubber match, Mark's blue horde over MAK's puter networks. Hearing customers lament over clite red troops by way of overwhelming producthe current state of wargaming Al, he stated that tion and some good fortune in battle. Avalon Hill's policy will not be to release a game when it's ready, but rather when it's good. While Ray Matthews vs. Henry Gale I've heard this before from many others, Jim This was a battle royale. These two friends, backed up his claim by sending a beta copy for who entered by signing up together in the same me to examine (sans Al) and indicated that piece of e-mail, conducted a six game march \"when the Al is better, we'll release it.\" Not only where cach would play both sides of every pois that the right attitude, but that is also a tential player combination in our three-way practical one considering the past reputation in tournament scenario. At the end of the first four computer gaming that Avalon Hill has to overgames, Ray was up 3-1 and looked like a shoe-income. (Would that all computer game compafor the finals. Each time, Ray would take a nies could afford such delays in releasing titles production handicap of two, while Henry aluntil they're more perfected.) ways took a combat handicap of two. Until next issue, so long from the bunker. However, Henry came back in the last two One final bit of advice to my brother wargamers: contests, leaving the match tied at three victories kiss your sweetheart under the missile tow this apiece. A rubber match was required. Ray took year—a TOW Missile in the kisser is not acceptblue, Henry green. Ray made an early attack able even if her family does come to visit. I hope against the computer player's red capital which you find some quiet time both for thee and thine seemed to have teed-off the computer player. It and thy hobby, wargaming. CGW Page 224 Computer Gaming World "


"Combat Supplies The WARGAMER'S Computer Company supplies you with the tools you need. weapons, etc. POA includes a choice of specific or random Middle East scenarios/ maps. An optional Map Builder program ($15) allows players to create unique maps. \"...for the grognard or serious student of the modern battlefield, POA becomes virtually mandatory.\" CGW ($44.95 + $4.00 S/H) POA runs on IBM and compatibles only, with EGA graphics, and 512K minimum RAM. PS Simulations is devoted to wargamers and their needs: the need to be an integral part of the action; the need to control battlefield conditions, the need for accuracy; the need for detail. HPS products satisfy these needs. Point of Attack The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation available. POA is a platoon/section tactical simulation, with over 100 modern weapon systems from eleven countries. The artificial intelligence is incredibly accurate. Wargamers can control air superiority, supplies, communications, SIMULATIONS weather, morale, Mail checks/money orders to: HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 publishers are creating ADC add-on disks for their games, allowing players to jump right into operations, bypassing the symbol set and map input steps. \"ADC is a must have Available product that will only by mail. change the way Please add $4.00 you play warshipping and handling. games.\" CA residents add state CGW sales tax. Please ($79.95 + specify disk spec $4.00 S/H) when ordering. ADC requires at VISA/MC: CALL least 600K RAM, (408)554-8381 VGA, for IBM and compatibles only. Mouse optional. HPS Simulationsthe source for all your Combat Supplies. Aide De Camp Now you can use your computer as a playing aid for all your wargames. Up to 30,000 hexes per game map, unlimited units, multiple user-defined zoom levels, game-turn replay ability, and easy play-by-mail or modem makes ADC the most exciting new product for board wargamers. ADC does not include rules for any specific games the board game must be purchased separately. Several board game Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"Order Now! 800-999-7995 International (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 $5 SAVE! $5 Tony Larussa Il Draft ..........16 Tony Larussa Il Player ........16 Mouse Yoke ............ Night Force Joystick........... Call Omega Joystick ...................9 PC Command Control .........19 Pilot's Edge Version 1.0 .....12 Pilot's Edge Version 2.0 .....12 Pilot's Edge Version 3.0 .....12 Sabre Analog Joystick ........22 Virtual Pilot For the Best in ADULT CD ROM. Call, Write or Fax Mission Control for a List of the Hottest Titles and Most Competitive prices. You Must be 21+ to Order. U.S. Atlas for Windows ......54 Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue .....22 Ultima 7:The Black Gate .....50 Ultima Underworld II ..........52 Ultima Stygian Abyss ..........25 Ultima VII Silver Seed.... 22 Ultima VIII Pagan Ultrabots .... Uninvited Windows Unlimited Adventures USA East Scenery Disk ......43 V Victory 4: Gold Sword ......43 Victory at Sea...... $5.00 off your order (over $50 Simply send in coupon with your order! (offer expires 12/31/93) Not to Be Used For Sale Items! One Coupon Per Household .25 -35 ..43 S. .....37 SOUNDCARDS/CD Virtual Pilot Pro................CALL Digital Edge CD ROM Kit....695 Discovery CD 16 bit Int......595 Edutainment 16 Internal....595 CD ROM HEADQUARTERS MARK II WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM 59 .45 Simply The Best! Flight Control -The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as a 2 button Joystick $69. Flight Control Pro $115. Rudder Pedals $115. ACM Game Card $35. WW Weapons Control Mark II Hands on throttle with 7 controls including radar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures Fully Programmable $99. BMX882 A5 32 Walker ........ A3 Positronic Bridge Power Game Bundle 2.... .32 Prince of Persia 2 PrintShop Deluxe Privateer .......... Privateer Mission Disk 1 .....22 Privateer Speech Pack ........22 Prophecy ........... ...27 Putt Putt Joins the Parade ..33 Putt Putt's Fun Pack Quarterpole. Quest Glory 4. Quest for Glory III Railroad Tycoon Classic .....22 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe ......43 Rampart .... Realms of Arkania Red Baron .... Red Crystal .... Return of the Phantom.... Return to Zork ................ Rome .............. 37 Rules of Engagement 2 ......43 Sam & Max Hit The Road ....40 San Francisco Scenery ....... Scenery Editor ................ Scenery Grand Canyon ..... Scenery Tokyo Japan Seal Team ..... Seawolf Seven Cities Gold .... Shadow of Yserbius ..... Shadowcaster ......... Sharif on Bridge ..... Shuttle Space Flight Siege Walls of Rome Silent Service 2 Classic Silverball..... Sim Ant ...... Sim Ant Windows Sim City 2000 Sim City Classic DOS. Sim City Windows Sim Earth ....... Sim Earth Windows Sim Farm Sim Life Simon the Sorcerer. ...........34 Slater Charlie Go Camping .32 Smokin' Gun Windows ........30 Solitaire's Journey Space Hulk ......... .40 Space Quest 5 Spaceward Ho! Speed Racer Racer X... Spellcast Springbreak.........37 Star Trek 25th Anniversary .37 Star Trek Judgement Rights.37 Star Trek Next Gen. ............47 Stonekeep Street Fighter II. Strike Command Miss 1......22 Strike Comm. Speech .... Strike Squad ............ Strip Poker Data Disk 1 ......18 Strip Poker Professional......35 Stronghold ....... Super Ships of the Atlantic .22 Super Tetris Windows Surf Ninjas....... SVGA Harrier... Syndicate ......... Syndicate American Revolt ..22 Take a Break Pinball Wind...32 Terminator 2029 .............. 43 Terminator 2029 Op. Scour 22 Terminator Rampage...........43 Tetris Classic ..................32 Tetris Classic Windows ........32 The Blue and The Gray .......43 The Dig The Elder Scrolls The Arena.43 The Great War 1914-18 ......47 The Labyrinth. Third Reich..... Tom Landry Deluxe ............32 Tony Larussa Baseball 2 ....40 Tony Larussa II AL/NL ........19 Victory Pak...... .32 War in the Gulf ... 34 Warlords 2 ....... WC 2 Ops 1 & 2 Pak......... When Two Worlds War ........37 Where Space Carmen Del ...50 Where in World Deluxe .......48 Winball Windows..............30 Wing Commander/Uit. 6 .....39 Wing Comm. 2 Speech .......27 Wing Comm. Academy ........35 Wing Commander Deluxe ....50 Wing Commander II ............ 25 Wizardry Trilogy 2..... WolfPack CD Rom. ...........45 World Circuit Grand Prix ......37 WWII Battles South Pacific ..37 X Wing MD 2 B Wing ...........22 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 ........22 Pro Audio Spectrum 16....189 Sound Blaster 16 .............219 Sound Blaster 16 ASP ......219 Sound Blaster Deluxe..........89 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe. 122 Sound Blaster Pro MCA.....258 Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16....132 Sound Machine w/PC Kit.....99 Soundman 16 ........... 129 UltraSound ..... 119 Voice Blaster ............... .72 THRUSTMASTER ....32 (1) = Interactive (M) = Movie 101 Serual Positions FIS Strike Eagle 3 Private Eye Mysteries. 101 Sexual Postions 2... Fantasits and Lifestyles.................69 Private Pictures Vol 1..... 7th Cuest 2 The 11th Hour ......... Family Doctor Protaslar War on the Frontier .. 7th Guest Fatdag Exposed() Putt Putt Goes to the Moon AD&D Dungeon Hack Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Putt Putt Joins The Parade .... AD&D Fantasy Empires Fores Putt Putl's Fun Pack Adult Movie Almanac () Fractal Ecstacy Q69 Adult Palate Vol. 1 CD Rom Game Pack 2 ... Rebel Assault .. Adult Sampler CD -Geekwad Games of the Galaxy Return of the Phantom Adventures of Seymore Butts (1) ....69 Gifs Galore Return to Zork Aeris Guardian of the Fleet... Cirts in Vivid 1 or 2 Rimfire Pacific (M) After Dark Trilogy (M)..... Girls of J. Stephen Hicks II. Rodney's Fun Screen ... All Beauties ..... 39 Girls, Girls, Girls, Girls Sci-Fi Fantasy .... American Business Phonebook Global Explorer Secret of Monkey Island American Girls Great Naval Battles Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe .29 American Journey Groliers Encylopedia Secrets (M) Animals ... Gunslip 2000 ........ Shakespeare's Complete Works Animation Fantasies 2 Hacker .... Shareware 1993 Animation Fantasies Hawai Girls Shareware 1993 Arthur's Teacher Trouble.com Hell Cab Shareware Explorer... Astrology Source Hidden Obsessions (M) Shareware Extravaganza B17 & Silent Service Combo...... High Volume Nudes. Shareware Overload Banskok Hot Hunks.... Shareware Studio Bare Assets House of Dreams (M) Sherlock Holmes Detective 1 or 2... Basics Electronic Cookbook 39 Sherlock Holmes It . .. Battle Chess Enhanced..... Indiana Jones 4 Fate of AHantis Shuttle Flight Simulator Best of Vivid (0) ........ Insatiable (M) Sleeping Beauty Betrayal (M)... Iron Helix.... Smutware ... .. Bble Library Island Cirts 3 in 1 So Much Stareware Blue Force Jutland Soft ... Britannica's Family Choice Kama Sutra Software Vault 2 Busting Out (M) King Dong....... Software Vault Cold Busty Babes 2 King's Quest 6 Upgrade Southern Beauties Cale Flesh (M) King's Ransom Space Quest 4. Camp Double D (0) LA Strippers (M) Sports Illustrated Almanac Cal and Mouse (1) Language Dicovery ........ Star Trek 25th Anniversary Chess Maniac Legends of Porn II (M) Storm 4. ChessMaster 3000 Library of the future Strike Commander College Girls (M) Local Girls 2 Super Smutware. Condo Cuties (M) Loom. Sweet Dreams Conspiracy...... Lord of the Rings Swimware 1993 Creepy Crawlies...... Lost Treasures of Infocom 1 or 2 ......47 Talking Classic Tales Creme De Le Creme Lovely Ladies 2 Talking Schoolhouses Cute & Cuddies Luscious Ladies Terrorist Group Profiles Dare Bluff or Die Mad Dog McCree. The Journeyman Project. Dark Sun Shattered Lands ........ Mammals National Geographic .......29 Timetable Business Politics & Media 42 Debbie Does Dallas (M) .... Man Enousta (1) Tony LaRussa 2... Deep Throat (M) Mantis: Experimental Fighter Total Baseball '93 Ed..... Digital Dancing (1) Men Who Love Women....... Total Fantasies Digital Dreains Mixed up Mother Goose ...........24 Traci I Love You (M) ... DirtyTalk (1) MM 2 Day of Teslade .. .. ... 45 Tropical Girls Doors of Passion (U).... Moving Fantasies (M) CD Rom..... Ultima Underworld/Wing Command 2 60 Dracula Unleashed Mystique of Orient 59 USA Wars: Civil War Dream Machine (0) New Wave Hockers (M) Video Cube . Night Trips (M). Visual Fantasies (M) Education Master Night Watch (I)...... . Weekend at Emie's (1) CO. Educational Gameland North American Indians Where in World Carmen Deline Encyclopedia of Clip Art P.C. SIG Games Wicked (M) Eric the Unready Paradise Club (1) Wild Places ErotiCafe PC Six Version 2 Wild Women..... European Racer ... PCG 1 CO..... Windowmaster Erotic Girls Phoenit 3.0 Windons 1993 Extreme Delight Phone Sex Wing Commander 2 Deluxe Eye of the Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle ....54 PhoneDisc Residential USA Wing Commander Deluxe. Eye of the Beholder 3. ........32 Pork Ware. .. Women of Venus FUTA Stealt/F15 Strike Eagle 2 .40 Princess of Persia (M) ..............44 World Traveler 2...............37 Wave Blaster. ACM Game Card Flight Control System ..... Rudder Pedals ......... Weapons Controller M2.......99 X-Wing ACCESSORIES *.48 ...20 Art of the kill. 29 CD Rom Caddie CS 150 Speakers CyberMan. Gameblaster ........ Mitsumi CD Rom Drive......299 Mouse Mat Single .............. Notebook Gameport.......... Sound Blaster Speakers......22 V32 Internal Fax Modem ...169 Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our Color Catalogue filled with New Items, CD Rom, Discount Coupons, Complete Listings and more! FREE with your order, or send $2.00 to receive it.. (Outside of US and Canada send $5.00) &GER CONTROLLERS Analog Joystick ..............32 Analog Plus ..... Aviator Yoke .. Eliminator Game Card .... Flight Control Pro Flight Stick ..... Flight Stick Pro. FX 2000 G Force Yoke Gameport 2 MCA Gameport III Automatic I controller ........ icontroller for Laptops ...... Intruder Joystick ......... Mach 1 Mouse Wheel ... .....43  Get The Facts Via FAXBACK! CALL (201) 676 7454 from your fax machine! Receive info on New Releases, Adult CD Rom, Specials & More! 24 hrs 7 Days a Week CONTROL "


"Take Advantage of Our $5.00 Off Coupon! Order via GENIE! Type MC-SOFTWARE to visit our store! METAL & LACE The Battle of the ROBO-BABES! The Seren Secrets \"The Seven Secrets of Life\" ..Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Use skills, magics, and raw strength to help you on your quest. Play alone or with your partner. An intuitive interface makes the game easy to control. Simply one fine adventure and role playing endeavor. NETRACE By QQP...... ........$37. WWNOWA IBM DISKS Beat the House Betrayal at Krondor ... Blades of Destiny..... Blood Net ... Bloodstone Blue Force Bram Stoker's Dracula Bridge 7.0. Bridge Master Windows Our gorgeous Robo Babes are expecting you! They'll give you a welcome you won't soon forget: An action game like you've never played before. You'll be dazzled by Hi-Res Anime graphics! ATrain............................... A.T.P.: Flight Commander ....37 A320 Airbus .................. Aces of the Pacific .......... Aces Pacific WW2 1946 ....22 Aces Over Europe ........... 47 AD&D Dungeon Hack ........ AD&D Fantasy Empire ........40 Adventures Willie Bem 2......43 After Dark Saver DOS....... .....**** Cuckoo Zoo ... Cyber Race...... Dark Side of Xeen ..... Dark Sun Shattered Land. Daughter of Serpents ...... Deja Vu 1/1l: Ace Harding ...33 Delta V....... Detroit 37 Discov. Steps Columbus Dominion Doom Dragon Knight 3.. Dune 2: Dynasty Dyno Quest. Eagle Eye Mysteries Earth Invasion Windows Easy Street Eight Ball Deluxe.. El-Fish....... Empire Deluxe ... Empire Scenario Builder ......22 Empire Deluxe Windows ... Eric the Unready.. Eternam Eye Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle ..47 Eye of the Beholder 3.... Falcon 3.0 ... Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 Falcon 3.0 Fighting Tiger ...30 Fatty Bear's Birthday........ Fields of Glory Flashback .... Fleet Defend F-14 Tomcat....48 Flight Sim Toolkit Flixmix Forgotten Castle Freddy Pharkas .. Front Page Sports Football ..43 Front Page Football Pro .. Gabriel Knight.... ..43 Game Maker .. ..59 Gary Grigsby's Pacific War ..47 Gary Grigsby's War Russia ..47 Gateway 2................37 Geekwad Games of Galaxy ..25 Global Domination ..............37 Grand Slam Bridge 2 ..........33 Links 386 Pro Links Banff Springs Links Course Belfry Links Course Innisbrook ......22 Links Course Mauna Kea ....22 Lost Files Sherlock ..... Lost in Time .......................43 Lost Treasures Infocom 2 ...32 Lost Vikings ........... Lucky's Casino ......... Lunar Command Madden Football 23.5........35 MM 2 Day of Tentacle ..... Masters of Orion ........... MechWarrior 2.. MegaFortress:Old Dog ........28 Metal and Lace ........... Mickey's 123 2.0............ Mickey's ABC's 2.0 ......... Microsoft Arcade Windows...34 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 .....49 MM 4: Clouds of Xeen ........43 More Incredible Machine .....32 More Vegas Games Wind ....22 NanoTank Windows.... Naval America Atlantic ........22 Naval Scenario Builder .......29 New York Scenery Disk........32 NFL Coaches Club Football ..43 NHL Hockey '94........... Out of This World ...... P.T.O. Pacific Strike .. Pacific Strike Speech Pack ...20 Paris Scenery Disk Perfect General .... Pilots Power Tools ....... Pinball Dreams Pirates Gold Police Quest 3 Police Quest 4... Brix....... By Megatech...$35. ..35 = FLIGHTSTICK ...37 4662-666-008  TOULNOJ NOISSINI Caesar ........... Carrier Strike .............. Carners at War ........... ..43 Carriers at War 2 ........... ..47 Carriers War Const. Kit .......37 Center Court Tennis .. ...15 Champions ....... Chess Maniac 5 PC ...........45 ChessMaster 4000. Civilization Master Edition ...47 Clash of Steel ............ Coaster .............. Cobra Mission ..................47 Cohort II Comanche Max Overkill ......47 Comanche Mission Disk 1...28 Comanche Mission Disk2...35 Command Adven Starship ..43 Companions of Xanth..........37 Conquer Windows.. .............43 Conquered Kingdoms Conquered Kingdoms 1.......27 Kasparov's Gambit Kid Pix Kid Pix ........................37 King's Quest 6 King's Ransom King's Table .... Koshan Conspiracy ...... Kronolog The Nazi Paradox..43 Kye Deluxe Windows ...........28 Lands of Lore... ..37 Leasure Suit Larry 6............43 Legacy Realm of Terror .......43 Legend Kyrandia 2 Fate.......40 Leisure Suit Larry 5 Life & Death II: The Brain ...32 ..47 The ultimate combat stick for all PC's. Powerful new features: 3 fire buttons, Trigger, Throttle, Trims, Viewing and more. Activate Weapon Controls. ON SALE!!.....$55. EIN ungdoms .........37  22 Air Dual Flight Simulator .....42 Air Warrior .... Airport & Facilities Direct ....20 Alone in the Dark Ambush at Sorinor Animation Studio Windows .79 Arborea...... Archon 93.......... Armored Fist ..... Armour Geddon... Ashes of Empire AutoWorks ...... Baseball Windows.......... Finally.. The Sequel, \"Warlords II\" Now, Warlords il gives you more of everything. More worlds to con quer, more mighty aremies to make and enemies to vanquish. All displayed in fabulous, hi-res graphics and backed by a full sound track. Features include: random worlds, hidden maps, exciting and dangerous quests, new exotic army types and th smartest computer opponents ever. BY SSG..... .....$47. VN 19 19 Graue Wolf Aces of Deep ....42 Great Naval Battles ...........47 Great Battle Admiral's Pak...54 iacebanese Admira While Supplies Last! A Line in the Sand 14 Mach1 Joystick CH Prod. 17 A.T.A.C. 29 Maelstrom 5.25 Action Station 19 Mantis: Fighter Ad Lib Gold 1000 99 Mario is Missing Air Force Commander 19 Martian Memorandum Airbucks 19 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0 19 Aircraft & Adventure Fact. Microsoft Flight Sim. 74 29 Ancient Art War In Skies 29 Monopoly Deluxe Windows 29 Arachnophobia 9 Mouse Yoke AutoMap Windows 2.0 39 Grammy Awards CD Rom 38 Bandit Kings Ancient China 37 Omega Joystick BattleChess 4000 VGA 29 Oregon Trail IBM Buzz Aldrin's Race In Space 34 Panzer Battles Macintosh Campaign 29 PowerGame Bundle Carrier Strike 5.25 Reading Adventures in Oz Combat Classics 24 Remote Control 5.25 Computer Cleaning and Rex Nebular Vacuum Kit Romance 3 Kingdoms II Computer Vaccuum Kit 14 Scenery Upgrade Bundle Conan Cimmerian CD Rom 19 Tropics & Rocks Crime Does Not Pay Scrabble Deluxe Windows 29 Dragon's Lair 3 29 Secret Island Dr. Quandry 29 Expert Pet Care 9 Software Jukebox CD Rom 29 Eye of the Beholder 3 37 Sound, Graphics Air F15 Strike Eagle III 37 Special Forces FailSafe Guardian 19 Special Ops 2 5.25 Gameport 2 MCA Spoils of War Goblins 5.25 27 Strike Commander Golf Guide: (CA & HI) CD 19 Super Munchers Greens: Ultimate Golf 5.25 37 Swap Gunship 2000 VGA 5.25 30 Theatre of War 5.25 Harpoon BattleSet #4 5.25 19 Tom Landry Football Heimdahl 19 Trolls 5.25 Hockey League Simulator 2 22 Trump Castle 3 K.G.B. 5.25 Ultima 7: Forge Virtue 5.2522 L'Empereur 5.25 Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle 42 Land, Sea, Air Trilogy 2 24 Ultima Underworld II 5.25 49 Leather God. Phobos 2 34 Vell of Darkness Legend of Excaliber Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Lemmings 2 32 What's My Angle Links Course Bountiful 5.25 14 Wonderland 5.25 Links: The Challenge Golf 19 Zoo Keeper    Gamepe 5.25 Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW1293, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! 22 & HD) 225 37 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk .....19 Hardball Ill Players Disk ......19 Harpoon 2... Harpoon Challenger SIG .....52 Harpoon Designer Series 2...27 Head Coach Football Wind... 27 Heirs to the Throne ............37 High Command......... Hong Kong Mahjong Pro .....33 Hoyle's Book of Games 3 Hoyle's Book of Games 4. IndyCar Racing Innocent Until Caught Isle of the Dead.. Italy Scenery Disk ... Jagged Alliance....... Jeopardy Alex... Jeopardy Alex Windows ... Jordan In Flight .. Jump Jet ... 19 29 Circle Reader Service #101 "


"REVIEW Meet Them.. Midway! World War II: Battles of the South Pacific by M. Evan Brooks orld War II: Battles Of The South (Yamamato is a hypothetical slug-fest; Coral gram, and intelligent planning. Pacific (BOTSP) is a simulation of depicts the Japanese attempt to seize Port The tactical/strategic hints are generic and naval strategy and tactics berween Moresby in 1942; Midway is the classic and may be summed up as \"hit them hard-hit 1942 and 1943. As either the Japanese or the decisive naval engagement of the Pacific). them first!\" Good words of wisdom, but often Americans, the user assumes the role of thea\"Campaigns» are long scenarios, with difficult to achieve in an unbalanced scenario. ter commander fighting for supremacy in the game-time running up to a year (Coral Sea Pacific in a plethora of scenarios. begins in May 1942; Solomons begins in Au\"Quick Games\" are small scenarios emphagust 1942; Esperance begins in October sizing a particular game mechanic and can be 1942). Even if one does not wish to engage completed in an hour or two (Flattops is an in a campaign, the option of using everything evenly-matched, ahistorical carrier battle; available offers a valid learning tool for the Seastrike is a build-your-own surface battle shorter scenarios as well. similar to some of the campaigns in Lost Admiral Free4All is similar to Seastrike, exThe Written Word cept one can choose carrier forces as well; The manual is a half-sized 100-page pamAmphib offers an American invasion of a phlet. However, South Pacific is not geared Japanese port; Clash is a major surface battle; for the grognard wargamer. Thus, the basic Mop-Up is an engagement wherein the rules are covered in 23 pages, the advanced American forces attempt to secure total surules in 31 pages, and combat/scenario notes The documentation covers everything, but premacy in the ending phases of a campaign; in the remainder of the documentation. The only actual play will enable the user to visuInvade offers a Japanese offensive early in the documentation is adequate. Any computer alize how the different aspects of the program war; Liberate portrays an American attempt manual that notes that the rules of the game fit together. This is not difficult, it just does to free a major island). are based upon common sense...\" delivers a not translate well to paper. As long as the \"Battles» are intermediate-length scenarios, sense of foreboding to most users. However, subject is potential mistranslation, I do wonwhich may be completed in an evening South Pacific is in fact somewhat intuitive, der why a Luftwaffe field marshal (\"Smiling and even a novice user WWII will be able to mancuWorld War II: Battles Of The South Pacific ver around the mapboard and engage in NAME: World War II: Battles Of The South Pacific PRICE: $59.95 combat. Being able to WORLD SYSTEM: engage in combat efWAR REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, 1MB RAM, VGA graphics, START 6.2MB hard drive space; Adlib and fectively is another SoundBlaster sound cards supported matter, and one that # OF PLAYERS: 0-2 (modem option) PROTECTION: Documentation look up will require both a DESIGNER: Rod Olsen, Bruce Williams and Mike Isom PUBLISHER: Quantum Quality Productions careful reading of the 1046 River Avenue documentation, expeFlemington, NJ 08822 URUT 1908) 788-2799 rience with the proPlayers Scenarios IBM bir Realism T Page 228 Computer Gaming World "


"Al» Kesselring, perhaps?) is prominently pictured in the manual. Perhaps this is another case of the Berg Theorem of Wargames (i.e., to be successful, a wargame requires Nazis, Nukes, or NATO). But aside from Herr Feldmarschall wandering into the wrong theater, the documentation is accurate. Star Spangled Soundtrack The graphics and sound are well done, especially the sound. As the user prepares to give orders, his subordinate will respond vocally and if one is playing the Japanese, in a PIC (politically incorrect) accent. The verbal acceptance of orders is amusing and the sound effects of depth charges, torpedoes and \"bombs bursting in air\" give proof through The submarine-and-destroyer scenarios are interesting initially, but soon become relatively insignificant. It would have been nice to be able to turn off this portion of the graphics. But what is even more disconcerting is the \"lessons learned.\" When aircraft penetrate a surface fleet screen, the vessels are lined up linearly, in a depth up to three vessels. The user has an option to reallocare his fleet in any manner he chooses. Since the enemy aircraft always penetrate from left to right, optimal placethe night that sound can indeed play a factor ment would be for the carriers to be in the in wargames. extreme right flank shielded by escorts to the A good variety of sound cards are supportedfront. What is wrong with this is that it is and, for the first time, I was able to get completely ahistorical. Carrier task forces digitized speech with my PAS-16. Actually, I utilize a defense in depth, with virtually a was able to use the PAS-16 option in the beta symmetrical defense. An air threat can easily version; when the commercial version was released, the use of the PAS-16 option caused continuous lock-ups. By changing to an AdLib compatible setting, I was able to get adequate sound. On first impression, the graphics are clear Pe and well-done. They are reminiscent of an amalgam of Carriers at War(ship-to-ship/airto-air engagement), Pacific War (strategic map), and Empire Deluxe (strategic map icons). However, as one continues to play, the graphics begin to pale somewhat. BEBE «Baseball heaven»| the Mike Douglas, online game player FASTEST Pay Pre-Pot Game Deense One reports on a CD DRIVE ON THE MARKET \"Has no rival\" PC Magazine \"Sparkles with unalloyed brilliance ... truly belongs in a league of its own.\" Game Players PC Entertainment Magazine PRED 10-Ft MAC/PC iki SPECIAL BUNIN \"Breathtaking ... stunning... a landmark 03 Compete against friends, challenge the computer, or relax in Spectator Mode. product\" WIND IBM/MPC Chessmaster 3000 Loom Secret of Monkey Island Stellar 7 Sports Game Review \"True baseball RCA stereo jacks Front head phone jack Personal head phone set Share the sense of time and place known only to true baseball fans. Playing the computer game Baseball for Windows is like being on the field. Includes four powerful programs that put you in control - Baseball StatMaster League Manager Advanced Draft Fast 200ms access time 330 KB/sec transfer rate Multi-spin technology With purchase of drive! head-first into baseball fantasy\" LOONSTELLATO Two stereo speakers Double enclosure door Automatic lens cleaner Plays audio CDS Photo CD capability MTBF 50,000 hr's TWO CD-Roms o sa Call now to order 1-800-654-5472 Ext. 10 (Open 24 hours) APBA presents BASEBALL FOR WINDOWS Only $69.95 plus shipping. No-Risk 30 day money back guarantee. Miller Associates, 11 Burlis Ave. Suite 200. New Canaan, CT 06840 Call for a FREE CD-Rom catalog filled with our complete line of CDs & Multimedia accessories! SOLID 1-800-777-3642 C ounty Computers Buality Computers Circle Reader Service #100 Circle Reader Service #112 December 1993 Page 229 "


"adapt to any direction, and in fact optimal torpedo bomber tactics called for a \"Hammer/Anvil\" approach in order to strike a vessel from two directions, thereby ensuring a broad target to at least one attack vector. The graphics herein, while enjoyable, do not teach a proper lesson to the user, and to a novice gamer, would in fact reach the wrong lessons of history. Ship-to-ship engagements are handled a la Carriers at War. While the placements and movements of the fleets are not purely accurate, the rendition of the battle line moving forward to engage is somewhat more acceptable. Engagements against surface installations are also depicted. The actual screen illustrates the fleet lined up to the lee side of the shore installation. Each hour, bombardments may occur, and while shore batteries may in fact be \"heavy,\" I wonder about the caliber and accuracy of those depicted herein. Let the Aggressor Beware! these shore batteries pack a tremendous punch, and an unwary fleet can go down to defeat. Once the game is loaded, one can use the mouse to perform virtually all functions. Moving a task force is as easy as clicking on origin and then on destination. The route chosen also states the time necessary to arrive, and one may alter speed as well (although continuous combat speed is guaranteed to consume fuel and add to wear al and tear). Victory is often determined by the judicious approach of reinforcements rather than a pell-mell rush of ships arriving in an exhausted and fuelless state. Surprisingly, a game editor is not included. While some of the scenarios allow a free-form composition, it would have been an added bonus to allow the player to determine his own campaigns in the Pacific. The advanced game allows one to tailor bombing missions for land (HE [high explosive]) or naval (AP (armor piercing]) targets, retrieve more details on individual ship damage, set up patrols, replenishment, etc. Again, irtually everything can be accomplished by a mouse click. simulation is to do-nothing. Just put the simulation on computer versus computer, and watch the ensuing battle. Hopefully, the observer will gather sufficient knowledge as to be able to begin a scenario alone. At no time will both sides ever be really equal in strength; even in the hypothetical scenarios, the inclusion of historical naval assets will mandate both different fleer compositions and qualities. The Japanese fleet has better torpedo capability (both on ship and plane) plus aircraft range, while the American feet has better endurance. Determine the Find, Fix, Destroy! Actually, the easiest way to understand the What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle: Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS\" And... FCS (Joystick) TrustMaster Controls 10tut RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (5031689-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #128 Page 230 Computer Gaming World "


"Psychotic Killers. Hand-TO-Hand Combat. High Explosives. Acid Baths. Then it Gets Bad. CRITICAL PATH Kat, chopper pilot-turned survivalist, has only one hope for escape from Generalissimo Minh's maximum security facility... You. Guide Kat along the Critical Path, through scene after scene of killers, mutants, traps and high-explosive surprises. It's a gritty, realistic cinematic experience! \"This isn't a game...they're going to KILL me!\" From your fully-equipped control center, you share Kat's view via a camera mounted on her headset. Action bursts forth on your screen with lifelike 3D motion video, explosive sound effects and music soundtrack! Warn Kat of fast-approaching dangers. But if you slip up... it's \"Game Over\"! Sign up for combat duty at a software dealer near you. MEDIA VISION WINDOWS CD-ROM Call 1-800-845-5870 for information or a dealer near you.  1999 Media Vision, Inc., 47300 Bayside Parkway. Fremont, CA 94538. Fax (510) 770-9592, Media Vision, the Media Vision logo and Critical Path are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. All other trademarks are those of their respective companies. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #161 "


"ME 21 1944 AB WednesdAVSeptember 23 searah phase Tontplane attaaking torically, this was not ammunition. Rarely will one achieve success correct, but South Pawith torpedo bombers; such was history, such cific was not meant to is the game. be a detailed historical Find, fix, destroy! The offensive catechism simulation. Thereholds true in South Pacific, as the American, fore, one should dione must seek out and try to close the range. vide the fighters into separate squadrons. Japanese aircraft have a longer range, although they do suffer from a certain fragility, The bombers do not have to be split, and actually they should Parting Shots stay together in order South Pacific is the most detailed wargame to achieve a unified yet released by QQP. It is engaging and enstrike and overwhelm tertaining, but I find it somewhat light as a the enemy's defenses. serious simulation. Is this a flaw? It isn't if The only exception is gamers understand that South Pacific is not to draw a few planes off in order to use designed to be a serious simulation. So, for those who tire of the satisfying historical chalvictory conditions and react accordingly. It them as spotters. One lenge of Pacific War and want a quick and lenge of Pacific War and w does little good to have sunk the enemy fleet can't strike if he doesn't know the location of me easy «pick-me-up,\" South Pacific will do. when the victory conditions called for occuthe enemy. Also, for the Alan Emrich-types, the inclusion pation of an island. Be sure to access all units-task forces, air of a modem option will insure a presence on In the simplified menus, air strikes may be fields, etc. Do not get distracted by a carrier the hard drive for a substantial period. either standard (bombers only) or full (bombWill the novice gamer be entertained? I am ers plus fighter escort). Be sure to divide the air. Remember, carrier air is important, but it not sure if Battles Of The South Pacific will fighters into a squadron to leave on CAP is much more fragile than land-based air. attract a novice audience, but assuming it (combat air patrol). The game simply has As the American, torpedo bombers are does, I'm unsure if the neophyte wargamer each type of plane in a separate squadron (e.g. good for searches. Their use in a combat will have the endurance to delve into the fighter, dive bomber, torpedo bomber). Hisoffensive role is to act as a magnet for enemy intricacies of the simulation. CGW SIDELINE SOFTWARE D. HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY ARE SO UNREAL? YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE NEW PC TITLES TYPE PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH, TESTING, & DESIGN. Lure of the Temptress 18.95 WE DIDNT . Nick Falda's Chartplonship Golf Edic 21 95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Fue Team 2200 16.95 Four Crys of Tra 2195 Flight of the Inder 18.95 GP Unlimited & Track 2195 Greg Norman Gol 1895 Harpoon 14.95 Haut China 18.95 Hyo Oud 18.95 HAC TRE Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16 95 King of Chicago 1495 Lexni olyanda 21.95 Links 385 29.95 A320 Atbus USA Archie McClean's Pool Battle Isle 93 BMy Blows Demonscale Fields of Glory Ishar 2 Flight Simulation Sports Simulation War Simulation Arcade Role Playing Game Strale Simulation Role Playing Game Sports Simulation Graphic Adventure Arcade Stategy Sports Simulation Role Playing Game Graphic Adventure Space Strategy ALL THREE for only Role Playing Game Arcade Platform Nippon Sales One Step Beyond Ryder Cup Gall Shadow Worlds The Patrician Wlules Voyage WWF, 12, The Simpsons World Legends Yo Joe   S G2GO C SIMULATIONS CANADA.. FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING PC EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo-packed playable cover DISKS with each issue! PC Format. PC Review, PC Zone, PC Plus, PC Power. PC Action, or PC Games each only $10 Marts 24.95 Alnis Bearon Typing Tutor 1895 Megilo Mania 2195 Alicroprase Creens 26.95 Mig 29 Fulcrun 1895 Nigel Mansells Grand Prix 2195 Orhus 1895 Pxilic kids 2195 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pil Fighter 18.95 Populous & Promised Lands 24.95 Power Hanger 21.95 Prince of Persia 16.95 Parthry 1895 RBI Baseball? 1495 Rex Nchita 2495 RoboCop 3 19.95 RoboSoort 2495 Rachel Range 16.95 Svan 5 1895 Shadowlands 18.95 Som Cay Terrain Edmor 995 Siever 2195 Siemping Gods Le 14.95 Sneakad 1695 Spal Forces 24.95 Spell Casing tot 18.95 Storm Masters 18.95 Sike Flex 19.95 Say Of Road 1695 Super Sure laders 18.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Test Drive 2. aldadisks 18.95 The inmorta 1995 The Lost Adria 2195 The pic Candie 2 21.95 The Simpsons 16.95 TV Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V.Sools Baning 2195 TV Sports Foolaai 1495 Trump Casino 2 18.95 U 6 2195 Velle 1495 Wahmarks 2495 While Drah (Raw) 18.95 Wirk 1895 Wolback 18.95 WWF 2 2495 Zool 2195 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availabilily subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Deleclive products exchanged with sameilem. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-95 19 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Fl. Lauderdale, FL 33309 NAVAL COMBAT: ***New\"RED SKY AT MORNING, Global Naval Strategic Combat In The Modern Era. ***New\"TYMAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 1815. THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1942. THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations in the Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Combat. G DON'T MISS THESE DIS COUNT PC DEALS! 4.0 Sports Boxing 18.95 689 Attack Sub 1895 A.Tran26.95 Adios Szis 18.95 Ala (Meroprose) 2495 8.17 Bomba (Micros) 2495 Beds Tale 3 1 95 BAT2 21 95 Battle Isle 18.95 Battlechess 14.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 Bloonych Cara Cama Carmes at ww Centurion Defender of Rome Chuck Yeaper's Advanced Comhal Collassis Brike 4 Command HO Crisis in the Kremlin Deluxe Sri Pola Delae Svip Poker 2 Draina 14.95 1495 21.95 1895 21.95 16.95 1895 21.95 16.95 1295 18.95 ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. \"Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #122 Computer Gaming World Circle Reader Service #120 Page 232 "


"NOW PLAYING AT A CD-ROM DRIVE NEAR YOU. TM ENTER QUANTUM GATE, THE FIRST VIRTUALCINEMA EXPERIENCE. How you interact makes the difference... full-length, cinematic adventure experience! How you between life and death! interact with real on-screen actors determines how The year is 2057. Earth will only support life for the story unfolds...all the clues you need await your another decade. You've enlisted to help conquer discovery. Six different action segments challenge you Tar-Palantire, possibly Earth's only salvation. Explore with new situations and constant a detail-filled virtual environment, navigating both danger. All presented interactive and arcade-style action scenarios that test in realistic video, with 16-bit your skill at space-age combat and role-playing. CD-quality sound. The High Adventure In VirtualCinema! challenge awaits at a VirtualCinema makes you the main character in this software dealer near you. MEDIA VISION Call 1-800-845-5870 for information or a dealer near you. Media Vision, Inc., 47300 Bayside Parkway, Fremont, CA 94538. Fax (510) 770-9592. Quantum Gate and VirtualCinema are trademarks of Hypertsole Studios, Media Vision and the Media Vision logo are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc.  1993 Hyperbole. All other trademarks are those of their respective owners. "


"REVIEW Pacific Theater Of Operations Koei's P.T.O. Blows A Hole In Video Game Stereotype by H.E. Dille cong 1040 CLGM DOO 3 If asked to describe a home video game, any point from the breakdown of negotiaare not going well in a battle. Finally, historimost players' descriptions would include tions to the final battles surrounding the Japacal purists are allowed to edit the names of the words like \"graphics\" and \"action.\" In nese mainland, but the game is in no way leaders to reflect the actual participants if most cases, they would be on the mark. The constrained by the historical timeline. The desired. vast majority of video games on the market attacks on Pearl Harbor, Wake and Midway are targeted at young adult males, 7-16 years need not occur unless chosen as the initial Retrofike ve old. Granted, there are crossover titles like objectives. Because of this, the game has a lot Mario Brothers and Sonic the Hedgehog that of replay value. Enterprise 8832321 hold broader appeal, bur these also remain Pensacola faithful to the core audience. Additionally, it The War Room Salt LK CITY is important to recognize that there are some Initially, the player selects either the camOhester adults that waited for \"Mortal Monday\" (i.e., paign option or one of the historical scenarthe release day of Acclaim's Mortal Kombat), ios. Among the included scenarios are Pearl with equal anticipation as their children. Harbor, Coral Sea, Midway, The Solomons, Battles in the South Pacific, Marianas, PhilPort RestFix Ord. Info Dara Cont ippines and the Okinawa Offensive. Each starting difficulty level must also be de2, 1941 12:00 scenario has multiple victory conditions and termined, from 0-10. This does not affect the if the player succeeds in fulfilling one or more skill of the Al opponent, simply the amount of them, they are given the option of continuof resource points one has for the performing from that point forward in a standard ance of certain functions. To explain, the campaign game. player is given a budget commensurate with Prior to putting to sea, there are several the selected level of difficulty. At the zero other matters to attend to as well. First, one setting, funding is very generous. One has be r peen must determine the ratings of the leaders for adequate fuel reserves and materials as well as the side chosen. None of the actual historical a good budget to allocate to research and development or other activities. R & D moAs a rule, older gamers tend to avoid the figures are portrayed out of respect for the nies can go toward the development of better dedicated video game consoles. As computer surviving families (remember, Koci is a steel, engines, electronics, etc., even to Jet and gamers, however, their enthusiasm for the wholly owned Japanese company), so a ranRocket research if desired. At the highest dom number generator is provided for these hobby can be just as rabid as their younger setting, the player has only those resources of counterparts. These, with few exceptions, statistics. One hundred and two points are spread among four ratings: Sea Command, fuel, materials and industry that the governhave been the traditional dividing lines of Air Command, General War fighting and ment provides, with no room for discretionelectronic gaming. Because CGW has always Bravery. The player can continue to ary spending maintained a clear editorial focus toward the roll the numbers until they generate latter group of gamers, we have rarely crossed P.T.O. a combination they like. The first that line. two skills act as modifiers in subP.T.O., Koei's newest release for the Sega sequent engagements. War fighting P.1.0. PRICE: Genesis, crosses the line on its own, appealing ability determines how a character's SYSTEM: Sega Genesis (SNES also available) PROTECTION: directly to the core group of strategy warbattle plans and other suggestions # OF PLAYERS: PUBLISHER: Koei Corp. gamers who normally do not play video are accepred at military conferences. Burlingame, CA games. It is a grand sweeping portrayal of the Bravery determines whether or not a (415) 348-0500 WWII Pacific conflict. Players may enter at leader will cut and run when things TITLE: $69.95 None Page 234 Computer Guming World "


"Port Rest Fix l Ord Info Data Cent AIlles Flag | BB Pen Sod The Battle Plan As the game proper begins, a military conference will occur to determine the initial strategy. The Army will have three plans, any of which may be selected, or the player can propose one of his own via the character selected to attend the conference. This proposal will only be agreed to by the Army if the leader has a high rating in War fighting, 55 or above as a minimum. All plans contain three objectives, either offensive or defensive. As an example, a good initial plan for the Allied player might be to defend Hawaii and Port Moresby while attacking the Marshall Islands. Once a plan is adopted, the next step is to arrange the battle fleets and assign leaders to command them. The default ship groupings are not the best arrangement, so the player should modify them from the beginning. blow by the Al controlled Fleets. Being in the right place at the right time has its advantages, even when it occurs through blind luck. Fleet #1 for the Allies, for example, consists of the entire contents of Battleship Row at Pearl Harbor. It is not a good idea to send these capital ships off on their own with only scouts as indigenous air support. As such, one can use the Arrange command to split these assets and their cruiser escorts into battle groups centered on the three aircraft carriers. Further, one can augment the new groups with full transports and freighters if they will be assigned an offensive objective. The player may have up to 16 fleets at any time, but they only control the first Fleet directly. Other fleets are given one of four objectives when they leave port: Attack an enemy fleet, Attack an enemy base, Gather Intelligence at a specified location or Make a Port Call at another friendly base. Enroute to these objectives, the Fleet Commander will scout for the enemy and, if encountered, may engage targets of opportunity. The aggressiveness with which these engagements are prosecuted is a function of the leader ratings. These battles can be watched passively or, if the player desires, only their results displayed. The importance of these chance encounters should not be underestimated. Several times in the course of a given campaign game, enemy invasion forces were stumbled upon in advance of their objectives and dealt a decisive Command at Sea The First Fleet should be given whichever objective the player feels is the most critical in the player can input orders every four hours. During these phases, it is also possible to change the missions of other fleets. The possible orders include: conduct warship drills, conduct gun or air attacks, send our search planes, make course and speed changes, rocket attacks, amphibious landings, aviation drills, even stage banquets to improve crew Training is always beneficial, but it is time consuming. Morale is critical, and the savvy Commander would do well to listen to his GAMER'S GOLD GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES USED IBM GAMES Virus Free Complete USED IBM GAMES Virus Free Complete We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 WE SELL USED GAMES All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility SA Amgion Countdown Kings Quest 5 Kings Quest 6 Lout Files Sherlock Holmes Mortion Memorandum Mean Streets Rise of Dragon/VGA Spoce Quest 4/VGA Star Trek 25th Anniversary Night Breed Bards Tale 3 Batrletech 2 Challenge of 5 Realm Dark Queen of Krynin Dark lands Dusk of the Gods Gateway Savage Frontier Legends of Valor Magic Candle 2 Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller 2 Mega Traveller 1 Midwinter Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 3 Planets Edge Sea Rogue Secret of Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds 1 Starflight 1 siamming Twilight 2000/VGA Ulrima 6 Ultima Underworld 2 Vengeance of Excalibur Wizadry 6 688 Altock Sub AIO Tonk Killer 1.5 F-117A Stealth Fighter FIS Strike Eagle 2 F19 Stealth Fighter Flight of the Intruder Flight Sim 4.0 Jump Jet Knights of the Sky LHX Anack Chopper Montis Exp Fighter/VGA Silent Service Strike Commander Syndicate Test Drive 3 Their Finest Hour WC Secret Mission 1 WC Secret Mission 2 Wing Commander 1 Wolf Pack Yeagers AFT ABC Monday Night Football All American College Football Front Page Football Hordboll 3 Joe Montana Football Madden Football 1 Mike Dirko Football ML Baseball 4 USAT ML Footboll Playmaker Football Skate or Die Tom Londry Football Tony Lorusso Ultimate Baseball Weaver Baseball 2 Weaver Commissioners Ancient Art of War at Sea breach 2 Castles Fighting for Rome Global Conquest Lost Patrol Populous Power Monger Railroad Tycoon Realms Romance of 3 Kingdoms Rules of Engagement Stor Control 2 Utopia Chessmoster 3000 WIN Corriers at Wor Conflict, Korea UMS 2 MER' Daca WE ACCEPT VISA, MasterCard/Discover Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air \"Games must be complete with all disks & printed materiols and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. 13 GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota  57105 Circle Reader Service #71 December 1993 Page 235 "


"QUBE requests, diplomacy and alliances, as well as the establishment of Base policies and quotas. DRU Make Proposal Don't make Parting Shots The actual battle sequences are less appealing than the strategic aspects of the game, but players who don't want to watch them do have the option of toggling them off. The only other major grumble is that the manual is inadequate. Although all the menu options advisor on the state of crew preparedness. are touched upon, many of the critical funcFuel conservation is extremely critical, so the tions are not discussed in sufficient detail that wise Commander shouldn't race all over the the player finds the right button combinaPacific at top speed, or he may have to bring tions to use from the outset. As such, it takes another force to refuel the stranded one. Fia while to master the interface. nally, scout planes should be sent out twice a On the positive side, P.T.O. is an ambitious day, at 0800 and 1600. design for a 16-bit machine. Players who elect Another military conference can be sched the campaign option are in for a solid 200uled when the First Fleet returns to home 300 hours of play time-more than can be port. Provided the mission was successful, had from any other comparatively priced carmorale will rise, more recruits and ships will tridge. Further, no two campaigns play the same, so the actual play value extends beyond be available, and subsequent proposals will be these figures to the limit of the player's intermore readily accepted. If one is unsuccessful, ful, est. As stated earlier, this product blurs the dismissal from command is possible. Other traditional distinction between video game types of military conferences can be held and compute and computer programs. It is a welcome loss whenever in home port as well, covering subof vision however, and one will willingly go jects like arms production, propaganda, speblind to the stereotypes if P.T.O. establishes cial forces ops, technology and armament a new trend in video gaming. CGW Co M P U T E R Talk to her Talk to a GIRLFRIEND in Your Computer RASKETBALL IBM.APPLE IL C-64 The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! Watch her Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. Add $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule  766 total teams included, NFL, WFL, USFL, WLAF & College from 1925 to present. Trade, draft or input teams. Standings and League Leaders! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler  Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies. 27 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included. Standings and League Leaders! Girlfriend Lisa $69.95 AldeaLabs, Box 450971, Garland, TX 75045 (214) 495-6047. Specify 3 1/2\" or 5 1/4\" HD disk.  Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles  Artificial Intelligence, Interactive Conversation  3000+ word vocabulary, synonyms, idioms . She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen  She learns from every conversation!  VGA video of a REAL Woman. no cartoons!  Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.)  Requires 640K RAM and 8Mb hard disk  No nudity, possible mature situations  Ask about Girlfriend Teri and other Personality Kits constantly being released! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 LANCE HAFFNER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service # 40 Page 236 Circle Reader Service #87 Computer Gaming World "


"STRATEGY On The Field Of Combat of itself: small tricke on to dion of the Dis month 550 Gore Order Report Hers View Motorylum Part Two Of A Series On Warlords II Strategy by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. Last month we covered the characteristics of itself in certain circumstances, like Spiders in the percentages for the normal combat syseach unit type in Warlords II. This month we cities. Hero bonuses are the bonuses that tem, while Table 2 provides the same data for pick up with a discussion of the combat system, Heroes confer on all units stacked with them. the intense combat system. The intense comand continue on to discuss general strategies and City bonuses are the one or two-point bobar system reduces the advantage that highsmall tricks that may foil an opposing Warlord. nuses that units receive for being in a city or powered units have over weak units for being entrenched. Stack bonuses are the somewhat, but does not change anything else. Tn Warlords II, combat is fought between bonuses conferred to a stack by certain non All examples in this article will assume the groups of units called «stacks.\" Each stack supernatural units, i.e. Pegasi and Unicorns. normal combat system is in use. Example: a Iconsists of one to cight unirs, and only Supernatural bonuses are the one or twoGriffin is attacking a heavy infantry unit in a one stack can reside in a map space at one point bonuses conferred to a stack by Dragcity (defense 2). The Griffin has a ner strength rime Ciries cover four map spaces and so can ons, Undead, Demons, Devils, Archons, of 7. the infantry a net strength of 5. This hold up to four stacks. Only one stack can Worms, Elementals and Wizards. The m gives the Griffin a 69.2% chance of winning attack at a time, meaning that it is possible to mum bonus that a stack can receive is +); 1.e., the combat. nits even if your Hero has a Hero bonus of +10, The nature of the combat system in Warsimultaneously when besieging a well-dethe stack with him or her will receive only a lords II is such that it is very, very difficult to fended city. +5 bonus. The highest attainable ner unit calculate the odds in any combat where both strength is 14. sides have multiple units. In a situation where Jan 30 However, there are exceptions to the +5 there is only one unit on one of the sides, the bonus limitation. Specifically, intrinsic and odds can be calculated exactly, however. In a city bonuses apply regardless of other bonus straight one-on-one combat, the table conlevels. Thus, a heavy cavalry unit (strength 4) tains the proper odds. In a many-on-one in open ground intrinsic +2 bonus) stacked combat, to calculate the odds is slightly more with a +5 Hero would have a total effective effective complicated, as the calculation has to be done strength of 11, not 9. InSSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn _ Jurn 59 trinsic and city bonuses do not appear in the View anx @ ABA GRO Stack menu option. The Fire Keep 35 34OOX highest attainable strength Currerit for any unit is still 14, Units have a base combat factor ranging however. from one to nine. Additionally, most unit Bonuses are not duplianotaurs. types have special bonuses that they either cated; a stack with two Jine: Cotia receive themselves under certain circumDragons does not receive a Strengths stances or that they confer to units in the same +4 bonus. Nove 12 stack. Dragons, for example, confer a twopoint strength bonus to all units stacked with Odds And Ends them, while Spiders receive a two-point Tables 1 and 2 detail the strength bonus themselves while in cities. I PRED percentage chance of winThere are five basic classes of bonuses. IntrinOp ning a combat between 40g sic bonuses are those bonuses a unit receives two units. Table I gives CERE TESLATOR December 1993 Page 237 "


"SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 59 000 advisor built into the defended cities on your fronts and head for game. The combat advithe interior of your country if you allow Tibros sor within Warlords II is, them; since there are no supply considerain general, a good guide to tions in Warlords II it does no good to \"cut Currents the rough odds between them off from their own country. If you can two stacks. However, it do it without stripping your defenses, destroy should not be trusted such invading armies outside of your cities if when a large number of they seem to be avoiding pitched battles at weak units are attacking your gates. Consider maintaining a strike one powerful unit (or force of heavy and light cavalry, backed up vice-versa). with Unicorns and Pegasi for bonus purposes, in the center of your empire; this allows you The Grand to smash any invading army quickly, at the Strategic View cost of keeping those troops permanently in nh, Q9 G LG ElE Warlords II is such a reserve and away from the front lines. 19 a Cop BP ska slap flexible game that it is dif Speaking of front lines, don't be married to ficult to make any hard them. If a good enemy city is left undefended using a small part of the mathematical field and-fast pronouncements deep in enemy territory, take it. If the attackof combinatorics. Let us assume that we have a have about what constitutes a good strategy. Howing army is strong enough to provide a good one powerful unit (a Dragon, net strength ever, there are some guidelines that can be defense of the new acquisition, consider vec11) attacking a stack of eight enemy light followed. toring in powerful units and operating a guerinfantry units defending a city (net strength The most important aspect of the game is illa campaign in the heart of your opponent's 4 apiece). The Dragon has a 95.3% chance of proper resource allocation. If you are assaultwinning each individual combat, but there ing enemy cities with cavalry and engaging In the mid-game, it is possible to fight only are eight smaller baules to be fought anyone enemy stacks in the field with Spiders and one enemy at a time. Try and do so as much of them can be lost. The chance that the Griffins, then you are wasting those units. as possible. The best way to forestall enemy Dragon will win is expressed by the formula Units are made for a purpose in the Warlords declarations of war on your country is to Units are made for a purpose in the War Chance = (X[1] * X[2] ... * X[n]) where XI II universe, and the prudent warlord will maintain high defense levels; keep a lot of is the percentage chance of each unit versus make use of each unit for the tasks for which units in your cities, and the other players will the Dragon (4.7% in this case). In our examit is best suited. SSG Game Driler Report Mere Vw Motory turn Jump p u ple, this works out to a total chance of 67.8% The nature of the combat system makes use to win all eight battles, and thus the combat. of combined arms an excellent strategy. To determine the odds of the side with the Stacks which mix their bonus types liberally multiple units winning, simply invert the will get the most out of each possible bonus: original probability; the infantry has a 32.2% a stack comprised of a Dragon, a Unicorn, a chance of defeating the Dragon. As you can Pegasus, a Wizard, and cannon fodder troops see from this example, hordes of weak units will do much better than the equivalent units have a fair chance at defeating small groups acting alone or in homogenous groups. of powerful units, even though their odds in Be frugal in your use of vectored produc00EB individual combats are terrible. tion. When the enemy takes a city that was a 2 production destination, that production is It is possible, but extremely complicated, to A calculate the odds for many-on-many comdelayed as the units are sent \"back through the pipe.\" Worse still, your vectoring cities be reluctant to attack you. Once you reach bats. The only way to get a rough estimate of shut off all future production until you reac 3/4 of the winning number of cities, however, the chance of winning is to use the combat tivate them by hand; if all bets are off-the computer players will SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 20000 you forget to do so, this attack you en masse. can be a disaster. In genIn the beginning of the game, neither igeral, do not vector to or nore ruins nor exclusively seek them out. Try from the front lines. Vecto explore those ruins that are conveniently tor to strategically located located along your path of conquest. Let later cities somewhat behind Heroes trudge through the wilderness to pick the fighting, rememberup those hard-to-reach ruins. Flying Heroes ing to update your vectorwith a large bat escort can quickly reach those ing as the front moves. I remote ruins where your initial Hero would find it is easier to allocate still be trekking through the woods. forces if I set up my vecTerrain is highly important; if major terrain toring such that only one features are part of your game map, then XAR unit type is vectored to a make sure to manufacture a few scouts (or A B CPP given city other movement-facilitating units) in the ap30x The computer oppopropriate locations. String your scouts out nents will bypass heavily along the path you are likely to travel; that Page 238 Page 238 Computer Gaming World "


"SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn o they might leave you alone what the highest-powered unit in it is. The long enough for you to unit displayed is the unit with the highest garotte them in their sleep. combat number in the Fight Order menu. Play with the Fight Order When the computer players \"look\" at your menu option if you like; in forces, they assume that all the units in a stack some games it can be worth are the same as the top unit. So, build seven while to make some light infantry and one Dragon. The other changes. In many games I players now think you have the monster stack end up with an army runof all time, and give you wide berth. (You will ning heavily to Pegasi and see them doing it on occasion; a stack will Griffins; in such cases, I usuapproach one of your cities, hesitate for a ally switch those two unit moment, then head off in an entirely different types so that my Pegasi direction after deciding that you are too XE don't get chewed up by city strong.) This does not work if the combat @@00039 defenders. It really depends advisor is turned on, however; the computer oX on what you are doing and players do use that option, and it will tell what your army's composithem that your stack is not nearly as tough as way major unit convoys will not be delayed tion is. it looks. because their scout runs out of movement If a unit uses less than its maximum move. With the combat advisor turned off. vou points. ment points, it \"saves\" one or two points. If can reverse this trick and have a wonderful you leave one point, one point carries over time. Build a stack of seven Dragons (or Always assassinate enemy Heroes, especially if you know it is the only Hero they have and leave more than one point and you get two whatever your ideal slaughtering stack looks like) with one light infantry unit. Go into the they are low on gold. Don't conduct a sneak points. Fight Order menu and switch the positions attack for this, unless you have reason to The automatic pathfinder is good, but has of light infantry and Dragons. The stack now suspect the Hero has some truly incredible many gaps and weaknesses in it; don't use it magic items and has no escort. for long distances. Be particularly careful appears to be eight light infantry. The computer player sends its Hero leading a few If diplomacy is turned on, start the game as when assigning naval paths, as the computer heavy cavalry into this stack, expecting to run a very honorable and decent person. Allow will often have your units move on land to a over you; you cackle with unholy glee as your port nearer their final goal rather than sailing your moral character to deteriorate as the Dragons convert him to blackened Herofish. game goes on. Start as Jimmy Carter, spend (ar a much higher rate of speed) the long way. ay. Great fun! Use the tentative path assignment feature the middle game as George Bush, and the end copiously; this lets you check the computer's If you don't have time to go after ruins, game as Richard Nixon. Once you reach that paths for errors, and if any are egregious consider spoiling the other players' fun. Have magic 75% point, start slaughtering indisenough you can simply move the units the one city do nothing but build scouts or bats. criminately without regard for petty things hard way. Send one out to each of the ruins on the map. like alliance status; everybody is about to You can probably cover a lot of them before declare war on you anyway. If, however, your Dirty Tricks hostile Heroes reach them. The computer position is not strong despite your commandplayer then has to declare war on you in order ing lead, consider playing nice for a while This one only works if you have hidden to get at the ruins. Generally he won't unless longer; the computer players tend to attack stacks (i.e., you can only see the \"top\" unit in he was planning to anyway. What can be truly you with abour as much vigor as you are each stack). Short of attacking them, your beautiful is that the computer sometimes asattacking them. Don't sack their cities, and enemies can see only how big each stack is and sumes your unit must be in transit somewhere Table 1 Chance of Attacker Winning A Given Combat, Die Size 16 (Normal Combat) Defender Attacker 10 13 74 50.0 0.7 0.1 14 0.0 0.1 0.3 12.8 32.7 50.0 63.5 73.6 81.1 0.4 1.8 4.1 7.4 11.8 17.3 0.3 0.7 1.5 0.6 4.1 CON 23.9 50.0 67.3 78.4 85.6 90.3 93.5 95.7 97.2 98.2 98.9 99.4 99.7 4.5 14.4 26.4 38.6 50.0 60.3 69.2 76.8 83.1 88.2 92.2 95.3 76.1 87.2 92.6 95.5 972 98.2 98.9 99.3 99.6 99.8 99. 9 99.9 100.0 86.7 6 2.8 9.7 18.9 29.2 39.7 50.0 59.6 68.4 76.1 82.7 88.2 92.6 95.9 98.2 2.8 6.2 11.0 16.9 23.9 31.9 40.7 50.0 1.1 1.8 2.8 21.6 36.5 50.0 61.5 70.9 78.4 84.4 89.0 92.6 95.3 97.2 98.5 99.4 23.9 1.8 6.5 13.3 21.6 30.8 40.4 50.0 59.3 68.1 76.1 83.1 89.0 93.8 97.2 1.1 4.3 9.2 15.6 23.2 31.6 40.7 50.0 59.3 68.4 76.8 84.4 90.8 95.7 12 0.1 0.6 1.5 2.8 4.7 7.4 11.0 15.6 21.6 29.2 38.6 50.0 63.5 78.4 0.3 1.1 2.5 4.7 7.8 11.8 16.9 23.2 30.8 39.7 50.0 61.5 73.6 85.6 4.3 90.8 93.8 95.9 97.5 98.5 99.3 59.6 6.2 9.2 13.3 18.9 26.4 36.5 50.0 67.3 31.6 40.4 50.0 60.3 70.9 81.1 90.3 69.2 78.4 86.7 93.5 6.5 9.7 14.4 21.6 32.7 50.0 97.5 14 99.9 99.7 98.9 December 1993 Page 239 "


"Table 2 Chance of Attacker Winning A Given Combat, Die Size 32 (Intense Combat) Defender Attacker 3 4 8.9 23.9 38.1 50.0 59.6 4. 1 12.8 22.8 .0 9.7 9 1.7 1.7 5.7 11.3 17.6 24.3 14 0.5 0.5 1.8 3.8 32.7 6.5 26.5 34.9 67.3 2 25.0 50.0 66.0 76.1 82.7 87.2 90.3 92.6 94.3 95.5 96.5 97.2 97.8 98.2 50.0 75.0 85.7 91.1 94.1 95.9 97.0 97.8 98.4 98.7 99.0 99.3 99.4 99.5 31.1 14.3 34.0 50.0 61.9 70.7 77.2 82.1 85.8 88.7 91.0 92.7 94.2 95.3 96.2 42.8 50.0 41.8 50.0 57.2 63.5 68.9 6.0 17.3 29.3 40.4 50.0 58.2 65.1 70.9 75.7 79.7 83.1 85.9 88.3 90.3 2.2 7.4 14.2 21.6 29.2 36.5 43.5 50.0 56.0 61.5 66.4 13 0.6 0.6 2.2 4.7 7.9 11.7 15.9 20.4 25.2 30.1 35.1 40.1 73.5 78.4 82.4 85.6 88.2 90.3 92.1 93.5 10 1.3 4.5 9.0 14.4 20.3 26.4 32.5 38.6 44.4 50.0 55.3 60.3 64.9 69. 2 11 1.0 3.5 7.3 11.8 16.9 22.3 28.0 33.6 39.2 44.7 50.0 55.1 59.9 4.5 12 0.8 0.8 2.8 5.9 9.7 14.1 18.9 23.9 29.2 34.4 39.7 44.9 50.0 54.9 59.6 37.7 44.0 50.0 55.6 60.8 65.6 69.9 73.9 73.6 9.7 13.3 17.3 21.6 26.1 30.8 35.6 40.4 45.2 50.0 56.5 62.3 67.5 72.1 76.1 79.6 82.7 11 70.9 45.1 77.7 81.1 84.1 86.7 12 13 74.8 78.4 50.0 54.8 14 6 and just happened to end up on that ruin winning the game, start sacking and razing get before the end of the turn cycle consigns space, so it will wait a turn for you to get out any newly-captured city that you know you him to the history books. Thus, if you are of the way. When you don't (your scout has can't hold for more than a turn or two. First about to put the kibosh on your opponent's encamped, of course), the computer Hero sack it, then raze it; this way you'll get all the plans for conquest by grabbing his last city, may sit there for turn after turn, doing nothmoney (and the maximum anger from your don't worry about the enormous armies he ing. This does not always work, but when it neighbors, so watch it). Use the money thus may have in the field (or besieging your capidoes it is the most profitable use of a scout or raised to enhance the production of your tal)—the stacks will melt away and do you no bat you will ever see. The same trick can be cities far from the front. harm. CGW used on temples. If a computer player has no cities, his units Once everyone is already furious at you for will do nothing on the one turn that he may KINBOARD) COMMANDI PREMIUM TEMPLATES\" FALCON & MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES\". ONLY $19.95 > OR quadrons. PER SET Exciting new utilities for *Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger\" and the new **MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0\"!! For one low price you get all six: FALCON COMMANDER OR # FALCCALC/MIGCALC 3.5: Superb campaign intelligence gathering tool. MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES Viewable Printable theater map with detailed into on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint timing. Strategic lactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet\". FaleCalc even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! + F3/MIG REQUISITION 1.5: Puts you in command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons. ONLY $24.95!! 11 Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sortprint roster hy rank or skill, Siena Hotel list and more! IMPORTANTOFCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0: Operation fignung uger only. **MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.02 and MIG-29: D.A.F. F3 MAPPER 6.0: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD customizing utility! Change default theaters for Recl Flag and Instant Action Customize and leclutter\" Keyboard Commander Corps keyboard templates end \"Keyboard Confusion' and let you concentrate HUD. Set default view scale Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New on winning. Our high-quality, full-color templates turn any AT101 keyheard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve! graphical map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! We SILOWF3 2.1: Allows viewing of screen-shots from F3's own secret screen capture program!! New interface makes viewing a snap. New conversion feature saves screen shots to popular.GIF or PCX formats. Includes instructions for F3's hidden capture commands! Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion KCCMENU II: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use default menu and increase one's gaming pleasure. .CGW more s9 26 or customize to user's preferences, Sub-menus can be created and linked to add other sims TITLULITE and games. Completely unloads itself from memory while running a menu selection! Falcon 3.0/3.01/MIG-29 Secret Weapons Luftwarte Strike Commander MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut-wrenching action-packed Red Flag Tornado A.T.P. missions. Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Strike Eagle III Jetfighter I & II say \"Mission Accomplished to these \"volunteer only thrillers! X-Wing B-17 Flying Fortress Gunship 2000181 CY Air Combat Mon-Sat Comanche: Max. Overkill DIJCOVER 8:30-6:30 EST F117A Stealth To Order Call: VISA Aces of the Pacific Megafortress 5. Template Special: 1$12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or 2 more $9.25 each!! fusion 09 CHECK SIX!! 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 All other inquiries to keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 143 Ave. 402. D i, 33130 300-26266366 * High-Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format Affixes to Keyboard them at the Mi s Circle Reader Service #86 Page 240 Computer Gaming World "


"Roger Keating On Warlords II A Collection of On-line Notes Compiled by Alan Emrich n the various computer networks, because they can fly. Their role is primarily knowledge about a hidden map than a husuch as CompuServe and GEnie, as airborne scouts. man player. It sends our scouting parties and there are many computer game debats, just like human players do. Temples, signers who take the time to read the bulletin Maintaining Standards cities and ruins are all placed completely boards and answer customer's questions The +1 bonus for each player's standard is randomly, too. about their games. Among them is SSG's ecumenical. It works for any side that posThere are no special triggers in the proRoger Keating, who has been busy answersesses it. gram that help or hinder heroes from joining ing questions about his latest design, Wara player's cause. Having about 1,500 GPs lords II. Maintaining Armies and a little time is all it takes. As Computer Gaming Worlds on-line ediThe normal maintenance cost for units is Remember, other computer) players will tor, I get to follow many threads (bulletin 1/2 of their purchase cost, every turn. Forstart in sparsely populated areas, and their pard \"conversations about computer units on boats, there is a minimum of 4 GP heroes will die at temples and then not be games. Since I have an affinity for Warlords (Gold Pieces) per turn. This is to discourage replaced for a long time, just like human II, every time I saw Roger Keating post a the formation of huge, standing fleets. players' do. There are only two differences little nugget on-line, I printed it out and in this matter. First, computer players don't squirrelled it away. With the conclusion of varying Unit Types complain to SSG about their tough luck. our Warlords 1l strategy article, I thought I Each army type in a scenario has a standard Second, computer players never cheat by would compile his on-line notes for the edicost, time and movement allowance. For saving the game just prior to the big battle\" fication of all Warlords. each city, there is a small chance that these in case things don't go right for them! Early Wall's Treat values will be varied. Note that this can make in the design process, SSG debated about them worse than \"average.\" Army types that allowing the computer to \"cheat\" rather City wall building is easier in Warlords II a player pays to have a city build, however, than spending the processing time it takes to than it was in the original game. However, always come with the standard values. carry out a computer opponent's searching, Catapult unirs are the antidote to that. but it was decided to let the computer playRoger never starts a campaign without them. Personality Problems crs take their time and do it \"fairly.\" Enhance Me! The computer player personalities only give a bit of variation among the different Alan's Advice A nation that is \"Enhanced\" will have +2 computer players. They were not really deThere is a nearly \"perfect plan\" for winadded to the strength of all its units. signed to reflect «personalities» in the huning a game at 100% difficulty. It was deman sense. The factors involved control the vised by Steve Barcia, designer of Master of The Bonus Situation number of assault divisions each player has Orion for MicroProse. The heck of it is, it's Only one of the special/stack bonuses is and the likelihood that they will burn and quite simple. ever applied to a stack of armies. Thus, even pillage. They also guide a computer player First, expand out to your equal share of if there were two Great Worms and three toward certain spending habits. The reason cities (usually around 20, but that may vary Pegasi (or any total of specials greater than they are there in the first place is so that with the number of cities and players in the one), players still only receive a +1 bonus for Roger can experiment with and expand on game). Next, build up your defenses (includthe stack. If you're lucky enough to have a this area when his next game comes around. ing a strong, defensive reaction force--prefdragon, the +2 is added to the stack. To this erably one with a Hero who has something will be added any Hero bonus for the stack. I Am The Greatest to speed up his/her stack's movement) and Note that stack bonuses are determined The «I am the Greatest\" button does two create one sure-fire strike force to attack once, at the beginning of combat. Thus, if a things in particular. First, it increases the with. unit that provided a stack bonus dies in the other players dislike for the human player Attack and conquer an enemy city, then midst of battle, surviving units in its army on the diplomacy index to something pillage it for the maximum money you can will still receive the stack bonus that it proequivalent to burning down three cities besqueeze out of it. After you've gotten all the vided through the battle's end. fore the game even begins. Razing any city money, go back to that city and raze it on Also note that both the attacker and demakes a player unpopular. Roger usually makes a player unpopular. Roger usually the same turn. Then go on to the next enemy fender are eligible for the terrain bonus. The doesn't raze cities until he is either well on city and repeat this process. terrain bonus is determined solely by the the way to victory or so firmly entrenched as What will happen is that: A) you'll become square the defender occupies, so if the dethe game's \"Running Dog\" that any further incredibly rich and get plenty of heroes and fender is in the plains, both side's cavalry will unpopularity would simply not matter. good units to produce back home to conreceive their combat bonuses. Second, computer players at war with the tinue your wars of aggression; and B) your human player will tend not to fight amongst enemies will go broke and be forced to reWho Gives a Flying...? themselves. duce the size of their armed forces, making The flying bonus was changed from the original Warlords game so that Giant Bats your prospects of victory that much better. Keating is not Synonymous Play patiently and, with only a modicum of would not give a +1 bonus to stacks simply with Cheating luck, you can win most of the time. CGW The computer doesn't have any more December 1993 Page 241 "


NA


"ALL OF THE PACIFIC THEATER. ALL OF THE CONFLICT. ALL IN YOUR HANDS. Victory At Sea  picks up exactly where the Japanese left off December 7, 1941. However, one thing is different. You're suddenly in control of the entire Pacific Theater. From the ice-encrusted Aleutian Island battlegrounds to the site of what many call the greatest naval battle ever, Leyte Gulf. Direct the entire campaign from the task force level, or engage in specific battles. Command the Allied Forces, or the Imperial Japanese Navy. Either way, Super VGA graphics and actual documentary footage bring your decisions to life. Decide which resources to stockpile. Who to promote. Who to demote. Get intelligence reports on the political and logistical situation around you. Then plan your next attack. Because it's designed by world-renowned military expert James F. Dunnigan, the historical accuracy of Victory At Sea is without equal. It's also the first game ever to give you GameBook technology. Featuring real WW II action photos and over 100,000 words of historical analysis not available with any other game all just a mouse-click away. JAMES DUNNIGAN December 7, 1941, may live in infamy. But what happens after that is all up to you. Visit your retailer or call 800-653-1360 to order in the U.S., or 800-697-2360 in Canada. VICTORY AT SEA IS AVAILABLE FOR THE IBM PC AND 100% COMPATIBLES AND THE MACINTOSH. VICTORY AT SEA IS A TRADEMARK OF THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC, INC. (C) 1993 THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC. INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, IBM IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES. MACINTOSH IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF APPLE COMPUTER. Circle Reader Service #31 "


"REVIEW It Was the Best of Times, It Was the Worst of Times Photos.comtesy RGM Studios Gold-Juno-Sword Wraps Up The V For Victory Series by Terry Lee Coleman T ver since Beachbead conquered the Apassault, the British and Canadian forces how to fight by using the \"quick start\" Opple and Commodore markets a decade striked Hitler's Fortress Europa from three crations Manual. In fact, the game is playable Jago, amphibious invasion games have beaches, hence the name of the operation through the various pull-down menus, and enticed gamers. Significant, then, that the (and the game). The player eagerly begins has several nice features, such as being able to first game in the V For Victory series would be Gold-Juno-Sword, only to find \"hitting the click on \"victory buttons\" to refresh one's Utah Beach, covering the greatest invasion in beaches\" has already been done prior to the memory on who owns which victory point all of history—D-Day. When released, Utah game! According to the designers, the player's hexes. Beach was a revelation, combining superb role as commander would not give him conAfter playing the first scenario, Orne graphics with a true «board wargame» feel. trol over the initial invasion forces, and rather Bridge, enough times, the player will want to While certainly complex, the system was logithan simply delegate the invasion to the comknow why things are happening, which leads cal, and with persistence, gave the player a Lore options Staff Outlet Planning the NAMU him to the Reference Manual. To call the rich and rewarding wargame experience. manual a \"massive tome» hardly does it jusThe problem with any game series is how rice; it's a walloping 131 pages of explanations to stay commercially successful while still beof Zones of Control, interdiction, and even ing perceived as fresh and innovative. Thus, rules on how units surrender. Many gamers despite a plethora of awards, Utah Beach fell have praised Three-Sixty and Atomic Games prey to the maniacal pace of ever-upgrading for the thorough rules found throughout the hardware and technology. The basic V For series, and Gold-Juno-Sword is certainly comVictory engine was tinkered with, and alplete. For those players who failed to get their though some graphic and technical improvelogistic nightmare fix, the manual has ten ments ensued, the releases of the next two games, Velikiye Luki and Market Garden, pages of supply rules, then follows with seven were infested with a variety of programming more pages of morale and fatigue rules, before puter, the invasion was simply considered bugs. In fact, the situation had deteriorated outside the scope of the game. Gold-Junothe player knows whether his tired, sore and so badly, that many gamers were checking the Sword tries too hard here to be a \"simulation\" hungry troops will fight or not. Supposedly, on-line services for updated versions, before rather than a game. Imagine a book on a by reading all the appropriate material, the even purchasing the games! military campaign that rigidly stuck to one players will be so illuminated that enjoyment will automatically ensue. From a design standpoint, one had to quespoint of view-certainly it would be distion the subject matter of the games as well. hissed as biased, even boring Nevertheless. Part of the lengthy rules is a backlash to the If Utah Beach was evocative, then Velikiye many wargames, Gold-Juno-Sword among criticism of computer games never telling Luki, covering siege warfare on the Russian them, rigidly define what role the gamer must the whole story of the design. NumberFront in the middle of winter, was perilously play, often without considering the gamer's crunchers will have a field day (no pun inclose to sleepwalking. Market Garden could \"suspension of disbelief,\" or what effect such tended) with the terrain and supply charts, hardly have been said to be boring, but the an arbitrary decision will have on the enter and their effects on combat. Nonetheless, volatile situation masked many of the game's tainment value of the there is no single chart for \"roll a 6, defender flaws. In all of the V For Victory games there product. V For Victory: Gold-Juno-Sword is a tendency for the designers to feel that their \"That the game games are superior, simply because they are takes such an apV For Victory: Gold-Juno-Sword $59.95 on a computer screen, rather than a game proach is all the more SYSTEM: board. Ironically, it is Market Garden that puzzling given the REQUIREMENTS: IBM: 386SX or better, 3MB RAM, VESA compatible video card, 5MB hard drive space, shines in this respect, if only because the \"fog care with which the mouse; Adlib, SoundBlaster sound cards of war\" rules are appropriate for the confumanual is put toMac: Mac or better, 2MB RAM for 256-color, sion at Arnhem. gether. Gamers wish3MB under System 7 PROTECTION: Considering the track record then, Golding to plunge right in DESIGNERS: Eric Young, Keith Zabalaoui, Larry Merkel, Ed Rains Juno-Sword (GS) is a return to the roots of may learn about PUBLISHER: Three-Sixty the V For Victory series—the D-Day landings. stacking, naval supCampbell, CA (800) 653-1360 While the Americans had only Utah Beach to port, and generally TITLE: PRICE: IBM, Mac EUR VILTURY supported; math co-processor supported None Page 244 Computer Gaming World "


"TURBO TOUCH 360,\" THE STATE OF THE ART PC GAME CONTROLLER! No Need To Pusa TURBO TOUCH 360 Hip 11111 TURBO ON TRIAX U mu For use with IBM PCs and compatibles 011111111 1111!!! 1111119 111111111111 1111111 11111111 Gives you better diagonal control Gives you easy circular control Faster movement for higher scores No more blisters or \"numb thumb\" Extensively consumer-tested with game \"thumb fatigue.\" Just pass your thumb or players, software developers and computer index finger over the control sensor-you don't game reviewers, the Triax Turbo Touch 360 have to push down. And, thanks to better controller brings a new dimension of control diagonal and circular (360°) control, the newest and comfort to computer game playing. and most challenging games are easier to It's a breakthrough product, control and more fun to play. offering the benefit of higher The Turbo Touch 360 is the scores and longer play without TECHNOLOGIES right product at the right time. ATRIAX For the name of your nearest Turbo Touch 360 retailer or to place an order, call 1-800-858-7429 *Patent Pending. IBM PC is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. Turbo Touch 360 and Triax are trademarks of Triax Technologies. , Triax Technologies Circle Reader Service #130 "


"DON'T WASTE YOUR SOUND CARD ON INFERIOR SPEAKERS. 1.o The Options Starr Duties Panning these CA . Na31191 The Powered Partner 622 Powered Partners are the perfect complement to your multimedia computer system. They are the only speakers to be named a 1992 Windows Winner by Windows magazine. They were also nominated for a Readers' Choice award by Multimedia Magazine. But the best reason to use Powered Partners is the sound. Listen to the experts: \"They (Powered Partner 622) set the standard for all the other speakers\" (David Ranada-\"Windows\" recommended) and \"If you want the best, look no further... the (Powered Partner) 570s are the Rolls Royce of sound\" (Rich Heimlich). With such high praise, why buy anything else. eliminated\" or whatever, and with no visible of a variety of ingredients—the chef's imagiCombat Results Table, the player is left with nation must combine the items so that the no framework for all those pretty numbers. dish emerges with its own unique flavor and Of course, one can always let the computer identity. Three-Sixty, by publishing the V For \"Staff Assistant (um)\" take care of everything Victory games, took a bold step. Yet after four and just watch... games, Gold-Juno-Sword is hardly the flagship Perhaps while the computer is having all the product the buying public has a right to fun fighting the battles, the erstwhile general expect. Although promised, no modemcan learn to be a meteorologist. Clear, storms, modem gaming is available, and while earlier and three varieties of overcast, allow the games such as Velikiye Luki and Market Garplayer to either flaunt his air superiority, or den are compatible with the new game, transfrantically pray for rain (if playing the Gerfer of saved-game files is not. Similar to such mans). Not only can the player manipulate disappointments as Theatre of War and Pathe weather ahistorically, but he may even triot, Gold-Juno-Sword succeeds only on a control the temperature, which somewhat technological level, bereft of soul. Threesymbolically, has absolutely no effect on the Sixty's legacy is akin to a line of books without an editor, its lack of control and support game. setting its buying public adrift. Nowhere was What the player does get to do is fight over the infamous \"bocage\" terrain, rendered in SVGA graphics far more subtle than the old Utah Beach. The tutorials are not quite as painless as in, say, Clash of Steel, but they serve well enough to teach the system. Allied forces are the better for the novice to begin with, if only because most wargamers are better on attack than defense. Sad to say, but even the most defensive-minded will dislike playing the Germans, as their situation is virtually hopeless. In the face of overwhelming Allied airpower, the German is beset with supply hassles, his retreats are interdicted, and his this made more plain then when Atomic movement is restricted. Worse, the AI is incapable of using artillery properly or of coorGames, the design team behind V For Victory, dinating assaults, even when obvious gaps are announced recently that Gold-Juno-Sword left to be exploited. Regrouping or using would be its last game in the series, and that replacements also seems beyond the Al's mea Atomic would do similar games with Avalon ger abilities. Hill. Perhaps Harpoon II or Jim Dunnigan's Should the player feel masochistic enough Victory At Sea can turn things around, but to take the German side, the first thing to do Three-Sixty's reputation in the hobby has is to give the Germans some airpower, or to suffered a major blow, which could only have make the weather ahistorically bad. Even been helped if quality control had been prewith adjustments, the deck is stacked so thorsent earlier in the V For Victory series. oughly against the Germans, that the Al on For Atomic Games, their knowledge and the Allied side almost seems competent! By productivity will be more than matched by a trying so hard to focus the player on a parcompany that has produced wargames for ticular role, the designers lost their own perover three decades. Avalon Hill has never had spective. If the point is that the Allied win was success with computer games, however, and inevitable once forces were ashore, why play Atomic will have to provide innovative and the game? Especially with two human players, the individual scenarios are agonizing for the relatively bug-free products from the first in German against any decent Allied player. order to win over a skeptical public. The true Should the players want to learn about the legacy of Gold-Juno-Sword and its brethren campaign, a book by Max Hastings, for inmay be that one of the best technical teams stance, takes far less time to read than the full in the computer wargame genre teamed up campaign of Gold-Juno-Sword does to play to with the wargame company with, arguably, completion. the greatest marketing resources and savvy. The excellent manual, copious plaver aids. Just imagine what this combination could do good interface, and sumptuous SVGA graphwith Russian Campaign or Panzer ics should all combine to give the true war Leader...certainly, something just as technigamer a feast. Why then are we left so empty? cally dazzling as Gold-Juno-Sword, and unBecause a recipe is not merely a combination doubtedly more enjoyable. Cow LINE W Powered Partner 622 Features  Sophisticated 3-piece system with separate powered sub-woofer  Fully shielded, even the sub-woofer  Perfect for all computer and video applications  Electronic crossover and 3 power amplifiers For a dealer near you, call 1-800-969-AR4U. In Canada, call Precor at 1-800-268-1172. ACOUSTIC RESENSUS Superior Sound Simplified  1993 Acoustic Research, a division of IJI Circle Reader Service #36 Page 246 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S ASK FOR PRICE LIST AND TAKE A LOOK AT OUR SALE ITEM (800) 788-2193 Take Break Pinball 29.95 Yobi Magic Spell Tricks 29.95 call HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635.00 Discovry 8 CDRom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CDRom Kit 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Kit 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro Dlx 119.95 Video Blaster 299.00 Video Spigot 399.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 PAS 16 Snd Cd 165.95 Pro Aud Studio 16 189.00 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 899.00 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 495.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO: Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 129.00 TelevEyes VGA-TV 199.00 WIN TV 399.95 SPORTS Car & Driver Front Page Sports Ftbl Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro NFL Pro Football 1992 NFL Video Pro Football Sports Adventure Tony LaRussa Bsbl II Trouble Shooting Golf Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit Grnd Prix World Tour Tennis call 41.95 41.95 36.95 39.95 35.95 35.95 47.95 37.95 29.95 35.95 24.95 35.95 31.95 25.95 34.95 tba 32.95 Sample Listing of Products B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Discovery Columbus 35.95 Wing Commander 11 47.95 Campaign 35.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Wizardary VII:Crsaders 41.95 Comanche:Maximm Ovrkl 43.95 Dune 11 35.95 X-Wing 41.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 El Fish 35.95 X-Wing Misson Dsk 19.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 CD ROM Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Flashback 31.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 7th Guest 52.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 19.95 Global Effect 41.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Falcon 3.0/Mig 29 Heimdall 21.95 Clip Art Haven-jewel 16.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Humans Compton Interact. Encyc. 249.95 Fit Sim Scen USA East 41.95 Inca Curse of Enchantia 24.95 Flight Sim 5.0 call Indy Jones 4 35.95 Daggar of Amon Ra 41.95 High Command 41.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Day of Tenacle 41.95 Jetfighter Il bundle 44.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Legacy Realm of Terror 36.95 Dune 56.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Legends Valour 37.95 Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis. Suit Larry 5 41.95 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Pacific War 47.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III 47.95 Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas Infocom 11 29.95 Fontraster 2 18.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Lost Treas. of Rain Forest 29.95 Games 1993-Jewel 21.95 Perfect General 35.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Global Explrer-DeLorme 89.95 Rebel Assault Maniac Mansion 14.95 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis 41.95 Secret Weapons Luftwffe 29.95 Mantis 31.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Special Forces 29.95 Mario Is Missing 34.95 Iron Helix call 47.95 King's Quest VI Strike Commander 44.95 37.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) Task Force 1942 38.95 Might & Magic V 41.95 Jutland 52.95 Theater of War 19.95 Monkey Island 2 25.95 38.95 Just Grandma & Me 44.95 Tornado Out of This World Kodak Photo CD 36.95 29.95 V Victory 1, 2, or 3 ea 43.95 35.95 Paladin 11 Legend of Kyrandia 41.95 Pirates! Gold 41.95 Map Expert by Delorme 299.95 Police Quest 3 39.95 Mayo Clinic (jewel box) ENTERTAINMENT 29.95 Midi Music Shop-jewl box 22.95 Prophecy by Sierra 24.95 A-Train 41.95 MS Cinemania MPC 54.95 Populous 11 37.95 ADD Unltd Adventure 34.95 41.95 Prince of Persia II 61.95 Monarch Notes Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 41.95 Quest for Glory III Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 Adventre Starter-Sierra 19.95 Return of the Phanton 41.95 PC Karoake 77.95 Air Bucks 35.95 29.95 Playing with Language Ringworld Alone in the Dark 35.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms 39.95 Prophone 1993 Ed 129.95 Amazons Rome:Pathway to Pwr Pub Paradise-Clip Art 22.95 Arcade Hits Putt Putt Fun Pack 26.95 Rules of Engagement II 41.95 Armourgeddon SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 Rodney's Fun Screen 39.95 Ashes of Empire 34.95 Shadow President 41.95 RoMaterial:Vis/Snd Effect 19.95 Back to Future II 26.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Shareware Studio V.C 18.95 Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Sherlock Hims:Lst Files Sherlock Holmes 3 43.95 Batman Returns 41.95 Space Adventure 2.0 61.95 Siege 22.95 Betrayal at Krondor 39.95 Space Quest IV 35.95 41.95 Sim Ant Blue Force 39.95 Sim City Ultima Underworld 1&11 58.95 Caesar 35.95 Who Killed Sam Rupert 24.95 Sim Earth Carmen SD-Space Dluxe 47.95 Sim Life Willy Beamish 41.95 Castles 11 35.95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 Wing Commander Il Dix 52.95 Challenge of 5 Realms 39.95 WCmdr II/Ult Undrwrld 34.95 52.95 Space Hulk Civilization:Master Playr 49.95 41.95 Space Quest v World Fact Book '92 59.95 Classic Adventure-Lucas 35.95 Spear of Dstiny: Wifnstn 35.95 Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Star Control 11 35.95 WINDOWS Creepers 29.95 Star Trek 25th Anniv. 35.95 Dagger Amon Ra 41.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Stunt Island 33.95 Dark Half 34.95 AudioStar Trek V.1 34.95 Syndicate 36.95 Dark Seed 41.95 Conquered for Windows 44.95 Terminator 2029 41.95 Darklands 41.95 MS Golf 42.95 Ultima Underworld Il 47.95 Daughter of Serpents 32.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Day of Tenacle 34.95 Star Trek Screen Svr 44.95 Ultrabots 36.95 29.95 22.00 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Amazon Trail 34.95 Auto Works 44.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo 31.95 Dinosauer Adventure Discover Space 37.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31.95 31.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain Kid Cad 3-D 29.95 Lost Tribes (Soc Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune Oregon Trail Dix Peter Pan Print Kit 31.95 Playroom ver 2.0 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters Rock & Bach Scooters Magic Castle 31.95 Time Treks 29.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Geom 29.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto III Game Card 27.00 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach II Mach III+ 27.00 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HISpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control Mark II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS Mark! 27.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 COLORADO SPECTRUM: Mouse Wheel call 24:95 19.95 35.95 35.95 38.95 24.95 29.95 39.95 29.95 34.95 MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra, Zoltrix, Zoom and others AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...!  FLT SIM/ WAR A Line in Sand 26.95 Aces over Europe 44.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Ambush at Sorinor 35.95 Armored Fist ATAC 34.95 42.95 MANY SALE ITEMS IN OUR FULL PRICE LIST ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 3315 E RUSSELL RD, #H-177 LAS VEGAS, NV 89120 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Any return subject to 20% restocking fee. Shipping: 1st game $5; addi games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #135 "


"REVIEW * More in Russia Illustration Roger MacGowan Gary Grigsby's War in Russia I dedicated group of gamers will be glad to assist novices, and even the battle-hardened veteran can find much to contemplate and discuss in the modem world. Hopefully, some of these vererans will upload their scenarios for use by other gamers. But for the gamer confused by the documentation, GEnie is a superb place to get help. I Came, I Saw, I Listened The graphics are functional and sound effects are limited, bur detailed wargames on an operational/strategic level need little in the way of sound. Perhaps the overall appearance of the simulation may best be summed up as akin to Second Front and Western Front, with by M. Evan Brooks the interface being more like Pacific War. Visually, an attractive graphic of the units There are five basic scenarios offered: Camappears during combat displaying the numpaign 41 (June 1941-July 1945; the entire ber of tanks, artillery pieces, troops, etc. The war!); Campaign 42 (June 1942-July 1945); actual battle report may be rendered in intriTyphoon (September 1941-March 1942; the cate detail or with quicker accounting; the assault on Moscow); Case Blue (June 1942former illustrates the actual ebb and flow of April 1943; the Battles of Stalingrad); Camthe battlefield, but it takes more time. paign '43 (July 1943-July 1945; commencing Weather remains consistent: if it is snowing with the Battle of Kursk). The scenarios cover the gamut of World War II on the Eastern Todos Front, but the box art notes that there are four campaigns, cight historical and one hypothetical scenario. This hyperbole is muted by the inclusion of a scenario editor. The grognard will be ecstatic at the possibility of creating his own scenarios. However, note that the effort and time necessary to produce a go 240 Pro viable scenario is formidable. There are four points concerning the documentation that must be addressed: a) a bridge TERRATNE. Roll Pel! Bull Basel ? bomb option mentioned in the documentain Leningrad, it is snowing in Sebastopol. As tion has been deleted; b) the tactical hints I noted in my review of Second Front (CGW were produced before the final version, #72, June 1990), this is unrealistic. Chris thereby being more generic than usual; c) in Crawford's Eastern Front (1979) had shown blizzard turns, Soviet tank armies may plot blizzard turns, Soviet tank armies may plota partern of graduated weather change. into three enemy hexes (not two, as stated); Couldn't this occur in WIR? This is not only d) shorter scenarios do not end when the a graphic weakness, but one of historical acobjective cities are captured. One must play curs the scenario to a conclusion (and have the curacy. captured cities in at least supply level 5). Panzer Pushing Victory conditions are not stated in the documentation, but rather are listed in the The game mechanics are mouse and keyscenario conditions (on-disk). Generally, ocboard-driven. While Second Front did not cupation of key cities are the have a mouse option, WIR clearly does. Mr. cornerstones of victory. Since Gary Grigsby's War In Russia the enemy forces will defend such cities to the maximum, Gary Grigsby's War in Russia one must be prepared to enPRICE: $79.95 SYSTEM: IBM gage in massive battles around REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGAVEGA graphics, them. SoundBlaster and SB Pro Finally, Mr. Grigsby has sound cards supported RUSSIA # PLAYERS: continued to support his PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNER: products on GEnie's Games Gary Grigsby PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. Round Table (page 805). A Alameda, CA (408) 737-4800 DATE: W22/11 Clear Brink Frut e ny aficionado of World War II gaming who likes a horde of tanks and a m aximum of troops ends up heading to the East. Gary Grigsby's War In Russia (WIR) is the designer's third trip in that direction, his latest rendition of the epic strug. gle between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. It is not to be confused with the CGW Hall of Fame's War In Russia, released for 8-bit machines in 1984, but bears closer resemblance to his 16-bit effort, released in 1990 as Second Front. Many, thinking through red, white and blue tinted lenses, were confused about the latter title, as we Yanks think of the second front\" as the Allied landings in Western Europe. To allay confusion, the latest game has reverted to a variant of the 8-bit title. Docs, Heal Thyself! The documentation is standard for SSIguaranteed to scare off the novice and confuse the veteran. The necessary information is there, it's just that the prose's elegance makes tax law appear interesting. For the truly mathinspired, the combat formulas are included. I characterized the documentation of Second Front as \"abysmal\"; my opinion stands for WIR. If one is familiar with Second Front, there should be few problems of interpretation, but pity the liser who is new to the system. Luckily, a tutorial allows the user to gain a basic familiarity with the simulation. Also, a relatively detailed Order of Battle has been included, along with a map. It is a relief to see gain including the map in the documentation; it makes strategic planning much easier for the user. The map is composed of hexes (representing 20 miles of terrain), with each turn representing a single week. Army units are represented at the corps level, with each corps consisting of up to eight divisions. i 5/03 TITLE: 1.9MB hard drive space; 0-2 Page 248 Computer Gaming World "


"MICHAEL WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION DESIGN Ninja Taro Might and Magic DEO 28.APANLUS214 pon: PT P Erura 87 Me Laser SA nek. Wing Commander 1220 LYNDON STREET #22 SOUTH PASADENA, CA 91030 Spaceward Ho When you need the finest in computer game illustration, call Michael Winterbauer. Partial client list includes: New World Computing, American Sammy, JVC, Taito, Bandai America, CSG Imagesoft, The Software Toolworks, and Atlus. TELEPHONE 818 799-4998 FAX 818 441-3086 "


"ICITY 111! HN THOUT ARCHI OILIES BANON N ews iu RAM R UIEN  Aut FAC CONTROL mc ONE 6/32/41 Cue MILFI Grigsby still recommends the use of a keypoor performance will lead to an automatic board to input plotting commands, but that «firing,\" or illness can even intervene to alter is a matter of personal preference. the command structure. A proper use of good There are some flaws in the mechanics; for commanders (and a potential fireman a la example, while hidden units are de rigeur, the Zhukov or Manstein) is required for optimicomputer's units become visible during its zation of force application. combat portion, undermining much of the There are certain options I would have liked 972 surprise element. to see: But what is new? Aside from the mouse  The use of separate combat routines implementation and a scenario editor, stratefor each side might have given a better gic and march modes have been decreased to feel; a more realistic level. This allows a better The 8-bit version of WIR mandated Bad weather, the nightmare of the chance to secure large envelopments and to that the player use engineer units to reWehrmacht, has been made even more deadly. pocket enemy formations. Special supply albuild the captured rail net. This perThere is little that the German player can do lows the user to combat supply-specific units mitted one to concentrare his assers for critical offensive or defensive missions. and determine where the Schwerpunkt to avoid the counteroffensive of General would fall. While this can telegraph Winter. Be aware that no matter how rosy the Operation points (a legacy from Pacific War) one's intentions to the enemy, it also picture in August, an early frost (or blizzard) encourage better discipline in strategic planwill change the situation literally overnight. could allow the user to potentially ning; the player should insure that his headbreak out on a narrower frontage. Curquarters move last as this will maximize the Despite digging in or fortifications, nothing use of such OP. The German player should can maintain the line. While some users conrently, railroad utilization becomes remember that, initially, blitzkriegsupply will automatic after a delay of four to five tend that the Germans could have more effiweeks; more than serve his needs, but once the barciently planned for the ensuing winter and tlefield becomes somewhat stabilized, normal Although detailed combat losses are emerged relatively unscathed, I do not believe supply only achieves a 70 percent resupply given for each week, there is no war to that the German logistical chain could have rate and special supply becomes mandatory tal. Aside from copying the weekly offset the effects of the weather. The Axis to maximize assaults. losses to paper, one cannot determine logistics were heavily dependent on horsethe actual losses during the course of The production rules have become more power-literally (over 75% of its transport the war. It would not have been diffiderailed, with factories being more restrictive ability came from horses, and not trucks). cult to add a running total optionin retooling. A tank factory can more easily This, coupled with the inability of the Geravailable at any time the user chooses. upgrade to a newer tank than switch over to man logisticians to sustain their troops over aircraft. In fact, the production can become a All This and the JSII the breadth of Europe, buttress the designer's game in itself. However, it requires much Game play is very reminiscent of Second treatment of winter. Be aware of the weakpainstaking attention to detail, and the more Front-with both its strengths and weakness, and be adaptable. Trading space for casual user would be well-advised to allow the nesses. The major building block of combat time, when done in a logical and coherent computer to act as one's Albert Speer. is the corps. with three to eight divisions manner, is the key to success. In fact, a plaver can allow the computer to being assigned. One may tailor his forces to Aircraft still seem to be too energetic. Air handle virtually any portion of the program. yield the appropriate mix. battles occur on a regular basis, making the Do you just want to handle the assault on Partisan operations have been made more Battle of Britain appear to be a skirmish. Moscow? No problem, change the other important, and if a German player ignores the However, a matter of more concern is that the Army Groups to computer control. Of rear, the partisans can well raise havoc with aircraft of both sides often appear to possess course, wargamers are detail people and it is his supply. Even without partisans, the Gerall-weather capability, and flying both comthe rare wargamer who can resist handling man will face a dearth of supply. Often, only bat missions and resupply in blizzard condieverything from national strategy to platoon airlift can preserve combat units in the front tions is routine. placement. Luckily, one cannot get down to lines. Use such assets carefully, since there is that detail... yet. never enough to satisfy the need. Red Flag Raising The leadership rules have remained unGenerally, a broad-based invasion is the key War In Russia is not a generational descenchanged. One can appoint the field leaders to success. Separate drives for Leningrad, dant of Second Front, it is more of a younger and relieve them on-the-spot. Occasionally, Moscow and the South should be mainbrother. A workmanlike simulation, WIR tained. Of course, Moscow is the prize-its capture will devastate the Soviet since it is the should be acquired by any grognard who does nexus of the road net. Yet, the initial Blitzknot have Second Front. However, for those reig is not rapid enough. Historically, Minsk already possessing the earlier product, does fell in the first week of the campaign. It is mouse implementation and a scenario editor simply not possible here; like Second Front, justify its purchase. That will remain an indithe German military machine often seems to vidual decision. My personal feeling is that be running at the same speed-historically the program has been released too soon after List of the slower in the first weeks but faster in the later Second Front, and since there are no financial months. While it evens out in the end, it does discounts akin to MicroProse's Railroad Tynot yield an accurate picture of the ebb and coon Deluxe vis-a-vis Railroad Tycoon, well... flow of the Russian Campaign. CGW ipota HEAR. UICY UN INDUSTRY MAIL LOVE HUOOF Tala od 21 MODE FAC A REVIEW TU REVIEW FAC CONTROL TH DATE: 783.13 Clour E CER HENTEUILT OTTIC Plot I LA MORE. .. w. 10791 TERRAIN hill and Page 250 Computer Gaming World "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own (free) ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444] or E-Mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B), CompuServe (76703,622), The Sierra Network at Box 1048, GEnic and America On-Linc (CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However,  Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing. Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether the number is a Home, Work or Modem number. . Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Novalink (formerly Digital Dreams) Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems Will you hack and slash your way through a real-time, multi-user dungeon (MUD) or attempt to conquer an entire galaxy? It's your choice when you call The Batboard BBS in Columbia, MO. Enjoy the truc ADD action of Legends and the professional e-mail game VGA Planets (with an off-line VGA interface), or tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including ANSI Pro Football, Chat Roulette, BandWarz, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for highest monthly scores, with full access on your first call (and it's free)! Two CD-ROMs on-line, with the latest in quality shareware games! FidoNet echoes (including GAMING), multiline chat, the adult role-playing game Wild Side visit today for the best in multiline diversions! We're always open 24 hours at (314) 446-0475 with 14400 bps supported. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (AD&D, GURPS), play-by-e-mail games (Diplomacy, ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 (2400 8-N-1] Free access. Dune BBS is seeking modem gamers like you! Modem warrior message area and on-line games. Running on remote access 1.1+. Operates 24 hours/day, 7 days/week. Located in the Milwaukee, WI area: (414) 571-0584 at 2400 14.4k: 8.N,1. The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Tradewar 2002 game. Fly your spaceship, battle the Ferrengi and other traders. Download TWRULES.ZIP before starting. Once you start, you may not restart for 4 months. Only 150 players maximum per game. Call (708) 424-6136. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connecting modem-to-modem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044, 24 hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everything (including over 5,000 files) available on your first call! The Ho-Down BBS wants you to test your metal in multi-player games of Spaceward, Ho! Are you tired of beating 19 smart computer players in a small galaxy? Want a real challenge? Try competing against the most deadly, devious, dastardly, dangerous, diabolical, double-crossing dealers of death and destruction this side of Deneb. In other words, against players just like you! Call with modem set at 8-N-1, up to 14400 bps, (206) 577-8868. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect Generaland Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have on-line games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at either: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342; 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The Informer BBS under Sysop John Custer is running WC 3.90 through two nodes, 24 hours a day at (415) 468-671476715 from 2400 to 14,400 v32.bis HST. Features operating systems, tech specs, conferences on-line drive & controller specs, game patches, drivers and more. The Mac Commonwealth BBS is metro New Orleans, LA is sponsored by the National Home & School Mac User Group, a nonprofit organization promoting leisure and learning on the Mac. Our multi-line system features over 1 gigabyte of downloadable files with emphasis on games and educational material. On-line magazines, Usenet newsgroups, OneNet conferences and Internet e-mail. Support file sections for over 60 commercial games! First Class graphic user interface. All lines support 1200 v.32bis 14,400 access. For information on BBS and group activities, send inquiries to NHSMUG, P.O. Box 640641, Kenner, LA 70064. BBS line 1: (504) 837-7984. Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for Command HQ, R-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games. Running on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokic, IL outside of Chicago. Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this ad in CGW for no-hassle access validation. The Modem Connection BBS in Atlanta, GA supports many modem games and flight sims including: Falcon 3.0, F-15 SEII, Command HQ, World Circuit and more. We have ladder competitions with prizes, and a local F3 squadron has networked Falcon meetings. Join the competition, new blood always welcome. (404) 952-8981; 2400 57600 BPS supported. Space Station Aragon welcomes all adventure gamers to call (206) 277-5489 in Bellevue, WA. This unique board features free downloads of the latest demos from many major software companies and text files on subjects like Star Trek and Star Wars. Take part in our forums to discuss and get hints on the latest games. Take a break and play one of our adventure doors. Sysops llibard and Tiern. Thunderbolt! BBS in Chicago, IL. now offers on-line entertainment with Poker, Blackjack, Bingo, Galactic Empire, Zorgon, Quest for Magic, The Arena and Flash Games (\"The Next Generation\" of on-line gaming). Play RPGs with on-line multi-sided dice! Eric Spanitz, SYSOP. Modem settings 8-N-1.300/1200/2400. Phone (312) 248-4822. The Vanguard Information Systems BBS in Boston is looking for more Gamers for their 70+ on-line games. VIS has two gigs containing over 8,000 files. Call at (617) 267-7168 (up to 14,400 v32bix 8N1). Downloads okay on first call! NO fee!! The World of Windows is looking for some great game players like you! Try your skill and compete for monthly prizes. Sports: Drag racing excitement at The Motor City Raceway, a fishing tournament at The Freshwater Fishery, play in the Tournament Golf game or even pick your favorite NFL team and play some Pro-Bowl Football. In RPGs there is the post-apocalyptic horrors in The Land of Devastation, warriors collide in The Pit, explore SinBard's Dungeon or conquer the galaxy during Trade Wars 2002. For Strategy games, try our ChessMagic chess tournament, deluxe versions of Scrabble and Blackjack or solve a murder at the Who-Dun-It Hotel Modem settings are 8-N-1, 300-38400! There is free access and thousands of Windows games to download for off-line enjoyment. Call today at (305) 751-3117. By Area Code Opponents wanted for Clash of Steel, Carrier Strike, The Perfect General and most other wargames. Particularly interested in face-to-face players in and around the Downey, CA area. Call Mike Garner at H-(310) 869-5155. Orlando, FL gamer seeks nearby opponents for Falcon 3.0, F-15 SENI, 688 Attack Subor any other modem simulation games. 4800 to 9600 speeds preferable. Contact Mike at H-(407) 898-4482. Seeking local \"live ones\" for Air Warrior: Call Don at H-(407) 482-0094 in Boca Raton, FL between 4pm-7:30pm local time. Secking pilots to go head-to-head in Falcon 3.01 and/or F-15 SENI. I'm in the San Francisco area and can be reached at H-(415) 468-2021 or through my BBS at (415) 468-6713. Ask for John Custer. Looking for local opponent for playing games of Conquered Kingdoms Lost Admiral or just to trade games with. Call Mike W. in the Berkeley, CA area at 11-(510) 525-3686 after 6pm local time. Opponents wanted for Conquered Kingdoms, Empire Deluxe, The Perfect General and others. Amiga or IBM. Please call mornings at H-(516) 758-7823 or write to Nick Galante, 246 Fair Harbor Drive, Patchoque, NY 11772-3344. Seeking local opponents for Empire Deluxe The Perfect General WWII-Pacific, Command HQ, Modem Wars and many others. Call Jim in North County, San Diego, CA at H-(619) 674-1543. I am interested in finding opponents for Battles of Destiny, Empire Deluxe, The Perfect General and Pacific War. Contact Chuck Frye at 1-(803) 546-1543 in Georgetown, SC. L ocal opponents wanted for Falcon, F-15 SENT or Tornado. Call Rod in Memphis, TN at H-(901) 527-8764 or W-(901) 525-2557. CGW December 1993 Page 251 "


"REVIEW The War End All Wars To illustrations O Rodger MacGowan A Review Of SSI's The Great War CAVALRY ARMOUR by H.E. Dille Si's The Great War should not be conattention to the essence of combat command: around of repaired units must be weighed sidered a serious study of the war that the planning and execution of fire and move against the enemy's ability to mount a local, ended chivalry in a blast of machine gun ment. Because historical campaigns and scelimited offensive and capture the structure. fire. Indeed, if it were such a game it is narios are eschewed in favor of cleverly Each map contains a mixture of terrain doubtful that it would hold as much appeal. designed fictional engagements, lack of motypes, from deep water to mountain peaks. After the initial offensives of the First World bility is not an issue. Indeed, the quickest way Every terrain affects unit types differently, War, the momentum was lost in a quagmire to win any of the scenarios is ro thrust deep but the player need not consult a myriad of of mud as dark and thick as the political into enemy territory and capture the opposcharts and tables to ascertain these relationclimate which spawned the conflict. Over the ing HQ, though this is never an easy task. ships. Rather, by clicking on the unit during course of four years, each side periodically The Lay Of The Land attempted to break the deadlock without sucthe movement phase, the complete range of cess. In the end, attrition became the major The Great War offers 72 scenarios, 24 each motivator for political resolution and the end for the single British or German player, and of hostilities. 24 constructed specifically for two human players. Within each scenario, the player begins with an HQ, several units of different types, and possibly a factory or depot. Both factories and depots are capable of repairing battle damage for existing units, but only factories may use build points to create new units. The opposing side begins with control of some buildings which may be captured via Nikkour size: infantry or cavalry units, and there may also movement is highlighted. By clicking again be several neutral factories or depots on the anywhere within that area, the player plots map. The latter often contain reserves of units the intended destination for the next phase. Despite the fact that the First World War which may prove vital to shifting the balance This is but one example of the elegant and saw the first significant use of many modern of power. As such, initial moves must attempt unobtrusive interface. to gain control of as many neutral structures weapons-tanks, aircraft, anti-aircraft batterThe Weapons Of War as possible. ies, anti-tank weapons, machine guns, subFactories cannot be constructed, thus conThe most basic unit in the game, the pawn marines, long range artillery—it remains a trol of those close to the front lines becomes of the system if you wish, is the infantry unit. poor choice for a conventional wargame beessential to timely reinforcement. Depots, on It begins with a base strength of six and no cause of the lack of tactical mobility. Good the other hand, may be built whenever special experience. Its elder brother, the elite infanwargame designs rightfully emphasize the imdepot building units are available in a scetry, is slightly more capable in the field, but portance of fire and maneuver, and WWI nario. These units require two unmolested also begins with a base strength of six. In fact, allowed little room for the latter. Fortunately turns and four squares of flat terrain to build all units in the game with the exception of for gamers, SSI's offering does not approach a depot. Because of the latter restriction, there there bomber aircraft and bunkers begin with a the topic in a conventional manner. The are a limited number of places depots may be value of six. Of course, if all units begin with Great War is an abstract strategy game that constructed on cach map. the same numerical strength, one may wonhas greater kinship to Empire Deluxe than Astute players will caremost of the other SSI wargaming titles. Of fully consider the strate The Great War: 1914-1918 course, it has an even greater kinship to Battle gic location and surIsle, Blue Byte's earlier design for UbiSoft, rounding terrain of deTITLE: The Great War: 1914-1918 being built on a similar engine. pots so constructed, as GREAT WAR SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, 8 MB hard disk A commander in WWI would have cer they should support of supports AdLib and Sound Blaster sound cards tainly appreciated the simple elegance SSI has fensive operations with1 or 2 (single computer-ho modem play) afforded commanders in their game. Unburout impeding the flow of PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Ralph J. Krait Bernhard Ewers, Thomas Hauser dened by limited intelligence or the delicate troops to the front. Also, PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations Inc. Sunnyvale, CA Achilles' tendon that is proper logistics, playproximity to the front (408) 737-6800 ers of this system may devote their entire lines for quick turnWAITING FOR ATTACK-HOBE CAVALRY PRICE: $69.95 IBM space, MS-DOS 5.0 or higher; None Page 252 Computer Gaming World "


"E30 CARRYING OUT COMMAND CEAINSI MAX GROUP SIZE der what the point is in having different unit a historical breakdown of the actual events of units are left on the board, or through detypes at all? The answer lies in a more comthe same period is presented. These cut sestruction of all opposing forces in a prolonged plete understanding of the combat model. quences are not influenced by success or failwar of attrition. The computer General is Whenever two units battle and inflict casu ure on the board, and exist solely as very adept at precluding, or at least making alties to the other side, they receive one expe background material for interested players. very difficult, early capture of their HQ. It is rience point. If their atrack results in the References in the manual to a \"Campaign less successful ar combating a war of attrition, destruction of the enemy unit, two experience Phase\" with variable victory conditions are in however. points are awarded. The maximum number error. There is no provision for a campaign or of experience points which may be accumu any form of linkage between scenarios. As ent. The computer has a tendency to favor the lated in this manner are six. such, one who seeks to alter the course of the construction of new units over the repair of entire war will be disappointed. cxisting, combat hardened vererans. It will Ascenario is played in a series of turns, with attempt to do the latter at times, but freeach side alternating between attack and quently fails to pull these units off the line in movement phases. When one side is planning time to avoid destruction by a human Genmovement, the other is plotting attacks, but eral who recognizes their potential danger. As neither action occurs until both players have such, later in the game, savvy human players input their commands and elected to proceed with full strength, full experience units will to the next turn. When this happens, units walk all over inexperienced computer reinwill attempt to exccute their orders, but may forcements striving to bolster failing lines and be precluded from doing so. Units that were halt an unrelenting advance. THINKING TIME ordered to retreat to a nearby depot may be Unit strength is not the deciding factor in destroyed before they can leave the line, for combat, serving only as a multiplier and example, or assaults may be wasted on posimeasure of attrition (i.e., if it is allowed to tions that have already been eliminated. drop to zero the unit is lost). The types of Atracks are resolved via animated cut units involved is more important, but their screens or, if desired, quick graphic displays. experience levels are the key to combat preThe latter significantly speed up the game. paredness. To explain, let us consider an inThe real time resolution of both player acitial engagement between mutually tions forces one to plan moves in advance, inexperienced infantry and elite infantry. We much as in chess, and makes for a more HAITING FOR ATTACH-HODE SUPPLY CAR have noted that the latter is an inherently interesting play dynamic. At the end of the more capable unit, thus one should expect an given turn, players proceed to the next order This has a definite impact on replay value isolated meeting between the two would input phase, albeit with their roles reversed. because even though new scenarios present eventually result in the destruction of the The interface for the input of these orders different challenges, the basic formula for infantry unit. Knowing this, the Commander is well chosen. All commands are controlled is success remains the same. Rotate units to the of the inferior force should seek to attrite via the mouse. The player positions the cursor rear for repair, which is cheaper than replacesome of the enemy, then withdraw the unit over the unit to be manipulated, then holds ment, and one will not only have more powbehind the lines for repair. down the left mouse button. With the button erful units, but also more reserve build points Having reduced the elite infantry to a still depressed, the player drags the mouse in for construction when necessary. strength of three, with three experience one of the cardinal directions and the icon points, for example, the infantry unit falls changes on screen to reflect different comLifting The Barrage back to a neighboring depot with equivalent mand options. It's smooth, slick and may be experience and repairs itself from a strength mastered in just a few minutes without having As we all know, the First World War did of one to six. Returning to the line with to crack the manual at all. not turn out to be the «War to end all Wars.\" experience intact, the infantry unit proceeds Many of the maps may be viewed as puzzles, Likewise, The Great Warcould not be considto destroy the remnants of the elite infantry where success lies in discerning the best stracred the game to end all games. More signifiover two turns. Reduced to a strength of two tegic approach to the terrain and opposing cant achievements lay just beyond the next now, because the elite infantry was still capable of inflicting 4 to 3 losses, the infantry unit forces. Winning is possible through capture trench, but as always the problem is getting returns to the depot a second time for repair. of the opposing HQ, where one receives a across «No Man's Land.\" greater number of points the more enemy It will emerge a very powerful unit, however, When the smoke clears, however, players of because it has gained maximum experience at The Great War will find that they have srumthis point. Experience ratings not only inbled on a much more playable game than any crease a unit's ability to inflict damage on a historical recreation of events could hope to given target, which varies by type, it also be. Even with a slightly inadequate computer reduces the amount of damage which may be opponent, a great deal of time must be ininflicted on the unit by all other unit types. vested to obtain consistent mastery, and playcrs will certainly obtain their money's worth Taking Command in that period. If one is blessed with another Each scenario is designed to reflect actions human opponent, then the replay value of the over a two month period. Between scenarios, product is extended immensely. Cow MEOWFITAATILLBT. SCAVALRI December 1993 Page 253 "


"REVIEW Let's Do The Gulf War Again AL BASRAR UTHEAST AL MUFRAN WANY ALIBAH S AR RUMAYLAN SOUTHWEST VOR DME VOKAL AL KUWAYE AHMED ALJABER AIR AU AL SALIR BASEN A Veteran Revisits Three-Sixty's Patriot RAQ ZONG ARABIA ARAB AUDI AD DIBDIBAH WAFRA \"NEUTRAL Re-Review by M. Evan Brooks JSANNAN SOUTH Pro MAR FESEHAT UNS ca atriot was initially reviewed in Comthe general situation. The net effect of the Using boundary lines as a game mechanism puter Gaming World #105 (April 1993) supplement is to allow the user to gain access is pure militarese. The initial release seemed to a less than resounding acclamation to the simulation. Granted, the innovation of to be a wargame of Harvard Graphics-great In fact, Patriot received virtually unanimous the system requires much thought, and cerpresentation, no input. To some degree this condemnation by the media and in the contain concepts remain somewhat ambiguous remains true of the revised program, in that sumer marker. While the Patriot design was (e.g. actual combat positioning), but at least the user has little to do once contact is made. boldly innovative, it was dreadfully unplayone can now use the program. Nevertheless, what impressed me most was able. Difficult to boot and prone to crashes, that this was a wargame straight out of Comthese programming oversights were nothing A Farewell to Crashes mand & General Staff College or the War compared to the aloofness and unplayability Unlike the initial release, the patch was easy College. of the game system itself. Patriot assumed the to install and easy to run. No separate boot mantle of «The Canine of Combar.» disk was required, and everything ran smoothly — no lock-ups, no crashes. By itself, this is a major improvement. A map scale indicator is now available as an option, and this allows one to conceptualize the distances involved. The maps have remained the same, and the problem with shifting fields of vision remains. The map shifring function is not sensitive enough to allow the player to center his area of interest. The zoom function could have been simplified, but it is workable. In fact, this remains Patriot's greatest The sounds are still limited to opening strength and failure --it is simply too miliThus, it was with some trepidation that I music and sparse battle sounds in the protary. There is no feeling of action or vicarious examined the updated program, version 1.10. gram itself, but at least now my Pro-Audio thrill/terror. Instead, Patriot should be marCould it have fixed what was so wrong before? Spectrum 16 was easily recognized by the kered to the defense establishment as a serious Could an abject failure be rendered a success program. tool for decision-making. This would involve with one patch: some adjustment (e.g, area of world, dataMechanics base, etc.), but it would see the product being Manual Override The game mechanics are used to its greatest advantage. The documentation has now been suppleequivalent to the initial release, mented with a 54-page manual that walks the except one can now under Patriot Version 1.10 user through three separate scenarios at the stand what is going on. The brigade, division and corps levels. While organization tree and force taiNAME: Patriot Version 1.10 there are occasional discrepancies between loring is a concept easily PRICE: $69.95 what is printed and what is on the screen, the grasped, and it gives a quick SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 4MB of RAM, Super VGA tutorials can, unlike the flow of the original rendition of the Order of Batgraphics, 3.2MB hard drive space, DOS 5.0 or OS/2 2.0, mouse; Ad Lib and game, actually be followed! tle. Indeed, it is so accurate that SoundBlaster sound cards supported PROTECTION: a military intelligence officer None Also, certain previous errors have been corDESIGNER: ARTECH Digital Entertainment rected (local times are now correctly noted who happened to see the proPUBLISHER: Three Sixty Pacific Campbell, CA and the Battle of Khafji occurs on the correct gram wondered if it contained (408) 879-9144 date), and each scenario is summarized as to security violations. IBM Page 254 Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE —ON PCZOOL TM NINJA DE THE \"Nth\" DIMENSION 1700L ZUL PEN Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085. Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #64 "


"AIR LASTS CUM SUPPORT STRIK has now begun to realize some of its potential. In all candor, I would not recommend it to a casual gamer. However, for the user who is familiar with Army planning techniques, the program appears to possess merit. command level to reduce the plethora of messages. I am still unsure as to the proper solution, but this definitely needs some additional work. I regret not being able to claim mastery of the system. Even with much thought, time and perseverance, I am somewhat lacking in confidence with regard to my expertise with the system. Still, 23 years of military experience (of which all but four were involved in operations and planning) give me a sense of assurance that I can figure it out. One wonders about the casual wargamer, however. Fixed wing air support and amphibious assaults have now been added and determining air missions has become a mere mouse stroke. Finally, the vulnerability of the Mi tank to enemy fire has been drastically reduced. Designer Sid Meier has said on numerous occasions that if it isn't fun, he doesn't do it. And that is Patriot's failing-it often is not fun. It may be accurate, it may be the most direct link to actual military planning that the civilian user will ever see, but there is little sense of fun. Patriot is really a series of games rolled into one. Depending on the command level chosen (brigade, division, corps, army), one will have certain choices. However, the user should be careful to maintain his proper station. A division commander should not involve himself in company operations. Remember, generals plan the battle, colonels implement the decision-making, and captains fight the battle. While the program will allow one to drop below his level of command, such actions often cause one to lose track of the greater battle. The battle reports often stream in fast and furiously once contact is made. Often, the sheer multitude of incoming information obscures the main screen and overloads the user, forcing him to eventually change to a higher FERRINGEWON COM For those users who suffered through the initial release, I would strongly urge them to secure this latest update. For those who have an insatiable interest in the Gulf War (all three of you), the new version should prove to be beneficial. Finally, for those users who want to know the intricacies of military planning, or for those with actual experience, I can now note that Patriot is accessible. Just be prepared to work at it. Finally, for those users enrolled in Army Command & General Staff or War College, Patriot may well assist in their coursework. CGW Milspec Wargame Patriot always appeared to be innovative. It THE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer... ...JUST GOT BETTER! Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention. Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. (European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!) Circle Reader Service #68 "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Robert Fros, Burbank Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxyd magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. ITD ET Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now shipping! Moc: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5MB RAM, EGA or VGA monitor, Soundblo. or Adl. optional. TTOO My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent product. R. S., Germantown Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescolt, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C Moore, Columbia This is, without question, the most impressive game / have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanly, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! tible with a morte landscapes he one third of Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I espe. cially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming / keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Oxyd Credits: Game of the Year Computer & Pasogogik 06/93 The variety of play is literally, incredible. Score this game a solid 10 Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. Amigal World 06/93 Game of the Month. MarWelt 02/93 Top of the Charts Ban Teaser Category. PC Games German edition This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes. New objects and game elements to explore. The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. I look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, CT I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnumlis on entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Ok so we got hooked! I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks Get a free appetizer for Mac, PC, Amig. or ST: Send $ 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxyd to Dongleware Publishing, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139-2909 Circle Reader Service #59 "


"The Rain Spreras Marvel Panic Collector W 1.9 Mark WILL Bataan Chewy lewe 3. Chene Destilles c. Change Artist Artiler Artist Steve Dita Taking  Comments: Ouretald: 20 Spider-kes Butantastic per Teles a t $8.99 a t 1. Change Price Pard Chest Conditions G. Change Flans View Bala 1. List Next 28 Canics 1. Ti Conle by under K. Find Next Conic L. Search for Title N. Previous Title N. Next Title 0. Search by Flag 1. Search for Coat 0 Price Comics Balckly R. MI Conic To title S. Change antity in Lange X. Return to M e $7.182.EE $0.00 TALU $2.938.69 $1.505.95 $0.00 $0.00 ACTIVE viduals to their former selves, the player must find hidden pieces of a special \"charmed» computer that can do the transformation. Seven puzzles of varying difficulty and style must be solved, including picture matching, word deciphering, letter transposing, crossword puzzling, maze solving and others. Since clues are randomized, multiple levels of play are provided as one moves from site to site in the game world. A built-in Personal Digital Assistant provides the player with descriptions of each computer component, while a notepad offers clues as necessary. Though playing time can be rather short, a modest degree of replayability offers young minds a good value and a fun experience. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3. RISC DIETI D L Mat. Contamos eraber The Comic Collector AbleSoft 4824 George Washington Hwy., Suite 103 Yorktown, VA 23692 (800) 545-9009 THE COMIC COLLECTOR: Anyone in the hobby/business of comic book collecting should consider this versatile inventory program. Not only does The Comic Collector feature numerous ways to access data, but it offers several different ways to make it easier to enter your custom data. Best of all, it allows you to display (on screen), print or file (on disk) information based on price, individual title, artists, writers, demand, active titles, inactive titles, or even the total value of your collection. Additionally, the database includes the entire Overstreet Comic Data & Prices Guide, and you can purchase a quarterly or monthly update in disk format by subscription ($24 for four issues, $60 for 12 issues). IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1. 2 118 Fate Step Word Connection Keyboard Baseline Publishing, Inc. 1760 Moriah Woods Blvd., Suite 5 Memphis, TN 38117 (800) 926-9677 AXIS, THE GAMECHEATER: Invincibility has its benefits. This is especially true when it comes to some of the more demanding action games on the market. While many \"chears\" have been available in the shareware and freeware realms, a commercial program of this type has yet to be seen. A significant new product designed specifically for this purpose is Axis, The GameCheater by Baseline. Available for PC compatibles and Macs, Axis allows the gamer to manipulate his or her game files to override predefined game functions with assignable hot keys, add time, lives, money, extra fuel, and even jump to different levels. Baseline's modular design allows periodic updates to the program to support new game releases. These modules are available at no charge through many on-line services. At present, over 40 games are supported in the PC version (S.W.O.T.L., Lemmings 2, Ultima VI, X-wing, Castles II), and over 50 in the Mac version. But one can only cheat so much: each game has limits in the degree of game control manipulation it will allow. If you're stuck midway through a game, you might be able to get by with a little help from this friend. IBM, Macintosh ($69.95, $59.95). Circle Reader Service #4. The Great Computer Adventure fox Action Software P.O. Box 1448 Ponca City, OK 74602 (405) 762-1622 WORD CONNECTION: Funny how the tasks we used to do for homework have become leisure time entertainment. In Word Connection, the object is to string connected letters together, going back and forth or around and around a grid in order to form words. The player determines the size of the grid of connected geometric shapes (either squares, triangles or hexagons), and races against a clock. It is very easy to play. What is surprising is the size of its dictionary, which includes many slang and irregular word usages. Wordsmiths will welcome this pleasant little gaming diversion. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2. ONE CAN B E les Spar o si SPECTRE CEM STELLAR COM Lestere Meals BOSSBE THUNDER CEX TING CEL DE Print 16 year MICHELE Axis, The Gamecheater American Training International, Inc. 12638 Beatrice Street Los Angeles, CA 90066 (800) 955-5284 THE GREAT COMPUTER ADVENTURE: Children ages 7 to 12 now have a fun way to learn how a computer really works. What components make up a computer? What's the purpose of a microprocessor? What about this thing called memory? All these questions and more are explained in the process of completing The Great Computer Adventure, a point-and-click, puzzle-based graphic adventure. The story is a simple one: a family has been turned into jewels by a mischievous gremlin. To restore these indiCallisto Corporation 182 West Central St. Natick, MA 01760-9582 (508) 655-0707 SUPER MAZE WARS: The Macintosh's domination of the network game market continues with Super Maze Wars. This arcadestyle, 3D action maze game pits players against tenacious robot enemies, networked human opponents, or both. Presented in a first-person, 3D perspective, Super Maze Wars challenges the player to enter their MazeCruiser and roam the complex hallways of a foreign world in an effort to reign victorious over up to seven humanand/or robot-controlled opponents. In the process of this search-and-destroy mission, the player must balance the cost of gathering valuable gems Super Maze Wars Page 258 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX RS# ADVERTISER PAGE RS# ADVERTISER PAGE RS# ADVERTISER PAGE 31 119 77 147 OA 40 . 81 74 65 464 140 75 A 214 @ 360 Pacific, Inc. 242, 243 62 3DI Productions 137 63 AT&T 5964 Abracadata LTD 178 65 Access Software 138,139 Accolade 71 67 Accolade 73 146 Accoustic Research 246 68 Activision Entertainment 75 69 Activision Entertainment Activision Entertainment 79 70 Advanced Digital Systems 217 72 Adventure Learning 176 Aldealabs 236 Apogee Software Athena Software Inc. 164 Aztech Systems 191 Bare Bones Software 120 77 Baseline Publishing 69 79 Binary Zoo 171 . CH Products 197 149 CMS Academic Software 208 148 Cape Cod Connection 186 78 Chips & Bits 87 150 Chips & Bits 89 166 Chips & Bits 91 151 Chips & Bits 93 80 Chips & Bits 95 81 Chips & Bits 97 82 Chips & Bits 99 83 Chips & Bits 101 84 Colorado Spectrum 26 85 Computer Express 106 152 Computer Express 107 86 Computer Express 108 153 Computer Express 10987 Computer Tooter Pals 166 154 Compsult 104 Computability 199 Computer System Sol. 212 Creative Labs, Inc. Cyberdreams 121 . Davidson 185 Devasoft 174 94 Disk-Count Software 21995 Domark 203 96 Domark 204-20597 Dongleware Publishing 257 167 Dongleware Publishing 267 161 Electronic Arts Electronic Arts 32-33 98 Media Vision 233 Electronic Arts 50-51 99 Microsoft Corporation 18-19 Electronic Innov. Design 255 100 Miller Associates 229 Entertainment International 127 101 Mission Control 226, 227 Entertainment International 129 157 New Attitude 174 Falcon Northwest 27 102 New World Computing 41 Family Ware 176 158 Ocean Software 172, 173 Flagship Magazine 256 159 Opcode Interactive Formgen 2 103 Origin Systems Formgen 165 104 Origin Systems Future Vision 162, 163 105 Origin Systems GE Information System 111 106 Origin Systems Gamer's Gold 235 107 Paper Mayhem GEnie 63 108 Papyrus Publishing GEnie 65 . Planet Kids GEnie 67 109 Psygnosis Genovation 143 203 Psygnosis 213 Gosselin Computer Consult. 130 204 Psygnosis HPS Simulations 225 205 Psygnosis 215 Handyman Computing 178 110,111 QQP 20-21 High-Tech Expression 157 201,202 QQP 22-23 High-Tech Expression 159 112 Quality Computers 229 Homebase Products 130 113 Quadra Interactive 135 Humongous Software 151 114 Readysoft 265 Humongous Software 153 115 Recreational Software 187 Imager Inc. 170 160 Romtime Impressions 3 116 Sierra Dynamix Impressions 13 117 Sierra/Dynamix 56-57 Impressions 15 120 Sideline Software Impressions 29 121 Sigma Designs 8-9 Inner Circle Technology 211 162 Silicon Alley Interplay 145 122 Simulations Canada 232 Jemmasoft 175 123 Sir-Tech Software Keyboard Commander 240 163 Software Ent. LTD 178 Knowledge Adventure 154, 155 124 Software Toolworks 189 Lance Haffenr Games 236 125 Spectrum HoloByte 44-45 Landmark Solutions 161 126 Spectrum Holo Byte Legend Entertainment 181 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Liberty International 261 128 Thrustmaster Inc. 230 Logitech 117 129 Time Warner I. Group 141 Logitech 119 130 Triax LucasArts 122-123 131 Tribex Intertech Inc. LucasArts 275 Twin Dolphin Games 201 Maxis Software 49133 Viacom 113 Megasoft Entertainment 183 183 134 Viking Software 194-195 Microprose Software 103 Michael Winterbauer 249 MicroProse Software 105 Zero's and One's 247 Mindcraft 115 165 Zero's and One's 179 Media Vision 231 No Reader Service number. Please call advertiser for information. @ 53 232 @ 169 Sas 89 131 85.. 245 126 143 56 58 57,70 135 61 7 December 1993 Page 259 "


"4 File Eeit Suder Mine with the chance of incurred damage. Games can be played against the clock or for a set number of points or rounds. Six scenarios are included, ranging in emphasis from pure adrenaline pumping action to strategic object collection. As expected, a game like this involves more than just a quick trigger finger: strategic thinking is a must for one to succeed and become King of the Maze. Macintosh ($64.95 single, $99.95 nerwork). Circle Reader Service #5. stone's latest software license, Surf Ninjas the computer game featuring side-scrolling karate action. The player steps into the shoes of Johnny McQuinn, heir to the throne of PatuSan, destined to rid his island of the evil Colonel Chi. Character movement is limited to flying kicks, regular kicks and punches. However, punching or kicking seems to make little difference when actually pummeling one's foes. There is no interface per se except for a means of picking up and dropping objects. Graphics are not bad, but the keyboard combinations for the characters' moves are perhaps this game's best puzzle. Documentation is adequate, but typically sparse. You're probably better off with the pajamas. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Super Mines ESHTE sorde tricks for us.Home I don't think 5 Homey don't play that. Horney don't make no frol out of himself. SUPER MINES: \"A Strategic Game of Logic and Daring,\" that's how Callisto describes their new offering for the Mac, a variant of the Bombergames that have proliferated on many computer platforms for some time. Actually, Super Mines includes two game variations: Super Mines proper and Mini Mines. Super Mines challenges the player to safely mark all the mines on each given playfield without setting any off. The faster one completes a mine field, the higher the score. Field \"promotions also increase one's scoring potential. Mini Mines is a shorter version of the former game with a focus on playing against the clock for high scores. Both games offer varying difficulty levels and a built-in, on-line help system. What sets Super Minesapart from other Bomber titles is the military theme the game is presented in, and the use of increasing ranks that affect one's score. The player's reward, beyond a high score, is to work his or her way from Private to General of the Army. A guaranteed blast for Mac gamers, Super Mines will keep the player guessing for a good while to come. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6. Homey D. Clown SURINGURERIRANO Davidson & Associates, Inc. 19840 Pioneer Ave. Torrance, CA 90503 (800) 556-6141 WORD ATTACK 3: A major upgrade to their Word Attack Plus, Davidson's Word Attack 3 is a strong educational title for users ages 10 to adult. However, it only has a lukewarm feel compared to similar titles when it comes to the snap and sizzle that keeps kids glued to the computer monitor. Consisting of five distinct modules, Word Attack 3 stresses developing a strong vocabulary, drawing from over 3200 words grouped into categories and word lists based upon difficulty level and subject areas. Presentation Activity introduces users to words, definitions and sentences in a Scrabble-like format. Tile Game allows one to match words with their definitions while trying to beat the clock. Those who enjoy crosswords will find Crossword Puzzle challenging. Maze Game, as the name implies, sends the user through a platform-based maze seeking words to match the appropriate definitions. Finally, Hat Game, the most entertaining offering in Word Attack 3, features arcade-style interaction as one's character tosses hats at the correct words in a column of banners. Progress is tracked for each user. A handy builtin editor allows one to add their own customized lists, and a print function turns crossword puzzles, word scarch puzzles, sentence completion tests and flash cards into hardcopy. If the kids don't mind the \"low impact\" presentation Word Attack 3 offers, there is much value to be gleaned from this product. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #9. Surf Ninjas Ward that Activity Language Fonts Halo Word Attack 3 Capstone Software Airport Corporate Center 7200 Corporate Center Dr., Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 HOMEY D. CLOWN: That surly bozo from \"In Living Color\" is in town, and he's in no mood to entertain. He's got an appointment with a major studio for a six figure deal, and anybody that gets in his way is gonna get socked. Homey be hittin' the streets to pick up items and figure out how to get to the studio. Bad guys and muggers be tryin' to take his wallet, but do Homey lose hope? I don't think so. Homey don't play like that! Homey be smackin' those bad men with his sock, so he doesn't wake up in the hospital and have to start all over again. Just lead this clown around with a mouse, cause Homey don't type. He's a cute character to put in a game, and may appeal to the pre-adolescent crowd for a few minutes. But is Homey up to entertaining a real gamer out in computerland? I don't think so. \"Homey\" don't play like that!IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #7. SURF NINJAS: You've seen the movie and you're now obligated to purchase every piece of merchandise associated with it: Surf Ninjas Pajamas, the Surf Ninjas lunch box, and CapEmpire Graphics P.O. Box 964 Union, NJ 07083 (908) 964-7864 THE MYSTIC TAROT: Originally released at The Tarot Master for the Amiga, this program concentrates clearly and directly on all aspects of Tarot fortune telling. Users can get an animated examination of every card, both in its right side up and upside down aspects, and have their fortunes told in both the 3-card and 10-card patterns. A handy print feature allows those who have had their Kontine Wat The Mystic Tarot Page 260 Computer Gaming World "


"Give Your Joystick n the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You and your opponent — wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money -action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold and Speed Master This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13. Wafoo free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7739. (8ND MEGATECH All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. Circle Reader Service #89 "


"TOU TES 5000 fortunes told to save them for future reference. IBM ($29.95), Amiga ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #10. UUL Tetris-style mold, Brix, produced by Epic Megagames and released through Micro League, offers the player an addictive game of over 200 levels of play with a devious array of mind bending puzzles to solve. Play, accordingly, is fast paced, being timed and requiring one to complete each level before the clock reaches zero. This puzzler's goal? To remove all the Brix (colored and patterned blocks) from play by eliminating them in pairs, or by removing individual Brix with the aid of laser cannons, acid pools, boiling lava and more. Though initial levels are quite easy, play difficulty escalates quickly as the puzzles increase in complexity. Colorful VGA graphics and an original music score add to Brix's enjoyment. However, it's the brain teasers that make this game a real time stealer. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #13. Street Fighter 11 TES W Hi Tech Expressions 584 Broadway New York, NY 10012 (800) 447-6543 STREET FIGHTER II: The \"bad boys\" have come to town in Capcom's Street Fighter II, \"The Baddest Brawl Of Them All.\" In this action title straight out of America's video arcades, players are pitted against cight of the world's toughest and wildest street fighters. Use martial arts kicks and punches, fleshsingeing flame spells and ear-piercing sonic booms to kick the silicon snot out of them. Street Fighter Il features one and two-player modes, multiple difficulty levels, adjustable time limits, and stereo sound effects with major sound card support. Large, smoothlyanimated graphics bring the action to life, but only for those with 386 or better systems. Expect the full arcade equivalent in this destructive, no-holds-barred title. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #11. EBC Harper Qu.. Par Malah Od M336 Fort ERAK Edward Grabowski's The Blue & The Gray XXXXXXXXXXX . NAXX THE PRO PAK: Sports fans who can't decide whether to slide into home with a computer baseball sim or go deep for a football title can now have both in MicroLeague's The Pro Pack, a combo pack featuring Micro League Baseball 4 and MicroLeague Football 2. The baseball game places the player in charge of historical major league teams, featuring direct connection to USA Today stats, manager profile editing, righty and lefty breakdowns, seasonal and stadium factors, and an expanded 30-man roster. The football game offers fast-paced, hard-hitting pigskin action with the player as head coach, calling the offense, setting the defense, making substitutions and even controlling the weather. Both titles offer digitized film footage and digitized sound with crowd noise, 256-color VGA graphics, close-up action zoom views, season play, league and exhibition play, game box scores and summaries, programmable customization of opponents and detailed stats. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Tx3 Tx2 7x5 7 17 ILIZZ y XXX Brix SOUZEU Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge, MA 02142 (203) 676-9002 EDWARD GRABOWSKI'S THE BLUE & THE GRAY: We thought the American Civil War was a bloody disaster until we saw the string of recent strategic wargames on the subject. In an effort to reverse this trend of games that have, generally, disappointed wargamers, The Blue & The Graygives players two games in one. Strategically, it is a turn-based, division level game of low-to-moderate complexity with weekly turns played out on a grid of 20 mile squares. The feel is akin to the popular introductory board wargame A House Divided. When units meet for battle, the game telescopes down to a grand tactical level where battles are fought in real time using Impressions' \"micro miniatures» system. As the brigades maneuver around the randomly generated battle maps, one definitely gets the feel of animated lead figures. While the inclusion of massive, cogent documentation (including a custom written history book and, for some, a VHS video tape on the Civil War), the red flag for \"historians» and «simulation\" junkies will be the game's many compromises away from these aspects (for instance, there are no leadership rules). Promised expansion disks will provide modem play and additional pre-generated historical battles. IBM, Amiga ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #12. DOUTOTULER The Pro Pak LLLL Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 MICROSOFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5: The wild blue yonder over Redmond, WA has never been as wild or as blue as it is now with the release of Microsoft Flight Simulator 5. This long anticipated update of Microsoft's best-selling sim provides digital pilots with a long list of new features to enhance their flights of fancy. Among the new features are: a new latitude and longitude system to help users locate destinations and current location; a \"Land Me\" feature that enables inexperienced pilots to complete their flights without landing nose-first; and more realistic sound effects and scenery (which expands in detail as approached by the aircraft). Additionally, the weather system has been replaced with a more user-friendly and controllable version. Basically, the whole shebang has been spruced up to provide a more realistic and attractive flight environment. Photo-realistic instrument panFor ... HOUSE Micro League Interactive Software University Office Plaza, Bellevue Bldg., Suite 201, 262 Chapman Road Newark, DE 19702 (800) 334-6572 BRIX: Grab 'em, slide'em, drop'em, match 'em, stack'em and zap 'em! Right out of the Microsoft Flight Simulator 5 Page 262 Computer Gaming World "


"ON TARGET A-CL OF THE COMPUTER GAVING WORLD COMP GAME WOR MPUTER ING WORLD CUP SATIYORI The rea s on Mops 18 MOL PACIFIC LINKS: 380 Underworld TNPIANAJONI COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Una VORLD COMPUTER GAMING WORL me I Comeuter Game Magaz hic Arts nitra Hot traBots! Interplay's Star Trek: 257 Anniversary Labyrinth OF Worlds FATE of ATLANTIS . Frontier Fun For Prair Pants for the Wine Don't go unarmed to the software store. For more than 12 years, Computer Gaming World has provided game hunters with the best information in the field. CGW is the magazine for gamers who want more than quick overviews of the latest games. We're loaded with the most complete reviews, new strategies, and the best hints for the discerning hunter. Take aim now with Computer Gaming World and save almost $20 off the newsstand price. Only $28 per year (12 issues). Lock and load with your Visa or MasterCard and call 1-800-827-4450 "


"CORETANOMIOTASOHIO O QUE VOC els (digitized from actual aircraft instrument panels) and realistic time-of-day effects have been added, as well. From flying the friendly skies in a Cessna Skylane to a Learjet to a sailplane, Flight Simulator 5 offers something for most airborne gamers. IBM ($64.95). Circle Reader Service #15. JDE 180 KODE EO K odiac Strike Squad Parsons Technology One Parsons Drive Hiawatha, IA 52233-0100 (800) 223-6925 CROSSWORDS PLUS FOR WINDOWS: Hmm... let's see, \"11 Across. Whole...\" It has eight letters and starts with a \"C.\" (Answer: \"complete\"] And that's the perfect word for Crosswords Plus for Windows. Not only does it include 100 pre-fab puzzles, it also provides tools for creating one's own! The included puzzles are broken down into categories by size and difficulty, and features include sound clues, incorrect letter placement highlighting, and optional font and color choices. Using a passable Windows interface, scores are earned and partially complete puzzles can be saved for later. The beauty of this package lies in putting the power in the user's hands. Creating crossword puzzles is even more challenging than solving them, and instructors will love making themes of their own to stress vocabulary and spelling. An excellent value! IBM for Windows ($19.00). Circle Reader Service #18. TRANSFER PHASE FRENCH FHASE 1 10-14-1006 DICO Soes, (1) RCT UIT VICTORY O EXIT LEADERLRHASE Mindcraft 2291 205th St., Suite 201 Torrance, CA 90501 (310) 320-5215 STRIKE SQUAD: Walking into a bar in the year 2208 with four heavily armed and armored mercenaries is sure to liven things up. Instantly the mercs under the player's control open fire at everything that moves with laser blasters, rockets and a few well-lobbed grenades. Assassins, drunks and space villains the likes of which haven't been seen since the spaceport at Mos Eisely return fire, but soon lie in crumpled piles with bloody pools about their midst. The mercs search the bodies and room for guns and goodies, then move on in their quest to combat the evil insectoids that have zapped the home planet (presumably as revenge for the bug zapper). There are 30 unique mercs under one's command in this arcade/role-playing/space quest adventure which unfolds in many missions on a number of worlds. Strike Squad uses the same engine, interface and 3-D scrolling perspective as Tegel's Mercenaries, but players may choose real-time or turn-based combar. Two-player game play, digitized sounds and humorous quips between mercenaries help draw commanders into the fray. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #16. nove DO03 DOD CURSOR 2001 Battles of Napoleon Scenario Pack Chwaste yo-OP Op ARMY Mg MO.Des Puzzl e PERECE Crosswords Plus for Windows Prima Publishing PO Box 1260BK Rocklin, CA 95677 (916) 786-0426 F-15 STRIKE EAGLE III: THE OFFICIAL STRATEGY GUIDE: The newest addition to Prima Publishing's Secrets of the Games Series, F-15 Strike Eagle III: The Official Strategy Guide by Lawrence T. Russell (former intelligence analyst for the U.S. Army) has just taxied onto the runway. The book offers assistance in basic flight training, air-to-air and air-to-ground combat, multiplayer missions and individual campaign missions. Special tactics are also provided for dealing with the enemy and for career progression. In addition, this strategy guide is amply illustrated with game screen shots, flight model illustrations and actual photographs. Pilots desiring assistance in gaining the most power and speed from their F-15, increasing their weapons accuracy, and learning how to maneuver with the best should check out this official strategy guide. It even includes a bonus disk with the latest update files for F-15 Strike Eagle III and all new historical missions based on the U.S. air strike on Iraq in 1993. IBM disk included ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Novastar Game Company P.O. Box 1813 Rocklin, CA 95677 (916) 624-7113 BATTLES OF NAPOLEON SCENARIO PACK: Although SSI's classic wargame Battles of Napoleon is long out of print, players keep returning to it like Napoleon from Elba. The game combined a grand tactical miniatures batde engine with scenario building tools, so it's no wonder that more and more of Napoleon's battles found their way into computer code. There are five scenario disks available to supplement this lost classic: Disk 1 features the battles of Austerlitz, Marengo, Dedoubt, Utitsa and Maida; Disk 2 has a Bridge Battle, New Orleans, Medellin, Albuera and Santon; Disk 3 presents Camden, Hobkirk, Guilford, Cowpens, Eutaw Springs and King's Mountain; while Disk 4 has a Hill battle, Eylau, Wagram, Leipzig I, Smolensk, Plancenoit, Waterloo II and Bladensburg; and, finally, Disk 5 has Ligny, Vimiero, Village, Retreat, Leipzig II, Podubno, Quatre Bras II and Aspern-Essling. All disks are available for IBM, while disks 1-3 are also available for Apple II and C-64 machines (remember those?). Each disk is $10 when sold separately or $45 for the complete set of five. Circle Reader Service #17. STRIKE EAGLE F-15 Strike Eagle III: The Official Strategy Guide D an M . SILVESTREAM. Quanta Press, Inc. 1313 Fifth Street SE, Suite 223A Minneapolis, MN 55414 (612) 379-3956 FRACTOOLS III: The latest iteration of Bourbaki's fractal graphics system comes on a CD-ROM laden with 590 fractal images for use with slide shows, screen savers, kaleidoscopes and miscellaneous graphical mayhem. Beyond the CD-ROM additions, the new version of the software supports several new graphics modes (up to 1024 x 768 x 256), Fractools III Page 264 Computer Gaming World "


"Kimus Ransom can do it for you if you bringe the ingredients... The evil approaches. The future of the kingdom is bleak. The people are begging for a miracle. The kingdom has turned to you to stop the evil Lukhan from seeking revenge Imagine.. in his crusade to ravage the land. 2500 frames of animation, 500 Battle over 40 different types of creatures with your choice of weapons and different characters to interact with armor. Travel to six cities and visit over 150 locations including the Travel to cities, dungeons, temples, mysterious forest of Zur, the twisted Mazes of Kheas and the Crypt of the shops, armorers and more Lost Soul. Your quest will ultimately take you to the Mountain of Kandor to Countless unpredictable scenarios battle the vengeful Lukhan in the final struggle. and excellent graphics The King's Ransom awaits you, valiant warrior... take the ultimate adventure Stunning movie-like soundtrack with and wear your bravery with pride! sound effects and speech Hundreds of hours of adventure ReadySoft Incorporated gaming 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 139 Tel: (416) 731-4175 Fax: (416) 764-8867 King's Ransom is a trademark of ReadySoft Incorporated  ReadySoft Incorporated Circle Reader Service #1145 "


"VESA drivers, and S3 Windows accelerator cards. IBM with CD-ROM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #20. After many days of tym. They arrived at the Amaron. Everyone cheered with excitement. Humpty Was yht, I was paradise. The sky was blue, the air was warm and balmy, and the lush green jungle smelled welcoming. They flew down to investigate maniacal and meaningless mole mashing. The goal is simple: pick up an enormous hammer and slam it down on the skulls of tiny moles. Not as gruesome as might be expected, WhacA-Mole brings a carnival classic from amusement parks across the country to the Windows desktop in a cartoonish presentation. No blood, no guts. Just flattened heads, bulging eyes and a medley of Oooffs!, Ouches! and Thuds! Whack enough moles and one advances to the next level. Sound effects and music are audibly polished, employing realtime sound mixing. Though Whac-A-Mole will be appreciated most by younger players, it can provide some welcome relief at the office, too. Now, if we could only replace the moles with digitized photos of the CGW staff.... IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #23. Shelley Duvall's It's a Bird's Life DMP Open Sanctuary Woods 1875 South Grant St. San Mateo, CA 94402 (415) 578-6340 SHELLEY DUVALL'S IT'S A BIRD'S LIFE: The first in a new cdutainment series from Sanctuary Woods called I-tales is Shelley Duvall's It's a Bird's Life, an interactive \"story\" for children ages 3 and up. Written and narrated by Shelly Duvall, this title features a cast of lovable parrots on a journey from Los Angeles to the rain forests of the Amazon and back. Children are involved in the adventure through a variety of interactive situations as they accompany their parrot friends, Pearlie, Humpty, Mowgli, Scarlet, Austin, Connie, Gorby and George. Subjects include geography, ecology, meteorology and ornithology. An easy-to-use, mouse-driven interface takes explorers through this 60 page digital \"book.\" Click on flowers to watch them bloom, on berries to do a jigsaw puzzle, on butterflies to see them fly, and on red words for pronunciation and definitions. In addition, one will find 11 original songs, 400 word definitions and 19 activities such as a shell game, a coloring book, connect-the-dots and jigsaw puzzles. IBM with Windows and CD-ROM, Macintosh with CD-ROM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #21. Checo Bicycle Limited Edition LO LUIU O o Villa Crespo Software, Inc. 1725 McGovern Street Highland Park, IL 60035 (708) 433-0500 ROSEMARY WEST'S HOUSE OF FORTUNES: This is the latest in Villa Crespo's \"Celebrity» software line. Rosemary West, L.A.'s fortune teller to the stars, is recognized as an expert on computerization of fortune telling. The program she helped create uses five different ways to prognosticate one's future. Featured are such fortune telling methods as Astrology, Numerology, I Ching, Taror Cards and a fascinating Crystal Ball. After typing in one's name and birthday, the computer keeps track of past sessions, sends special date reminders, and allows for mystical interpretations of the past and future. Entertaining (and less vague than most fortunes one reads), Rosemary West's House of Fortunes, we predict, will have a long lifeline. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #24. Whac-A-Mole Swfte International, Ltd. Stone Mill Office Park 724 Yorklyn Rd. Hockessin, DE 19707-8701 (302) 234-1740 BICYCLE LIMITED EDITION: The battle of the Windows card games continues, and Swfte brings in the big guns with the most well-known name in playing cards. The Solitaire game that comes with Windows is no match for Bicycle's collection of 52 popular Solitaire variants. The Bicycle system also has a handy Help system and a statistical database that tracks your Solitaire success over time. Gambling types might sit down at the table with the Bicycle 5-card draw and stud poker game. While not the savviest poker dealer, it does allow the user to customize the game by determining wild-cards, betting limits, and by choosing among seven computer-opponent personalities. The Cribbage and Bridge games are decent, no-frill programs that will serve for a rainy day. While each of the four games has been done better by other companies, you'd have to do some creative shuffling to beat the excellent price-to-quality ratio offered in this collection. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #22. WHAC-A-MOLE: Windows users looking for a quick and dirty way to blow off steam may find the answer to their need by senselessly pounding some defenseless rodents in Whac-A-Mole, a little game of malevolent, Rosemary West's House of Fortunes Virgin Interactive Entertainment 18061 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714-9841 (800) VRGINOZ CURSE OF ENCHANTIA CD: Developed by Core Design Limited for Virgin, Curse of Enchantia offers the gamer a Sierralike adventure puzzler that is actually more of a multi-screen puzzle game than a traditional animated adventure. Featuring an icon-based interface similar to Sierra's, this title, distributed on CD-ROM, draws the player's character (a young lad named Brad from the mortal world) into a land cursed by a powerful and malevolent witch who is intent upon employing him as an ingredient in a special restorative potion. Thus, the player's quest is to escape from this perilous land and return home safely without becoming an elixir of youth in the process. Though the interface is a bit clumsy, gamers with a strong penchant for puzzles should find it entertaining. IBM with CD-ROM ($42.99). Circle Reader Service #25. 200JQYASI Curse of Enchantia CD Page 266 Computer Gaming World "


"MASTER OF ORION The Experts All Agree! \"This product will offer enough late nights and missed appointments to make it a definite game of the year candidate as well as Exhibit A in many divorce cases.\" Computer Gaming World \"Almost certain to fall into the category of Instant Classic\". Master of Orion is a gem. Game Bytes \"Simply put the most enjoyable game to come clong since MicroProse did Civilization. Compute Master of Orlon is one of the best games of the year! Its blend of deep-space action, exploration, and strategy will keep you playing for a long, long time to come. PC Entertainment I swear this game is growing on me in ways haven't seen since Civilization, and I like it better than Civ in a lot of ways.\" -Alan Emrich, author of the book, Sid Meier's Civilization, or Rome on 640K a Day \"A game that will not quickly become shelfware. The combinations ... make for an amazing number of different challenges.\" Strategy Plus People who haven't bought it yet: Buy it. Buy caffeine. Damn this thing is addicting!\" David Weinstein \"A perfect mix of diplomacy, war, technology, and economic mastery....It will keep dedicated gamers at their computers for days on end.\", . Computer Game Review \"This game has so much complexity hidden in an easy to use format that it is surprising. It may very well replace Civilization as my favorite game.\" Marvin R. Lamb Nou that PSC, to aggression are sure of the Sold latch closely and talente Actual screens may vary. CATE XOX PELD MOROPROSE here DOBULAT SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE  1993 Microprose Sttware, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #60 "


"intimate with several pre-created worlds. Also included is a \"Fresnel viewer» — a pair of cardboard goggles with Fresnel lenses. The viewer is placed against the screen and the user peers through it to get a decent stereoscopic (3D vision) effect. Serious hacks will delight in the appendices that cover refitting Nintendo PowerGlove and SEGA goggles for PC use, an introduction to linear algebra and other mathematics with specific application to 3D computer graphics, and a detailed discussion of stereoscopics. If you're a VR dilertante who wants to get serious with the hobby, here's the next step. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #28. ESKIP TO DESTINATION CHANGE DESTINATION Dune CD Apple placed. DUNE CD: Based upon the original PC release, Dune CD takes the computerized version of Frank Herbert's epic novel and David Lynch's cult film of sand, spice, and expanded consciousness to new heights. The music and digitized sounds employed in this enhanced product have been remastered to take full advantage of the CD-ROM format, adding to the surreal atmosphere emanating from the computer adaptation. Full-screen video foorage from the film has also been incorporated into Dune allowing live actors to visually and audibly move the storyline along. The result is a greater suspension of disbelief and a more enjoyable playing experience. Those who enjoy games of strategy and intrigue, and who have not yet played Dune, would do well to consider this \"spiced up» version of Virgin's tactical adventure. IBM with CD-ROM ($99.99). Circle Reader Service #26. THE LEGEND OF KYRANDIA CD: For many centuries, all was peaceful in Kyrandia. The pact made berween the residents of Kyrandia and the Natural kingdom provided for the mutual care and protection of both parties. Then the evil, maniacal Malcom, once court jester and friend to the king, seized control of the Kyragem, a source of great magical power, and killed the king and queen. Though Kallac, Chief of the Royal Mystics, overpowered Malcolm and magically scaled him within the walls of the royal castle, time and weakening magic has resulted in the failure of that seal and Malcolm's escape. The goal, then, for the player in Westwood Studio's latest conversion to CD-ROM is to defeat Malcolm and restore peace to Kyrandia. The addition of digitized voices in The Legend of Kyrandia CD helps bring the world of Kyrandia to life for the player. Although this animated adventure is of the light duty variety, it is still an enjoyable, playable and highly entertaining game, and a graphical and musical delight. IBM with CD-ROM ($74.99). Circle Reader Service #27. TBS) The Legend of Kyrandia CD WALKTHROUGHS AND FLYBYS CD: Containing over 500 megabytes of animated presentations and accompanied by a 148-page manual, this book/CD combination introduces multimedia hopefuls and those interested in computer graphics to a wide array of ray-traced images, virtual reality demos and a vast assortment of special effects. Also included are the tips and tricks employed by many of the creators of these graphic demonstrations to assist those just entering the multimedia waters. In fact, 40 of the world's best computer animators guide one through a 3D sight and Sound Blaster audio tour of virtual homes and buildings, animated brochures, interactive educational flicks, missile and chopper rides, electrified chess matches, and even a digital spinal exam. Designed as an instructional tool and idea resource, Walkthroughs and Flybys CD provides an interesting look at the world of computer animated graphics. IBM with CD-ROM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #29. Pos 5544.4301 Area: South Franeo/sed: 20 Virtual Reality Creations Walkthroughs And Flybys CD Waite Group Press 200 Tamal Plaza Corte Madera, CA 94925 (800) 368-9369 VIRTUAL REALITY CREATIONS: The Waite Group Press has begun to make a name for itself with its book series covering the conceptual and technological fringes of computer culture. The latest in their line of \"books with disks\" covers the topic of Virtual Reality, and does so more thoroughly and accessibly than any other book we've seen. The book starts off with a comprehensive listing of current hardware and software available to the common reality hacker. It continues by introducing VR-heads to two heavyweight world building tools, VREAM and Superscape VRT, and then a more complete tutorial of REND386, a freeware version of which is included with the book. With REND386 and a mouse, keyboard or joystick, users can get Wisdom Tree 2700 E. Imperial Hwy., Bldg. A Brea, CA 92621 (800) 772-4253 BIBLE ADVENTURES: Biblical heroes are featured characters in Wisdom Tree's latest Bible-based game, Bible Adventures. The first of three games in this package is Noah's Ark, the object being to gather two of each animal and deposit them safely in the Ark. Numerous woods, forests, caverns and mountains must be searched in order to fulfill the needed quota of wildlife. Save Baby Moses requires the player to protect the young Hebrew toddler from Pharoah's soldiers and numerous obstacles blocking the way to safety. Third on the list is David and Goliath. As a young shepherd, David must round up scattered sheep and defend the family's flock. Once David has proved his abilities against wild beasts, Goliath and his shield bearer must be faced. All three titles look and play like straight Nintendo conversions. However, the stress is as much upon teaching biblical knowledge as it is on providing entertainment. Designed for ages 4 and up. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #30. CGW Bible Adventures Page 268 Computer Gaming World "


"* COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME. The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dares. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Induction Ceremony! The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts, 1990 Many Formats THE SECRET OF ONKIYE A GRAPHIC ADVPN BY RON GIBP BERT LUCASFLM The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh M-1 Tank Platoon (Micro Prose, Inc., 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (Micro Prose, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) C64, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats The real secret to The Secret of Monkey Island is humor. There is humor in the text, humor in the animation, humor in the music and humor in the plot. Who can ever forget the hilarious wordplay used in the swordfighting sequences, the non-sexist nature of the game's conclusion, the controversial instruction to insert Disk Number 256 (too many people believed that there really was such a disk), and the hilarious animation for the grog machine sequence? Further, the play balance in the game is perfect. Designer Ron Gilbert has a marvelous way of letting the player know what has to be accomplished in order to move to the next story segment and prodding the player along with clues that function as cues. In a very real sense, the Monkey Island series marked the SCUMM system's (LucasArts' proprietary software tools for graphic adventures) coming of age. December 1993 "


"5 Val Reader Poll #111 COMPUTER NON Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM The Seventh Guest Virgin Star Control Il Accolade Les Manly in. Lost in L.A. Accolade 9 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 10 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra SCORE 10.20 9.91 9.80 9.56 9.55 9.53 9.40 9.28 9.20 9.14 Top 100 Games GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine Type SP RP WG AD AC Undetinerid 001 RP Stum ST * WG AD RP OLAWNTop Role Playing Games GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 10.02 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.90 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.62 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 9.46 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.42 Might & Magic II! New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Ongin 9.34 9 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 10 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 AD WG WG,ST WG WG RP Score 10.45 10.29 10.21 10.20 10.06 10.02 9.97 9.93 9.91 9.90 9.89 9.88 9.84 9.81 9.80 9.75 9.71 9.67 9.63 9.62 9.59 9.58 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.53 9.51 9.47 9.46 9.43 9.42 9.42 9.41 9.40 9.39 9.37 9.34 SCORE 9.89 Game Company R 1 Links 386 Pro Access Ultima Underworld Origin Warlords II SSG Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Wing Commander 11 Origin Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 7 Solitaire's Journey QQP 8 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 9 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 10 Lands of Lore Virgin R 11 X-Wing LucasArts 12 Dune 11 Virgin 13 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 14 World Circuit MicroProse 15 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 16 The Perfect General QQP 17 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 18 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 19 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 20 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 22 V For Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 24 Quest for Glory III Sierra 25 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 26 The Seventh Guest Virgin 27 Syndicate Electronic Arts 28 Links Access 29 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 30 Warlords 31 Eye of the Beholder II Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 33 Might & Magic III New World Computing 34 Star Control II Accolade 35 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 36 Hardball !!! Accolade 37 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Ultima VII Origin 40 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 41 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 42 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 43 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 44 Lemmings Psygnosis 45 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 46 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 47 Second Front SSI MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 49 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra SI WG AC AD,RP AD AD ST.AC Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts World Circuit MicroProse Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 8 Red Storm Rising MicroProse 9 Stunt Island Disney 10 Silent Service II MicroProse 83°3*8878393*************8633*33333°4433343333*** 9.81 como AWNSP 9.59 9.42 9.39 9.19 9.16 9.04 9.04 9.03 SSG SSI RP WG,ST RP SI RP ADAC SI SP WG RP RP SOLITAIRES JOURNEY 9.34 ST AD SP VOULAWNTop Strategy Games GAME COMPANY Solitaire's Journey QQP Dune Il Virgin Syndicate Electronic Arts Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts The Lost Admiral QQP The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8 Mech Warrior Activision 9 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra 10 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra SCORE 9.97 9.88 9.51 9.32 9.13 9.05 8.98 8.94 B.91 8.78 RP AC,ST AD 9.34 9.32 9.28 9.27 9.25 9.21 9.20 9.19 9.17 9.16 9.14 9.14 SI WG 48 SI AC AD "


"availords ST AD RP AD WG RP WG RP AD,RP NOUL AWN Top Wargames GAME Warlords II V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General Conquered Kingdoms Carriers at War Construction Kit V for Victory: Utah Beach V For Victory: Market Garden Warlords Pacific War 10 Second Front COMPANY SSG Three-Sixty Pacific QQP QOP SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific SSG SSI SCORE 10.21 9.93 9.75 9.71 9.67 9.63 9.58 9.43 9.34 9.17 Electronic Arts Sierra SSI Sierra SSI Origin New World Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Disney MicroProse Legend Sierra MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Sierra Origin QQP Sierra Dynamix 9.13 9.11 9.10 9.09 9.09 9.08 9.07 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 SSI AD,RP SI AD ComSIDER AD Top Action Games RP WG,ST AD ST SSI WG o von ONGAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh No! More Lemmings Flashback Prince of Persia 2 Out of this World Lemmings 2: The Tribes Spectre COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis SSI Broderbund Interplay Psygnosis Velocity 51 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 52 The Castle of Dr. Brain 53 Eye of the Beholder The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 56 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 57 Empire Deluxe 58 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 61 Stunt Island Red Storm Rising Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 65 Silent Service II 66 Quest for Glory II Gunship 2000 68 Police Quest 3 Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 70 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 72 Space Quest IV The Incredible Machine Western Front High Command 76 Carriers At War 77 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 78 Alone in the Dark 79 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Mech Warrior 81 Clash of Steel 82 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 84 The Island of Dr. Brain 85 Tony La Russa Baseball II Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 88 F-15 Strike Eagle III 89 Indianapolis 500 90 Elvira 91 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 93 Rex Nebular 94 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 95 Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 97 Heart of China 98 Veil of Darkness 99 Battlechess Gateway SCORE 10.06 9.58 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.65 8.59 8.57 8.35 8.02 8.95 WG WG AD AD SI ST,SI WG SI AC.ST ST 9 10 8.94 8.94 8.93 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.89 SP Top Sports Games AE 8.89 SI GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Links Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball | NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge PGA Tour Golf 4-D Boxing Three-Sixty Pacific SSG Dynamix 1-Motion Electronic Arts Activision SSI MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra SSI Dynamix Access MicroProse Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Dynamix SSI Interplay Legend COMPANY Access Dynamix Access Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Electronic Arts OUA SCORE 10.45 9.84 9.47 9.37 9.27 8.89 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.37 8.89 8.88 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 RP WG,ST AD AD RP ST ST AD RP 8 9 10 8.78 8.75 8.74 ST 8.72 AD 8.72 Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST-Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP-Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What You've Been Playing Lately 1---Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with sug. gestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don t mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out...keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #111, October 1993 X-wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Lands of Lore (Westwood Studios) Civilization (MicroProse, Inc.) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix) Might & Magic: Darkside/World of Xeen (New World Computing) Falcon 3.0x/MiG-29 (Spectrum Holobyte) Syndicate (Electronic Arts) 10. Links 386 Pro (Access Entertainment) ** Cross **** OVOU PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software August, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source Lands of Lore (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit (LucasArts Entertainment) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) SimCity (Maxis Software) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Betrayal at Krondor (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Stronghold (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Hardball II (Accolade, Inc.) 10. Links 886 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) Wolfenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) SimCity for Windows (Maxis Software) Piratus Gold (MicroProse, Inc.) King's Quest VI CD-ROM (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Take A Break! Pinball (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Scenery Disk: USA East (SubLOGIC Corporation) Syndicate (Electronic Arts) 18. The Legacy (MicroProse, Inc.) Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc.) Prince of Persia II (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Amiga Games Rank Title and Source 688 Atrack Sub (Electronic Arts) AD&D Eye of the Beholder il (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Overlord (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) AD&D Dark Queen of Krynn (Strategic Simularions, Inc.) Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Macintosh Games Rank Tide and Souree Prince of Persia (Brderbund Software, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corporation) SimCity Supreme (Maxis Software) PGA Tour Golf (Electronic Arts) CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) ROMaterial (Moon Valley) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Lord of the Rings (Interplay Productions, Inc.) Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts Entertainment) Dumne (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Just Grandma and Me (Broderbund Software, Inc.) 2. Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis (LucasArts Entertainment) 10. Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compton's New Media) This list is bad on units sold by Software Etc. Babbages. Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique hors Information please contin P Research at 703435-1025. !   3-**** Do You Remember When We Met? Our short answer\" question for issue #111 asked our readers to think back to their first computer gaming experience. \"The first computer game I encountered was \"Lunar Lander\" on an HP programmable calculator, about 1976. You entered the amount of fuel to burn and it computed your new height and speed. Vernon Lee, Fremont, CA \"My first game was Wasteland, and I'm still trying to find a CRPG as good...\" Miles Goosens, Nashville, TN First computer game? Wumpus! Remember hunting the wumpus? Used to play it on a mainframe (IBM 360) through a DECwriter (that's paper -no screen). Gee, I'm not that old! Am I? T. Madden, St. Louis, MO «Adventure was my first game. It was on an IBM 370. That game created a whole world in your mind in a way that che latest in graphics don't always do. It's not just the clock speed or the dot pitch...\" David Martin, Albany, CA \"First game was Starflight. I snuck downstairs one morning about 4:00 am to look at my dad's new computer. I saw a directory, STARFLIGHT, and typed the first name on the list. I have been hooked ever since. Andrew Hakes, Mr. Morris \"In college I spent most of a Thanksgiving holiday playing the Dallas game on my roommate's PC. It took three of us several days of near nonstop kibbitzing to finish it. Also, being brash college youth, we would drink beer and play an air traffic controller game. Can you blame me for getting hooked (on games, that is)\" T. Mesarch, Washington, D.C. Computer Gaming World * ******** N Page 272 "


"patches The Patch File Rules of Engagement 2 Campaign Disk Update: Updates Campaign Disk 1 to version 1.01. This update adds 9 new Breach 2 IGS links to the campaign \"Operation Hammer.\" This update is only useful if you're playing the game in conjuction with Breach 2.8/30/93 Shanghai II Version 1.04 Update (Mac). Resolves incompatibilities with After Dark and SuperClock, and fixes a 32-bit addressing problem. If you are getting random crashes or freezes, this update is for you. 8/20/93 The Seventh Guest Fix: Updated sound cards drivers, installation program and player program (requiring only 450K memory). 7/28/93 ** Strike Commander/Tactical Operations 1 Fix: Converts old Strike Commander save games to the Tactical Operations format. Only needed if you wish to run Strike Commander saves created prior to Tactical Operations installation. 9/30/93 Tony LaRussa II Patch: Fixes bugs in SSI's baseball simulation. 5/21/93 Unlimited Adventures Version 1.1 Patch: In addition to new files for the software, this patch contains a supplement to the game's manual. 5/21/93 V For Victory 3.1 Upgrade (IBM): Upgrades Utah Beach, Velikiye Luki, and Market Garden Versions 2.0 to version 3.1. 8/19/93 V For Victory: Velikiye Luki Version 3.1 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh version 2.0 to 3.1. 7/09/93 V For Victory: Market Garden Version 3.1 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh version 3.0 to 3.1. 7/08/93 V For Victory: Gold Juno Sword Version 4.01 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh version 4.0 to 4.01.8/28/93 ** War In Russia 1.1 Upgrade: Fixes three bugs and adds an enhancement. 10/04/93 ** Warlords Version 1.1.5 Update (Macintosh): Updates any version of Warlords Mac to V1.1.5. 10/09/93 ** WW2: Battles of the South Pacific: Corrects a problem with the ranking system. 9/21/93 Yomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World publishes this list of the latest updates of which we are aware. These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. (** indicates new files) Air Bucks Version 1.21: Corrects lock-up and mouse compatibility problems. 8/06/93 Ambush at Sorinor Version 1.02: Adds a speed control option for fast machines, replaces several bad mission descriptions, and fixes the AI for VIPs and escorts. 6/17/93 Battles of Destiny V1.1 Patch: Enhancements and bug fixes include: Patrol Mode, Map Editor, and two player modem enhancements. 5/06/93 Bu Aldrin Race Into Space Version 1.0b: Fixes a lock-up bug and allows the removal of some files from the hard drive. 7/06/93 Caesar Patch: Allows players to use Impressions' game with disk compression utilities, and corrects the \"culture\" problem. 5/19/93 Carriers at War Construction Kit Patch: Fixes the \"CAP\" bug and a few other minor problems. 7/13/93 Harpoon Version 1.32A Upgrade: Makes changes to the Harpoon game system. 5/18/93 Imperial Pursuit Fix: In the original version, it can be difficult to lock-on k-on to a target with missiles under certain system configurations. This parch should correct this problem. 7/08/93 Indy Jones/Atlantis 486 Patch: Allows one to play the game on a 486 without color problems or errors. 5/26/93 Jordan in Flight SVGA Patch: Allows owners of Diamond Stealth, Diamond Stealth 24 and Orchid Fahrenheit 1280 Plus video cards to run the game in SVGA. 5/21/93 Jump Jet Update: Corrects the joystick problems some players are reporting and some other compatibility problems. 5/18/93 Kings Ouest VI CD-ROM Patch: Fixes the problem with the disappearing ball in the Endless Desert Temple Stone Wall trap. 8/24/93 ** Lands of Lore Version 1.11A Patch: Fixes a number of small bugs including the inability to retrieve Dawn's second key. 9/08/93 Lands of Lore Sound Card Patch: Allows multiple sound cards to be used at one time. Now includes Waveblaster/SB16 support. You need this patch only if you use more than one sound card. 8/16/93 ** Links 386 Complete V1.11 Update: Contains both the Link 386 Pro EXE version 1.11 and a collection of new VESA drivers for various video cards. 9/03/93 Omar Sharif on Bridge Upgrade (IBM/Windows): The latest version of Interplay's bridge game for Windows. 9/03/93 Patriot Version 1.1: The long-awaited parch ro Three-Sixty's Gulf War simulation. 7/27/93 Pirates Gold Patch: Corrects the evil person in the city\" crash, the \"mission from the governor crash, and the Vi switch should now function as stated in the README file. 7/19/93 Realms of Arkania Disk 3 Fix: The first print run of this game was missing some data from disk 3. You only need this file if your BLADE directory has 48 files and 3,030,380 bytes in it. 6/23/93 Realms of Arkania Update #1: Corrects the \"Skeletarius\" problem, among others. 7/01/93 ** Red Sky At Morning V1.33: The latest version of SimCan's new wargame. 9/18/93 Rules of Engagement 2 Version 1.05: Latest version of the Omnitrend/Impressions space war simulation. 8/01/93 *Rules of Engagement 2 V1.05 to 1.06 Update: Parch for those having problems running the game with a Viper graphics cards. 10/09/93 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-linc games expert. Look for us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted online by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated weekly. Nore that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" in computer gaming, STEPGEE TOP TEN RANKED GAMES Week of September 38 to October? RANK SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE 1289Wolfenstein-306 1568 Civilization 7 3 1565 X-Wing 8 1486 Kings Quest UI 9 1895 Aces of Pacific 10 1070 Front Po Football 1064 Wing Commander 2 1024 Falcon 3.0 995 Links 386 Pro 894 Spear of Destiny Each day. PRODIGY has more news than a newspaper...without the ink smudges Another PRODIGY member value! Look Menu Xref Jump Path Copy Tools Help Exi BORE December 1993 Page 273 "


"Rumors To Hi for by Alec Reginald Forsythe III y source—since I never reveal one, years back, and it is one of the stations where The Legacy, the OTHER Times bestseller let's call her 'D' for short-didn't I get particularly nervous if the train is late. about Dark Elves in the Forgotten Realms, I want to meet at «Buck House\" (the My mind wandered from imagined emergenhad made such an impact on merrie olde edifice you Yanks refer to as Buckingham cies in the London underground to a rumor England. I couldn't resist. I penned an addenPalace). She said she was afraid of the tabloids I had heard at the European Computer Trade dum, \"Coming soon from SSI—To Be Disand I assured her that she had unnecessary Show. Folks were talking there about a Rescue tributed By U.S. Gold.\" I wasn't sure the deal anxiety on that score. \"After all,\" I reassured 911 license that had just been signed by Caphad actually been signed, but I figured anyone her. \"I'm not THAT famous.\" Nonetheless, stone. Now, as much as I like being in on a who read graffiti in underground runnels she said she had some information about a game design, I certainly hoped that no rescue would attempt to ascertain its veraciry before computer game and, since she muttered was going to be needed. I'll keep my emerplacing an order. something about a «prince\" and she wanted gencies in games, thank you. Arriving at the British Museum, I must to meer beside the Elgin Marbles in the BritFortunately, my train arrived before my have stunned the crowd with my insensitivity ish Museum. I assumed she was going to tell ill-placed anxiety could bring on cardiac arto the treasures around me. Hurrying past me something about QQP's Merchant Prince monuments like a shrine to Apollo, the game. Bronx cheer that sounded vaguely like some So, I found myself in the Underground, winged lions and bulls from Ashurbanipal, of the sound effects in The Journeyman Protaking the tube to my rendezvous with D. and the Rosetta Stone itself, I finally reached iect. I mentioned it to the old man seated next Actually, I love the Underground, especially D's side. I could see her distinctive profile, to me and reading (or at least, looking at The since so many stations are very different from even behind the veil, so I whispered, \"And Sporting Life. He merely said, \"Sorry, I'm each other. Some of the older stations have where's your husband, today?\" She glared at waiting until it comes out in MPC format. tiled, arched corridors that end in well-worn Gametek, you know.\" Actually, I didn't me. How was I supposed to know that she stairs; others are musty dungeons with escaknow, but now that I did, I couldn't wait to was on the offs with him? It's not like their lators that are so old that the steps are made pass it on. marital troubles would be front page news, is of wood; and still others have ultra-modern it? How paranoid could she ger? Anyway, she I managed to reach my goal and wandered escalators or use ordinary elevators to move said he was off inspecting some naval vessel, through the tunnel toward the \"Way Out.\" passengers to street level. In the States, the and then he was going to talk to some comYou Yanks hang onto the anachronist Latsubway stations all seem to be the same age puter game designer. The computer game inism, \"Exit,\" but we believe in posting signs and tend to have the same look. In jolly olde designer was Matthew Stibb, a good chap for in our OWN language, as opposed to approan Oxford graduate. Somewhat eccentric, London, it's more like SimCity 2000 with priating and diminishing someone else's though. having majored in History. new stations added according to the popula(ahem!). If most of you Yanks saw a «Way tion's needs. Of course, SC 2000 should have Out» sign, you'd think it was something Still, D managed to inform me that Stibb shipped by the time you read this column, but weird, an advertisement for a bizarre concept was working on a naval simulation with rolelike London, there's a lot of life in the old city of some kind. The only way out product I Pay playing elements. The game would use deyet. It seems that Dux, the Unix publisher, could think of that was coming down the pike o down the pike railed 3-D models with a smooth-scrolling has created a multi-player SimCity that runs was Humongous Entertainment's upcoming capacity, due to the fact that the whole sim on workstations for Unix-based networks. I graphic adventure, tentatively titled Bobo and was running in protected mode, and the live personally can't wait until there is also a Fletcher Go Deep Into The Congo. It's Tarzan graphics would be interlaced with film from multi-player SimCity available on a commerand King Kong meet Space Ghost and Speed the U.S. Department of Defense's film arcial network for those of us who are still Racer. Ron Gilbert, the wry wit behind the chives. According to D, it's an extremely rich PC-based. Some talks were apparently going Monkey Island and Putt-Putt series of games, CD-ROM product that's due out in the first on with The Imagination Network (nee' The has opted to bring back talking simians and quarter of 1994. Sierra Network), but appear to have broken Saturday morning-style animation for his latI asked D about Merchant Prince, but she down, just like the train I was awaiting at est humorous romp through the world of gave me another one of those looks. Really, King's Cross Station. graphic adventures. Now, that's way out.\" you'd swear I'd said a dirty word or someIt's rather eerie, actually. The only station As I perambulated through the tunnel tothing. Or, maybe it was all those flashbulbs I've ever had to non-stop (pass through with ward the Way Out, I read the graffiti on the going off in our faces. Maybe, since I was out stopping because of a security alert) is wall. Imagine my surprise when I read a wearing my Beefeater uniform as a disguise, King's Cross. It has a plaque reminding passcrawl that said, «Welcome to Menzobarranit would have made more sense to have met sengers about those who died in a fire some zan-City of the Drau.\" I hadn't realized that at Buckingham Palace in the first place. Cow Page 274 Computer Gaming World "


"EXTES LALK TO M < CE EX Its graphics are lush and colorful, with skewed perspectives and grotesque .characters that could have been lifted from vintage Warner Brothers cartoons. --COMPUTER GAMING WORLD KO . It's one of a kind and one in a million. --COMPUTER GAME REVIEW Maniac Mansion 149494 When face them to put the w ay Taba m ed Deng Only you ind your daring and f enila sam so him from being sucise dunder hree dieten sharacter de control Overloo digriized sound effects 3 Progressively challanglast pie Includes original and Mansion ng a game 3. BMEROM ries les Vis alle eliyor all -2003 ASPARS are your Taupy Way wat are o ne contatto police LUCAS ISTI TUR TA3K to no Bydd cenedl Butano wa w Xunta Otax 3 TOP Best LE ared deals adad haben dat e r in den W "


" itima u AVATAR\", YOU'RE NOT IN BRITANNIA ANYMORE! Foiled by your defense of Britannia, the evil Guardian transports you to a world already under his dominion. Now you must confront alien realms and powerful new enemies in a battle without allies. But wait! Perhaps more has changed than just the battlefield ...?  Incredibly smooth and lifelike animation — 400 frames of art per character (1200 frames for the Avatar) and 10 times the art of any previous Ultima!  A new, more natural perspective.  Compatibility with EMS, XMS and all other common memory management systems. Twice as many frames per second, producing a richer, faster story in this luxuriously detailed world! . Dex Wide IS GRIGIN Actual screens may vary.       Look for the new Pagan Clue Book! An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Pagan and Avatar are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima, Origin, and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc Copyright  1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. For IBM PC and 100% compatible systems. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #103 "

