February 1988
Number 44

FEATURES
An Open Letter To
Computer Game Forum Readers
Rumor Bag

4
10

Rumors, Rumblings, and Ruminations

Alternate Reality: The Dungeon

12

A Review and Some Hints / Scorpia

Choppers!

14

A Survey of Helicopter Simulators / M. Evan Brooks

Apollo 18: Mission To The Moon

20

A Historical Action Game / David M. Wilson

Jewels Of Darkness

23

A Collection of "Classic" Adventures / Douglas Seacat

Falcon

28

Spectrum Holobyte's F-16 Flight Simulator / Regan Carey

Arkanoid

31

"Breakout" Revivus / Roy Wagner

All The Screen's A Stage

32

The Interactive Screen Play As Medium / Jim Gasperini

Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer

34

Some Tidbits on "Yeager"

Early Bird C.E.S. Notes

36

Some Initial Impressions from the Consumer Electronics Show

Guild of Thieves

38

Firebird's New Fantasy Game / Alan Roberts

2400 A.D.

40

Scorpion's Tale Takes (Us Into The Future / Scorpia

Test Drive

44

Accolade's Hot New Action Game / David M. Wilson

The Faery Tale Adventure

46

A Fantasy Role Playing Adventure / Roy Wagner

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

7

Reader Input Device

55

Game Ratings

56

An Open Letter to the
Subscribers of
Computer Game Forum
Frankly, we thought our quarterly magazine, Computer
Game Forum, was pretty innovative. After all, no one else
had a "Rumor Bag" to leak the industry's gossip or a
- "Source Code" to help
bridge the gap between consumer and publisher. We
also thought we had a different style from our flagship magazine. Creating
that humorous "Table of
Contents;" coming up with
satirical songs and epitaphs
for "Boot Hill;" attempting
to be controversial in the
editorial and "Forum Input
Barometer;" and developing
scenarios for each issue
were major efforts.
Alas, our "baby" could not
stand against the competition. "What competition?"
you may ask before ripping
this page out, wadding it
up, and throwing it into the fireplace. You may even go so
far as to suggest that there were not any other publications
like Computer Game Forum. We believe you would be correct, but our advertisers and potential advertisers believe
you would be in error. It
seems that Forum's
greatest competition was,
believe it or not, Computer
Gaming World itself. Advertisers insisted that our
newest publication was not
distinctive enough to warrant their attention. They
reasoned that subscribers
read Computer Game
Forum for the same reasons
that they read Computer
Gaming World. Therefore,
advertising in both
magazines was a duplication of effort and not costeffective. If advertising in
only one of the magazines
was useful, they assured
us, CGW would be the one.
Now, we know that many of our readers found the
paucity of advertisements in CGF to be refreshing. Nevertheless, the discriminating reader knows that advertise-

ments keep magazines in business. We were faced with the
prospect of losing money on CGF, and having CGW itself
at risk as a result, or turning the problem into an opportunity for expansion.
CGW subscribers responded to the introduction of Computer Game Forum enthusiastically. We assumed that this
was because you wanted more coverage of computer games
and a publication to fill in the gaps when CGW did not
publish (three months each year). Therefore, when the advertising agreements did not materialize, we had to determine a way to satisfy your needs and desires without
"losing our shirt."
Since the demand is out there and advertisers would
rather advertise in Computer Gaming World than CGF,
we have decided to take a step we have been considering for
some time and go monthly with CGW. At the same
time we are discontinuing CGF. Thus you hold in your
hands the first ever monthly issue of Computer Gaming
World. Like a phoenix rising from the ashes of the officially
discontinued Computer Game Forum, a new expanded
monthly Computer Gaming World arises!
What this means to the CGF subscribers is that they will
get the number of issues of Forum remaining to them
added on to their CGW subscriptions. Now, instead of a
26 page two color newsletter/magazine, they will be getting a 54+ page four color magazine for the same price.
That is an increase of more than 100% at no additional
cost.
We believe this is good news, but we recognize that there
may be subscribers who feel like this is not fair (we hope
not!). In those cases, we will refund the remaining credit
on your Forum subscription.
Of course, there may be those subscribers out there who
are saying, "I will definitely miss [insert Forum feature
here]!" To those subscribers we are happy to say that those
features will be added as alternating columns in Computer
Gaming World. In other words, we will still try to provide
"Inside The Industry," "The Rumor Bag," "The Source
Code," "Scorpion's Mail," "Abstracts from the Journal of
Computer Game Design," and "Boot Hill" on, at the very
least, a quarterly basis. We will also try to provide more
scenario and strategy articles.
We want to express our heartfelt appreciation to all of
you subscribers who believed in us enough to subscribe to
Computer Game Forum. We want to express extra appreciation to those visionary advertisers who felt that
Forum had something more to offer than a "cost per
thousand" rate. Finally, I offer a Hebrew toast
("Lechayyim" - "To Life!") to our publisher, art director, advertising representatives, writers, artists, and even, yours
truly. What we attempted to accomplish in Forum will live
on in CGW. The effort is not wasted and Computer
Gaming World will become, we trust, even better as a
result. We hope that both the subscribers and the industry
as a whole will agree. Forum, we hardly knew ya'! Nevertheless, we move forward.
Johnny Wilson
Former Editor
Computer Game Forum

Access Software
2561 South 1560 West
Woods Cross, UT 84087
ECHELON: At first glance, this 3D Space Flight Simulator looks like
a half dozen other programs. Do
not be fooled. Not only does this
simulator include non-military expeditions, but comes complete
with a voice-actuation controller,
"The Lipstick," which enables
players to "Fire" without pushing a
button. C-64. Circle Card #1.

Activision, Inc.
P.O. Box 7286
Mountain View, CA
STAR RANK BOXING II: This
revision of the Gamestar division's
popular "Star Rank Boxing" simulation offers better animation and
more sensitive player control over
the boxers. As in the earlier version, players may create their own
boxers, train them, manage them,
and fight them. Up to five fighters
in each class may be created and

saved. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #2.
Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA
MAGNETRON: This arcade adventure pits the player, as pilot of a
photon fighter, against the "magnetron generators" of an alien
siege force. The fighters must
penetrate the orbital bases where
these generators are located and

destroy them. Pilots must generally
avoid the walls of the orbital bases,
however, while dealing with a ship
that must be piloted via thrusters.
Momentum plays an extremely significant factor in controlling the
ship and increasing the difficulty
factor. C-64 ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #3.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA
SKYFOX II: Players pilot a Skyfox
II warp fighter in this sequel to the
popular action game. On-board
weaponry for "warpwarriors" includes: neutron disrupters, photon
pulse bombs, and anti-matter
mines. The game includes ten possible missions with names which
read like a science fiction anthology: "Diplomatic Immunity," "Incoming," "Xenomorph Uprising," "Guardian," and "The Boondock Expedition," among others. C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #4.
STRIKE FLEET: Players com-

mand task fleets of up to 16 vessels and four helicopters in this
game of modern naval warfare. As
in the earlier Lucasfilm Games and
Electronic Arts combined venture,
"PHM Pegasus," the object of this
strategy/action game seems to be
to put the player inside the ships.
In this case, the player can have
the viewpoint of any one of the
ship's captains or the pilot of the
helicopter. Successful players can
rise through the ranks to the position of Fleet Admiral. Of course,
"court martial" is a live option in
this game, as well. C-64 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #5.
Japan International Software
5300 Stevens Creek Blvd.
San Jose, CA
3D ORIGAMI: Those who are looking for a way to absorb some traditional Japanese culture before the
dollar is devoured by the yen may
be interested in the ancient art of
paper folding. Origami is a
therapeutic and restful activity. This
program, complete with
honourable Japanese music

soundtrack, leads westerners step
by step from the simplest paper
cup to a very complex "Crane
Card" as it unravels the threads of
mystery surrounding this art. IBM.
Circle Reader Service Card #6.
Microillusions
P.O. Box 3475
Granada Hills, CA
DISCOVERY: It's a space adventure! It's an arcade game! It's .. .
(gulp!) an educational game! Yes,
this flexible game uses elements
from all three genres to create a
fascinating product for youngsters
from grade school through high
school. The basic game comes
with either elementary mathematics questions or spelling.
Players explore the ship, using a
joystick to jump over potentially
deadly alien specimens (not quite
as deadly as those in "Aliens,"
however), locating the crystals
needed to restore the spaceship
"Discovery" to operating efficiency,
and answering questions from the
ship's security computer in order
to open doors. There are eleven ex-

pansion disks in the works which
include: science, history, social
studies, math concepts, language,
geography, and others. Amiga
($39.95 for basic set, $19.95 for expansion disks). Circle Reader Service Card #7.
ROMANTIC ENCOUNTERS AT
THE DOME: Whether you fancy
yourself as a "sensual single" or
simply want to try on a "wild and
crazy" lifestyle, this "R"-rated text
adventure game may be your ticket to kinkiness. The designer of
the game is an award-winning
playwrite and screenwriter (Lee
Thomas) and he has attempted to
create situations where players can
"act out" responses rather than the
mere puzzle-solving that is so common in text adventures. Background research was also provided
by a practicing psychologist. This
means that when your character is
tired of "playing around," he/she
can visit the Psychological Department for some "Love Capacity Testing." Amiga, IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #8.

Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL
Q-BALL: If you have ever wished
you could pick up a billiard table
and flip it over to get a better
angle on the ball, this is the game
for you. Another stunning
European arcade import, this
game has splendid graphics and
sound, but the most incredible feature is the rotation of the playing
surface (262,144 different angles).
"I say, old boy, nothing ho-hum
about this billiard product." Amiga
($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #9.
PBI Software
1163 Triton Drive
Foster City, CA
TOWER OF MYRAGLEN: As the
last remaining Knight of Justice
("Have Sword Will Travel"), players
must enter the Tower of Myraglen
and attempt to retrieve the Medallion of Soul Stealing to save the
Kingdom. The game uses both the
sound and graphics capabilities of
the the IIGS well and involves rid-

dies and puzzles in addition to the
fast reflexes needed to succeed at
the game. IIGS with 512K
($54.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #10.
Scholastic, Inc.
730 Broadway
New York, NY
A.I.: A teacher's manual, two
game disks, and an Apple II with
128K are needed in order to embark on this "Experience With Artificial Intelligence." This learning tool
is designed like a well-designed
laboratory manual and can provide
ten different experiments in discovering how to simulate intelligence by means of a computer.
Apple II with 128K or IIGS ($69.95
for educator's edition, $49.95 for
home product). Circle Reader Service Card #11.
Sierra
P.O. Box 485
Coarsegold, CA
MIXED-UP MOTHER GOOSE:
Roberta Williams, designer of the
Continued on page 54

THE
RUMOR BAG

by Alfredo
Gambino
Coloma
Giancanna
Southern Californians are unable
to resist the lure of the slopes
on those rare occasions when the
snow level drops into the vicinity of
our local mountains. My editor suggested that my writing was going a
little stale, so it might be worthwhile
for me to take some time off and
venture into the white stuff. Now, I
wasn't really expecting to pick up
any juicy rumors about entertainment software when I visited Snow
Valley, but I no sooner entered the
rental shop than I overheard the
name, Infocom. My ears perked up
and this advertising type started talking about this new Legends of
Literature series that the company is
supposed to be working on. He said
that Sherlock: The Riddle of the
Crown Jewels is supposed to be the
first release in this series. He also
said that this product marks the first
time Infocom has used an outside
developer to design a product for
them.
I didn't hear what else he said because I was grunting too loudly as I
pulled my boots on. My doctor told
me I had been eating too much
pasta. Still, I couldn't wait to get

S

lined up for the lift to the beginner
slope, so I popped into line behind
two guys with United States Olympic
Committee patches on their jackets.
Imagine my surprise when I discovered that they were talking about
their new licensing agreement with
Epyx. Apparently, the company
which published Winter Games is
planning to launch a new product
entitled The Games/Winter Edition
tied to the games in Calgary. The
game is being developed with the assistance of the U.S.O.C. and previous Olympic team members. Big
things seem to be happening in Redwood City because Epyx is expected
to announce its new "Consumer
Electronics Division" at the Winter
Consumer Electronics Show.
The chair lift took us to the start of
the beginner slope. As usual, I was
careful to criss-cross the slope in
tight turns in order to keep my
speed down. Unfortunately, I committed the unpardonable sin of
skiing. I didn't get my skis at the
right angle and found myself
pointed straight down the hill. My
right ski came off and I found myself
flying directly toward one of the

snow-making machines (we have to
enhance everything in California),
ludicrously balanced on one ski and
travelling at a preposterous rate of
speed. My life passed before my
eyes, especially the recent days
when I picked up a tip about
Interstel's Empire. It seems the
company is planning to release
another version, perhaps Empire II,
in 1988. In this new version, infantry
and armored units would be handled differently; aircraft could be
transported by ship; paratrooper
units would be available; full modem
play is anticipated; and a full editing
system (including scenario editor,
map editor, and ability to name individual cities) should be added. The
company's aim is to provide enhancements without allowing the game
to become bogged down with
morale, supply rules and other
details. I also remembered that Interstel is planning on releasing a fishing simulator for bass fishermen
(Gone Fishing) on the Atari ST and
a boating, exploring simulation entitled First Expedition (IBM).
With not a moment to lose, I
(Continued on page 48)

Scorpia's review of the sequel
to Alternate Reality: The City
contains numerous hints.
TITLE:

Alternate Reality:
The Dungeon
Apple, Atari 8-bit
C-64
PRICE:
$34.95439.95
DESIGNERS: Ken Jordan
Dan Pinal
Philip Price
PUBLISHER:
Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA

SYSTEMS:

I

n a dim, unused corner of
.Xebec's Demise, a door
creaks open onto darkness.
Worn steps wind downward,
going deep below the city. At
the bottom lies the Dungeon,
the beginning of the journey
towards enlightenment, and, perhaps, escape . . . or revenge.
The stairs beckon, and the first
steps are taken on that journey .

T he

second scenario in the
epic Alternate Reality
series, The Dungeon continues
the saga of the human kidnapped by aliens and dropped
into a bizarre world for unknown
reasons. The City was nothing
more than a struggle for survival; The Dungeon begins the
quest for information and a
return home.
Since this is a continuation,
you can bring your character
over from The City, and this is
highly recommended. Note,
however, that the transfer is oneway; you can take a character
from City to Dungeon, but not
by Scorpia
from Dungeon to City. Also, not
all of your equipment may make
two is only half that, 32x32; level
the transfer. I was quite surprised
three is half again, being 16x16; and
and not a little upset, that both ol
level four is a minuscule 8x8. The
my magical swords did not come
bottom three are actually relatively
with me into The Dungeon. Ordieasy to map. Most of your efforts will
nary weapons (as well as crystal
be spent on level one.
plate), however, should make the
transition intact.
Mapping, as usual, will be a major
The Underground Gourmet
activity. The Dungeon is a large
place, comprised of four levels of
nlike the previous game, there
descending size. Level one is the
is only one store, one tavern,
same size as the city, 64x64. Level
and one inn. These are all on the

U

first level and fairly close to your
starting point. The Damon and
Pythias Store (run by Omar and
his twin brother Jeff) is a combined armorer, clothier, and
provisioner. Here, you can stock
up on food packets and water
flasks, purchase clothing,
weapons, and armor, exchange
copper and silver for gold, and
sell gems and jewelry.
Omar (as well as Jeff) is open
to bargaining on weapons,
armor, and clothing. Everything
else has a fixed price and there
is no haggling. However, do
watch the prices when you buy
multiples of food and water.
Omar's math is sometimes a little off ("Four water flasks at one
silver each . . . let me see, that
comes to five silvers").
The Retreat is the place to
sleep. For a small donation of
coppers, you can get a spot on
the floor. There are no rooms.
Any amount over 30 coppers
will get you a place by the fire.
Spend less, and you'll end up in
a corner or the drafty spot by
the door. Still, they will take any
amount, but you must give
something to stay the night. If
you are broke, you are out of
luck.
At Der Rathskeller, you can
purchase food and drink for immediate consumption. No water
flasks or food packets are sold
here. If you leave early, though,
the remains of your unfinished
meal will be wrapped up (as a
sort of doggy bag) and serve as
an extra food packet. If you buy
enough rounds for the house,
and wait long enough (this takes
a lot of patience), mysterious
strangers will come by the bar or
table and pass along cryptic information in return for a meal or a drink.
Only one such stranger will appear
during any visit.
One thing absent from The Dungeon is a Healer shop. You must
rely (at least at the start) on running
across a wandering Healer if you
need hit points restored, poisons nullified, or diseases cleansed. While
the prices are fairly high (1 hp res-

tored per silver piece; 50 silvers to
cure poison, and 100 to cure diseases), the Healer is actually a kindly
soul, who will heal you for whatever
money you're carrying, leaving you
broke but healthy. Note, however,
he will leave immediately after performing a service if you have no
money left.

A Bard in a Guilded Cage

T here

are eight guilds underground (four good, four evil)
and you can join them (a great relief
to 8-bit owners, who were not able
to join any City Guilds). Which ones
depend, naturally, on whether the
game considers you to be good or
evil and by how much. Some guilds
may accept you right away, others
may be more choosy.
The first guild you join is your
primary guild. They give you a ring
that provides energy for casting
spells (rechargeable at a price) and
a locker where you can store excess
valuables, such as food, water,
money, gems, and such. Unfortunately, you can't store spare
weapons, armor, or other items,
which can later become a problem
(more on that in a little while).
You may belong to the other three
guilds as an associate member.
They do not provide rings, ringrecharging, or lockers, but they will
teach you spells, allow you to practice spells, and also (Free!), remove
any curses that may have been
placed upon you.
Two other places of interest are
the Enchantress' and the Dwarven
Smithy. The Enchantress (for a set
price of eight silvers each item) will
tell you all about your weapons and
armor. In return for crystals, she will
enchant any weapon or piece of
armor you wish. Here, you must be
very careful.
When an item is to be enchanted,
you get a choice of what you want
done. The item could be made
lighter; its life could be extended
(many weapons break after awhile);
it could be made to do more
damage; or have a new category of
damage added to what it already

does. These last two may confuse
people.
Choosing to "make it more effective" means that the weapon's current damage rating will be raised
(e.g. a sword that does low sharp
damage would do medium sharp
damage). Choosing to "add extra
damage capability" means that the
weapon would do another kind of
damage (e.g. a sword that does low
sharp would now do, say, low sharp
and low fire). You have no choice as
to what type of damage ability is
added.
The best choice is usually making

a weapon more effective. There is little sense in spending crystals to
make weapons or armor lighter, nor
would you really want to rely on the
judgment of the Enchantress as to
what the item needs ("Let me decide
what's best" is also on the list.).
An item can only be enchanted
once, so be sure you pick what you
really want. Also note that, insofar
as weapons are concerned, the
secondary types of damage they do
will never be raised when the item is
enchanted. Armor protection,
however, will have its various
categories raised, if you pay enough.
The Smithy sells quality weapons
and armor; buys your old stuff; and
will also, for a stiff price, make a custom weapon for you. The custommade weapons (which you also get
to name!), are the best in the game.
However, it will take awhile before
you can afford one, since the Dwarf
accepts only gems and jewels for his
wares (but he gives you silver when

you sell something). Start collecting
the baubles early in the game, and
buy a custom weapon (sword or
hammer recommended) as soon as
you can (by the way, it takes four
days, game time, for the weapon to
be forged, and you can't do anything at the Smithy during this
period).
Note that when you want a
weapon made, the Smith will tell you
he wants "at least" a certain number
of gems and jewels. The more you
give him, the more potent your
weapon will be. I paid him 300
gems/jewels for my sword, Annihilator. It turned out to be wellnamed and came out doing high
sharp, low blunt, and low good
damage and was able to kill most
things with one blow, at times doing
over 200 points of damage on
aimed attacks.
The last important shop is Lucky's
Potion Brewery on level two. Here
you can buy potions, or have potions you've picked up identified.
The prices here are quite
reasonable, but perhaps that's because all the potions are temporary,
and wear off after time. Lucky may
also offer you, at a bargain price, an
experimental potion. This is a
gamble, since you won't know what
it does until you drink it (this is the
one potion Lucky won't identify for
you); the effects could be good or
bad. Take one at your own risk.

Quest for Hire
Sitting in the middle of the first
level, just below the Floating
Gate, is the Oracle. For a donation
in gold (and only gold, minimum of
five pieces), he will send you out on
little quests. Completing these
quests will bring you some information, raise some of your attributes,
and allow you to reach level four.
Therefore the basic activities in
The Dungeon are mapping and performing the quests. Along the way,
you get to pick up a variety of
weapons, armor, magic items, crystals, jewels, and other goodies,
(Continued on page 17)

Choppers!
Evan's Fighting
Gunships
Reviews by M. Evan Brooks

Helicopter \'hel-ê-kap-ter\ An aeroplane
flying machine with a vertical screw arrangement to lift it into the air, and other power
apparatus gives it horizontal motion. It has
not yet been practically realized, though
some experiments have been made. — from
Winston's Cumulative Encyclopedia, Philadelphia, 1912.
With that working definition
firmly in mind
(and tongue firmly in cheek), it is
time to examine
the plethora of
helicopter
simulations currently available.
Microprose was
one of the first
companies to
produce such a
simulation, (see
CGW #35
(March 1987) for
a detailed review
of Gunship). Gunship was an
innovative break-through
TITLE:
Infiltrator II
SYSTEM:
C64/Apple/IBM
entry.
Do these recent entries
PRICE:
$29.95
DESIGNER:
Chris Gray
forge new ground or merely
PUBLISHER:
Mindscape, Inc.
reshovel used oats?
Northbrook, IL
Perhaps a threshold question should be framed as to what one expects from a
helicopter simulation. Infiltrator Il is clearly an arcade
game, while Super Huey approaches the pure flight
simulator. Tomahawk, to this reviewer, seems closer
on the scale to the arcade, with Thunderchopper and
Helicopter 3-D balancing more towards the simulator
side.
Each simulation has attempted to reflect own its
sense of flight reality. Perhaps, Infiltrator II belongs off
by itself. As an arcade-type product, its sense of
reality is obviously not accurate or meant to be taken
as such. With graphics and game play somewhat

reminiscent of Spy vs. Spy I-II, Infiltrator II is a continuation, wherein the player must fly his Gizmo DHX2 into enemy air space, infiltrate an enemy ground installation, seek various objects and eventually, make a
brain implant into the enemy leader in order to render
him innocuous.
The documentation is very tongue in cheek. This is
initially fun, but after the first reading, the jokes can
become tiresome when one is attempting to find a
particular answer.
Overall, however, the program is well done. The
graphics are functional, albeit cartoonish, but they
clearly convey the necessary information. Game play itself is entertaining as an arcade product, but at the
same time, flight mechanics are sufficiently difficult to
raise this product above the normal "shoot-'em-up"
and the mission sequences are varied. IFF (identification — friend or foe) is an essential survival characteristic, and luck can well play a portion in one's lot
when encountering the Unfriendly Skies.
While it is a credible job overall, this reviewer's
hesitancy in offering a recommendation is that the
product is more difficult than the normal arcade
product. Given that difficulty, when compared against
the likes of Gunship, it obviously falls short in both
realism and replay value. If one is more inclined
towards the arcade spectrum, however, Infiltrator II
should fill the bill. If one desires a more realistic accounting, then read on .. .
Tomahawk is a simulation of the AH-64 Apache
gunship. Covering the same area as Microprose's
Gunship, this simulation is easier to operate, albeit
much more primitive overall. From the opening sequence, one is quickly made aware that the graphics
are primitive. The documentation is adequate, although lacking in sophistication and delineation. It is
interesting to observe that Tomahawk and Mach 2 appear to have been done by the same design staff
(though Firebird's Mach 2 is silent as to the name of
its designers).
Unlike most helicopter simulators, Tomahawk has a
correcting feature so that if the stick is released, the
helicopter will automatically assume a straight heading, no matter what turn mode one is in. While this
may assist the novice, it becomes a distraction to the
more advanced gamer, given that one has to continually correct for this automatic realignment.
Aside from flight training, scenarios are map
oriented, and require one to liberate particular sectors
from enemy influence. One may select either day or
night missions, as well as determine the cloudbase,
crosswinds, and turbulence. These are welcome
touches, but overall, this simulation does not approach the sophistication, sense of realism and sheer
enjoyment that Gunship offers.
Perhaps, Tomahawk's greatest appeal will be to the
Atari 8-bit machine owners. Since Gunship will never
appear in that mode, Tomahawk is the only viable sub-

stitution. The simulation offers the Atari version on
one side, with the Commodore version on the flip.
Tomahawk does offer cloudbase and turbulence as
interesting options, but overall, the simulation is simply not innovative or exciting enough to justify a strong
recommendation.
Thunderchopper ActionSoft's response to Gunship,
just as Up Periscope was their response to Silent Service (and Stealth their forthcoming response to
Stealth Fighter). Does anyone see a pattern here?
Still, Up Periscope was an interesting simulation (cf.
Computer Game Forum (Fall 1987)) in which the
documentation was superb and definitely whetted
one's appetite for more. Unhappily, the documentation in Thunderchopper is not up to that standard.
The flight instructions are terse and could well be expanded. Furthermore, the historical flavor is bland.
This reviewer finds it interesting that Col. Rosenow
was an Air Force officer and not Army, since most
combat air operations from rotary wing aircraft are
currently under Army jurisdiction.
Be that as it may, Thunderchopper lacks the detail
and gameplay that Gunship offered. Instead of the
Apache we are familiar with from Gunship, the aircraft
in Thunderchopper is a Hughes 530 MG Defender.
The ground terrain is handled somewhat more realistically than in Gunship and the zoom television target
monitor is a definite plus. However, the scenarios,
while varied, do not offer the sweaty palms that Gunship yielded. Scenarios include flight training, rescue
alert and rescue at sea (picking up downed pilots),
combat, and armed escort. These scenarios offer a
varied view of the role of the helicopter. An interesting
flight sidelight is that when one approaches a building, one must beware of updrafts. This condition is a
real factor and one which is rarely seen on computer
simulations. Overall, though, Thunderchopper lacks
the elan and panache that one would have expected.
3-D Helicopter Simulator offers a unique twist that
has not appeared heretofore. One can play
head-to-head via modem and even write nasty messages to
one's opponent as he seeks victory in the skies!
Sierra plans to upgrade the program, as well as
offer scenery disks. The program itself offers a somewhat generalized helicopter simulation in a combat environment where one's opponent is a single ship with
similar armament and handling characteristics. No
Warsaw Pact ground or air targets are offered, but
given the use of the 16-bit machines, 3-D Helicopter
Simulator does offer graphics which are a cut above
the competition. The helicopters themselves are
graphically disappointing, appearing somewhat
chunky and boxish. The surrounding vistas, however,
are wonders to behold. One of the nicest options is
the "out-of-body" approach. This enables players to
view his craft from groundside, rear or satellite. The
most difficult aspect of most 3-D helicopter simulations is landing the helicopter in one piece, given the
graphic limitations of the computer and the lack of

depth perception in this
medium. The different
views herein obviate that
failing, although in all
truth, the experienced
gamer may well consider
using a ground or satellite view to be "cheating."
While 3-D Helicopter
Simulator offers an interesting flight experience
and a challenging two
player modem game, the
game is somewhat predictable as a solitaire
combat simulator. Those
desirous of a product
more akin to Flight
Simulator II will find this
program definitely to
their liking, but those
desiring a true combat
Tomahawk
simulator will find it a little too TITLE;
SYSTEM:
Atari (64K)/C-64
PRICE:
$29.95
dry.
DESIGNER:
D.K. Marshall
Cosmi's Super Huey is an
PUBLISHER:
DataSoft
Chatsworth,
CA
older program, mentioned
here for completeness. It is
also more of a flight simulator than a combat
simulator. With missions of combat, rescue and exploration, the latter is the longest and most difficult
scenario. For those desiring an 8-bit helicopter flight
simulator, Super Huey and its sequels fill the bill. For
those desiring excitement as well, it would pay
dividends to look elsewhere.

Conclusions
Virtually all of these
simulators present a
somewhat accurate rendition of rotary flight (of
course, they all ignore
the pedals, but then
again, that type of input
would require additional
hardware in order to
yield its increased
dividends in the realism
vs. playability trade-off).
Microprose's Gunship is
obviously the competition to beat. However,
Gunship offers an actionoriented realism sorely
lacking in all these
products. Also, only Gunship offered a keyboard
overlay which made flight

—
TITLE: Thunderchopper
SYSTEM:
C-64/Apple/IBM
PRICE:
$29.95
DESIGNER:
Col. John B. Rosenow
PUBLISHER:
ActionSoft
Champaign, IL

mechanics easily accessible. These other
products, although
most offer a
separate reference
sheet, do not have
the ease of use that
a keyboard overlay
does. Thus, it becomes difficult to
remember which key
to press at the
proper time — a
flaw which only
repeated playings
would obviate.
In reviewing these
products, this
reviewer is reminded
of a Bloom County
comic strip, wherein
Opus the penguin
becomes a film
reviewer. As he
-lunches over the
TITLE:
3-D Helicopter Simulator
SYSTEM:
IBM/MS-DOSCompatibles
.typewriter, his review
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNER:
Joe Wofford
enfolds " . . . has
PUBLISHER:
Sierra, Inc.
Drought the word 'bad'
Coarsegold, CA
o new levels of badness. Bad acting. Bad effects. Bad everything. This . .
just oozed rottenness . . . . simply bad beyond all infinite dimensions of
possible badness."
[Pause] "Well maybe
not that bad, but
Lord, it wasn't good."
These individual
programs were not
that bad. They all
have a new or different viewpoint. The
problem is that, after
Gunship, if something does not simply knock everyone's
socks off, there is little justification in
publishing it.
However, of those
products reviewed in
this article, this
reviewer was most
impressed with 3-D
Helicopter Simulator
because of its
TITLE:
Super Huey
modem capabilities and better
SYSTEMS:
Atari/C-64
PRICE:
$12.95
scenery. Then again, as a sixDESIGNER:
Paul Norman
teen-bit product, such is to be
PUBLISHER:
Cosmi, Inc.
expected.
Wilmington., CA
•

(Continued from page 13)
many (but not all) of which are nicely described in the manual.
Graphics, especially on the 8-bit
Apple, are much improved. Wall
boundaries are clearly delineated,
making mapping easier, although not less tedious (as
before, one step in the game
does not equal one square on
the map). Pictures of the various
beings you encounter are sharp,
and many feature minor animation. The sewers are suitably
murky in dark blue, and have a
slightly claustrophobic atmosphere about them.
Encounters have a variety of
outcomes, depending on how
you feel about the creatures,
and how they feel about you.
Some, of course, will always attack. Others may adopt a
neutral stance, waiting to see
what you will do first. You can
try starting a conversation, or offering something from your inventory, in the hopes of obtaining information (which never worked
too well for me; I never learned anything useful). Sometimes, a friendly
creature will give you something you
lack (a compass, a food packet, or
such).
You may also find yourself up
against multiple monsters of the
same type, up to as many as eight
(this is where spells really come in
useful!). A few of them, including
flame demons, goblins, and guards,
are able to summon more of the
same, so it's essential to kill them off
as quickly as possible.
Combat is pretty much the same
as in the City, being handled in an
all-text manner. You do have the
ability to use spells as well as
weapons, however, and if worst
comes to worst, you can always try
running away.
Thieves will plague you throughout
the game, sometimes fighting to the

death, other times just grabbing
something and running off (very irritating). Note that being a member
of the Thieves Guild does not necessarily confer immunity from such attacks. My character (evil, of course)
was an associate of the Thieves
Guild and this did not prevent occasional theft attempts and attacks
from other thieves. Master Thieves
in particular seem to pay no attention to your guild affiliation, so be
wary of them at all times (this, by

the way, also holds true for the Mercenaries Guild; associate members
may sometimes attack you).

The Importance of Being
Honest

T

he game can be difficult if your
character is good, since you
have to be very careful of your actions. Fighting the wrong creatures
will bring warnings from your guilds
and those who do not quickly mend
their ways are expelled.
The same is true of evil guilds. If
you start acting in too good a
fashion, they will be very upset with
you and start giving you warnings
about that. This happened to me in
the game. I came in from the City,
and was judged to be evil, as the
priest in the Chapel told me. He offered me the chance to repent, and

all I had to do was give up all my
worldly possessions.
Well, I was standing there with four
hundred gold in my pocket and
there was no way I was going to
give up that, plus all my weapons,
armor and other goodies, just to
make things harder for myself! So, I
decided to stay evil and went
around and joined all the evil Guilds.
Things were going well until one
time I walked into the Dark Wizards
Guild and was told they were getting
tired of my "holier than thou" attitude. Oops! I was being too
good. Time to go out and bash
a few paupers; get my soul back
to being dark as pitch again
(grin). That took care of the
problem and as long as I remembered to do an evil act every
now and then, I remained a
member in good standing of all
my guilds.
For all that, the game is not
particularly well-balanced. Starting a new character from
scratch is almost impossible, unless you already know where
some of the good things are,
and are lucky enough to get
them before being killed. As in
the City, attribute generation is
totally random and incoherent,
and you might have to make
many tries before you get a viable
character.
Even then, you could find yourself
dead before many moves have
passed in the game. You rarely get
enough money to equip yourself
even half-way decently; certainly
there won't be enough to obtain all
the armor (which now comes in
pieces for various body parts) you
need, not to mention a weapon or
two.
The major dangers at the start are
the giant rats and bats, which will
frequently cause diseases when they
bite you. All you can do in that case
is hope a wandering Healer shows
up before it's too late. You probably
won't have enough money for both
being cured and having hit points
restored, so you could be undiseased, but low on points, making
you dead meat in your next combat.
Thus, it's much better to bring in

an experienced character from the
City. However, the armor you had
there will now only cover your torso,
and you'll have to buy additional
armor for your head, arms, and legs
at Damon and Pythias from the
start. Later, after encounters, you'll
find better types of armor that give
more protection.

The Ultimate Consumer

T he

most outrageous aspect of
the game is the Devourer. This
creature shows up when the game
decides you are carrying too many
items. It has nothing to do with your
strength, simply the number of
things in your inventory.
When the Devourer appears, it always surprises you, then goes on to
suck up random items from your inventory. Money, jewels, food, water,
weapons: anything you have with
you could go into its maw, although

most of the time it will home in on
the best thing you have in weapons
or armor.
The creature also attacks you, and
many times you will stand there
stunned while your inventory
vanishes and your hit points go
down until you're dead. The thing
can be killed, but often not before
several valuable items have been
lost (the manual does not tell you
what triggers the Devourer; you
have to discover this by trial and
error).
This is one of the most asinine
devices I have come across. If the
idea is to keep players from carrying
around too many goodies and thus
becoming unbeatable, then it should
be implemented in a more intelligent and logical, not to mention
fair, fashion. Limits could easily be
imposed, either by strength, or in
total number of items regardless of
stats. To use a juvenile conception

such as the Devourer is just plain
poor design.
As before, you save to a separate
character disk. Unlike City, however,
when you bring in your character for
play, it is not entirely wiped from the
disk. Instead, it is marked as "Lost".
If you should die (or turn off the
computer without saving), your
character is still there. There's a
catch, though. One of your stats will
be randomly reduced by one the
next time you play.
This is silly. The character disk can
be backed up, and of course
everyone is going to back up every
time they save. When a character
dies, it will just be restored from the
backup. So why bother with all the
folderol of reducing stats? It accomplishes nothing. Far better to
just leave the character alone on the
disk, as is.
The quest structure in Dungeon is
rather loose. Supposedly the Oracle
sends you on these little jaunts, but

you can stumble on them by accident and complete them without
consulting the Oracle at all. After
the first two, I just kept going along
on my own, and managed to do all
the others without ever hearing
about them from the Oracle. This
greatly reduces the importance of
the Oracle in the game, when it's
supposed to be one of the more important aspects. A more cohesive
design would have had the quests
triggered by visits to the Oracle, instead of just sitting out there to be
inadvertently discovered.
Here a word for Apple //c owners:
before you boot Dungeon, make
sure that the joystick is plugged into
the computer. If it isn't, you'll find
that the game will spin your character around in circles, making movement or any other action virtually impossible.
Now, a word for all Apple owners:
when you go down the stairs from
level two to level three, do not try to
take them back up. This will cause
the game to crash! Always use the
other stairway (which you have to
find) to go back up to level two.

The Alternate Reality
Improvement Association

O

verall, Dungeon is a big improvement over City, but it is
still ultimately unsatisfying. Part of
this is due to the scope of the game,
spreading out over a total of six
scenarios. Until the last one is
reached, you're really just marking
time in the game. You may be picking up clues and information, but
the lack of a definite ending (which
isn't possible in this setup) or of
some specific accomplishment
leaves a hollow feeling when the
game is done.
The lack of true puzzles also contributes to this feeling. The quests
are pretty straightforward matters
and there is generally little mystery
about them or their completion. In
fact, the most puzzling part of the
game is apt to be figuring out what
the various goodies do that you pick
up.
Perhaps, some of this cannot be

CONTEST RESULTS
Long, long ago in a game magazine far, far away (Computer Game Forum #1),
a great challenge was issued for the most powerful characters of both alignments
(good and evil) to present themselves for recognition. Great wealth (in the form of
a complete set of Datasoft products) was to be presented to both champions.
Over two hundred challengers vied for these honors. Herein doth lie the results of
this tournament.

and
Dragon Slayer - by Tim Patrick
544-C Wailepo Street
Kailua, HI 96734
Computer System - Atari 1200 XL

Dragon Slayer is a level 13 character who has achieved a very high level of
sanctity in Alternate Reality: The Dungeon. He has been offered sanctuary from
the Chapel Monks and was awarded with St. Percival's Mace and the Spell of Dispell Evil. He wears Enchanted Armour (Helm of Light, Crystal Breast Plate, True
Silver Gauntlets and Leggings) and carries three custom made Enchanted
Weapons along with St. Percival's Mace. All spells have been mastered to 95%
and Dragon Slayer has completed all quests, including the defeat of the Great
Wyrm.

Champion of Evil
Orion - by Jeff Towich
1990 Sunset Avenue
Whitehall, PA 18052
Computer System - Commodore 64

Orion is a level 13 character of evil proportions. His primary guild is the Wizards
of Chaos. He has killed the Great Wyrm and emptied his lair of all treasure. He
has mastered 10 spells to a success level of 95% and wears full Enchanted Ar
mour. Orion wields an Enchanted Ironwood Boken and Mirrored Shield as
weapons. He also carries several other Enchanted Weapons. Orion has defeated
the Goblin and Troll Kings and delivered the Reforged Ring to the Oracle. Other
quests completed include: answering the Gargoyle's riddle, returning the three
staff pieces to Acrinimiril, surviving the Gauntlet, and killing the Alien in the Control Room on the fourth level of the Dungeon.
And the scribes of the game magazine did heap praise and congratulations
upon the champions. And subscribers to the magazine, in all 50 fiefdoms and 27
foreign kingdoms, cheered the victors!
helped in a game of such magnitude. Yet, surely the individual
scenarios could have a little more
meat, depth, and cohesive design to
them. There needs to be more positive and meaningful activity in the future scenarios, if the game as a

whole is to live up to its ultimate conception.
Bottom line: Better than City, but
still too close to treasure-grabbing,
hack-and-slash action.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

As both an educator and arcade
fanatic, David was an ideal choice
to help us launch a review on this
"historical" action game.
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

I

Apollo 18: Mission
to the Moon
C-64
$29.95
Artech Digital
Entertainments
Accolade
Cupertino, CA

n 1961, President John
Fitzgerald Kennedy set
the nation's resources
toward sending man to the
moon and returning him
safely to the earth. In the
fast-paced decade that followed, the imagination of
the entire world was fixed
on the heavens. Every nation watched in awe as Neil
Armstrong first stepped on
the lunar surface with his
now famous statement,
"One small step for man,
one giant leap for mankind."
I was one of those young
men whose hearts swelled
with envy as I watched those
first moonwalkers (the real
ones, not Michael Jackson)
frolic on the moon. Now,
however, any aspiring
astronaut can launch his
own moon mission in
Accolade's new space
simulation game, Apollo 18.
The game is a faithful attempt to re-create an actual
Apollo mission from
countdown to splashdown.
The game is not an arcade
game, even though portions
of the game operate like
one. First of all, the game instructions are packed full of
details about how the Apollo
flight operations worked; a
detailed drawing of the Apollo command/service modules accompanies the game; and the last page
of the game pamphlet includes a list
of the Apollo manned missions, as
well as a bibliography which shows
the research which went into this
project. The designers encourage
players to do extra research and

learn even more about the Apollo
project.
From first boot, the game has a
great sense of realism. The digitized
voice on the synthesized
"soundtrack" really sounds like those
memories of mission control when it

On Moonlight Way

The

mission begins in mission
control with a simple setting,
checking and re-setting of the
operating systems. The game becomes difficult during the launch.
Players are responsible for
watching a number of
gauges and responding to
the information given, as well
as keeping their timing down
to the split second or having
the mission scrubbed. The
game system gives the player
a small margin of error, but
the player must keep the
craft on course while jettisoning various stages, firing
various boosters, and the
like. This is not an easy task.
This segment of the game
will take a lot of practice and
players should not become
discouraged if they have a
hard time getting beyond it
and on to the remainder of
the game.

APOLLO 18
MISSION TO THE

by David M. Wilson
says "T minus 15 and holding." The
voice sounds so much like the real
thing that the first time I failed in a
mission (I burned my crew up on reentry) and the voice said, "The Apollo spacecraft and crew have been
lost," I was sharply reminded of the
loss of the Challenger astronauts.

MOON

Once into orbit, the player
ceases to play mission control and becomes the pilot of
the space capsule. If he has
achieved a safe parking
orbit, Houston will allow him
to continue on to the moon.
If not, you will be forced to
go to re-entry and splashdown. Assuming the player's
orbit is safe, Houston will
order the player to make
several course corrections.
The on-board computer establishes the proper burn
and gives players a mark five
countdown to fire the burn. I
found that if one holds the
fire button down until the
scrambled monitor of the onboard computer changes
from green to red, one's
course correction will be correct
from the first burn. If one misses his
mark five, fails to hold the fire button down long enough, or holds it
down too long, the course correction portion of the game must be
repeated. It will also be repeated
before landing on the moon.

The next maneuver consists of
releasing the lunar module, rotating
the service and command modules
180 degrees until the nose of the
spacecraft is head to head with the
lunar module and docking the two
together. Actually, it sounds more
difficult than it is. The only arduous
part of the docking is to be discriminating in the amount of thrust
the player uses to slow his approach
to the lunar module. If too much
thrust is used, the approach will be
completely negated, the player will
run low on fuel, and the remainder
of the mission scrubbed.
Assuming, however, that the player
has docked successfully with the
lunar module, he will make midcourse corrections and approach
the moon. There will be more
course corrections to make as the
distance narrows between the craft
and the moon, but finally, the big
moment arrives.
Now, players are ready to land the
lunar module by use of a visual
monitor and a command monitor.
The object of this sequence is to set
the craft down at the slowest
velocity possible. If one does not
bring the vehicle down at the first
landing site, there are two alternative sites. Once again, players
should be cautioned not to use too
much fuel on the first approach or
the mission is scrubbed without
making a lunar landing. Upon
making a safe landing with the lunar
module's systems operating properly, the astronauts will be given a
"Go" for the moonwalk.

lunar module to the landing site of
Surveyor Ill, an early unmanned mission which landed on the moon in
April of 1967. On one of the actual
moon landings, the lunar module
landed only 600 feet away from the
Surveyor, so the astronauts did not
have far to go.
Then, the fun really begins. The
player blasts off from the moon,

tracks the command module on
radar, aligns itself with the command module, and docks with it. Inside the command module, players
initiate the return home sequence.

The Re-entry Craft

A

fter the EVA sequence, players
complete final course corrections and prepare for re-entry. The
player must manually set the reentry angle and do his best to hold
it as steady as possible during reentry. One can never hold the crosshairs perfectly straight on the reentry angle display, but one should
just keep hauling them over to the
center of the display and try to hold
them there, despite the excessive
vibration caused from re-entering
the atmosphere. If one enters the atmosphere without burning up, the
next step is firing the "'chutes" and
coasting in for a smooth landing as
mission control says, "We've got you
spotted, the carrier is one its way!"
or "Re-entry must've been a real
rough ride. You guys are way off
course." On board the carrier, the
smiling astronauts are treated to a
rousing rendition of the national anthem and are congratulated on a
job well done.

Moonglow

T

The Man on the Moon

W

ith the lunar module depressurized and the hatches open,
players begin their walk on the
moon. The mission is to stay on the
path and conduct a "locomotion" experiment. In reality, the rationale for
this experiment was to allow
astronauts to learn how to move
around on the moon in case of a
solar-flareup so that they could
return to the safety of the lunar
module quickly. Players must stay
on the course which leads from the

way back. The player uses a grappling stick to ensnare the satellite,
but it is no easy chore.

On the way home, players stop for a
short spacewalk (EVA - extravehicular activity). Three satellites
are released from the spacecraft.
The astronaut must catch the
released satellites and stabilize them.
He must be careful, though. Too
much thrust from the jetpack will
cause the player to overshoot the
satellite entirely and have to work his

he game is another one of
those well-put together games
that teaches without preaching. One
cannot even read the instruction
booklet without learning about the
Apollo project. If reality-based simulations are exciting to you, this game
belongs on your game shelf. If you
like games with a great variety of
segments, this would be a good
choice. Every time one plays it, it is
slightly different because the game
rates one's performance by percentages, not by points. Players may
even compare their ratings with the
ratings the designers' have given to
the historical Apollo astronauts. One
thing is for sure, gamers who spend
their money on this game will not
spend their time in the light of the
silvery moon or moonlighting, they
will be at their computers.

In his initial review for CGW, Doug
suggests that Firebird's trilogy of
classic games may be flawed.
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
DESIGNER:

Jewels of Darkness
Atari 8-bit, 0.64 ($24.95)
Amiga, IBM, ST ($29.95)
Mike, Nick, and Pete Austin
Firebd
PUBLISHER:
Waldwick, NJ

A

h, the good old days of interactive fiction! Who cannot remember the days of the two-word
parser, the short descriptions,
and the ridiculously small
vocabularies of early adventure
gaming? In Jewels of Darkness, an inexpensive combination of three "classic" adventures, Firebird gives us the
chance to relive those days.
However, remember, the
product is dated (and is priced
accordingly).

dominion to find more treasure.
While I have never played the
original versions of "Adventure
Quest" and "Dungeon Adventure,"
"Colossal Adventure" seems to be a
true remake of the original game,
with only small alterations. All in all,
too few alterations.
The game has added a few things
that weren't present in the original

JEWELS OF
DARKNESS

New and Improved
with Secret Ingredients

R

eading the back of the
package, one receives the
impression that the game includes several bold, classic adventures with which to spend
many hours of fun. The game
even promises that these
games have been "significantly
revised to incorporate the latest
innovative techniques." How exciting!
How untrue!
The game does include
"Colossal Adventure," which will
seem very familiar to veteran
players. It is a classic text adventure game which is basically a
treasure hunt set in a magical
atmosphere. The player must
wander about dungeons, mazes,
and caves in a search for diamonds,
gold nuggets, and other pleasing
items (sound familiar yet?), while at
the same time, avoiding evil and
helping good. The other two games,
"Adventure Quest" and "Dungeon
Adventure" follow along much the
same line, with a few plot changes
and some differences in locale. For
example, in the second game, you
must destroy an evil lord. In the
third, you must return to the lord's

by Douglas Seacat
all-text games: graphics, a more
complete text parser, and some new
commands. Unfortunately, the first
two additions leave something to be
desired. The C-64 graphics are
crudely done, take a while to draw
onto the screen, and rarely have
more than four or five colors. Other
computer versions may be better,
but from the screen shots of the
Amiga version, I seriously doubt it.
In several instances, I had the feeling that the artist hadn't even read

the room descriptions. This was all
the more disappointing since previous text adventures by Firebird
(Guild of Thieves, The Pawn) have
had very fine graphics. Fortunately,
moves can be entered before the
graphics are finished being displayed or the graphics can be obviated entirely, but the text descriptions aren't much better.
The parser wasn't impressive
either. While it is a definite improvement over the two-word
version that plagued the
original game, it is not nearly
as flexible as those used in
either The Pawn or Guild of
Thieves. Full sentences can be
entered, but the vocabulary of
the game is so limited that a
few words are about all you will
be able to use anyway. There
were also several curious quirks
in the play-system. For example, when I tried to use the
word "put" in a sentence, the
game replied with "I'm sorry,
but I don't understand the word
'putting." It was bad enough
that it didn't know the word,
but a game should never
create words that it does not
understand.
Some of the new commands,
however, were interesting and
full of possibilities, even if the
game isn't. Ram Save and
Ram Restore were definite lifesavers, allowing one to use the
game with absolutely no diskaccess. Further, the Oops option comes in handy in certain
areas. Such options can hardly
be termed "the latest innovative
techniques," however.

Contains Oddities
and Artificial Perversities

The

puzzles and story-line also
leave much to be desired. The
game-play is very uneven in that
most of the puzzles are ridiculously
easy, while several of them are extremely difficult (mainly because
(Continued on page 26)

Jewels of
Darkness
(Continued from page 23)
they are illogical). Personally, I enjoy
a game that offers difficult puzzles,
but such puzzles should, at least,
make sense. There is one location
in the game where there is a broad
cavern which cannot be jumped, yet
one must reach the other side in
order to continue the game. What
does one do to solve the puzzle? A
black rod must be waved which, in
turn, causes a crystal bridge to span
the opening. What hat did they pull
that out of? Still, with persistence
and a lot of trial and error, the game
can easily be conquered.
Basically, there are only a few rules
to follow. The player should keep in
mind that there are few red herrings
in the game, so almost every item

has a use somewhere. For most puzzles, the obvious will do (if you find a
dried plant and you have some
water, pour the water on the plant,
etc.). If the obvious doesn't work, do
something completely crazy or illogical and that may work. Also, the
game has quite a few locations, so
an accurate map is vital.
Experienced adventurers will find
the puzzles too easy to be challenging and the crude parser and primitive graphics a distraction to the
gaming experience. Novices might
get more challenge from the puzzles, but will quickly become
frustrated with the sparse descriptions and limited vocabulary.

Original Formula

S

till, despite the many problems
related to Jewels of Darkness,
the game isn't completely bad. Many
of the problems related to the story
and puzzles stem from the fact that

this was one of the first of its type.
The authors who originally worked
on it didn't have years of previous experience and example to follow in
writing their stories. In addition,
many of the facets which made the
original version popular remain.
Some of the locations are quite ingenious, or even humorous. Further, it is interesting to note how
much of the game was copied in
later adventures by different companies. Many of the old stand-bys
which modern players take for
granted have their origin, here. If
you are interested in the genesis of
adventure gaming and don't have
much money to spend, this threegame combination certainly would
be hard to beat.
The game illustrates the positive
progress in game design by means
of its faults. Much innovation and accomplishment has occurred since
this game was first published, and I,
for one, am glad.

Spectrum Holobyte's
F-16 Fighter Simulation
Reviewed by Regan Carey

T he

General Dynamics F-16 is one of the most versatile high performance military aircraft in use
today. For example, the USAF Aerial Demonstration
Team, the Thunderbirds, uses the F-16. Now, you can
try out the Fighting Falcon for yourself.
Talk to your crew chief and select your armament
load. You wanted AIM 9 Limas, but they're on back
order! Oh, well. Be careful that you don't overdo it, or
you'll be flying a brick. Now, climb into the cockpit
and buckle in. Engage the Jet Fuel Start and the engine starts to roar. Increase the throttle to full military
power. Disengage the wheel brake and you're off
down the runway. Cut in the afterburners. Your ears ring as the
roar increases. Pull back on the
stick--gently! Look over your
shoulder and you can see your airbase fade into the distance.
Spectrum Holobyte's new F16 simulator is, from my personal perspective, one of
the most detailed and accurate flight simulators on
the microcomputer market today. The software is accompanied by a 140 page manual that provides extensive detail on the care and feeding of an F-16. You
are taken from the basics of flying all the way through
to complicated maneuvering.
Luckily for the non-pilots among us, Falcon has a
number of "reality" levels. They range from the magic
aircraft of the 1st Lt level that virtually ignores gravity,
never crashes and never runs out of fuel or ammo, to
the highly sensitive Full Colonel level that is a challenge to all except true fighter jockeys.
A full range of armaments is available. Air to air combat is carried out with AIM-9J/L Sidewinders, and the

M61-A1 Vulcan internal gun.
Mavericks, Mk 84
low drag bombs,
and Durandal
Anti-runway
bombs are used
for air to ground
attack. The ALQ131 ECM pod
makes survival a
little easier on air
to ground missions.
Views are available out the front,
rear and both
sides of the cockpit. Ah yes, the
cockpit. The
graphic rendition
of the cockpit is
highly detailed
and matches a
real F-16 cockpit
in most major points (see photograph provided courtesy of General Dynamics Corporation). A variety of
Heads Up Displays (HUD) are presented, depending
on the armament currently selected. Again, Falcon
scores well for accuracy. The simulated HUDs are
quite close to the real thing.
A "black box" feature records the maneuvers of your
Falcon and, if applicable, the MiG that was being
engaged. The dogfight can then be played back with
three simultaneous views of the action-- top, side and
front. Analyzing your successes, and failures, can help
you to survive in a hostile sky.
To be sure, the sky is hostile. You face MiGs in the
air and SAMs from the ground. Up to three MiGs can
be flying against you at one time. However, if too
much is going on the smoothness of the graphic display can be affected. The designers recommend that
the full complement of three MiGs only be used on
micros with the faster processors, such as the Mac II
or the 386 series.
One of the more innovative and exciting features of
this software is the capability to support simultaneous
play between two micros that are hooked together
with a null modem cable, letting two hotshots fly
against each other. I haven't tried to fly in a cooperative mode yet, so I don't know if it's possible. It sure
would be nice to know I've got a wing man when I
engage, though.

The Right Stuff

F rankly,

I was impressed by the product, . . . but
what do I know? So, I asked a real F-16 driver

in place yet, but a
free upgrade will be
available to
registered owners
when the new version is released this
spring. Both versions
can be copied for
backups or for installation on a hard disk.
from the 474th Tactical Air Wing (Nellis AFB) to give
Falcon a whirl. His initial skepticism was replaced with
interest as the Mac version progressed. Soon he was
flying about with a large chip on his shoulder, just
looking for a target.
While he was able to point out a number of compromises that the designers had made with reality, he
liked the program overall and gave it good marks for
accuracy. He was even able to coach me through a
couple of maneuvers that I had previously been unable to pull off. The problems had been with my
flying, not with the software.

ac vs. IBM

W

hat's the difference? Basically, the Mac has
sound and the IBM has color, but there are
other differences that originate with the basic
capabilities of the equipment involved. Falcon is one
of the few recreational programs on the market today
that truly uses the capability of the Macintosh. With
the faster processor, the Mac version is smoother and
has more detail. I guess you can tell something from
the fact that the IBM version comes on a single 360K
disk and the Mac version comes on two 700K disks!
The digitized sound on the Mac version is the best
that I have heard in a game to date. The opening
screen provides an upbeat treatment of Wagner's
"Flight of the Valkyries," using some of the sound effects from the game as part of the musical score.
Detailed sound adds spirit to the play. Missile
launches sound like missile launches and machine
guns sound like machine guns. When you start your
engine, you hear a jet engine start. What more can I
say?
As well, the Macintosh version provides a series of
air combat practice maneuvers. Select the maneuver
that you'd like to try and suddenly you are in a dogfight against a MiG, and you need that maneuver to
get him! Talk about motivation for practice. Your
Soviet opponent is also miraculously trailed by a
series of windows that show you his direction of flight.
The IBM version has a slower keyboard response, so
the controls aren't as responsive as they could be. In
addition, the resolution of the color display actually
cuts down on the quality of the detailed graphics of
the cockpit. Otherwise, flying is essentially the same.
The Mac version doesn't have the two machine option

Reporting for Duty

U

nfortunately, like Spectrum Holobyte's other offerings, Falcon is limited to a pretty small piece of
real estate. At Mach 2 it is easy to suddenly find yourself off the edge of the world. Nevertheless, the bottom line is that Falcon is a worthwhile addition to your
software collection, assuming you like flight
simulators. It takes hours of practice to develop skill at
flying, let alone combat, but the hours will fly by, pun
intended.

Our former "Commodore
Key" columnist takes us on a
tour of a space-age arcade
game in this short review.

WARPED IN
SPACE!

TITLE:
Arkanoid
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS: Chris Chirogene
Rick Ross
Joe Sleator
Eric Reinhart
PUBLISHER:
Discovery Software
Annapolis, MD

Arkanoid comes to the
under license
from Taito, producer of the
arcade version of the game.
On the Amiga, it is a perfect
version of the arcade game. It
has playability that is lacking
in most all other home computer arcade like games. It
has amazing graphics, play action and stereo sound. It is incredible!
All 33 levels are loaded into
RAM thus eliminating disk access during play. You can
begin on any screen from
level one to twenty. If you
haven't seen this very popular
arcade game before, it is
somewhat like the old game
of Breakout. You hit a ball
with a moving horizontal "paddle" bar at the bottom of the
screen to knockout a wall of
bricks worth various point
values. In Arkanoid, the concept is the same except that
the bricks are now in various
challenging patterns. In addition,
floating obstacles descend from the
top of the play area to the bottom
and affect the play action of your
ball.

Amiga

"Breakout" of a Space Trap with
Arkanoid!

When some bricks are hit, they will
release a capsule that falls to the bot
tom of the screen. Hitting these cap
sules with your paddle provides you
with additional powers. These include slowing down the speed at
which your ball moves, catching the
ball to provide greater control, an ex
panded paddle size (making it easier
to hit the ball), a disruption that
splits the single ball into three active
balls, laser fire that will destroy
bricks, an extra paddle, and a

by Roy Wagner
"break" in the wall that lets you go
immediately to the next level.
You start with three paddles and
can get additional ones with paddle
capsules and for every 20,000
points. You lose a paddle if the ball
goes past your paddle. When all
your paddles are gone, the game
asks for another "quarter." Although
your score is reset to zero, you can
begin again at the same level where
play ended. This is one feature that
has been left out of far too many
games. Too many games frustrate
the player by requiring one to begin
again from the start (Marble
Madness and Barbarian, both excellent
arcade-style games, have this fault.).
By giving you a chance to start at a
designated level and to begin again

from where you left off, the
less adept player or player that
just can't make it by a particular situation in the game
has a fighting chance.
Everyone is more willing to try
again and again until they get
it.
The game also begins with
an arbitrary Top Score board.
With any reasonable score,
you can add your initials to
the board. However, the
scores cannot be saved to
disk. I usually prefer to see a
game save the top scores to
disk. This one got me to thinking about this preference. I
realized that while everybody
likes to see their initials on the
list, after a while the new and
less capable players never
stand a chance to put their
name on the list. By not
saving the top scores, just like
at the arcades, everyone can
get their name on the board
when the game is first started.
If you want to keep track of
your top score, just put a sticker on the disk or game container and write that score on
it when you finish playing.
[Ed.: By not saving the top
scores to disk, the game also
avoids the Amiga virus (see
The Rumor Bag in this issue).]

This game has great sustaining play value. Since you can
continue playing at a given
level, it is easy to keep on playing.
When I first booted the game, I
played for three straight hours. I
started at level 1 and played on to
level 28. I didn't even know how
tired I was until I pressed the
"Pause" key ("Space Bar") and left
the room to watch some TV. A little
over an hour later, I came back and
went on to reach the final 33rd
level. The last level is the only one
from which you cannot continue
playing. It is a vicious level in which
you are under attack and once your
paddles are gone, you are back to
the beginning again. This is quite a
game. Some simple skill, luck, and
time is all you need for some very
enjoyable, yet challenging play.

ALL THE SCREEN'S
A STAGE:
The Interactive
Screenplay as a
Performance Medium
by Jim Gasperini

A co-author of Star Trek: The
Promethean Prophecy, Jim
Gasperini, shares some insights
about creating fictional worlds for
text adventures.

I

sometimes have trouble explaining to people exactly what it is
that I do. "What kind of software do
you write?" they ask. 'Well," I have to
say,"it goes by many names, all
clumsy and inadequate." The terms,
"adventure game" or "computer
game," do not manage to communicate the potential I see here for the
development of a new genre of narrative. On the other hand, "interactive fiction" or "computer novel"
come off as either pretentious posturing or clumsily confusing
metaphor.
Experiencing one of these
programs is quite unlike experiencing a novel. It is closer, actually, to a
form of drama. Since the reader is
asked to play a role while looking
continually at a screen, the ideal
term would be "screenplay." Unfortunately, another industry has about
a fifty year claim on that word, so I
have to fall back on yet another
mouthful: "interactive screenplay."
In a good interactive screenplay,
the roles of actor and audience
begin to blur. The "audience" finds
itself on stage in something more
like an improvisational workshop

than a finished production. One is
given the general outline of a
character and told to improvise. The
spotlight is on the audience, now, as
players wander about the stage imagining the things you should say
and do to stay in character.
The software provides not only the
stage, but also the set, the props,
the other characters, and also, in a
peculiar way, the director for this
theatrical exercise. Stay in character
and have the wit to solve the requisite puzzles and one's performance
will be well-received within the
restricted imaginary world. Slip out
of it and the consequences will
range from total indifference to
death itself. In Star Trek: The
Promethean Prophecy, part of the
reader's job is to act as much like
Captain Kirk as possible. If he
should do something odd, like set
his phaser to overload, his officers
grow alarmed at the risk he is
taking. If he does something Kirk
would never do, like attempt to
shoot Doctor McCoy, an officer
steps in to admonish him. If he
repeats the attempt, Mister Spock
may relieve him of command and
the reader finds himself pacing in a
narrow room, while the mission
proceeds without him.
Who really controls Kirk? The
reader inhabits a hollow protagonist.
That is, at times, Kirk's mind is his
mind, but at others, the captain's

range of choices is already set, so
he has merely to discover them.
Sometimes, it may feel like one of
those robot gloves a NASA technician dons to control the mechanical arms of a space probe a million
miles away. Yes, there is freedom of
movement, but within a decidedly
circumscribed range.
In fact, the free choice one has
when playing Kirk is largely an illusion. For the most part, the
authors of interactive screenplays
are as firmly in control of their
actor/readers as the authors of more
conventional plays. Sometimes, the
authors give them great control over
the story; sometimes they thrust
their readers up against clearly
defined limits; and at others, they
set them up in control, only to let
spring a deus ex machina (this time,
quite literally "in the machine.")
As authors, we use all sorts of
tricks to create this illusion of control. Suppose a player/actor is
wandering around the U.S.S.
Enterprise, for example, and finds
himself in the hallway on Deck
Seven. The room description tells
him that, from here, he can go aft
into the turbolift, fore into the
transporter room, or starboard into
engineering. "Hmmm," some players
will inevitably say. "Fore, aft, and
starboard . . . how about if I try
going to port?" Now, we didn't have
the time and the computer didn't
have the memory to create the entire Enterprise. In fact, most of the
story takes place on the planet
Prometheus IV, so we only needed
to set up a small part of the starship.
How, therefore, were we to handle
the people who might try to explore
the rest of it?
We set up a kind of optical illusion.
If characters say "PORT" when there
is no room set up to port, a
paragraph will appear on the screen
reading something like:
"You stride purposefully down the
labyrinthine corridors, passing
storage areas, crew's quarters and
mess halls. Crewmen bustling past,
stiffen a little when they notice their
Captain. You ignore them, brooding
over the perplexing problems facing
the ship. You soon find yourself

back in front of the turbolift."
Despite what the lines say, the
character has not really left the
hallway at all. The next time he tries
going offstage, a different message plays,
making it clear that
he is not really going
to get anywhere if he
keeps it up. The effect, I hope is like that
of a backdrop on a
stage, a painting of
birch trees fading off
into the distance to
give the audience the
illusion of Chekhovian
surroundings. Now
that the actor is also
audience, he is given
enough of the
Enterprise as is
needed for the story
to be presented, and
the rest is all matte
paintings and trompe
l'oeil backdrops [Ed.:
The term refers to a type of artwork
designed to literally, "deceive the
eye." Don't worry if you didn't
know, we had to look it up, too.].
As we accept stagings that are less
than perfectly realistic, so we may
accept such effects in the setting of
the computer game.
We are actually doing the player a
favor, here. We try to suggest as
elegantly as possible, "Don't bother
trying to do that; it is not important
to the story." It would have been
easy enough to create endless
chains of rooms where nothing ever
happens, but I find games that do
that to be somewhat boring. We
tried to make the world of Star Trek
as dense and rich as possible, with a
lot of different things going on in
the background of a relatively small
world, rather than spreading the important events out all over a largely
empty map.
In the original T.V. show, whenever
Kirk passes through the corridors of
the Enterprise, anonymous members of the crew can be seen bustling back and forth in the background. To simulate this, we used a
technique we call "scramblers."
Whenever you are in the hallway,

there is a random chance that one
of a number of messages will play
about crewmen hustling past. Sometimes, they are described as intently
busy with their tasks
and sometimes, they
are nervous about
how well they are
doing their jobs in the
presence of their captain.
If the scenes on the
Enterprise had been
more important, we
could have elaborated
this technique, like we
did to create "background" Promethean
characters wandering
around the planet.
There, we took one
character, and gave it
various faces: "an old
blue-eyed
Promethean," "a
young female
Promethean carrying
a broom," "a young boy whose robe
is a little bit too big for him." Then,
we added randomized bits of text
describing the character in more
detail, and finally, a text from a third
pool describing what actions they
take: "walks by, chanting something
unintelligible," "glances at you briefly
before hurrying on her business,"
and so forth. Putting the three kinds
of text together creates a reasonably
effective crowd of passersby, kind of
like those picture books for kids that
show a different animal on each
page, divided in three, so you can
flip the parts and create various
sorts of chimeras: lion's head, pig's
middle, bird's feet, etc. Combined,
interwoven, and layered on top of
each other, these sorts of tricks can
provide the illusion of an interestingly diverse and changeable "stage"
for you to strut and fret your hours
upon.
The range of characters which "interactive fiction" has so far
presented for players to impersonate
is quite small, especially when compared with other forms of drama.
Remember, though, other genres of
narrative have had hundreds and in
some cases, thousands of years to

develop their enviably varied tricks
of stagecraft. Someday, perhaps, we
will develop something similar. The
epic tradition may be abandoned entirely, exchanged for stories focusing
on the ambiguities of performance,
amounting to actual differences in
meaning. Perhaps, there will be
room enough in the future for the interactive roles one plays to mirror
the difference between Olivier's interpretation of Hamlet, say, and Kevin
Kline's . . . between Dustin Hoffman
as Willy Loman and Lee J. Cobb in
the same role.
We are a long way from that, admittedly. The gap between the role
of Captain of the Enterprise and that
of Prince of Denmark may ultimately
prove unbridgeable (no pun intended). In the meantime, though,
we can have fun seeing where these
imaginary productions take us. All
the screen's a stage, after all, and
each of us play many parts.

NAME:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

A

Chuck Yeager's Flight Trainer
IBM, C84, Apple
C64 $34.95
Others$39.95
Ned Learner
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

rose by any other name would
smell as sweet. Such also is the
case of Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flight Simulator Trainer. Released
last July as Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Simulator, Electronic
Arts changed the name to Chuck
Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer.
Why? SubLogic of Champaign IL,
manufacturers of "Flight Simulator
II", expressed their opinion that the
term "Flight Simulator" was their
protected title. Rather than become
embroiled in a legal battle over the
term, EA decided it would be more
efficient to market the game under a
new name.
That minor bit of turbulence aside,
"Yeager" has been a top gun performer for the San Mateo based
software company. The "game" went
SPA "Gold" quickest of any
Electronic Arts title (in a little over
three months of sales). Karen

Janowski, Marketing Director of
EA's Entertainment Division, feels
that the title will go "Platinum"
(250,000 sales) sometime in 1988.
That's a lot of flight trainers!
The simulation features three levels
of onscreen instruction from Yeager.
Level one teach basic flying skills
such as takeoffs and landings; level
two teaches advanced maneuvers
such as aileron rolls and hammer-

Flightstick
The Maxx

TM

Two products that will be of special interest to computer flight simulator/trainer fans are MAXX from Alturas Corporation and FlightStick from CH Products.
Alturas has become a member of the growing list of
Electronic Arts Affiliated Labels. Their MAXX control
yoke represents the first hardware peripheral distributed by Electronic Arts. Randy Thier, Director of Affiliated Labels at EA describes the MAXX yoke as a
control device for computers which adds to the
realism of being in the driver's seat when playing computer auto racing, submarine, helicopter, space and
flight simulations.
Thier added that "with the MAXX yoke, first person
simulation on a personal computer has never been
more real".
The MAXX yoke does indeed enhance the realism of
simulation software. MAXX has been released for the
IBM and will be available shortly for the Tandy and
Apple II systems. The suggested retail price is $129.95.
If the $129.95 price tag is a bit steep for your
budget, or if you prefer a more joystick oriented flight

controller you
might consider CH
Products
Flightstick.
Priced at $74.95
for the Apple version and $79.95
for the IBM version, Flightstick
adds a new level of
realism to your experience s in computer flying. We
like it.

head stalls. On level three the student learns acrobatic stunts and formation flying.
The program also contains a Test
Pilot option that allows the player to
actually explore the "edge of the envelope" of various aircraft (both historical and unknown experimental
craft).
But the favorite option around the
CGW offices is the Airplane Racing
option. You choose your plane and
take it over one of six different race
courses. The computer records your
competitors. But what makes this option especially exciting is that your
prior performance (if other than a
last place finish) is exactly recorded
(every movement, every turn) and becomes one of your "competitors" in
the next race. Not only are you
trying to better your own time, you
can watch yourself in action from
the prior race(s).
Electronic Arts is also working with
Chuck Yeager on Chuck Yeager's
Combat Trainer which will be ready
before the end of 1988 (IBM initially
with others to follow).

EARLY BIRD
C.E.S. NOTES
T he

CGW staff just returned from
the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show at press time. Current trends in game design and appearance include: options in terms
of cinematic perspectives; use of
automapping in adventure games,
improving graphics on most
machines, and more effective use of
sound routines (particularly on the
more powerful machines). We are excited about the potential of many of
the products under development
and will be sharing more in our formal report (March, 1988). These
products include: Three-Sixty's
Harpoon, based on the boardgame
and described in this issue's Rumor
Bag; Infocom's new lnfocomics line
which features graphic stories where
the reader chooses the viewpoint
through which he/she will observe
the story rather than text games
(with the intent of reaching nongamers); Electronic Arts' John
Madden Football for the Apple II
(64K) with its phenomenal in-depth
approach to NFL football (you will
not believe this is an Apple game);
Strategic Simulations' first of
seven planned Advanced Dungeons
and Dragons products, based on
the Forgotten Realms world and
featuring peripheral vision and open
spaces along with the familiar adventure game action windows;
Broderbund's Arcade Game Construction Kit for those who have always wanted to design their own
"shoot-'em-up"s, climbing-jumping
games, and maze chases;
Cinemaware's hilarious Three
Stooges game which features the
digitized voices of the actual
stooges, as well as arcade sequences based on the movies themselves; Omnitrend's beautiful foray
into fantasy adventures with Paladin
on the Amiga; Mindscape's Citadel,
an adventure game on the Macintosh with a unique approach to the

command interface from earlier efforts; Sierra's Manhunter, an adventure by the authors of Ancient Art of
War and its sequel, which features
some interesting approaches in
cinematic point-of-view; and
Microprose's first Red Storm
Rising product (featuring the submarine encounters depicted on the
Chicago). Next month's issue will

feature our interview with Tom Clancy (best-selling author of Hunt For
Red October, Red Storm Rising,
Patriot Games), and Microprose
game designer, Sid Meier. We will
also inform next month's readers of
industry trends, product similarities,
and expected releases for 1988
when we present the Winter C.E.S.
Report.

Title:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Guild of Thieves
Amiga, ST, Mac,
C-64, IBM, Apple II (no graphics)
$39.95
Magnetic Scrolls
Firebird/Rainbird
Waldwick, NJ

Alan Roberts has been a contributor
to Fantasy Review for several years.
West coast science fiction fans are
used to having him show up, pipe
in hand, at any science fiction convention within driving distance of his Oregon
home. In this review, he
shares his views on Firebird's
fantasy game.

visit the library. The reading is as
educational as it is humorous.

start getting points for the loot you
have been gathering.

Milling it Over

A Thousand Words
Worth A Picture

The

"surrounding countryside" is
a square piece of land
(three "rooms" by three) bordered by
a river on three sides. A windmill lies

of Thieves

o you think you're clever,
eh? Good enough to become a member of the famed
Guild of Thieves? We've got a
little exam for you (we were
going to tie you to the back of
a giant Kerovnian python and
lower you into a mine full of
rabid rats,but . . . ). All you
have to do is loot a local
castle, go grave-robbing,
jump down a well, that sort of
thing. Not to worry, you'll be
supplied with all you need to
finish the job: jeans,striped
tee-shirt, and a credit card.
Remember, we'll be watching
you.
Guild of Thieves is a sequel
to Magnetic Scroll's The
Pawn. However, one does not
need to have played The
Pawn to enjoy Guild of
Thieves.

Parser Snatching

Mind Your Manors

Although

most of the
game is non-linear, a visit
to the castle should be the
first item of business. Not only
are these the best pickings,
but there are several items that you
need to solve puzzles in other areas.
Be warned, a simple "look" command may not be sufficient to reveal
items in plain sight. "Look on cupboard" might show something overlooked by a casual search. Be sure
to hang about until the running of
the rat race. If you have time to kill,

s an extra bonus, all versions except the Apple II include over a
dozen top- quality illustrations.
These periodically rolldown
and cover 80% of the screen.
This slows down game play,
so you can replace them with
postage stamp-sized "cameos"
or shut them off entirely. On
the machines with powerful
graphics, these are a treat indeed. The Macintosh offers
the options of stipple, dither,
or freehand-style pictures.
Graphics on the IBM version
are only available on EGA
screens; other screens run
text-only versions. This is just
frosting on the cake, though,
as the text is sufficient to give
the description and mood of
the game. No extra clues are
gained from the graphics.

by Alan Roberts

to the southeast, with one room and
four puzzles to be solved. To the
southwest is a small temple, and a
good spot to save the game. Adventurers will get the opportunity to
go spelunking. The hill in the
northwest corner is riddled with passages, catacombs, a zoo, and the
local bank. Here is where you first

The parser can accommodate long strings of commands. When the parser cannot understand a command, a
prompt appears and the game
continues after getting your
response. "Open bag," you
say. "Which one, swag bag or
rubbish bag?" If you type
"swag," it will continue from
there. There is no need to
retype the command. As with
Magnetic Scroll's earlier game
(The Pawn), Guild of Thieves
has a helpful text editor. If you
make a typing error, simply
push a key and bring back the
last command. The typo can be
fixed with a keystroke or two.
To speed up the game, the Macintosh version allows you to define up
to ten function keys with frequently
used commands, like "get all." Unfortunately, the IBM and Commodore
versions
do not have definable keys.
Guild

On the minus side, the game was
not rewritten for the American
market. Remember to use English
spellings (cheque/check,
colour/color, etc.). Words like "yell"
and "garbage" won't work; try
"shout" and "rubbish". It is more civilized that way.

Steal Tips
ncluded in each box (along with a
parchment contract, credit card
I
and a six- sided die) is the "What
Burglar" magazine. The last fifteen
pages are encoded hints. To get a
hint, type "hint," return, and enter
the long string of alphanumeric
characters. On the average, you get
three hints per puzzle. These range
from the general to specific. Sometimes, a hint will end with a "+"
sign. This means the hint is continued on the next line. If you make
an error or two, there will simply be
an error or two in your hint. Doublecheck anyway. You can only enter a
hint when the program specifically
asks you about one. This is one spot
where the command editor won't
help you.
Magnetic Scrolls chose a poor font
to write the hint section with. It is
hard to tell the difference between
Ts and 'I's; I think they are all 'I's.
Some of the hints in the back are
red herrings to keep you busy. After
typing in the code for the puzzle
"Why Can't I Open the Safe?", you
are told in the last line to give up.
Some hints are only slightly less
cryptic after being decoded. "What
Can I Do With The Billiard Balls"

yields: "Play billiards;
deviate from the
straight and narrow;
a straight answer is
out of the question;
the answer is contained within." Most
hints are in the form
of riddles and are fun
for their own sake.
Thirty-nine different
puzzles have hints for
their solution. Others,
like how to get out of
the well, do not.
Some puzzles, like
opening the till, are a
push over. On the
other hand, the only
way to solve "How Do I Get The
Honey" is: "at the nuclear power station, collect the radioactive [+]
isotopes and deposit them in the
hive. Wait for the [+] next generation of malformed bees, which you'll

find [+] have no stingers!"

Passing
the
Test
(Reviewer's
Conclusion)

T

he game must
be highly recommended and it is
tough. The off-beat
British humor is a big
plus. Frankly, The
game compares well
with the best of Infocom. Although the
box says "Steal this
game" on the back (and it is not
copy-protected), they do have a
protection scheme that kicks in after
you've gotten far enough into the
game to be willing to go out and
buy your own.

One of the
most popular
hang-outs for
adventure
garners is the
tavern known
as, "'The
Scorpion's
Tale" (Our
regular column
offering revealing hints on
some of the most topical adventure games available.). This
month, Scorpia offers readers
some advice regarding Origin
Systems' new science fiction
game, 2400 A.D.

the relationship between what's on
your screen and what you've read in
the manual. Unfortunately, it only
gets worse from there.
All the human figures have a
definite male appearance, regardless
of sex. At times, it's a bit disconcerting to talk to a brawny man who
says "Hi! I'm Lola, the receptionist."
You'd think they could have

2400 A.D.

'mon in out of the cold
(hehe). We've got a nice
C
blaze going in the fireplace, and
Fred is making up your usual
(don't worry, we've hidden the
Alchemy books this time!). So,
pull your chair up close to fire,
get cozy, and we'll have a chat
about the future . . . 2400 A.D.
The basic plot is the timehonored one of a small group
of rebels out to overthrow the
evil empire. In this case, the evil
empire (the Tzorgs) is represented by robots that keep the
planet under control during the
aliens' absence (they're off
trying to conquer the rest of the
galaxy). Your goal is to reach
the master control console and
shut off all the robots.
When you look at the striking,
dramatic picture on the box and
read the enclosed manual,
"Notes From The Underground," you get the impression
that you're in for a tough, exciting adventure. Then, you boot
up the game and find that what
you really have is Cartoonland.
What's Up, Doc?

T he

graphics are somewhat in
the Ultima style, and quite
good. Unfortunately, most of the
robots and people have a definite
"cartoony" look to them. Right off,
you have a hard time taking this
game seriously and can barely see

In some respects, this is not as
easy as in an Ultima. There are basically three types of people. Dimwits
have nothing of importance to say.
If you talk to them, they make such
remarks as "I despise robots!" or
"Things were so much nicer before
the Tzorgs came," etc. There are a
lot of dimwits running around the
city.
The second kind will be more
familiar. They give you their
names and generally make a
reference to what they do. You
can pick up on this in the usual
way, feed it back to them, and
get some information (most of
the time, but not always).
The third kind is a little more
mysterious. They just give you
their names. "Hi, call me
Chuck". Then, they wait for you
to ask about the right thing. If
you don't know what to ask
about, you could have some
frustrating times with these
people. For some of them, I
never found the right phrases
and perhaps, there aren't any.
Some are probably just red herrings to slow you down.
I T'ought I Saw a
Public Twacking Office

As told by Scorpia
managed to get some female figures
in there.
Talking is what you'll be doing for
much of the game. This is how you
pick up the various bits of information you need to complete your mission. You go all over the city of
Metropolis, as well as to the Underground (the large complex of tunnels set up by the rebels), trying to
find the people who have the
knowledge you require.

To make your life more difficult, there is the 2000move check-in. Every 2000
moves in the game, you must
report in to the Public Tracking
Office (there is a counter
onscreen that thoughtfully keeps
track of this). If you fail to report
before the timer runs out, every
robot that sees you will attack
on sight.
Actually, this is not really as bad as
it sounds. You see, they don't kill
you. They just knock you out, confiscate all your items, and put you in
jail. About the only way you could
get yourself killed in this game is to
step in front of a moving subway
train (there's a little subway that runs
around the city).
It's right about here that any last
vestiges of reality break down entirely. Follow this carefully now. When

they put you in jail (called the Social
Rehabilitation Center), your check-in
timer is reset to maximum (1999),
and all your social demerits (picked
up for doing things like sneaking
across to other city zones) are wiped
out.
The cell you're put in is always in
the same cell. That's the one with
the secret panel in the wall, leading
to a ladder that goes down to the
Underground. So you climb down
the ladder, and go out the exit on
the west side of town. You sneak
back across to the Central zone,
and walk boldly into the ground
level of the Social Rehab Center
(from which you've just escaped), go
to the right storage room, and pick
up everything that was taken when
you were arrested.
No one stops you. No robots will attack you. No alerts are sounded. No
one seems to realize in the slightest
that you have no business walking
around the streets. Even the Public
Tracking Office is never notified that
you've been arrested. Believe it or
not, this happens every single time
you're put in jail.
So, getting bonked by the robots is
an event hardly worth worrying over.
Most of the time, you won't even
have to think about it, as the robots
generally do not attack unprovoked
(at least not those on the city
streets). Even should you get caught
sneaking across the borderline to
other parts of the city, the most that
happens is that you get a social
demerit and are put back where you
came from.
On the other hand, you can do
some provoking by shooting at
robots with the various weapons
available (for a price) in the game.
You need money (called credits) and
the only way to get it is to disable
robots and search them. Early on,
it's best to ambush a lone level-one
type robot, search it, and get away
from the area as soon as possible
(your credits, by the way, are the
one thing not taken from you when
you're arrested).
Later in the game, you will have
sufficient firepower and shielding to
take on several robots at once.
However, for these occasions, it's

best to have at least two weapons
and two shields with you, because
these items have a rather distressing
tendency to break at the wrong moment. Sometimes, you can fix them
yourself. Sometimes, you'll have to
visit Hugo's Fix-It Shop and ask him
to repair the broken items (for a
price).
The best weapon (which will take
some time for you to obtain) is the
plasma rifle, which is not only the
most powerful, but unbreakable as

well. It also does a good job in blasting open locked doors (there are a
lot of them in the game). Once you
have this weapon, you can get rid of
any others you may be lugging
around with you.
One handy item you'll want sooner
or later is a Scanner. This device
shows you a picture of the surrounding area (much like the Ultima mapping gems). It requires no power,
but is susceptible to breakage, and
also sounds an alert every time you
use it. Make sure you have a scanner with you when you go to visit
the terminals with the robot deactivation codes. You'll need it.

Cheap Beep!

W

hen the game begins, you
don't, of course, have very
much. Just a low-grade (empty)
hand phaser, a grid reader (also
empty, and which is used to give
your position in the city, coordinated
with a map that comes with the
game), and a measly 100 credits.
You have no idea how to get to the
Underground (it isn't marked on the
map).

The best way to get started is to
visit Joe's Bar, second floor. After
that, just go along, talking to
everyone you meet. Remember that
you can climb over things, such as
counters, to get to other places in
buildings. Doors that are locked can
be broken open if you have enough
strength, or you can try shooting
them open or using a time bomb. If
you're feeling less violent, you can
buy forged passcards to open locked doors in the Underground. Breaking open doors will not set off any
alarms, unless you use a bomb to
do it.
One thing in the game that might
give people some trouble is using
the little transporters. There are five
on the surface (one in each of the
city zones), and several more underground in various areas. Using them
is a two-step process. First, you
need the access code (the same for
all transporters), which you can
learn in the Underground. Then,
you need a destination code. Not all
codes will work from all transporters.
The destination codes have nothing
whatever to with the numbers on the
transporters. All the codes are two
digit numbers, ranging (as far as I
could tell) from 00 to 18. Use trial
and error until you find one that
works and make note of where it
takes you. The transporters are very
handy in moving you quickly around
the city (and past the city zone boundaries without being seen).
As you near the end of the game,
you'll start coming across the more
powerful robots. Of course, even if
they get you, it means nothing more
than a trip to the cartoonland jail,
but then you have to retrace your
steps, which would be tedious (then
again, you could also save frequently, and reboot if you get caught).
The best way to handle the higherlevel robots is to let them run down.
They are incredibly stupid things.
Even if they can't get to you, they
shoot their energy bolts, and eventually they just use up all their energy, coming to a dead halt. My
favorite method was to disable one
robot in a doorway, blocking it, then
wait awhile. All the robots on the
other side couldn't reach me (and

shots won't go past an obstacle), yet
they would bounce around, shooting at the walls, until they stopped in
their tracks.

Wile E. Character
Generation

2

400 A.D. is billed as a role-play-

ing game, which means you get
to create a character by allocating a
bunch of points among four attributes. Don't put too much into Affinity. That will go up automatically
as you talk to people (even then, I
never saw that it had much
relevance in play; people were willing to talk to me, no matter what my
score was).
Put a good chunk of points into
Agility, since this determines how accurate you are with weapons. Energy (your strength) should also start
high. You can increase it by running
a lot instead of walking (especially

helpful when going through the long
underground tunnels).
Intelligence is useful primarily for
fixing things; the smarter you are,
the better your chance of repairing a
broken item (your energy and agility
are also taken into account when
trying to fix something). This doesn't
have to start out very high, as it, too,
will increase over the game.
Character creation is, thus, an uncomplicated procedure and
shouldn't take very long to complete.
So mostly what you do in 2400
A.D. is running around a lot, talking
to people, blasting robots when you
need money (or if you just feel like
it), and getting together the
weapons and information you need
to turn off the robots.

That's All Folks!

O

verall, the game lacks intensity
and is a disappointment. There

are practically no puzzles, and hardly any challenge. It does not live up
to the atmosphere and expectations
generated by the "Notes From The
Underground". Combined with the
cartoony aspects, the whole thing is
simply too unreal to be satisfactory.
Well, we've come to that time
again (and none too soon!). Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: Stop by the
Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: Send Smail to ST1030. By
US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

Life in the
Fast Lane
Accolade's
"TestDrive"

by David M. Wilson
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Test Drive
Amiga, C-64,
IBM, ST
$29.95-$44.95
Distinctive Software
Accolade
Cupertino, CA

You're buzzing along at a brisk
120 MPH when the display on
your radar detector lights up like a
Christmas tree. In your rear-view mirror, you see the blinking red light of
a "Smokey" and he's gaining on
you. Now, a most important
decision must be made. Do you pull
over and take your ticket or continue acting like a daredevil and
floor it. Of course, you decide to
floor it. After all, it's only a game.
The game is Accolade's Test
Drive. It is somewhat different than
most racing games in that the game
gives players the choice of five of
the world's most exotic high performance automobiles. One can drive
a Ferrari Testarossa, like Tom Selleck on Magnum P.I., or choose a
Lotus Turbo Esprit. One can go
domestic and choose the Chevrolet
Corvette or go European with the
Porsche 911 Turbo or Lamborghini
Countach.
Once the player selects the model

for the first "test drive," he begins his
trek up "the rock," a treacherous
mountain road. It may seem like a
difficult way to begin a game, but
where better to demonstrate the
capabilities of each
machine? Each car
will be taken to the
limit on a mountain
road full of curves,
up/down grades, and
slow-moving vehicles
(just begging to be
passed).
Each vehicle will
handle differently, because they are all different. For instance,
the engine on the Lotus Esprit
winds much tighter and much faster
than the engine of the Ferrari. After
playing with the Ferrari, I overwound
the Lotus several times with the
result of a "blown"
engine. At the same
time, I felt that the
steering of the Lotus
was much more
responsive than that
of the Ferrari. The
Lamborghini's steering seemed least
responsive. Players
should, therefore, be
aware of the
strengths and weaknesses of each car. Assuming that
one is better because it is the fastest
can lead to poorer scores.
The radar detector and rear-view
mirror should assist you in avoiding
the Highway Patrol
who have speed
traps set up just for
those "show-offs"
among our readership. If players can't
outrun the officer,
they should pull over
rather than having
an unnecessary accident. Once he pulls
in front of the
player's car, the
player is definitely going to be issued a traffic citation. It is impossible to pass the officer. One can
either appear to succeed, only to
have the computer assume control

of the vehicle and receive the citation on behalf of the driver, or
(worse, yet) one can rear-end the
patrolman's vehicle which instantly
ends the game. Apparently, highway
patrolmen do not appreciate people who
damage their fancy
patrol cars.
As for the game
mechanics, shifting
is done by pressing
the fire button on
the joystick. An option allows players to
emulate the shift pattern with the joystick,
but it is extremely difficult to do this and steer with the
joystick at the same time. The option is definitely worth trying a few
times, but most players will simply
choose to press the button.
The Amiga has
several improvements over the C-64
version (and well it
should). The Amiga
has sharper images
than the already
crisp C-64 graphics,
but the most notable
difference is in the
sound of the game.
In the Amiga version, the sound of a
speed shift has a realistic "screech"
when the tires "peel out," but the
speed shift of the C-64 has more of
a "boing" (sorry, that is the best
description available for the printed
media). The C-64
version has a "Digital
Display" option that
makes your speed
and RPMs easier to
read. This is a very
helpful option.
There may be more
competitive racing
games on the
market, but this
game combines the
enjoyment of driving
five of the most exotic sportscars in
the world with outrunning "Smokies"
on mountain highways. What more
could a race car junkie (or arcade
fan) ask for?!

Roy Wagner is "Mr. Amiga"
in Southern California. He
is one of the prime contact
persons or an officer of, at
least, three Amiga users'
groups in the Los Angeles
area. In this article, he offers a brief overview and
some detailed hints on an
exciting adventure game.
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

For Whom The Text
Scrolls (Attributes)

D

The Faery Tale Adventure
Amiga, (IBM/C64 soon)
$49.95
David Joiner
microillusions
Granada Hills, CA

Island on the
Screen (Overview)

T

he Faery Tale AdvenThe
(FT) is a simplified
role playing game (RPG)
with a very natural user interface. It is simplified to the
game player's advantage,
but does not cause any significant loss in game play
value. As a graphic RPG adventure, it shows some
similarities to the early classic, Temple of Apshai, and
the watershed Ultima
series, but graphics and
play action go far beyond
these games.
It is a common story of a
young man against an evil
magician. Players take on
the role of one of three
brothers, whose father was killed
seeking the evil Necromancer who
had taken the talisman from the
town's shrine. The king's daughter
has also been kidnapped and must
be rescued. The quest takes place
on a very large island with a few
scattered towns, taverns, and stone
buildings.
The game begins with the turning
pages of a book which tell players
briefly of the story and the brothers,
while appropriate music plays in the
background. This music, an alternate theme of impending danger,
and other themes for various
specific locations will continue as
the game proceeds. After this opening, which can be skipped by press-

FAERY IS FAIR
ENOUGH!
by Roy Wagner
ing the "Space bar," the program
seeks the final words to three quotations that surround the map
provided with the game.
The quest now begins in the town
of Tambry as the player assumes the
role of Julian, the youngest brother.
The top two thirds of the screen displays Julian in the center and the
area about him from an oblique
overhead view. The graphics for this
game are exceptional with very fine
detailing of all objects and intricate
shadowing. Stone, floor tiles and
wood all appear very realistic. The
playing map is 144 screens tall by
100 screens wide, but all movement
is handled by scrolling smoothly
from one place to another.

isplayed on a parchment at the bottom left
of the screen are four lines
of text which describe
events as they happen and
display five values for the attributes of Bravery, Luck,
Kindness, Virtue, and
Wealth. The values are the
same each time the game is
played. Each brother has different fixed values, but the
game is always started with
Julian. Bravery is gained
from encounters with the
evil spirits and soldiers of
the Necromancer. Fighting
is most easily executed
using a joystick, but the
mouse or keyboard can also
be used. Players gain one
point for each enemy killed.
With enough successful
"kills," one may become
nearly invincible. However,
the initial armament is only
a dirk and this weapon
proves nearly useless. Even
with a sword or mace, fighting is fairly tough in the
early stages of the adventure.
When the Bravery attribute
goes beyond 100 points,
the only foes that still
remain a problem are bowmen. Players can also use a bow,
but are usually attacked by the combined arms of forces with both those
with sword/mace and bowmen.
Though one can switch weapons,
the time taken to do so may easily
work against the player.
Luck provides characters with a
new life if they are killed. Each
brother starts with a limited value of
luck and once "out of luck," the
quest passes to the next oldest
brother.
Kindness is obtained by giving gold
to the strangers which are encountered. Note that one can only
gain one Kindness point no matter
how many times he gives gold to the
same individual. If these isolated

figures do not attack, they will
generally provide one with useful information.
Vitality is the very essence of the
character's life and functions like hit
points in more traditional adventure
games.
Wealth is represented by a number
for the gold coins possessed. They
are used to gain information or to buy food, vials,
weapons and totems. Gold
may be scavenged according to orthodox adventure
game procedures.

of each item is not documented, but
rather left for you to figure out.
This task of "what do they do" has
always bothered me in an adventure
game. Some people like the challenge of determining what an item
does. To me, however, repeatedly
trying to use an item in different
situations is just a waste of good

The Sword
Also Slices
(Common Items)

T here

are only a few
common items used
during the adventure, but a
number of each can be obtained. Some can be
bought, but most are found
in buildings, found just lying
around, or taken from slain
enemy bodies. There are a
few one-of-a-kind items that
are essential to completing
the game. These are found
in special places and from
special people.
There are four common weapons:
a dirk, sword, mace, and bow with
arrows. Players start with a dirk.
Other weapons are taken from
goblin men, dark hooded figures, or
skeletons slain in battle.
Food is usually bought and consumed at a tavern. This food cannot
be carried. Food can be found,
however, in some of the buildings
and this food can be carried in
order to be consumed when
needed. Most buildings are locked
and require one of six colored keys
to gain entrance. The keys are
colored grey, blue, red, white, green,
and gold.
MAGIC ITEMS
Magic items are very useful. They
can only be used once, but you will
find plenty of them. All magic items
can be easily and quickly put to use
by selecting them with a quick press
of one of the function keys. The use

game playing time.
Glass vials are used to increase
one's Vitality. The amount of increase does seem to vary. Any vials
found or purchased at the beginning of the game should be used
before the character leaves Tambry.
Jade skulls are used to cause immediate death for all lesser creatures in one's vicinity. Players should
find one of these before they leave
Tambry. By using it against an
enemy armed with common
weapons, they will quickly be in possession of a sword or mace. Gold
Rings are used to stop time for a
few seconds in order to disarm an
enemy, take an item, or escape
from a difficult situation. Green
Jewels are used to see in the dark.
Using the jewel will create an effect
similar to infrared vision, lasting fairly long.
Blue stones can be used to

transport to different areas on the
map (which appear as a small circle
of dots on the map provided with
the documentation). The blue
stones must be used from within
one of the circles of large stone pillars, however. Eight pillars make up
each circle. Based on the direction
you last moved, you will be consistently transported to the
same location from the
same starting location.
However, there are eleven
different locations possible
and the same direction in
different circles leads to a
different locations. (See
diagram.)
Crystal orbs are used to
see hidden objects. Bird
totems are used to display a
very large overview map of
your current location. A skillful adventurer will make judicious use of the game's
"Save" option to use the
crystal orbs and bird totems
and then, "Restore" them
for use at another time.
Other magic items include
a golden lasso, rose, sea
shell, sun stone, and wand.
These are one-of-a-kind and
are for very special situations. Their use is hinted at
from the conversations with the
strangers you encounter.

To Have and Have
Not (Getting Started)

S

earch all the buildings in
Tambry. You should have found
a glass vial and jade skull among
other less important items. Visit the
tavern and buy some food and
another glass vial. Use the glass
vials. You are now ready to start
your adventure. "Save" the game
first. This will require a formatted
disk. (On the Amiga, if you have two
drives, put the "Save" game disk in
the other drive and the game will
"magically" know to use it or any
other unprotected disk in that drive.)
Leave the town by the eastern exit
and proceed south staying on the
(Continued on page 50)

The Rumor Bag
(Continued from page 10)
remembered my instructor's wise
counsel, "When you fall, and you will
certainly fall, fall up the hill." It
sounds dumb, but it works. I came
to a soggy, but safe, stop about six
feet from the snow-maker. I heard
my name called aloud and that
surprised me. After a nervous look
toward heaven to make sure I hadn't
misunderstood what happened and
this was, indeed, to be "my time," I
turned around carefully to see who
knew me. After all, no one except
my editor knew I was here. So, who
should I see, but a lovely public relations representative who had
wandered down from the "Silicon
Valley" for some fun and recreation.
Always prepared, this feminine
vision passed along a plain, white envelope with some screen shots and
advance information on Accolade's
planned releases for the Winter Consumer Electronics Show. She also
brought me my A.W.O.L. ski and we
completed our daring trek down the
gentle slope, together.
We shared a cup of hot chocolate
and I eagerly opened the envelope.
Inside were details about, The Train:
Escape to Normandy. This C-64
product will allow the player to assume the role of Pierre Le Feu,
leader of the French Resistance
movement. In the course of the adventure, the player must seize the armored train, bring it to "safe harbor"
in Normandy, and by so doing, rescue the priceless art treasures. The
next document shared about Power
At Sea, an action-strategy game for
the C-64, based on The Battle of
Leyte Gulf in World War II. Strategic
decisions are made during scenes
which take place on the bridge and
the action sequences consist of:
ship-to-ship surface combat,
ship-to-air anti-aircraft routines, air-to-ship
attacks, and ship-to-land bombardments. Another game to be announced at Winter CES is Card
Sharks for the C-64. This card game

allows the player to play against
computer-controlled opponents
which each have different styles and
strategies for Poker (5 Card Stud, 7
Card Stud, or Texas Hold 'Em),
Hearts, and Blackjack. All the games
should retail for $29.95.
I looked up from my reading and
my p.r. snow bunny had disappeared. Fortunately, however, she
had dropped a napkin with some
notes on Data East. Those who
liked Ikari Warriors will be excited to
know that Victory Road, a sequel to
the earlier game, has been ported to
the C-64 and IBM. The company will
also introduce an arcade-style, nontechnical flight simulator, using realtime and excellent graphics. The
title for this product which features
full panel instrumentation and realistic skyscape is Lock On and it is expected to be released for C-64, IBM,
and ST.

After securing the documents and
photographs in the glove compartment of my car, I hit the slopes
again. Well, I had intended to hit
only the slopes. As it was, I found
myself hitting an icy section of the
slope and unable to come to the
snowplow stop my instructor had
shown me. Of course, the fellow I accidentally hit from behind felt like I
had the "snowplow" part down pat.
Our glasses, poles, and skis went
flying. The other fellow, a rival journalist for another computer publication, demonstrated his lack of
vocabulary by muttering an unprintable character string with scatalogical overtones. As for myself, as soon
as I discovered that there were no
broken bones, I made myself useful
by picking up the notepad which
had been dislodged in the fall. It was
the other reporter's, of course, but I
managed to catch of few scribbles

before I gave it back. He had noted
that the third installment of
Intellicreation's Alternate Reality
series is due to be released in mid1988. The title is supposed to be
The Arena. There was also a note
about a 16-bit version of Alternate
Reality: The Dungeon. No definitive
release date was given.
Then there was a note about
Electronic Arts's alleged foray into
interactive fiction. He had a note
about their Storyteller System
which is supposed to out "Infocom"
Infocom. I chuckled to myself because I had been trying to get EA to
confirm that rumor for six months.
So far, the company says that this
recurring rumor is way off base.
I handed him his notebook with a
sigh of relief that he didn't know anything about Three-Sixty's upcoming wargame, Harpoon. Based on
the successful miniatures rules and
boardgame (published by Game
Designers' Workshop) by Larry

Bond, this computer product should
have an extremely different look and
feel than anything else on the
market. Bond, of course, assisted
Tom Clancy with the best-selling
novels, The Hunt for Red October
and Red Storm Rising. He is a member of the Naval War College and
acts as a referee for NATO wargames. According to our inside
source, Bond will be teaming with
former Digital Illusions' designer,
Don Gilman, to create a layered
product, user-friendly, but full of
depth for the hardcore wargamer.
The "Intelligence Phase" is supposed
to offer 1/700th scale representations of up-to-date naval vessels and aircraft. There is a "Practice
Battles" feature and the actual battle
scenarios (the same types of
scenarios which Larry Bond sets up
for NATO wargames) will feature an
Ultimate NATO Task Force with
more than 50 platforms. Designed
to be an educational product, as

well as an entertainment experience,
the documentation will be thick and
detailed. It is intended as a supplementary reference to the game
and not an integral part of the
game. One unique feature is the
"Staff Assistant," a help facility.
When one is just learning the game,
he can delegate any number of
operations to the "Staff Assistant"
whenever the intensity becomes too
much to handle. When the player
reaches a certain level of sophistication, however, the "Staff Assistant"
can act as executive officer (XO) to
the player.
Now that I think of it, I hope that
other reporter didn't get a look at
my notebook. In the meantime, if
you want to keep the California ski
slopes safe for those who know
what they're doing, send your hot
tips and rumors to: The Rumor Bag,
c/o Computer Gaming World, P.O.
Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 928034566.

the button down and more towards
your assailants. If two are playing,
one can use the joystick to move
and fight, while the other can control the mouse and easily perform
many of the selected options, especially "Take" and "Save".
pathway. You should come upon a
chest. Using "Take" will get you
some additional items. You will soon
be attacked. You
will be "warned" of
any attack by the
change in music.
Though you might
get tired of the
music and toggle it
off, the advance
warning is very helpful.
You want to be
successful in this
first attack and
"knowing" that it is coming, you
should be ready to press F5 to use
your jade skull and
kill off all attackers.
You can now
"Take" from each
body and arm yourself with a sword or
mace. I found either
to be equally effective. If the attack did
not yield you a
sword or mace, I
suggest you "Restore" and try again.
It is very important to have a good
weapon before you travel anywhere
else.
As you travel
about and time passes, you will need
both food and
sleep. Food is in
limited supply and
can only be found
in a few buildings
and bought at inns.
You can only sleep
inside of buildings
on mats or in beds.
If you do not get food or sleep, you
will notice that your character staggers as it moves. With time, you may
even collapse and be very vulnerable
to attack. When fighting, just hold

Quest in
the Afternoon (Brief
Walkthrough)
ouarenw
ready to actually begin your
quests. Your ultimate quest, the
goal of all your actions, is to defeat
the evil Necromancer and get the
Talisman. There are
seven independent
quests (or more, depending on
how you count). There are
several parts to
completing each
quest and accomplishing one
will sometimes
provide you with information and items
needed for others.
The following list of
quests are not
necessarily in the
order that you must
complete them, but
in a somewhat logical order for
achieving your goal.
First, you should
build up a supply of
keys of each color
by wandering about
the area surrounding Tambry. These
will come from
those defeated, as
well as from searching buildings you
come across. Once
you have a white
key, as well as
some gold and grey keys, you can
go to Marheim and visit the castle
and the other buildings. You will be
(Continued on page 53)

Y

(Continued from page 50)
able to find food, increase your
vitality, and get
useful information.
You can now
proceed to the
Watch Tower
where you should
find a sea shell.
This can be used
to travel across to
the Isle of Sorcery
where you will
find the Crystal
Palace. Here, you
will meet with the
Sorceress. If you
talk enough with
her, your luck
should be significantly increased. She will
also give you a
statue. (You will
want to collect
five statues during
the quest. If you
happen to encounter some serpents or snakes
from the sea,
don't kill them.
They will protect
you from harm.
At Sea Hold, you
will find another
statue, but you
must have
another White
Key. A visit to the
Dream Knight's
castle will provide
you with the sun stone. This is used
to provide strength to defeat the
Witch. Inside the cave in the Mountains of Frost, you must get by a
dragon to find the Magic Wand
which will be used to defeat the
Witch.
You will find the Witch in Grimwood. You should also find another
statue. Once she is defeated, you
will want to take the golden lasso,

proceed to Swan Isle, and get the
swan. It will provide you with yet
another means of transportation. Fly
to the Tower between Marheim and
Sea Hold to rescue the Princess.
This should indirectly provide you
with another statue.
Next, go to the Hemsath's Tomb.

This underground area will require
some mapping; some easy and
some a bit more difficult. You
should not leave without another
statue and a bone. You might also
encounter someone with information for you. "Take" the bone to the
Crypt north of the path between
Tambry and Marheim. Exchange it
for the shard which is needed to
pass through the force field at the

Citadel of Doom.
Having all five statues should make
the Hidden City of Azal visible.
Proceed there to get a rose which is
needed to pass through the lava
near the Citadel of Doom. You
should now have all that you will
need to defeat the
Necromancer.
You should also
know that he is located on the Plain
of Grief, but getting to him will
still be quite a
challenge. Defeat
him, get the Talisman and you have
completed your
adventure. After
all your efforts,
the ending is
somewhat anticlimactic, but
very satisfying for
all the work it took.
Don't plan on
finishing this in a
single evening. It
will take some
days to accomplish all that
you must. Land
travel in this game
is slow, so getting
and learning to
use other means
of travel can help
greatly.
If you are having
any problems with
the "Restore"
games not
functioning correctly, you probably have an early
release of the
game and should send your disk
back to MicroIllusions for a replacement at no charge.
This game is very impressive and a
worthy addition to the game library
of any computer adventurer. It is
very playable, an excellent value for
its price, and there will likely be a sequel available some time this summer.

Taking A Peek
Continued from page 9
best-selling "King's Quest" series
has created an animated graphics
adventure for children. Children
can communicate with the characters in the program (most of them
from familiar nursery rhymes) by
means of either text or pictures.
Players help Mother Goose solve
her problems by restoring the missing objects from nursery rhymes to
the correct characters. IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #12.
Simon & Schuster Software
One Gulf & Western Plaza
New York, NY
STAR TREK: THE REBEL
UNIVERSE: The synthesized voice
of William Shatner which opens
the playing of this product on the
Atari ST is incredibly authentic and
the graphics are spectacular. In a
departure from previous Star Trek
titles published by Simon and
Schuster, this adventure is a colorful, graphic approach to the
familiar crew's adventures. There
are more than 4,000 planets to
weave the ship's path around and
through in order to quell a rebellion against the Federation itself. C64 ($29.95), IBM, ST ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #13.
Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA
SOLITAIRE ROYALE: This game
teaches and adjudicates eight different adult solitaire games and
three different children's level
solitaire games using a deck of 52
playing cards. Many won't like playing solitaire without the handy
ability to cheat when one feels
frustrated, but those who want the
challenge of winning within the
rules will enjoy playing "Pyramid,"

"Golf, "Klondike," "Canfield,"
"Corners," "Calculation," "Three
Shuffles and a Draw," and "Reno."
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #14.

CONVERSIONS
RECEIVED

XOR Corporation
5421 Opportunity Ct.
Minnetonka, MN
BASKETBALL CHALLENGE: This
is a sports simulation with enough
depth to be an excellent coaching
simulation. Unfortunately, the
teams are not contemporary
professional teams. Numbers from
one to five move represent the
players and move about the court
to execute each play. IBM. Circle
Reader Service Card #15.
BERMUDA SQUARE: So, you
think you're good at puzzles, do
you? This program is a
mathematician's dream and the
average schoolchild's nightmare.
Players strive to fill one large
square to capacity by means of
smaller squares with lesser area.
There is more than one solution
and the company has a promotional contest with a $5,000.00 prize
for the best solution. IBM. Circle
Reader Service Card #16.
OLIGOPOLY: Form your own multinational corporation and own the
world. That is the object of this
multiplayer (2-6) game of
geoeconomic intrigue which takes
players from the boardroom to the
third world. IBM. Circle Reader Service Card #17.
PRO CHALLENGE: For those
who cannot afford the expensive
"NFL Challenge" with authentic
NFL rosters, this version which features the "All Pros" vs. the "All
Stars" has the strategy of the earlier game without the chrome. It
still features excellent graphics,
however. IBM. Circle Reader Service Card #18.

For the Amiga:
Into the Eagle's Nest (Mindscpe)
Moebius (Origin)
Superstar Indoor Sports
(Mindscpe)
For the Apple II family:
Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flt Trainer (EA)
Tomahawk (Datasoft)
For the Apple IIGS:
Roadwar 2000 (SSI)
For the Atari ST:
Moebius (Origin)
President Elect 1988 (SSI)
For the C-64f128:
Might and Magic (New World)
Soko-Ban (Spectrum Holobyte)
Wizardry (Sir-Tech)
For the IBM:
Hardball (Accolade)
Might and Magic (New World)
Mini-Putt (Accolade)
Roadwar Europa (SSI)
S.D.I. (Cinemaware)
Shard of Spring (SSI)
Superstar Indoor Sports (Mindscape)
Ultima IV (Origin)

On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for evaluation, as well as
some general interest questions. For each
game which you have played or each article
which you have read, place a 1 (terrible)
through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate number.

"Defender of the Crown" abdicated from its position in the top 10 on the
strategy side, while "Seven Cities of Gold" journeyed into the top 10 by
default. RID fans will watch to see if the venerable exploration game can
hold its own when it is evaluated once again. Meanwhile, "Russia's winter
chilled slightly as it slid tower in the top 10. SSI had 5 titles in the top 10
and 10 in the top 20. SSG was impressive with all 5 of its rated games in
the top 20 of the strategy side.

On the adventure side, the impact of the latest "Wizardry" release has yet
to be felt with many readers still unable to find "Werdna" in the stores. So,
there are no new titles in the top 10. Nevertheless, "Starflight" warped past
the mages in New World's "Might and Magic" and left "Pirates" awash in its
wake as the Electronic Arts' game regained third position.

