MENU

April 1987

Number 36

FEATURES
Baseball Game Survey
Bezbol Been Berry Berry Good To Me!

6
Johnny L. Wilson

Titans of The Computer Gaming World

12
Epyx is the First Company Covered in Our New Series Charles Ardai

War In The South Pacific
SSI's New "Monster" Game

16
Bob Proctor

Hollywood Hi jinx

22
Scorpia

Scorpion's Tale Takes Us To Tinsel Town

Might and Magic

24
Scorpia

A Fantasy Role-Playing Game

Gone With The Wind
A Survey of Computer Sailing Programs

28
Russell Sipe

You've Come A Long Way, Baby!

32
Bruce Artwick's Flight Simulator: An Epic Program Daniel Hockman

Interview With Earl Weaver

36

Weaver Talks About His New Electronic Arts Baseball Game

The Mail Plane Blues
Computer Moderated Play-By-Mail Games

Ogre
A Review of Origin Systems Sci-Fi Tank Game

40
Johnny L. Wilson
46
M. Evan Brooks

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Letters

48

Reader Input Device

55

Game Ratings

56

TAKING A PEEK

Accolade
20813 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
DECEPTOR: In this arcade game, released through Accolade's budget
"Avantage" line, you actually become
the Deceptor (a quasi-Transformer) in
undertaking a quest against the evil
Replicoids. C-64/128 ($14.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.
DESERT FOX: This is the Avantage
line's foray into wargames. DF is a hybrid arcade/strategy game based on
the exploits of Field Marshall Rommel.
C-64/128 ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
PHM PEGASUS: This wargame includes eight progressively more difficult scenarios where you command a
patrol hydrofoil in the "danger zone" of
the Eastern Mediterranean and Per-

Sian Gulf. Apple, C-64/128 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #3.
Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
P. 0. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
SUB BATTLE SIMULATOR: If you've
ever wanted to command on submarine
in either theatre of World War II, this
detailed simulation with five levels of
maps, six different ship class es, and
four levels of difficulty. Macintosh
(soon for Apple, Atari, C-64/128 and
IBM - $39.95). Circle Reader Service
#4.
Firebird
P. 0. Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446
TALKING TEACHER: A basic
preschool education program for letter
identification, pronunciation, and spatial relationships, this program has
excellent graphics and synthesized
speech to encourage learning. C-

64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#5.
TRACKER: In this fast-moving three
dimensional arcade game, you attack
renegade cybernetic forces which learn
and remember your strategy as you
attempt to destroy them. Players pilot
skimmer craft through twenty-two interconnected sectors and attempt to
reach the Central ring (the cybernetic
brain itself). In order to accomplish
this, players must defeat Cycloid
(robotic vehicles) units and destroy
communications centers along the way.
C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Scorpio Systems
P. 0. Box 2008
San Francisco, CA 94126
PROFE$$OR CRAP$: This tutorial/game on the classic casino gambling game seeks to duplicate the "look
and feel" of a craps table. You can
learn the odds and basic strategies,

then create your own strategy during
the game itself. Atari ST, IBM, and
Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service # 7.

CONVERSIONS RECEIVED

Springboard Software, Inc.
7808 Creekridge Circle
Minneapolis, MN 55435
CERTIFICATE MAKER: This is an
exceptional awards construction set
with over 200 prefabricated certificates
to choose from and the tools to make
hundreds more. Apple, C-64/128,
IBM, Macintosh ($49.95, $59.95). Circle Reader Service # 8.

For the Amiga:
Exodus: Ultima III (Origin/EA)
Hollywood Hijinx (Infocom)
Moonmist (Infocom)
World Games (Epyx)
Zork Trilogy (Infocom)

For the Apple:
Championship Wrestling (Epyx)
Gemstone Healer (SSI)
Marble Madness (EA)
Realm of Impossibility (EA)
Spy vs. Spy (Accolade)

For the Atari (8 bit):
Battle of Chickamauga (GDW)
Mail Order Monsters (EA)
Ogre (Origin/EA)
Rommel: Battles for Tobruk (GDW)
Spy vs. Spy (Accolade)

For the Atari ST:
Arcticfox (EA)
Championship Wrestling (Epyx)
Exodus: Ultima III (Origin/EA)
Flight Simulator II (subLogic)
Ogre (Origin/EA)
Phantasie II (SSI)
World Games (Epyx)

For the C-64/128:
Autoduel (Origin/EA)
Ogre (Origin/EA)
Spy vs. Spy (Accolade)
Starglider (Firebird)
Warship (SSI)

For the IBM:
Amnesia (EA)
Psi-5 Trading Co. (Accolade)
Where In The USA
is Carmen Santiago (Broderbund)
World Games (Epyx)

For the Macintosh:
Hardball (Accolade)
NFL Challenge (XOR)
North Atlantic '86 (SSI)

by
Johnny Wilson
As an incorrigible Cubs and Angels fan, I'm not
sure that the hilarious, albeit racist, line immortalized by Garrett Morris' Saturday Night Live character applies to me. "Bezbol," hasn't always "been
berry, berry good to me." It has always been of
great importance to me, however. Like the protagonist of Sinclair Lewis' Babbitt and the great line
which summarized his value system ("They were of
eternal importance, like baseball and the Republican Party."), baseball has always been a tremendous
symbol of hope reborn and hope deferred. Each
trade, each "meaningless" spring training game, each
extra inning victory, and each second-guess
brought new hope and new life into the daily routine. It may have been a barbaric day at work, but
a victory by the Cubs could redeem it. There have
been times when I would have been willing to
make the same deal as portrayed in "Damn Yankees" if only the Mets would fall apart.
Fortunately, the computer age has enabled me to
experience new hope (and new anguish) with regard
to baseball. The emergence of statistics-based
games has enabled me to replay those extra-inning
losses and often, turn those frustrations into triumphs. In fact, participation in a computer baseball
league has allowed me to function as both manager
and general manager. So what if my Angels lose
tonight? They can redeem themselves by winning
on my computer screen with any year's stats. So
what if I don't like Shawn Dunston's excessive
number of strike outs? I can always trade him to
some other team.
Here is a brief survey some of the computer
baseball games which are currently on the market.
The present article will not mention Full Count
Baseball which will be covered in our next issue.
Instead, it seems best to begin with some of the
newer programs which have hit the market, then
we will attempt to summarize some of the older
programs which were reviewed in the June-July
1985 (5.3) issue.
EARL WEAVER BASEBALL
(Electronic Arts, available for Amiga; soon for
IBM; later for the Apple IIgs).
Undoubtedly the most exciting sports simulation
to be released in years, Earl Weaver Baseball (EW)
has it all. Although it is a statistics-based game, the
graphics and animation are superb. The fluid ani-

mation of the players is kinetically correct. Of
course, one would expect this from Eddie Dombrower of Mirage Graphics who did the first computer dance notation program for microcomputers.
Eddie uses a split-screen approach (a la television
and his own Intellivision product, World Series
Baseball) in order to show pitching and batting in
detail and fielding by means of an overview. The

pitcher even differentiates between the full windup and the stretch. Further, you can actually see
the ball curve when a breaking pitch is thrown.
That's not all! The sound is magnificent from the
opening Sousa march to the digitized speech of Earl
Weaver coming out to argue with the umpire. Teri
Mason, a flutist herself, is a specialist in sound and
made certain that even the crack of the bat was

authentic aurally. Of course, the big difference in
this program is provided by Earl Weaver himself
(see the interview published in this issue). The
strategy comes from a series of meetings with
Weaver throughout a full season. The computer will
even set up a lineup based on Weaver's percentages
and has an "Ask Earl" tutorial which is of some interest to those unfamiliar with Earl Weaver on
Strategy, his authoritative book on the subject.
The chrome included with the game includes: 1)
the ability to design and save your own stadium; 2)
the ability to choose and save your team colors (for
both road and home uniforms); 3) a general manager function for ease of trading, complete with
player with suitcase icon; 4) the capacity for instant
replay and slow motion instant replay; 5) the ability
to print out lineups using Earl's system; and 6) a
stat compiler for league play that even allows trading during the season. In addition to all of this, the
algorithms are not strictly based on statistics. Dombrower has an extensive knowledge of physics and
has developed a matrix modified by physical laws
to determine where the ball is likely to land within
(or beyond) the confines of the stadium. A typical
play, for example, might go like this: Don Mattingly is at bat against Oil Can Boyd at Fenway
Park. Boyd pitches. The random number generator
picks a number which is compared to the combined
stat matrix formed by the interaction of Mattingly's
and Boyd's stats. The computer determines that the

result is a double. The program then looks at a
doubles table to randomly determine what kind of
double it is (some of the possibilities here might be,
grounder down the third base line, line drive to
right center, ground rule double to right, fly ball
off the left field wall, etc.). The program determines that this particular double is a line drive
smash down the left field line. Once the ball leaves
the bat, physics and distances take over. The distance to the wall, the wind, the position of the left
fielder and his speed all interact to determine how
soon he is able to field the ball. In the case of
Fenway park the ball gets to the short left field
wall very quickly. What may be a double in any
other park in the league turns out in this case to be
a long single.
Not only does the added physics bring more realism to the game, it also adds much to the appearance and enjoyment of the game. A deep fly to
center may or may not be out. You can't be sure
until the ball actually comes down. It's exciting!
The stadium design option is fascinating. You
can choose: what the color of your stadium will be;
distances down the lines, to the power alleys, and
to straight-away center; height of the fences,
whether your stadium is indoor (with no wind effects) or outdoor; if you will have a pitchers' park
with lots of foul ground or a hitters' park with very
little; and whether it will have artificial or natural
turf.
If you prefer you can use one of the 32 stadiums
already on the disk which include some of the
current parks as well as many classic parks of the
past. [such as the Polo Grounds, Ebbetts Field, The
LA Coliseum (with it's left field screen), old
Yankee Stadium (with the Grand Canyon center
field and Babe Ruth inspired right field short deck)
and many many others].
The general manager option facilitates trading
and compilation of statistics for league play, as well
as allows you to edit the players' names so that the
speech synthesizer can pronounce them.
The game itself can be played strictly as a
statistics based game or as a statistics modified arcade game ("Play & Manage" mode). The latter
mode allows play under four different sets of rules
(Major, Minor, Semi-Pro, or Sandlot) and the
player can choose to play where one pitch represents the entire at bat or take the full at bat. In the
last mentioned mode, one has the chance to use op-

Bezbol (cont.)

tions like "Swing Away" or "Take Pitch," which are
not relevant to the "One Pitch" mode.
Most important to armchair managers, however,
are the actual offensive and defensive options
which they have to work with. EW is full of options, including specific steal orders (steal of second, third, home, or double steal), differentiation
between a bunt and a squeeze play, and consistent
with Earl's strategy, the ability to call for the "Run
and Hit" play over the "Hit and Run" (although
both options are present in the game. Weaver contends that the "Hit and Run" is the worst play in
baseball because it both takes the bat out of the
batter's hand and has a tendency to hang the runner
out to dry. The "Run and Hit," however, tells the
runner to try to steal and the batter only swings if
he has a good pitch, not just to protect the runner.
EW allows you to try either one. Rest assured that
the game itself is not statistically biased against the
hit and run even though Earl hates the play. Likewise, bunting is statistically accurate even though
Earl dislikes the sacrifice bunt as a general rule.
On the defensive side, DV really spices up the
game. In addition to standard orders like "Visit
Mound," "Guard Lines," and "Hold Runner," the
program allows you to shift both the infield and
the outfield to the left and right according to the
placement you wish, not some basic formula. The
program also allows you to ad just the outfield and
infield depth according to your needs. Further, the
program allows for pitch outs in steal situations, as
well as pitching around a dangerous hitter. In bunt
situations, one has the option of charging from first
and/or third. In short, EW really gives you the
chance to think like a manager.
Finally, in the Commissioner mode you have
everything you need to set up your own league
with up to 32 teams in up to four divisions. EW
will compile stats, print league leaders in all stat
categories, maintain standings, compile team stats.
In short, give you everything you need to run a
league without spending all of your free time calculating averages and standings.
MAJOR LEAGUE MANAGER
(Spinnaker Software, available for IBM).
This is a new incarnation of Pro Manager
(originally published by Avalon Hill). As noted by

Bill Oxner in a previous baseball survey (CGW 5.3,
p. 26), this game is tremendous in its stat-handling
ability. The program still allows the manager to
"profile" any player (getting a statistical picture of
his previous performances), compile the stats of
league leaders in rank order, derive standings from
won/loss records, and print out all league stats.
This game isn't simply a repackaged Pro Manager,
however, because it's been tweaked up quite a bit.
It is now easier to make trades, create teams, or
key in a player with your own stats. The description of each play is somewhat more colorful and
the addition of music adds to the play (but may be
toggled off, if the player doesn't care for it or
wants to speed up play). One piece of chrome that
executives may find interesting is the "Executive
Pause." This command clears the screen and allows
you to type anything you wish without affecting
the game. To return to the game, you simply hit
the F10 key. This is handy for playing the game at
work. [Ed.: So that's what you've been doing in the
afternoons! And I thought you were editing!]
Unfortunately, the game isn't nearly as rich in
managerial options as some of the other games
covered in this article. For example, there are only
five offensive options (pinch hit, pinch run, bunt
for a sacrifice, steal with all runners unless there is
a first and third situation, and hit and run). Defensively, there are five basic choices (defensive or
pitching change, infield in, guard lines, pitch
around, and walk). Of these basic choices,
the first allows replacement of the
pitcher or any fielder, as well as
exchanging the positions of two
players. Major League
Manager probably
plays the
quickest
of the
products
reviewed in
this article, but I
can't help feeling
that this is because
you can't make as
many decisions in
order to affect the
outcome as you can
in the other games.

Defensive options are also divided into two
consecutive menus. The first menu consists of four
options for the pitcher. These are: 1) pitch aggressively; 2) pitch around the batter; 3) intentionally
walk the batter; and 4) pitch out. The second menu
consists of five options for the fielders. These are:
1) infield in; 2) in at the corners; 3) guard the line;
4) play aggressively in the outfield; and 5) play behind the runner.
Another nice touch of Pure-Stat Baseball is the
availability of three different stadiums (Yankee,
Dodger and subLogic) which are part of the basic
game and the stadium disk which contains several
more. No matter which stadium is used, however,
the graphics can be disorienting, at first. It seems
that the entire stadium layout flip-flops on the
screen, depending on the handedness of the batter.
Hence, a left-handed batter is seen on the right
lower corner of the screen, while a right-handed
Continued on pg. 42

PURE-STAT BASEBALL
(SubLogic, available for C-64/128 and Apple).
Although the graphics are reminiscent of Micro
League Baseball, the managerial choices of this
subLogic program are far superior. The game is
playable as a solitaire, two player, or computer only
contest. It is statistically based and comes with a
1985 Team Data Disk, as well as the eight great
past teams which come on the game disk itself.
Players are rated on defensive range and throwing
ability, as well as base running ability, bunting and
sacrifice capability on the offensive side.
Offensive options are divided into two menus
presented consecutively. The first menu offers
seven choices for the batter: 1) hit and run; 2) bunt
for hit; 3) swing aggressively; 4) bat cautiously; 5)
sacrifice bunt; 6) hit behind the runners; and 7)
squeeze bunt. The second menu compliments the
first with seven choices for the runner: 1) steal second; 2) steal third; 3) steal home; 4) run aggressively; 5) run aggressively if hit to left field; 6) run
aggressively if hit to center field; and 7) run aggressively if hit to right field. Those latter choices
are facilitated by the inclusion of the throwing
ratings for each fielder on the same screen.

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World
Part I of V: Ardai on Epyx

by Charles Ardai

Chapter One
Wherein the reader uncovers the many wonders of
Epyx games and examines an eternal question, to
wit: "How do action-oriented games succeed in the
post-videogame era?"
——

In the past, all that was necessary for a computer game to be successful was an imaginative title
or an attractive bit of packaging; the quality of the
software was incidental. This curious situation came
to pass as a result of most games being of equal
play value. With ten versions of "Shoot the Flying
Lump" competing for your consumer dollar — and
often no way to compare the games in a store —
decisions were made on rather flimsy premises.
What was Starpath's Communist Mutants from
Outer Space, if not Space Invaders redone? It was
obviously nothing more than an attention grabbing
title. Since the title wasn't worth some forty dollars
worth of entertainment, however, Communist Mu-

tants had its moment in the sun and vanished as
quickly as HES' Attack of the Mutant Camels and
Fox's Revenge of the Beefsteak Tomatoes. All of
which has nothing to do with Epyx and that's a
darn good thing! If it did, Epyx would never have
gotten past the Mutant Camel Tomatoes period of
computer gaming.
While Mattel was selling Advanced Dungeons
and Dragons, Epyx was selling the similar Temple
of Apshai trilogy. When the allure of the former's
licensed trademark wore off, Mattel's game disappeared. Apshai, on the other hand, is still going
strong, more than half a decade after its inception.
There is only one explanation for this and that explanation is the story of Epyx's existence: in the
end, a good program will always be more successful
than a poor one.
So, while Epyx's competitors spent their energies
trying to find a way to make Q*Bert clones look
like original games, Epyx busily recruited talented
designers to write original, high-quality software.
Today, one doesn't need demonstration models at
a computer store to be assured of purchasing a
quality game. If someone wants a top-notch text
adventure, he buys one of Infocom's. If he wants
the same high standards in a graphic action game,
Epyx can be counted on to deliver.
This is not to say that Epyx hasn't come out
with some clunkers along the way. As long as we
are on the subject of text adventures, we might as

well mention Robots of Dawn, an Infocom-esque
offering based on the bestselling novel by Isaac
Asimov. It wasn't a terrible game, but it wasn't
particularly noteworthy, either. For one thing, it
completely lacked Asimov's distinctive prose style
(Dr. Asimov told me that he had no input in its
design.). For another, it used his plot only tangentially. Most of all, however, it just wasn't what
people wanted from Epyx.
There were other failures, too: a resurrection of
the ancient arcade games Star Fire and Fire One;
Barbie, a reprehensibly empty-headed and sexist
toy; and Ken Uston's Puzzle Panic, a confusing series of uninteresting puzzles.
Through it all, however, Epyx has developed a
well-deserved reputation for creating fine games
and for adding elements of complexity to even the
most basic contests. At every turn, Epyx surprises
gamers with features like split-screen play (Pits top
II), digitized voice synthesis (Barbie), background
graphics (Winter Games),complex sports games with
quickly learned control systems (World Karate
Championship and Championship Wrestling), and
products which match unusual concepts with unusually good gameplay (Breakdance, The Movie
Monster Game, and Impossible Mission).
Infocom might have done a better Robots of
Dawn or Electronic Arts might have created a better Fun With Music, but no one could have made a
better Jumpman. On its own turf, Epyx just can't
be topped.
Chapter Two

In which the author acknowledges an error
——
You are in the "Software Village" computer store.
All around you shelves overflow with games, utilities
and bottles of Monitor Cleaning Solution. Many of
the games you see are made by Epyx. Behind the
store's counter, a salesman is reading the "Year In
Review" article in the December issue of Computer
Gaming World.
>EXAMINE GAMES
Which games do you mean, the Epyx games or
the others?
>EPYX
One game in particular catches your eye. In
bright red letters its title reads, "The Eidolon." The
salesman looks up from his magazine and points at
you accusingly. "You wrote that Activision makes
"The Eidolon!"

>SALESMAN, I KNOW
"How could you make such a stupid mistake?"
>SALESMAN, I DON'T KNOW
The salesman mutters something unpleasant under
his breath. "Epyx games are some of the best sellers
we've got," he says, "but when they make a turkey,
they should get credit for that, too."
>KICK SELF
Done.
Chapter Three

The article is resumed with a discourse on Epyx's
award-winning techniques.
——
At their best, Epyx games are lavish productions, filled to the brim with the result of what
Epyx representative Noreen Lovoi calls "tweaking,"
adding interesting features to a game in order to
heighten its appeal. At their worst, Epyx games are
nothing but "tweaks." For instance, Lucasfilm's The
Eidolon is a collection of imaginative graphic accoutrements with no game to speak of.
Generally, however, tweaking adds a great deal
to what are already interesting games. The monitor
replay in Summer Games II, the facial expressions
in World Karate Championship, and the crowd in
Championship Wrestling are all prime examples of
successful tweaks. None of them are essential to the
mechanics of the games, but they add depth and
flavor to the worlds of the simulations. The most
successful tweaks of all are the Olympic-style
openings to the "Games" series. From the animated
sequences to the choosing of nationalities and the
playing of national anthems, the tweaks frequently
overshadow the events themselves (not terribly surprising when one considers the occasionally dull
gameplay).
How can a joystick's motion be said to simulate
gymnastics? "Inaccurately," one should answer, "at
best." Without tweaks, Epyx's software would be
innocuous and flat, not nearly as entertaining as it
usually is.
How does the ability to choose your motorcyclist's jacket style affect Supercycle? It adds to
one's satisfaction in the same way that the use of
Godzilla instead of a generic dinosaur affects the
Movie Monster Game. Tweaks serve a similar purpose in Epyx games as gag lines in text adventures.
That is, the greater the number (anyone out there
catch 9 1/2 Tweaks?), the richer the texture of the
game and the better the replay possibilities. At

around forty dollars per game, players want and
deserve all the replay value they can get.
Game quality can be determined by its replay
value and playability, as well as its graphics, background music and other aesthetic components. The
best games on the market, and most Epyx games,
are successful in all of these areas. What sets Epyx
apart from the pack is the extra polish that is put
on Epyx products. Musical themes aren't just there,
they're good. Epyx's one piece of hardware, the 500
XJ joystick (soon to be available as an Apple and
IBM peripheral) is not just a stylish handgrip hyped
by snazzy marketing, but it actually responds faster
to the player's movements than any of its competitors. Action games are never solely action. They all
involve multiple levels of play and require strategic
planning, especially in the new Masters Collection
line of war simulations.
Perhaps the best example of the value of Epyx's
adding extra features to its games prior to release is
to be found in the visually aesthetic Impossible
Mission. At heart, the game is nothing more than a
climbing game tacked onto a simple puzzle and
time limit. It is only the multitude of special features — realistic voice synthesis, appropriate sound
effects, colorful and varied scenes, and unique adversaries — that make it an unusually fine game.
What makes it a classic computer game, however, is
a pair of otherwise non-essential tweaks. First,
when the player's character jumps, he doesn't hop;
he performs a perfectly fluid forward flip. Second,
when he falls through a gap in the floor at the
bottom of the screen, the player is treated to a
horrific scream accompanied by a sound effect that
suggests plummeting to unimaginable depths.
That's it — a scream and a somersault. Doesn't
sound like much, does it? Still, people have written
to me to say that those features were what
prompted them to buy the game. I suppose, when
you think about it, pointed ears and a raised eyebrow don't sound like much either, but they helped
make at least one television character extremely
popular.
Chapter Four
Which features a perusal of a catalog of Epyx's
newest releases, including a short review of each.

Though very diverse, Epyx's products can be
broken up into two basic categories: sports games
and everything else. In their newest batch of games,

there are five of each. Three of the latter group
and one of the former group have not been released
as of press time. Comments based on them are
based entirely on information provided by the
company and may change.
Sports Games:
Championship Wrestling — With heroes and villains of the squared circle created in imitation of
Hulk Hogan and his ilk, this game is a rollicking
good time. Bash heads, use fancy moves, throw
your foes out of the ring and win the championship

belt. This lighthearted simulation is hard to win and
is as much fun as the real thing. Of course, some
people don't like senseless violence. For them,
there's...
World Games — This offering is an adequate sequel to computer gaming's most popular non-adventure game series. It includes eight unusual
events ranging from sumo wrestling to cliff diving
and takes players to locales like Japan and Canada.
The graphics are typically excellent, but the mechanics have deteriorated into bizarre joystick patterns which have little to do with the events. Still,
the game is recommended, if for nothing else, because of the exasperatingly enjoyable Log Rolling
contest.
Super Cycle — Similar to the arcade game, Hang
On, players drive motorcycles along winding roads
under a variety of conditions. The concept isn't
Continued on pg. 53

BALI HAI WILL CALL YOU

A Review of War In The South Pacific
by Bob Proctor

Name:
System:
Price:
# Players:
Designer:
Publisher:

WAR IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC
Apple, C-64
$59.95
1 or 2
Gary Grigsby
Strategic Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA

Before we go one step further, let me say that
the full title of this game is War In The South Pacific and that is the first and last time I will spell it
out. Henceforth it shall be known as WITSP. Since
that is easy to type, but not so easy to read, I suggest you call it "South Pacific" (unless you're likely
to confuse it with a musical).
WITSP is a "monster" game of the Pacific theater
of WWII. It does not attempt to cover the whole
Pacific but only the southwestern portion: from
New Guinea, Truk and Brisbane in the west to Fiji
and Makin Island in the east. This area saw most of
the combat (with the notable exception of the Battle of Midway) during the first year of the war.
This naturally includes: the Battle of the Coral Sea,
the fighting for Port Moresby, and all of the battles
for and around the Solomon Islands. The game uses
a 40x48 square grid where each square represents
about 50 miles.
OPTIONS, OPTIONS...
There are 3 choices of starting date. In each case
you can choose to play one to eight weeks or a
campaign game that ends in early March 1943.
Only ten months at most, you say? Well how about
ten months of hourly turns, with every ship and
almost every airplane represented? Fortunately, it
doesn't have to be that long; you can play a scenario as short as a week, choose eight-hour turns to
speed things up, and let the computer help you
manage all those forces. Still a one-week game may
still take 8-10 hours to play, this is not a short
game!
Beginners should start with one of the later start
dates, 8/8/42 or 10/17/42. These are historical scenarios in that all of the ships that had been sunk
before the start date are considered sunk. Thanks to
the loss of 4 carriers at Midway in June, the
Japanese player starts at a slight disadvantage: 370
points behind in August. By the later date, they've

closed the gap to 251 points thanks mostly to the
Battle of Savo Island. Keep in mind that up to 499
points is still only a marginal victory. Both scenarios focus on the fight for Guadalcanal and both can
be quite interesting even if only played for 2 or 3
weeks. See the tables for a profile of the starting
position of both sides for phase 3.
The earliest start date is May 1, 1942. This scenario is different, it is not historical. The Japanese
are not committed to an invasion of Midway,
therefore all of the ships that were involved there

are available for duty in the southwest Pacific by
late May. With up to 8 carriers, 5 or 6 more than
the USN, the Japanese player definitely has the
initiative and can choose to invade New Guinea
(and Australia?) or try to establish a base on one of
the Solomons.
THE GAME SYSTEM
At the heart of WITSP are the ships. There are
over 400 of them in 76 classes. Every combat vessel
destroyer-sized or larger is represented. Submarines, oilers, attack transports, minesweepers,
seaplane carriers: they're all here. Only service
vessels like submarine tenders, hospital ships and
the network of supply transports are missing. Each
ship is rated 8 ways: main guns, flak, torpedo
tubes, speed, flotation, armor, cargo capacity, and
fuel capacity. In addition, carriers are rated both
for the number of aircraft they can carry and for
the number of operations (take-offs and landings)
they can perform in one hour.
A turn in WITSP has three parts: an Order Phase
for each player and an Action "pulse" in which orders are carried out. Normally, the Order Phases
are skipped so that the action is continuous. If you
want to change any orders for your forces, you hit

War South Pacific (cont.)

the "0" key at any time and an Order Phase will
occur after the current pulse.
The Order Phase lets you give six different
kinds of orders: task force, carrier, airfield, port,
army, and commitment. The Order menu also lets
you review the date and time, turn sound off and
on, end the game, and see what ships have been
sunk. It does NOT show you what the current victory point count is, however.
Task forces are given one of 10 different types
of "missions". Usually only a few of these can apply. For example, submarines always get a submarine mission and four of the missions will invariably involve loading and unloading in port. For the
rest, a speed and a destination are required. Each
side can have up to twenty TF's but usually 5 to 10
of them will be subs. Each TF is limited to 20
ships. Often when you need to refuel a large TF at
sea, much dividing and combining of TF's must be
done to get all of the ships into a TF with an oiler,
especially if there are lurking enemy subs that
make it unwise to leave the oiler escortless.
Carriers and airfields are much alike. In fact,
carriers show up under the airfield menu when
they're in port. The only reason to separate them is
for convenience, because carriers often need orders
several times a day and it's nice not to have to
scroll through a lot of airfields to get to them. Orders are given to air groups (there are ten types of
missions for these, as well). Fighters can fly CAP
(combat air patrol over their own base or TF), long
range CAP, or Strike Escort. Bombers fly strikes
with either HE (high explosives, used against land
targets), AP (armor-piercing bombs, used against
ships), or Torpedoes. All groups can also be assigned to search, to transfer bases, to rest, or to
break off a mission and return to base. Groups are
rated for experience and morale as well as the
number of aircraft. Attention to details—like using
groups with low experience to fly searches and
build their rating, or resting groups when their
morale is low—can reduce losses and pay dividends
in the long run.
There are six types of Japanese aircraft and
eleven US types. Each is rated for range, maneuverability, durability, bomb load, and gunnery.
Seaplanes are not represented individually, but they
are active at any operational port with at least ten
supply points. They always search a 360 degree
circle out to 600 miles. Float planes are not represented individually either, but are assigned to cer-

tain Japanese cruisers and battleships and conduct
automatic searches for 300 miles around their TF's.
The Port Orders menu is used mainly to create
new Task Forces from the ships currently in a port.
For WITSP Owners...
Here are some notes and tips of interest
to those who already own a copy of WITSP.
1. Get an accelerator card! Otherwise it
can take an hour of real time to play a day
of game time, maybe two hours if there's
combat.
2. As with some other SSI games, CTRLS will pause (and un-pause) the game. This
is crucial if the phone rings and you can't
wait until the next order phase stops the
action. This feature is not documented.
3. Watch out for ships slowed down by
damage! There is no warning of this, you
must ask for Orders and inspect each TF to
verify its speed. When a ship is badly hit,
the whole TF will slow to match its speed
which may mean spending another day
within range of enemy air! Damage gets repaired fast enough to add several knots per
hour but the TF's assigned speed must be
increased manually so you have to give orders every hour to keep a TF moving at
best possible speed.
If any ship has been used before, you will typically
have to give the TF a "Replenish" mission so that
all ships can top off with fuel and ammo before
leaving port.
Other Port Orders include the ability to expand
either the port itself or the local airfields. This is
done in steps of 25 up to a maximum of 200. Expansion requires Supply Points, which we will discuss soon. The Port Order menu also lets you create
an Army out of some or all of the garrison.
The Army Orders menu is then used to control
these armies. They can move, attack and create new
bases. There isn't normally much land combat in
WITSP, which is probably why these routines
haven't been fully debugged. It's possible to create
armies with zero troops or supplies, or have an
army suddenly disband and merge with a nearby
port garrison. However, I have yet to find an error
that seriously affects play and certainly none that
stop the game.
The last kind of orders are commitments. Each

War South Pacific (cont.)

player receives about 5 commitment points per day.
These points can be used to buy ship replacements
from a list of all ships available in the Pacific. It's
a clever but simple system that keeps replacements
at a realistic level but avoids a fixed schedule. It
permits some strategic planning; do you spend your
12 points on a carrier or a battlewagon? Or is one
heavy cruiser (4 points) really more effective than
four destroyers (1 point each)? When a ship is
heavily damaged in combat but still manages to
make port, it is sent off-map (home to Japan or the
US) for repairs. The ship will appear on the commitment list showing how long repairs will take and
yes, you are forced to spend commitment points to
get it back!
The Supply system is unique. Supply points are
not consumed by operations -- an invisible network
of transports is assumed to keep everything going.
Remember this is different than fuel, which is
consumed by ships and forces them to return to
port or rendezvous with an oiler periodically. Supply points are used to create new bases and to expand port and airfield capacity of existing bases.
Since Victory points are awarded for maintaining
bases -- and the bigger the base, the more points
you get -- this is an important part of the game.
Both sides can get double points for bases in
"enemy territory".
The last piece of the game system that needs
mentioning is computer control. Playing WITSP
would take a lot longer if you had to give every
single order yourself. Fortunately, you can tell the
computer to handle any TF or airfield for you. It
can handle the mundane task of returning a TF to
Fiji or Truk. For airfields, it can assign CAP,
search, and even conduct repetitive strikes against
an enemy base within range. When combat looms or
when better judgment is required, you'll have to
take charge yourself. If you put your home base
(Fiji or Truk) under computer control, it will
manage all of your forces including committing to
replacements, sending out patrol and bombardment
missions, moving up supplies and expanding bases.
When the action begins you'd better pay attention to the screen. The position of any task forces
sighted by searching planes is shown along with the
pilot's estimate of their composition but not their
course!). As usual, the computer is too predictable
in that it varies the number of ships but never the
types. In other words, two carriers might be reported as more or less than two or even as non-ex-

istent, but carriers will never be reported as present
when there aren't any -- something the green pilots
of '42 were prone to do. Weather systems also flash
across the map and it's important to note them in
order to know where the enemy might be hiding if
you should come up empty-handed during your
search process.
The action pulses can be one, four or eight
hours long and it is possible to change back and
forth at any time. Using eight-hour pulses makes
the game go as quickly as possible, but also makes
it impossible to fly two carrier strikes in a single
day or to respond quickly to changing conditions.
It's usually better to slow things down when a crucial battle is eminent.
When combat occurs, a brief blow-by-blow report flashes across the screen. If surface combat is
occurring, you see what type of ship is being fired
on and what caliber of gun is firing. Only when
hits occur do you know which of your ships is involved. There are no damage reports, except when
a ship actually sinks. Anything less than that and
you are required to examine forces in the next Order Phase to see how bad the damage is. During air
combat, CAP and flak extract their toll and then,
the bombers roar in. You have no control over target selection, but they usually go after the biggest
targets.
JUDGMENT TIME
So much for a description; what do I think of
the game? WITSP is a good simulation, which I expect from Grigsby and SSI, but it is not an easy
game to learn. Part of this is due to its complexity
but I also fault the manual for not having any kind
of tutorial or example of play. Even the inclusion
of a few simple charts such as the two I've included here would make it much easier for a beContinued on pg. 54

by Scorpia
Well, I see it's that
time of year again...
spring (already?), when
a young person's fancy
turns to adventure
games. So just step right
in, settle into your usual
chair, and Fred will pour
you a tall, cool one.
Something you'll
probably need, as in a
short time you'll be on
your way to Tinseltown
to indulge in some
Hollywood Hijinx.
Good ol' Uncle Buddy. He was a real fun guy.
Of course, you'd expect that from the producer of
such box-office busters as "Vampire Penguins of
The North", "You Can't Fight City Hall-But You
Can Blow It Up!", "Slash and Chop Sock Hop", and
the controversial "Atomic Chihuahuas From Hell",
to name only a few.
Alas, Uncle Buddy is gone, and now his wife,
Aunt Hildegarde, has gone to join him in that great
Grauman's Chinese in the sky. However, since you
can't take it with you, they've left behind a tidy
little estate. Being childless, they decided to leave
their earthly goodies to one of their many nieces
and nephews. Which one? Maybe you. All you have
to do is stay one night in their cozy beachfront
bungalow, collect 10 "treasures", and the entire
bundle is yours! What could be easier?
Probably a lot of things, but there's a lot of
money at stake here, and above all, you don't want
your rotten Cousin Herman to get it! Just thinking
of all the mean tricks he played on you during your
youthful summers at the bungalow is enough incentive to get you going.
So, now the funeral is over and you're standing
outside the bungalow, by the statue of that macho
screen star, Buck Palace, the Fighting Mailman.
From here, there are several ways to go. Hi jinx is
non-linear, and most (but not all) of the puzzles are
stand-alone; you can solve them in any order.
A quick tour of the grounds is a good idea.

While the number of locations in all is pretty small,
it helps to know your way around when you need
to move fast. Although you might want to stay out
of the hedge maze until you have the map (with the
map, there is no trouble at all getting where you
need to go, but it's a rather tedious route in and
back, sigh).
Getting into the house itself is not difficult,
even though the door is locked. Just pay careful
attention to the poem on the back of Uncle Buddy's
photo and you should be inside pretty quickly
(warning: the poetry is bad, even by Vogon standards).
Indoors, you'll find a number of interesting
places to explore. The Game Room, for instance,
which has a scale model of Tokyo, complete with
Atomic Chihuahua. However, it's not the dog
you're after, but the Big Diamond Ring (from the
movie of the same name) that you want. Unfortunately, the model is covered by a heavy plastic

dome, and there's no way to move it.
Careful examination shows five buttons just
outside the dome. I wonder what they do? There's
only one way to find out! Just be sure to save the
game BEFORE you start fiddling with those buttons (personally, I thought this was the most fun
part of the whole game). And remember to save the
heat for last.
Of course, you won't want to overlook the private screening room, complete with theater seats
and its own projection room. Curious place, that
projection room, it has both a slide projector and a
film projector. Synchronicity is the key here.
Along the way, you've probably been finding
some colored punch cards. Count them carefully.
There are seven in all and you'll need every one of
them. While most are right there in plain sight, one
or two may not be so easy to find. It helps to be
thorough in your searching.
Naturally, there is a connection between the
cards and the super-hi-tech (prop) computer in the
basement. It takes no great leap of logic to decide
the cards go into the machine....but in what order?
Ah, that's the question! Keep your mind on business, and who knows what you might end up with!
You don't need me to tell you about the fireplace, a favorite area in any adventure for explorations, but those three patriotically-hued statuettes
on the mantlepiece deserve close inspection. They
will be helpful in more ways than one.

Before long, you will have probably discovered
the not-very-well-hidden wall safe. Do save the
game before you start messing around with the
combination dial. If you make a mistake, you'll be
out of luck (somewhat like the trunk in Sorcerer,
you must be right the first time).
When you make your way up to the second floor
(having first figured out a way past the staircase,
which has a distressing tendency to flatten out
when you try to walk up), you will probably be a
little disappointed. There isn't really much up there.
Oh, there are a couple of items to add to your collection, but most of the rooms are just, well, rooms.
Even the one with the fancy brass handles in the
floor is merely, so to speak, "for show".
However, that panel in the ceiling of the middle
hallway is a definite attention-grabber. Too bad
there's no way to open it from this side. Really,
you'll just have to think of some other way of getting up into the attic. It pays to stay on top of
things in this case. That's all I have to say on this
matter. I refuse to leak any further information.
Getting back down to earth again (really down),
the crawl space under the parlor has some attractions of its own. Unfortunately, there seems to be a
small area that you just can't reach; part of the
floor above is blocking the way. How inconsiderate!
Well, you certainly can't let that stop you (not
when you've been doing so well up to this point!).
Continued on pg. 52

A Review by Scorpia

Name:
Might & Magic
System:
Apple
# Players: 1
Price:
$54.95
Designer:
Jon Van Caneghem
Publisher: New World Computing
P.O. Box 491415
Los Angeles, CA 90049

A mystery... a secret... perhaps no
more than a rumor, since no one has ever
seen it and no one really knows where it is.
No one is sure if it truly exists, but scattered across the extensive world of Varn
are vague hints and cryptic clues, obscure
signposts to the possibly mythical Inner
Sanctum. Only the fittest of the fit, the
most powerful warriors and learned wizards, will be able to unravel the puzzles,
overcome all the obstacles, and discover
the truth. It is not a task for the faint of
heart or the weak of limb.
Without question, Might & Magic is
one of THE most extensive computer
RPG's around. By the time you're finished, not only will you have over 50
maps, your party will have traversed
burning deserts and frigid glaciers, cool
dark forests and rugged mountains, sunny
groves and restless oceans, and delved
deep into deadly dungeons. This is definitely world-touring on a grand scale!
M&M is also one of the most difficult
games in which to get started, particularly
if you have one of the earlier versions. In
those, your party starts out with no
money, no armor, and only clubs for
weapons. This does not make for a very
effective fighting force, especially when
monsters show up in large groups. Characters die with appalling frequency under
those circumstances.
Fortunately, by the time you read this,
the newer version of the game should be
out. In that one, the pre-created party
that comes on disk will have some money
with them, and you can mug 'em to equip
your own characters a bit more decently.
That, of course, is no guarantee they will
survive, but at least their chances will
have improved slightly.
Speaking of characters, there are six
types in the game: Knights (your standard
fighter); Paladins (fighters who acquire
clerical spells at high levels); Archers
(fighters specialized with bows, and who
also learn sorcerer spells at high levels);
Clerics (your standard cleric); Sorcerers
(your standard magic-user), and Robbers
(your standard thief). It's a good idea to
have one of each in the party.
In addition, you also choose a race and
sex for your characters. Races available
are: Human, Elf, Dwarf, Gnome, and
Half-Orc. If you pick something other than

Human, it will have an effect on the initial
attribute scores of the character. Create
some test characters first to see what the
various effects are, so you don't end up
unpleasantly surprised.
The sex of your character has no effect
on attribute scores or abilities, but there is
a point in the game where it will be extremely important whether the character is
male or female. So, have both in the party.
Take your time when creating the
characters. You want the best possible attributes for each one. Every little bit
helps, especially at the very beginning,
when your party is at its weakest and most
vulnerable. Later on in the game, you'll
find ways of increasing attributes, but you
have to survive long enough to do that,
and it ain't easy!
Once the group is created, you begin
just outside the inn of Sorpigal, one of the
five towns in the game. Don't think you're
safe because you're indoors; monsters roam
the corridors here and in all towns, as well
as everywhere else.
A map of Sorpigal comes with the
game, and shows you most, but not everything, in the town. At least you won't
get lost. So now it's a matter of wandering
around town, trying to pick up as much
information as you can, while staying
alive.
At the very start, do not go too far
from the inn. Inns are the only places
where you can save the game. This is especially important at the beginning, when
you'll want to save a great deal of the
time. Each encounter with monsters that
you win is very precious indeed, and you
don't want to lose any of the experience
points, gold, or goodies you've just fought
so hard to obtain.
Fortunately, the saved game stays

saved. Which means if your party gets
creamed in an encounter, you can re-boot
and the characters are still there, just as
they were before they stepped out into
trouble. Of course, anything found or any
experience gained after that point is lost,
but your characters are still alive and
well...to get creamed again.
There is a dungeon below Sorpigal (as
there is under every town except Algary),
but low-level parties would be wise to
avoid both dungeons and the great outdoors for some time. I would suggest having at least 3rd level characters before going outside of the town. You will have
more than enough to handle within the
confines of Sorpigal itself.
This mostly means a lot of fighting and
probably, even more running away from
fighting than actual fighting. If your party
is overmatched (a frequent occurrence at
the start), it's better to retreat than stand
there and watch your characters bite the
dust. Monsters can come in groups of up
to fifteen, which is quite a lot, although
you won't meet too many of these large
parties at the beginning. Still, even a small
group of six monsters (which, by the way,
is usually a mix and match assortment of
various nasty types) can be overwhelming.
So, swallow your pride and beat feet when
necessary.
You should especially retreat when you
see Sprites, number one on every player's
hate list. While they don't have many hit
points, they are extremely difficult to hit.
What makes them such a pain, though, is
the fact that they cast curses on you. Each
curse reduces your chances of landing a
blow on an opponent, Sprite or otherwise.
As beginning characters will have a hard
enough time getting blows in anyway, they
don't need any more problems in this area.

Avoid monster groups with Sprites whenever possible.
One of the nicer features of combat is
the ability to use distance weapons: bows,
crossbows, and slings. Any character, except Clerics and Sorcerers, can use a missile weapon. However, only an Archer can
use them in hand to hand combat, and the
first 2-4 characters in the party are usually the ones in direct confrontation with
the enemy. Thus, most of the time, only
your Archer and Robber will be using
bows.
Of course, if you can use missile
weapons, so can the monsters. Kobolds,
Orcs, Thieves, etc., will be shooting at you
from the back ranks, and naturally, they
can aim at anyone in your party, including
those in the rear. Try to get rid of them
with spells as quickly as you can, while
knocking out the front ranks to move the
archers up and out of bow/sling range.
This is much easier said than done, naturally, and on occasion may even prove impossible. Such is life (or is that, "death"?).
Eventually, with a lot of patience,
some luck, and a great deal of saving the
game, your party will be ready to go out
into the cold, cruel world. Your first excursion should be to the dungeon below
Sorpigal, where you will get some idea of
what's in store for you later on, and also a
job offer. All you have to do is deliver a
message to someone in another town. And
live to tell about it.
However, don't be in a rush to leave
just yet. Once you're done with the dungeon, map out the area around Sorpigal.
You'll get some good practice in outdoor
mapping. And you'll need it, because there
is something (or even several somethings)
of importance in each and every sector.
Therefore it is crucial to go over every

square in the sector so you don't miss
anything.
Actually, mapping in most cases is
pretty straightforward, and more timeconsuming than difficult. Except, of
course, in some dungeons, which have a
few traps for the unwary cartographer.
Frequent use of the location spell is recommended. You might not be where you
think you are.
Among the many sights in the great
outdoors are castles. Three of these White Wolf, Blackridge North, and Blackridge South - are ruled by Lords who will
be happy to send you out on quests, a lot
of quests (seven for each Lord)! and all of
them necessary for completing the game.
You won't be able to finish one set at a
time, because many of the quests are interrelated and you'll have to switch off,
now and then, from one Lord to another.
Also, your party might not be strong
enough for a particular quest at the time
it's handed to you (low level parties should
NOT be going out after a Medusa's head).
That's the moment to use the Remove
Quest spell, and go visit a different Lord.
Be careful when dealing with Lord
Hacker of Blackridge South. He is not altogether a nice guy. Under no circumstances should you ask for another
quest after you have completed the seventh one (ring of Okrim). Should you do
so, you'll get an extremely unpleasant, and
possibly fatal, surprise.
Throughout your wanderings and
questings, you'll be visiting all the towns,
probably more than once. Each of them
has the standard set of establishments:
Inn, Smithy, Temple, Training Area, Food
Store, and Tavern. Prices of most items
vary from town to town, though Sorpigal
has the lowest prices in general. Food, in
particular, is cheap here. A character can
carry a maximum of 40 units of food; for
only 5 gold pieces, he or she will get as
much as necessary to bring the current
supply up to 40 (even if he or she had only
1 unit left!). In Dusk, however, it will coat
you 200 gold pieces for the same amount.
The taverns are very important. Don't
overlook them. Each one has several rumors you'll want to hear, although it will
take repeated visits to get them all. On
some days, there won't be any rumors, so

you'll have to come back another time.
Make sure that you do and remember to
tip the bartender!
Training areas are where your characters can gain a level, if they have enough
experience points. This is not free. You'll
have to pay for it. Also, each time a character goes up a level, he or she will age one
year.
The Smithy, as you might expect, is
the place to buy weapons, armor, and
miscellaneous items such as torches and
lanterns (you can also sell unwanted items
here, too). Each Smithy has a different inventory; not all things are available in all
places. Magical arms and armor, for instance, can only be purchased in Dusk and
there only at a stiff price.
Temples, naturally, heal you of various
unpleasant conditions...for a price. How
much they will charge depends on the type
of healing needed. A quick restoration of
hit points, for example, is cheaper than reviving the dead. Donations are also accepted. So, when you have a fair amount
of money, keep handing it over until
something interesting happens.
Of course, there is more to the towns
than the usual run of shops. It will be up
to you to find out what's there. Map each
one as carefully as you would a dungeon or
outdoor area and remember that some
walls have secret doors. Algary in particular is riddled with them.
Let's not forget those dungeons, either.
There are twelve in all and many with
multiple levels (multiple monsters, too).
They are nasty places indeed, but essential
to finishing the game. When messing
around down there, be on the lookout for
numbered messages (of which there are a
total of nine). They'll be found in any
dungeon with more than one level (so
don't expect to find 'em below a town;
those dungeons are strictly single level).
Did someone say treasures? You bet
there are treasures, ranging from magical
weapons to armor to potions and all sorts
of neat little items. Of course, it's not always obvious just what a thing may be or
do, so some experimentation is necessary
(better save the game first!). And, sorry to
say, some of those magical items are
cursed. Naturally, you will only find this
out the hard way. Good thing you can run
to a temple and have it uncursed, provided
you can afford it.
As you can see, this is a major undertaking! So what's it all about, Alfie? The
first paragraph of this article is what it's
all about. Might & Magic is not a "
Find-and-kill-the-evil-wizard" campaign.
Rather, it is a quest for knowledge and
truth and you will find it only when you
find the Inner Sanctum..... wherever that
is. This is a refreshing change of pace.
The game is all graphics (no animation), with single-stroke keyboard input.
The view is 3-D, you-are-there, both indoors and outdoors. The outdoors are

Might & Magic (cont.)

represented by a few simple icons: trees,
mountains, ocean, desert, and glacier, but
they are used to good effect. When you're
in the wilderness, the entire sector is
loaded in at once, minimizing disk access.
The same is true for towns, castles, and
dungeons.
In combat situations, a single full-figure graphic of the lead monster is displayed, while the right side of the screen
lists how many and what kinds of monsters
comprise the total group (at times, this list
can be depressingly long).
Mapping, as mentioned earlier, is not
hard most of the time. Each area in the
game (indoors or outdoors) is a 16x16 grid.
The manual contains several blank mapping pages to start with; after that, considering the number of areas to map,
you're better off using graph paper than
making copies of a map page. It works just
as well, and is cheaper.
The manual needs special mention; it's
a class act, and one of the best I've seen.
Over-sized (9x12), spiral-bound, printed
in crisp, clear, type, well-organized, and
including a beautiful, fold-out, two-page
map of Varn (handy spell guide on the
back!), it's informative enough to get you

started in the game while leaving plenty
for you to figure out on your own.
Might & Magic comes on two doublesided disks; you make copies of three sides
before playing (Side A is used only for
boot up). The game supports one or two
drives (two is recommended), and will run
on any Apple, from the old II through the
new IIGS. If you don't have an Apple,
don't despair; the game is currently being
ported over to the IBM and Commodore
64; those versions should be out by
Christmas. Versions for other computers
will be done in the future, so hang in
there!

My only real complaints with this
game have to do with the very real difficulty in getting started, and the Astral
Plane sequences. Too often at the start,
my party would run into a band of monsters that were just too much to take on,
especially with only clubs as weapons. Retreating was not always possible, and new
characters simply don't have enough
money to offer a bribe. Getting the party
up a level or two was a somewhat frustrating experience. Fortunately, once you
get past that point, things even out somewhat, but it does require patience and determination to obtain a real foothold in
the game.
Further, I found the Astral Plane to be
frustrating, as well as a bit tedious. Such
an important part could have been better
handled to be more enjoyable and less ulcer-producing.
Still, when compared to the game
overall, these become minor points. There
is much to learn and enjoy in Might &
Magic, because its scope and complexity
are amazing. Don't miss out on it.
Bottom line: Highly recommended!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Three Sailing Programs for Microcomputers
by Russell Sipe
When Dennis Conner piloted Stars and Stripes
across the finish line 1 minute 59 seconds ahead of
Kookaburra III to win the fourth race of the
America's Cup Finals (and thereby sweep the series) he brought to a conclusion an incredible computerized campaign to, as they have been saying
here in the U.S., "win back The Cup". While we all
recall the drama on the Indian Ocean (the ocean
spray, the zinc oxide smeared faces, the looks of
agony and despair, as well as the smiles of victory),
the fact is that the 1987 America's Cup had been
fought for the four years (prior to the actual competition) on computer. Just a partial listing of companies that were involved in computerized simulations of Twelve Meter yachts and the America's
Cup competition would include Digital Equipment
Corp, Hewlett-Packard, M.I.T., Grumman, Boeing,
McDonnell Douglas, the Lawrence Livermore Labs,
Stanford University, and Cray Computer. Therefore, it is little wonder that sailing has now come to
your micro. During the last year, fueled by the
frenzy surrounding the Cup, at least three new
sailing programs have appeared on the market: The
American Challenge: A Sailing Simulator from
Mindscape; America's Cup from Electronic Arts;
and Dolphin Sailing System: Simulator & Instructor
from Dolphin Marine Systems. What is interesting
about these three releases is that each is unique. We
are not looking at three clones here. An avid computerized sailor will find room for all three on his
entertainment shelf.
AMERICA'S CUP
Name:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

America's Cup
C-64
$33
Micro Forte
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

The full title is The Official America's Cup
Sailing Simulation but everyone is going to call it
America's Cup (AC). Despite the fact that EA calls
this a sailing simulation, it is less that than a game
of sailboat racing. In AC the gamer does not need
to know how to actually execute a tack, or a jibe,
or to head into the wind, or watch the mainsl' for
luffing, etc. Rather he must pay attention to wind
conditions, using the correct sail, keep in mind the

right of way rules, etc. So, you say, that sounds
like important aspects of sailing to me, what do you
mean, AC is not a simulator? What we mean is that
the skills one exercises in AC are the larger skills of
outfoxing an opponent tactically rather than the
more basic skills of trimming the sail properly,
watching the heel angle, etc. Crew skills are minimized; pilot skills are maximized. One can learn to
play AC well even if they have had no time on the
water learning the basics of sailing. The same cannot be said for the other two products. Additionally, the skills learned in the other two games can
be directly translated to the basic skills needed to
actually sail, while mastery of AC will do little to
actually show you how to tack from one side of the
bay to another. This is not to say that AC is not a
good product, it is an excellent product.
After watching the America's Cup on ESPN, AC
has taken on a realism that many gamers never realized was there. Playing AC feels like actually
racing for the Cup. It's all there, the tactical jockeying for the start line, the perplexing question as
to which headsail to use when the winds are borderline, the threat of mechanical failure, the rapid
action of the grinders (yes, even that is simulated
in AC); the maneuvering to gain position and advantage over your opponent; and the necessity of
making a clean turn around each buoy, etc. This
game can become addictive if you love sailing or

even just a good one-on-one contest!
You can play against the computer at three different difficulty levels, but to really enjoy the
game, you will want to sail against a human opponent. The tension can be excruciating... but extremely exciting!
AC recreates the eight-leg three-buoy course
recently used in the America's Cup held off Fremantle, Australia. You race against another human
or the computer as you pilot your 12-meter yacht
through changing weather. Viewing the race from
overhead (the helicopter view perhaps?) you pilot
your yacht choosing from between six different
headsails suitable for the three main wind conditions you will encounter (light, medium, and heavy
genoas, and the same range for three spinnakers).
The designers (Micro Forte' of Australia) have
cleverly worked in the furious action of the
grinders by requiring a grinding action with the
joystick to raise and lower the headsails.
The rules of the International Yacht Racing
Union Blue Book are incorporated into the program
and are enforced. For example, failure to give the
right-of-way to a yacht on a starboard tack causes
your port tacking yacht to slow down or even stop
dead in the water. A windward yacht blocking a
leeward yacht will have a similar penalty assessed
against it. And so forth.
The 55 page manual includes the rules of the
game, a tutor on the basics of sailing, a summary

of the most important rules from the Blue Book, a
yachting glossary, an America's Cup history, and
score sheets for recording the results of the America's Cup (OK, so the race is over, you can still use
the score sheet for your own competitions if you
wish).
One irritating feature of the game is the fact
that when a boat nears a buoy, the split screen
showing both boats disappears and only the boat
near the buoy is shown. This is not a problem if
the two boats are near one another. But it has happened several times in our playing of the game that
the boats are approaching different buoys at the
same time. Whichever boat gets to its buoy second
will be sailing blind since the program defaults to
the full screen view for the other yacht. There is a
small arrow on the indicator panel that gives you a
general idea where the buoy is, but it is inadequate
in helping you make a good racing turn. The problem could have been solved by having the program
cycle every two seconds between full view for each
boat.
The glossary is good but inconsistent. It is so
detailed on the parts of the boat that it includes a
definition for bow and stern but neglects to define
cats' paws which is referred in the instructions.
"Cats' paws" refers to a puff of wind affecting a
localized area such as would causes patches of ripples (the paws) on the water.
If you enjoyed watching the America's Cup or
just want a good sail racing game, AC is just your
"cup of tea".
THE AMERICAN CHALLENGE
Name:
System:
# Players:
Price:

The American Challenge
Apple/IBM flippy; C-64
1-2
$39.95
(C-64 $29.95)
Designer:
Chris Lutes Jr.
Thomas Snyder
Publisher: Mindscape Inc.
Northbrook, IL

More of a simulation than America's Cup and
more of a game than The Dolphin Sailing System,
The American Challenge (TAC) combines the good
points of the other two. Sailors will feel right at
home with TAC, and while the actual task of sailing requires more skill in TAC than AC, non-sailing gamers will not find it overly difficult to learn
the basics. Sailing in TAC "feels" like sailing. Your
basic perspective is a view from about 10 feet directly behind your boat looking forward so that

Gone With The Wind (cont.)

your boat is in the extreme foreground and your
point of sail is on the horizon. When you pinch the
wind too much (heading up into the wind more
than you should) you see your boat right itself and
your speed drop. Come off the wind too much
without letting out the mainsheet and you see your
boat heel over excessively (again losing speed). The
"feel" of sailing is even more realistic when you

have the opposing boat in view. The adrenaline begins to flow as you see him heel over and catch the
wind. Is your trim correct? Is he pulling
away/gaining? If I tack now I may gain a few seconds, but will my new course be off the wind
enough to maintain speed? When playing TAC I
feel like I am out there in the club race on saturday afternoon.
TAC can be played against the computer (in
which case the opposing boat simply represents the
course taken by the boat having the best time on
record for the course in question) or it can be
played against another human using a modem or
direct cable connection. In the one player mode the
opposing boat is a "ghost ship" and can be sailed
into, through, etc. with no penalty. In the two
player mode the opposing boat is "real" and you
will need to pay attention to the rules of sailing.
The game includes a Hot Line Protest Screen which
assists sailors in resolving collisions and protests.
The main screen shows the sail boat view. Below this is the instrument panel that shows your

compass direction, the angle of the wind relative to
your boat, the angle of your sail, your speed, the
wind speed, the status of the centerboard (up or
down), and any comments from the race official.
The game contains eight race courses the last of
which, the Cup Race, can only be run when your
boat has recorded the fastest times on the other
seven courses. Be prepared to spend a goodly
amount of time on the other seven races as the
computer's best time on those courses is difficult to
better. You will have to race nearly flawlessly to
beat the computer's best times.
For sailor/gamers this program is an absolute
must. Non-sailor/gamers will also find it to be a
good value and may learn some valuable "ground
school" sailing techniques.
DOLPHIN SAILING SYSTEM
Name:

Dolphin Sailing System
(Simulator/Instructor)
System:
IBM
Price:
$20 (master); $39.95 per lesson
Designer:
Jim Spalding
Publisher: BCI' Software
1140 Greenwood Lake Turnpike
Ringwood, NJ 07456
(201) 728-7796
Circle Reader Service #99

For the serious sailor or the person who is more
interested in actually learning to sail (as opposed to
just playing a sailing game) the Dolphin Sailing
System (DSS) should appeal. To get a feel for this
program imagine it as the Flight Simulator II of
sailing complete with a tutorial. The detail, the realism, the navigational features; plus the no-nonsense nature of the DSS mark this product not as a

game, but as a serious sailing simulator and instructor.
The price of the system alone points out how
this program differs from the others. While the
master diskette only costs $20, each lesson diskette
(there are eight of them in the "Sailing Instructor
System") costs $39.95. The cost of the whole
"Sailing Instructor System" is $395.00 (nine
diskettes). And the "Sailing Instructor System" is but
the first of eleven planned systems (including, for
example, the racing instructor system, the navigation instructor system, the fishing instructor system,
etc.). Within the "Sailing Instructor System" there
are eight lessons. Lesson one teaches you basic
sailing and takes you out on a single sail CATBOAT in Chesapeake Bay. Lesson two, "Sailing
Theory", finds you on a sloop with jib and mainsail
in San Francisco Bay. In lesson three you sail between Boston, Cape Cod and Newport as you learn
the "Rules of the Road" on a cutter. In the remaining five lessons you learn basic navigation and piloting, racing techniques, cruising techniques, passagemaking, and heavy weather techniques. In these
lessons you will sail on ketches, catamarans, yawls,
and motorsailers in such locations as Tampa Bay,
Lake Michigan, New York Harbor and Long Island
Sound, San Diego Harbor, Mission Bay, the Pacific,
Seattle Harbor, and Vancouver Bay.
Your basic view is from the cockpit of your
sailboat. Like Flight Simulator, you can select from
a variety of views: forward, aft, port, starboard, or
scan the 360 degrees around your vessel. There is
even a binocular mode that lets you take a close
look at the detailed features and landmarks that you
will be sailing near. Beyond the cockpit and binocular views, you have access to a series of very
graphic and detailed information stations, such as
the navigation chart, the tactical chart, the navigaContinued on pg. 45

Bruce Artwick's Flight Simulator

You've Come A
Long Way, Baby!
The History of an Epic Program
by Daniel Hockman
In one of the most vivid memories of my early
days in computer gaming, I was sitting at an Apple
II plus computer staring intently and proudly at the
screen. I had taken my Piper 150 far off the edge
of the "world" and had executed a turn to begin a
descent back to the world of gridland. The five
mile by five mile grid that made up the "real
world" in SubLogic's A2FS1 Flight Simulator (FS)
looked like a small postage stamp on the screen. I
was exploring the "edge of the envelope" and it was
fun! It was 2 a.m. on a warm summer night in 1979
(I had begun playing with the simulator at 7 p.m.)
but I ignored the messages I was getting from my
tired aching body. Who cares about tense tired
muscles when you're jazzed?!
Some six years later I sat down at a new version
of Bruce Artwick's famous FS. This time I
manipulated the mouse of an Amiga to make my
Learjet buzz the Transamerica Tower in San
Francisco. Then I gave the motorists on the Golden
Gate bridge a thrill as I did a low "
the-FAA-frowns-on-that" pass over the bridge. Banking right
and climbing I toggled the instant replay switch
and, using the spot plane feature, positioned myself
at sea level and watched myself buzz the bridge.
Wow! That's when the title of this article came to
my mind.
Computer games tend to be the offspring of the
hardware on which they exist. As hardware became
more powerful, programmers developed new techniques to make use of that power, and games,
thereby, improved. Games that were "hot" five
years ago look like dinosaurs now, but not so with
FS. As the technology improved, FS improved with
it. Very few programs are strong enough to warrant
the continued release of "new and improved"
versions. This, then, is a brief history of the
ongoing development of this epic program that
every computer gamer should own.
IN THE BEGINNING...
In the beginning there was Bruce Artwick and
Stu Moment. Behold, they were roommates at the
University of Illinois. Bruce was a computer

graphics specialist and Stu was a devotee of flight
and a master's degree candidate in marketing. Bruce
thought it would be a good idea to combine his 3D graphics knowledge with Stu's piloting and create
a flying simulation. The original work was done on
punch tape. When the Apple II came out Bruce
wrote his program for the Apple and called it
A2FSI Flight Simulator. Having formed SubLogic,
Bruce and Stu were now in business with a unique
product. Three months after the October 1978 release of A2FS1, they released the TRS-80 version.
"LET THERE BE 16-BIT"...
...and Bruce saw the new 16-bit IBMpc and he
said "It is good!" So when Microsoft approached
Artwick about an IBM version of FS, a deal was
struck. Microsoft was looking for a translation of
FS, but Bruce felt that the new 16-bit machine offered the chance to develop a new program altogether. With the power of 16 bits and the added
memory, Bruce could add shaded graphics, realistic
scenery, actual airports, a slew mode, user definable flight situations, better sound, better flight
equations, and a more realistic instrument panel.
The new Microsoft Flight Simulator, with all these
features, was released on November 11, 1981.
Next, Artwick and Moment decided to do a new
8-bit version of FS which would incorporate the
best features of the 16-bit IBM version. One year
of development followed.
THE ADVENT
And when the praises of the IBM version were
noised abroad, Bruce did say "Let us make a new
Apple version in the image of the IBM." And a
year later, on December 26, 1983, we beheld the
advent of Flight Simulator II for the Apple.
The new version was an immediate hit and
SubLogic recovered all their research and develop-

Speaking of the Amiga (and the other 6800 versions)...
A NEW HEAVEN AND A NEW EARTH

ment costs in the first month of release. The new
Apple version was a bit slower than the Microsoft
product but it was a faithful recreation of the IBM
version even having an ADF gauge which was
lacking in the IBM.
In May 1984 the C-64 version of FSII was released and in November, the Atari 8-bit version
came out. In early 1985 (at the time of the release
of the Apple Ilc) code was written for a multiplayer version of FSII. It was tested but not pursued (there was difficulty with the synchronization
of the planes). At the same time (early 1985) the TI
Professional, Tandy, and NEC 9800 versions were
released. The NEC 9800 version was developed for
the Japanese market which has a large installed
base of NEC 9800's. This is why there is a Japanese
scenery disk available. Speaking of scenery disks...
"GO INTO ALL THE WORLD..."
In early 1985 SubLogic began working on a series of "scenery" disks (Project USA) that could be
used in conjunction with the various versions of the
Flight Simulator. The original concept was to develop a series of disks that contained detailed
scenery of the entire USA. As it turned out, this
would have required more than a 100 years to develop. Needless to say, the project was scaled down.
The San Francisco Star Scenery Disk and Japan
Scenery Disk still follow the original concept of
detailed scenery, but Scenery disks 1-6 which covers the Western USA can more accurately be
thought of as airport disks than scenery disks. The
airports are there, but the scenery is sparse.
Presently, SubLogic is working on scenery disks
7-12 (#7 has just recently been released). Disks 712 will contain more scenery than 1-6. Most of the
scenery will be along "corridors of interest". Disks 8,
through 12 should come out at about three month
intervals. Owners of the Amiga version, however,
will have to wait until fall to see the new disks.

Awe inspiring! That is the only way to describe
what Artwick did with the 6800 versions of Flight
Simulator II. When I first sat down at the monitor
of my Amiga and began flying around the Bay
Area I was astonished at what the program had
become. But first, the story of the development of
the Amiga and Macintosh versions.
When Amiga Corp. was developing what would
become the Amiga 1000 they approached Artwick
and asked him to do some 3-D graphics work and
develop an Amiga version of FSII. An agreement
was reached and Bruce spent New Year's Eve
1984/1985 holed up in a hotel suite with other
Amiga developers working feverishly at the keyboard of a "grey box" Amiga (he was developing 3D drivers for the new machine). At midnight the
developers paused long enough to drink an orange
juice toast to the new year (as any designer can tell
you, programming and alcohol don't mix). One
minute after midnight it was "back to the keyboard".
When Commodore bought Amiga, Artwick and
Commodore entered into talks concerning the
Amiga version of FSII but, unlike the talks with
Amiga, things did not work out (June 1985).
At this same time the Macintosh version was
under development. When the contract on the
Amiga version of FSII fell through Artwick devoted his efforts to the Mac. Mike Kulas of
SubLogic also jumped into the project and from
September 1985 through March 1986 both men
worked full time on it. The Mac version shipped in
March 1986. It took extra time to develop because
the two programmers had to write some of their
own development tools, including their own assembler which ran 10-15 times faster than the old assembler.
New FSII features added to the 6800 versions
included the use of a mouse graphic interface, windows, a map, spot plane views, the capability of
displaying two 3-D views simultaneously, control
tower view, super zoom, instant replay, and a second aircraft (a Learjet). The San Francisco Star
Scenery (from the IBM scenery disk series) was
incorporated as a standard feature in the 6800 versions.
Following the March 1986 release of the Mac

version, SubLogic returned to the Amiga version

feedback from customers about the desirability of
modem/cable linked simulators. The feedback has
been positive, but it turns out that there is a
problem with finding the other plane (it's a big sky
and a small plane after all). SubLogic is considering
changes to the modem/cable feature that will make
it easier to find the the other aircraft. The Amiga
and ST versions shipped in November 1986.
ALPHA AND OMEGA
SubLogic's Flight Simulator has come a long
way. From that marathon flying session in 1979 to
the present it has never failed to hold my interest.
But then, that is how an epic should be, right?
I have slipped the surely bonds of Earth....
and have touched the Face of God.

and also began developing the Atari ST version. A
multi-player capacity was added, due mainly to get

--"High Flight"
John Magee Jr.

EARL WEAVER BASEBALL
AN INTERVIEW WITH EARL WEAVER

CGW: What can you get it up to?
Dombrower: Well, there's always a
random chance you could make him a .70C
hitter for a short period of time, but you
really won't keep that because the difference between a .200 hitter and .300 hitter
involves other things. The power of the
hitter and his running speed figure in.
Daglow: The way you need to think of
it is that the better you get at the timing
of the game, the better you fulfill the potential of that player.

In January of this year CGW
editor Russell Sipe and Assistant
Editor Johnny Wilson interviewed
Earl Weaver concerning his new
baseball game, Earl Weaver
Baseball (EWB) from Electronic
Arts. Also interviewed were, Eddie Dombrower (game designer),'
Don Daglow (Electronic Arts
Producer), and Teri Mason
(sound and music designer).

CGW: Earl, we have seen a lot of
products that are closely associated with a
famous person (Arthur C. Clarke and the
computer version of Rendezvous With
Rama for example). The fact is, the famous person in question rarely has any involvement with the development of the
product. That was the first thing that
came to our minds when we were told that
your name was connected with this product. Electronic Arts has told us, however,
that you were very much involved in the
design. Could you describe your involvement?
Weaver: Well, Electronic Arts contacted me about doing a baseball game. I
was interested because, when I was a kid,
we were looking for any kind of baseball
game that you can play. You know, roll
the dice and move your man and if a certain die came up, you could get him to
second base. I don't know how many different baseball games that I played as I
was growing up.And then there was
football. I don't know if you remember the
football games where you placed your men
on the football field and turned on the
motor to watch the play while it vibrated?
I thought that was great. But now, when
something like this (i.e. stat-based sports
games) comes along and you can make the
plays yourself, it's great! My son is into
these stat-based computer games. He's 36
years old and lives in Atlanta.
CGW: So, you've played these games
on his computer?
Weaver: Not a baseball game. All he
had was golf and bowling. Whenever I'd go
visit him, we'd play golf, but we'd never
play baseball. I didn't even know there
was one out until Electronic Arts con-

CGW: In the "Play and Manage" mode
(i.e. arcade mode) how big an affect can
you have on the batter and his stats?
Dombrower: You can drive a batter's
average down quite a bit. You can make
him a zero hitter, real fast.

tacted me. When they did, I was very interested. I flew out to San Francisco to
meet with them. What a day that was!
Now, I've been asked baseball questions
before, but never like this. And I'm sure
you CGW fellows could wear me out as
well. I could only answer a third of their
questions accurately. But, they kept asking me and they kept asking me. So I got a
blackboard. I put people in position, told

what they do, where they should be, how
deep they should be, when you should
bring the infield in, etc. They asked every
question that could be answered and they
asked questions that I couldn't answer,
after thirty years of involvement with
baseball !
CGW: We noticed that in the Play
and Manage mode of EWB, there is a
strong arcade element. Does this arcade
element also play a role if you want to
play the game as a stat-only game?
Dombrower: No. In the stat-only mode
(that is, our "manage" mode) you can only
affect the actual pitching and hitting by
ordering a 'pitch out' or a 'pitch around'.

CGW: Let's get back to the algorithms
in the game. For example how did you arrive at a formula that would determine if a
player such as Alan Wiggins would successfully steal second against Lance Parrish?
Dombrower: Well, we go to kind of a
mixed medium because of my programming background is not in sports, but in
real world modeling. What we've done is
rate the players. Lance Parrish's arm is
rated and Wiggins' speed is rated and his
lead-off will be somewhat random. The
time he breaks is somewhat random. Those
are four variables. There's also the speed
of the pitch variable (in the arcade mode
that is). Those things affect the outcome
of the play. They've just been adjusted
through manual adjustments. We've taken
the formulas and tweak them until they
work. We started out with basically what
we thought was going to be the model and
each time, I guess it was five times, now,
Earl has seen the game, and he would say,
"This needs to be a little faster. This needs
to be a little different." He's helped us balance and fine tune it. We've seen things in
the current playtest version of EWB [Ed.:
this interview was conducted in January]
that need to be changed. For example,
Earl coming out to argue with the umpire!
CGW: Yeah, we've played the game.
Earl argues with the umpire, too
much.(laughter).
Weaver: Way too much, but you've
got to realize, it's the other manager coming out to argue half of the time. (more
laughter).
CGW: Okay, so let's return to the algorithm that determines if Wiggins is safe
or out.
Dombrower: Well, part of it is based
on the reality of the situation. He runs in a
real number of feet per second. Now, Par-

rish throws in a real number of feet per
second. And those two factors more than
anything affect this.
CGW: You mean, you go in for physics
and trigonometry? It's not just percentages?!
Dombrower: Everything in this game is
really based on the fact that the ball falls
at 32 feet per second.
CGW: Are you serious?
Dombrower: Oh, yes.

CGW: This is totally different than
any other stat game. Any other stat game
is totally based on the percentage chance
of Wiggins stealing in that situation. This
is based on physics?
Dombrower: Well, EWB still uses
percentages. But physics are used to modify the basic play result called for by the
statistical matrix. For example, an astro
turf bounce is totally different than a natural field.
CGW: Where did you get this approach?
Dombrower: Well, I have a degree in
math. A lot of this stuff comes from my
college education.

CGW: The rest of it?
Dombrower: I don't know. A lot of it
you just go to the library and look it up, if
you have to.
CGW: While we're talking about
modeling, this brings up another question
and this is directly to Earl. In your book
Weaver On Strategy you give examples of
charting pitchers. You mention that you
had on index cards, references to every
player that had come to bat against the
Orioles in major league play.
Weaver: Actually, they cover all baseball, now. In spring training we look at the
players and see how they hit against us in
the past. Now, if a guy hit .189 and we
look at the chart and it says that we
pitched him down and in, then, he'll primarily see slow breaking stuff, down and
in and we'd stay with it. If a guy had a
successful year against us, then, we'd have
to look at where we'd got him out and

then, we'd go to those spots. Now, a typical example was Sal Bando, who hit us
just about every other year. We'd get him
out on the inside part of the plate in 1974,
and he'd hit .180 against us. Well, Bando
had his own book and he'd say, "They got
me out on the inside part of the plate." So,
the first time we'd see him the next season,
he'd back off of the plate a little bit and
whack, now he's hittin' it. So, we have to
change. Now, you can't do that on a machine. That's the manager and Bando was
a pretty smart player.
CGW: Did EA had access to your data
in working on this project.
Weaver: Well, yeah!

CGW: They saw your cards?
Daglow: Yes, he took us into his office
and let us study them.
Weaver: Yes, that was in Oakland.
CGW: Did you actually use this data
to create the algorithms?
Dombrower: No, they were a little too
sophisticated.
CGW: Earl, did you use a computer to
keep track of this data?
Weaver: No. It just wasn't that complicated. As far as my hitters against the
opposition, I'll tell you what I did against
Catfish Hunter. Al Bumbry just wore him
out. Now, I had a sheet on Catfish Hunter

and it would say "Bumbry - .423" and,
who was on the team with Bumbry, well,
Brooks [Robinson] was there, .289. You
know, this helped me decide when to bunt
and when to swing away. Now, when Ripken plays, there's a couple of guys where
he's 1 for 33, already. Against a couple of
these guys, I put on the bunt for the base
hit. Get one or two guys on and Ripken is
liable to bunt in the first inning. But,
there's not that many guys he's 1 for 33
against.
Daglow: Earl took us back into the
clubhouse and had us look at those cards
so we could figure out how he does it..
CGW: When you saw those cards, how
did you use them?
Daglow: We saw how he fixed them.
We didn't get the actual data off of the
cards.
CGW: Okay, but did Earl's pitching
cards influence the game design in any
way?
Daglow: Yes, it helped us decide how
computer Earl picks his lineup in the machine, the way he substitutes players,
pinch hits, etc.

CGW: Let me return to the Wiggins
example. So, you're dealing with physics,
here. How fast he is, how fast the ball
travels, and that. How does the program
determine how fast he is? It has to use a
statistic.
Daglow: The speed rating translates
into a figure. We use Project Scoresheet to
detail those ratings. They are located in
Chicago and publish new statistical analyses on baseball. They're headed up by a
guy who used to be an insurance actuary
and programmer. They are the biggest
baseball research lab and staff in the
country.

CGW: So, you work with them on your
subjective ratings?
Daglow: Yes. But, there is one other
feature which we have in our game and
that is, that you can edit the stats. If you
find that we've done something wrong, you
can always change it yourself.
CGW: Let's explore another area.
Please describe a typical design session on
EWB.
Weaver: The first design session was

took place during the off season. It was
something like ten hours long. It was a
blackboard session of everything that I
knew about baseball that I could tell Eddie and the EA people in a ten hour session. From that meeting Eddie developed
the first draft of the game. Later in the
year, in Oakland, we played the game for
the first time. I made suggestions. For example I might say: "this is wrong" or "the
cut-off man is too deep" or "the runners
are running too fast." We had two or three
more sessions like that.
CGW: Eddie, How did you come onto
the EA Baseball project?
Dombrower: I worked on a similar
project at Mattel for the Intellivision
called "World Series Baseball". The
'producer' of EWB was Don Daglow. Don
was my boss at Mattel before he joined
EA.
Daglow: The Intellivision was so much
more limited than the Amiga but Eddie
had done such a phenomenal job in the
physical modeling in "World Series Baseball" that we knew he could do great
things with the Amiga. Our goal at EA
was to do the greatest baseball game ever

done; we wanted to emulate the greatest
manager of all time, and we got our first
choice on that one, Earl. So when Earl was
brought on board, I asked Eddie to work
with us.
CGW: How much of "World Series
Baseball" ended up in EWB?
Dombrower: Well physics are physics.
A baseball falls at 32 feet per second. Any
program based on baseball physics is going
to emulate that. But I did not incorporate
anything specific to "World Series Baseball" into EWB. Mostly what I took from
that project was what NOT to do. One
thing I discovered was that the TV like
viewpoint in "World Series Baseball" does
not work. The TV view uses a lot of inferred information. In "World Series Baseball" the basic view was from the centerfield camera, looking over the pitcher's
shoulder. That perspective is worthless for
the batter. On the other hand, the pitcher
does not need the centerfield view in order
to select his pitch. So the more optimum
view would be from behind the batter and
home plate umpire. Obviously this has
more relevance in the 'play and manage'/arcade mode than in a strictly stat

replay mode. Additionally if you cover up
any of the bases during the pitching you
place the players at an additional loss. The
eye can't readjust quickly to a new screen
that again shows the bases. Therefore
EWB has a set view of the field on the left
side of the screen with a pitching overlay
on the right side of the screen.
Daglow: Just for a point of history.
Eddie was the first designer to use a split
view in a sports game. After "World Series
Baseball" and the promotion of that game
on TV with George Plimpton pushing it,
everyone began to copy it. But Eddie was
the first one to do that and no one ever
gives him credit for that.
CGW: Well, we'll straighten that out
[Ed.: Consider it done.].
CGW: Moving along, the music in
EWB is great [Ed.: Teri Mason is a professional musician; it shows in the EWB
music] and the sound effects are SO realistic. Teri, how did you accomplish getting
such great sound effects?
Mason: Most of the sounds are digitized. We would take a tape recorder to
the ball park (Anaheim Stadium) and get

right behind the batting cage. The sound

of the bat crack in EWB comes from actually batted balls during batting practice.
The sounds of the ball being caught come
from players playing catch in front of the
dugout.
CGW: We are out of time here, but we
want to ask Earl a question about last
season. The Angels were one strike away
from going to the World Series and went
on to lose the playoffs. Then the Red Sox
were one strike away from winning the
World Series and went on to lose. How do
you rate last year's playoffs and World
Series?
Weaver: How do I rate them? They
were among the greatest! They had to be
two of the most exciting series in the last
two to three decades.
[Ed.: That is, until my Tehachapi
Steamers repeat as the CGW Baseball
League World Series Champions this year.]
Postscript: We were so impressed with
EWB when we saw it in January that our
Computer Gaming World Baseball League
(see CGW #28) not only became involved
in beta-testing EWB, we also adopted it
for our league this year!

THE MAIL PLANE BLUES
or Why haven't I got my turn
results?
by Johnny L. Wilson
Believe it or not, I've got a few friends
who don't have computers. We still have
the age-old problem, however, when and
where to play a strategy game. We've tried
numerous methods. We've tried
play-by-mail with one gamemaster trying to do all
the adjudicating by hand. This works for a
while, but we usually finish only about one
in three games. We've tried
play-by-phone, but none of us are rich and we
certainly are spread out all over the country. There is, however, a solution. That
solution is computer-moderated
play-by-mail.
Rick Loomis of Flying Buffalo, Inc.
takes (and rightly so) a lot of the credit for
such a phenomenon. When he started his
Nuclear Destruction play-by-mail in 1970,
the only alternatives were Avalon Hill's
pbm kits and pbm Diplomacy.
Loomis began by soliciting players
from the pbm ads in The General and
ended up trying to keep up with 200
players. This was quite difficult to do
without help, so he asked Steve McGregor
to write an adjudication program for the
game and they ended up renting time on a
Control Data computer in order to keep up
with the game. In 1972, Steve and Rick
pooled $14,000 in order to purchase a
Raytheon 704 (with a measly 4K!) and
Flying Buffalo ushered in a new era of
computer games. The Raytheon is now
28K (and still in use). In the succeeding
years other companies appeared and the
computer moderated play-by-mail game
became a vital part of the gaming hobby.
The following discussion is a brief survey
of some of the computer-moderated
play-by-mail games which CGW is aware of.

of chrome, and lots to think about. The
results sheet gives a tongue-in-cheek report on how each of your orders fared;
details the number of blocks your gang
controls; updates notoriety and morale;
delineates the demographics for each of
your blocks and the ones you've scouted
(for example, 46% derelict, 2% restaurants,
9% entertainment); accounts for income
and expenses; and informs you of each
block's defense level. It gives you a list of
the "City's Most Notorious Gangs" and
allows you to find out what the "Barf
Bags," "Crypt Rats," "Strassekindern," and
the like are up to. Finally, you get the
New York City Post reports on the most
interesting events taking place in the city.
Your yellow post card begets at least 3
pages of information. One of the players
had a unique experience. He heard on the
street that a movie studio was filming
"Karate Kid III" on one of his controlled
blocks. His gang hired on as extras so that
Pat Morita would teach them karate. I
particularly liked the turn result where my
"Skull Busters" took control of the block
after shaving the heads of two bus drivers.
Naturally, game players are wondering
what you can do on that yellow post card.
Orders involve: ambushing other gangs
and its counterpart, defending against
other gangs; spreading your gang's influence by controlling new blocks; enlisting
recruits in order to build your gang's
strength; firebombing buildings in order to
bring down a block's defense level and
make it easier to control; mugging defenseless victims; pushing drugs; committing armed robbery; spying on other gangs;
using dope; purchasing weapons or drugs;
and acting tough. The game mechanics are
simple but allow for a multiplicity of options.
The rule book and first two turns for
It's A Crime are free. After that, each turn
is $1.50. In the world of PBM, that's a
bargain. This game is highly recommended, especially (but not exclusively)
for your first PBM effort.

It's A Crime!

Fleet Maneuvers

It's no accident that I begin with Adventures By Mail's (Box 436, Cohoes, NY
12047-0436) It's A Crime. Of all the PBM
games I've played and seen, it seems to be
the easiest to get into, afford and keep up
with. I have friends who don't even care
for PBM that have tried It's A Crime and
think it's great. It's A Crime puts you in
the role of an inner city gang leader who is
trying to take over control of a city which
consists of almost 10,000 blocks
(coordinates). You name your gang, scout
up to four blocks, and issue up to four orders (more on that, later) for each turn.
Your move can be written in 10 minutes
on a yellow post card provided by ABM,
but the detailed report which is returned
to you provides numerous details, plenty

If you can imagine a multi-player version of Star Fleet I where you are interacting with other captains of a your fleet
(as well as human opponents in the enemy
fleets), you have an initial handle on Fleet
Maneuvers (FM). I say "initial handle"
because the game is more complex than
the computer game, even without considering the variables involved when playing
with other humans (humanoids?). The use
of the X and Y coordinates on a two dimensional Cartesian plane is similar to the
computer game, but allows room for more
intricate maneuvering. Further, players
have to be concerned with three different
enemies, rather than the two in Star Fleet.
FM allows you to be a member of the Alliance (the good guys, roughly equivalent

to the Federation in Star Trek), the Confederacy (an imperialistic splinter group
from the Alliance), the Donna (A small in
stature, peace-loving race of incredible engineers, these one meter tall beings are
deadly when they are threatened.), and
the dreaded Krell (These are a cross between Klingons and Romulans in Star
Trek and Krellan and Zaldron in Star
Fleet I, being both culturally bellicose and
having a cloaking device.). FM demands
that its captains make judicious use of
energy units by making command decisions regarding allocation of energy for
weapons, shields, life support, command
control, and sensor scans. Then, if the
original game isn't complex enough for
you, the company runs two addition games
with expanded rules (Fleet Maneuvers 3:
The Next Dimension, where a Z axis is
added to create a three-dimensional
cartesian plane and allow considerations
like roll, pitch and yaw to be factored in,
and Fleet Maneuvers 3: The Final Exam,
where the player attempts to command a
fighter-type Krell Cub Escort - a highly
maneuverable "throw-away" ship). Fantastic Simulations (P.O. Box 24566, Denver, CO 80224) is a classy company which
features professionally printed rules;
maintains a BBS to assist players with

questions, record turns, and provide a forum for helpful interactive communication;
and uses the most attractive turn sheet of
the lot. The rule books have extremely
helpful diagrams and examples and the
advanced games have some beautiful
transparencies available for keeping track
of defense points, targeting points, and
maneuvers. The company also publishes a
professional looking newsletter, CommLink, which contains updates on all the
games, lists individual player's rankings,
sponsors contests, and clarifies rules. Rule
books are free and turns cost $2.50 per
turn.

Uncovering An "Illuminated"
Conspiracy
Though Flying Buffalo, Inc. (P. 0.
Box 1467, Scottsdale, AZ 85252) runs two
of the longest running PBM games (Heroic
Fantasy and Starweb), one of their current
best is Illuminati, a PBM version of the
Steve Jackson table top game which really
enables the fiction to shine. After all, Illuminati is supposed to be based on covert
operations and paranoia. You don't know
anything without infiltrating, subverting,
probing, or controlling these conspiratorial
organizations. Game play is similar to the
table game, but seems to be more in tune
with the fiction when you have to wonder
who is controlling what than when you can
see their entire structure laid out on the
table. You can not only add to your
power, influence, and wealth, but you can
corrupt, neutralize, or destroy other
groups, as well as assassinate other leaders.
What more could you ask? I've always
wanted to control the "Morticians" and
"Radio Evangelists." Now's my chance.
This game features the best turn sheet
which FBI has published, yet. The game
mechanics are easier to get into than either Heroic Fantasy or Starweb and the
open-ended due dates increase the playability. Turns cost $4.00.

Feudal Lords and Futile strategies
One of the most interesting and educational games available at the present is
Feudal Lords (Graaf Simulations, 27530
Harper, St. Clair Shores, MI 48081 - also
available through Flying Buffalo). This is
an incredibly sophisticated simulation of
ruling a fiefdom in the England of the feudal age. What's so remarkable about the
game is that it isn't just another conquer
the world (or galaxy) game. It is a simulation that is actually concerned with the
"way it was." The barons must provide for
the peasants and the general economy
through a series of economic, as well as
diplomatic, decisions. The baron who sim-

ply goes charging off to conquer other fiefs
is going to be very disappointed in the
outcome of this game. Feudal Lords is a
game system which has such a thorough
understanding of the Middle Ages that
even members of the Society for Creative
Anachronism should be impressed. Food,
Population, Trade, Natural Resources, and
Diplomacy are even more important than
training knights at arms in this game
(although you should never be at home
without them, either). Each turn consists
of up to twelve possible actions, ranging
from the mundane (mining and agricultural research) to the sublime (a campaign
for conquest). The rules and turns cost
$2.50 each and the company recommends
that you keep $10.00 in your account.
Some middle schools and high schools are
using this game as an educational tool to
introduce life in the Middle Ages to their
students.
That's all the room we have for now,
but I hope to update our readers on these
games and talk about C2 Simulations' New
Order (a soon to be released game of space
conquest and colonization from a new
company), Flying Buffalo's Heroic Fantasy
and Starweb, Graaf Simulations' Spiral
Arm, and Reality Simulations'
DuelMasters in a future article.

Bezbol (cont.)

Continued from pg. 9
batter is portrayed on the left lower corner of the
screen. Once you think of this as being a different
camera angle, this is somewhat easier to cope with.
Nevertheless, it can be disconcerting in your first
couple of at bats.
The computer manager seems somewhat better
than "Casey" in Computer Baseball, but not as effective as Full Count Baseball or Earl Weaver
Baseball. Percentages seem to favor the aggressive
manager, especially in solitaire mode. I found that
my fast runners almost never get thrown out and
when they are, it is usually because I've tried to
steal with them every other time they've been on
base. It is exceedingly rare for a runner to get
thrown out taking the extra base, unless the ball is
hit to a field where the fielder's throwing rating is
4. It certainly doesn't hurt to swing aggressively,
especially with batters who have a high average but
less power. A player tends to pick up more doubles
than strike-outs. Aggression is the better part of
valor in this mode.
Those who want to have a computer baseball

league will certainly want to give Pure-Stat Baseball
a chance, since it has a statistics compiler which
allows both manual and automatic updates of stats,
the addition of new teams to the stats, and printing
of individual team stats. It also facilitates the general managers of each team with its capacity for
trading players. This function makes trades much
simpler than the earlier stat-based games where
each statistic had to be entered by hand.
Pure-Stat is a good value, only to be avoided by
those who insist on realistic graphics or those with
64K systems who want a fast-playing game (With
less than 128K, the program has to access the disk
for the graphics and this gets tedious). For those
who want to have a computer league on Apple or
Commodore machines, Pure-Stat provides a nice
array of options and plenty of managerial challenges.
HARDBALL
(Accolade, most systems).
Like EW's "play and manage" mode, Hardball is

a statistics modified arcade game. The pitchers are
not based on real pitchers, but they have characteristics similar to real players. As for the position
players, the field is pretty level here, unlike statistically based games where actual fielding ability
based on real performance is important. Strategic
decisions for the defensive player are reduced to
simply selecting a lineup, changing players or positions, shifting the outfield or leaving it in normal

position, moving the infield to normal or double
play depth, or intentionally walking the batter.
Once those options are decided, the defensive
player selects one of eight types of pitches: very
fast, fast, offspeed, straight change-up, sweeping
curve ball, screwball, sinker, or slider. The offensive player has even more limited choices. He can
bunt or steal (if he has a base runner), but is primarily concerned with swinging high, swinging
low, looking for an inside pitch, looking for an
outside pitch, or swinging straight away. Timing is
more important than strategy in this game and it
would probably be disappointing to anyone other
than an avid arcade fan.
BASEBALL FANATIC
(Performing Arts Software, IBM)
Baseball Fanatic is a stat-based game with an
interesting twist. It allows the player to set five
different play levels which affect the probabilities
related to offensive production. For example: 1)
Super Slugfest usually nets a thirty to forty hit
game (more than 10 above the major league aver-

age); 2) Slugfest isn't quite as wild, but usually
produces almost 10 more hits than the average major league game; 3) Pitcher's Duel allows the most
minimal production of hits (about 6-10 hits under
the average) and makes strategic decisions loom
even larger; 4) Average Big League is for those
who want a more realistic statistical replay; and 5)
Pot Luck creates a random setting from one of the
previous four, so that your strategy is developed "in
the dark," as it were. The game allows computer vs.

Bezbol (cont.)

computer replays, solitaire mode, and human interplay, as well as facilitates the creation of new teams
for league play and updates the standings for your
league from game to game.
Unlike most statistical games, the game plays
one pitch at a time, which allows you to mix up
your pitches and attempt to fool each batter. The
pitcher uses a numeric menu which allows him to
select the type of pitch and what portion of the
strike zone and/or plate he is aiming for. Changing
speed becomes very significant in this game. Further, the game keeps track of the number of
pitches thrown by each pitcher and the fatigue
factor weighs heavily on his effectiveness. The offensive options are primarily limited to bunting,
stealing, running, and taking a pitch. Beyond these,
the batter's guess at the pitcher's selections has a
positive or negative impact on the outcome of the
at bat.
The game has color graphics and requires a
CGA card (or equivalent).
A BRIEF ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

than make up for this. The amount of statistics
considered for each situation is considerably more
than most programs and bound to please the most
avid stat player. At $60 retail, it is also the most
expensive of the games considered. Apple, IBM.
Championship Baseball (Activision): This is an
arcade game which is slightly affected by a statistical database. Action lovers will en joy it, but it's
not for those who want to recreate professional
baseball. Championship Baseball does allow for
drafting players and having league play, however.
Apple, C-64/128.
Computer Baseball (SSI): Even more of a bargain
as part of SSI's "Classics" promotion than it was
when it was released in 1981, this program is one
of the most playable and versatile simulations on
the market. The Computer Gaming World Baseball
League used this program as its unanimous choice
during its first three years of existence. The version
on the market doesn't help with league statistics,
but does allow for the creation of teams by
inputting actual statistics from any era by means of an
easy-to-follow step-by-step process. More than
30,000 copies of this program have been sold. Apple, Atari, C-64, IBM.
Micro League Baseball (Micro League Sports
Assn.): Endorsed by the Major League Players Association, this program features a good balance
between graphics and statistics. An optional General Manager's Disk is available to assist you in
trading and drafting players and a Stat Compiler is
also available as a separate purchase (the game
doesn't keep stats otherwise). Apple, Atari, C-64,
IBM and soon for the 68000 computers.

APBA Major League Players Baseball (Random
House): This is a faithful recreation of the famous
table-top game. Although short on graphics, the
decision-making options and text descriptions more

Playing all of these games could well make one
into a baseball pundit. Of course, as one wag put it
as early as 1915, "Knowin' all about baseball is just
about as profitable as bein' a good whittler." (Abe
Martin's Savings and Sketches). May all your whittlin' be on a 38 ounce bat. [Ed.: CGWBL Tehachapi
Steamer pitcher Dwight Gooden has whittled on a
few 38 ounce bats over the past few seasons. Sorry,
Johnny, just had to sneak that one in there.]

Gone With The Wind (cont.)

Continued from pg. 31

tion station and others.
As detailed as the actual sailing portion of the
program is, DSS is just as detailed as a tutorial.
Within lesson one there are nine chapters. Each
chapter contains a story and instructional adventure
which teaches and then quizzes you about various
aspects of sailing. In the instructional adventure
you will be given a situation (such as another sailboat crossing your path forcing you to change
course to avoid a collision). You will then be questioned about the situation. In the present example
you may be asked which boat has the right of way:
the boat on the starboard tack, the boat on the port
tack, etc. If you get the answer correct you gain
points, wrong answers lose points. Your scores are
recorded for each chapter of the lesson and a performance analysis is available to compare your
scores with those of other "students" using the same
program to learn sailing.
In preparing this article we spoke with DSS designer Jim Spalding who indicated that there is a
possibility that the sailing features of DSS could be

put on a single disk program without the sailing
tutorial and with slightly fewer features. This configuration could be marketed more as an entertainment product than a tutorial. We would like to see
such a version become available. But even in its
present configuration, DSS offers a lot of value,
especially if you are interesting in sailing beyond
the confines of your computer screen.
SUMMARY
There is something intellectually, emotionally,
and at times spiritually satisfying about sailing. The
intellectual task of getting from here to there using
only the wind and your brains is exciting. Being
out there on the water and knowing that you are in
tune with nature, as well as using nature's own
tool, the wind, as your means of transport is a
spiritual experience. Sailing is a sport/hobby we
highly recommend and these programs are a good
introduction to the sailing experience. Prepare to
come about!

OGRE®
Name:
Players:
System:
Price:
Designer:

OGRE
1-2
Most
$39.95
Steve Jackson
Steve Meuse
Publisher: Origin Systems
Manchester, NH

by M. Evan Brooks
In 1977, Meta-Gaming released OGRE, the
boardgame. Quickly becoming a classic for its
playability and challenge, numerous expansion kits
and magazine articles (especially in The Space
Gamer) kept this "simulation" in the arsenal of most
wargamers. Now, Origin Systems has released the
computer version, a faithful adaptation of its famous boardgame predecessor. No matter which
system is used, Ogre utilizes a GEM-like pull-down
menu system where menus are selected via mouse
or joystick (depending upon one's system). This
makes for relative ease of movement and reasonably fast play.
The heart of Ogre is a one-unit tank against a
combined-arms defensive in the "future". Anyone
familiar with Keith Laumer's science-fiction Bolo
stories will recognize a collateral relative here [Ed.
Note: Ogre isn't the first computer game to claim
affinity with Laumer's stories. Synergistic Software
published Bolo, an arcade game based on the series,
in 1982. This is definitely not the same game,
however.]. The OGRE is a cybernetic super-tank,
computer-driven and sporting enough weaponry to
devastate an infantry division. The OGRE's sole

mission in life is destruction. The defensive command post is the OGRE's goal because the OGRE
must destroy the command post and every extant
opposing force element in order to achieve a decisive victory. Destruction of the command post alone
will merely yield a minor OGRE victory. For the
defense to secure victory, it must destroy the
OGRE, a task which will prove extremely difficult.
The defense may pick and choose its composition. For the Basic Game, normal force composition
is made of 12 armor and 20 infantry units, while
the Advanced Game uses 20 armor and 30 infantry
(OGRE opponents are Mark III and Mark V models
respectively). Armor units available include Heavy
Tanks, Missile Tanks, Howitzers (immobile and
counting as two armor elements apiece) and G.E.V.s
(Ground Effect Vehicles, similar to super-hovercraft). Silhouettes delineate each type except for
infantry, which is available as an actual integer (i.e.
"1", "2" or "3") and may be combined or broken
down in a hex.
As for playability, Ogre best lends itself to solitaire play. The human OGRE has little real strategic or tactical thinking to dissuade him from his
goal of marching to the enemy Command Post. The

solitaire defense has a difficult job, even in the
Basic Scenario. The most important strategic guideline is to destroy the OGRE's mobility. Even if all
weapons systems are destroyed, the OGRE may still
crush a Command Post beneath its treads.
The obvious critical decision is the initial defensive mix. A voluminous amount of print has
been devoted to determining the "optimal" mix (cf.
The Ogre Book by Steve Jackson Games). A defensive force emphasizing GEVs is one optimal strategy, since these vehicles are the only ones that can
move, attack and move back before the OGRE can
react. Of course, they are relatively weakly armed,
so the net effect is a stinging annoyance which
hopefully escalates into a fatal crippling of the
OGRE.
With their second movement phase, GEVs can
avoid all casualties from the OGRE's secondary
batteries (after, of course, its speed is reduced to
"two" from the initial "three"). Time is critical,
however, as Lawrence Duffield noted in "Ogres and
the Fuzzy Wuzzy Fallacy," because OGREs can
reach missile firing range in six turns and overrun
a Command Post by the eighth turn. Therefore, the
defense must reduce the OGRE's mobility from the
outset. In The Ogre Book, Chester Hendrix opted
for a four howitzer, mutually-supporting defense.
This has the effect of reducing the armor assault
capabilities of the defense, but allowing the massive
firepower of the howitzers to tear massive chunks
out of the OGRE. Notice that no reference has
been made to the infantry. The PBI (poor bloody
infantry) has the role of acting as grease to the
OGRE's tread. With their low mobility and inability
to escape the OGRE's wrath, they serve as suicide
troops, hopefully buying enough time with their
bodies as to slow down the OGRE for the artillery
and armor.
What is the real critical factor in Ogre? The
answer is luck. While assaults against weapons systems may mass for best odds, the assault against the
OGRE's mobility (treads) must be done individually
at a 33% odd. Thus, when all is said and done,
Ogre boils down to a die-rolling (or with the computer, a random number generator) contest. If the
defense gets sufficient 1-3 successful die rolls, then
the OGRE is doomed. If not, ...
The computer game is easy to play. The odds are
displayed on the screen, and the pull-down menus
are very clear. The map is the traditional one that
board wargamers were used to; however, the com-

puter does have a benefit. One may design the
board in any desired fashion. Indeed, it is simple to
do so by using the map editor. As with any battle
situation, terrain can have a marked effect upon
the strategy and result. Craters and rubble are easy
to insert or delete, and the finished product may be
saved for future games. Even more important, if
the gamer feels that he needs more defense, he may
select the size of the defense of his choice. The
computer will allow him this license, after confirming that this is indeed the player's desire.
Ogre is not without its flaws. During tread assaults, especially with infantry, the player may tire
of having to continually confirm his attacks. But
even more important is the lack of design options.
The boardgame version of Ogre allowed the player
to design his own OGRE. OGRE statistics have
been published for the Mark I (a beefed-up heavy
cybertank), the Mark II (larger chassis and more
guns), the Mark IV (light raider unit) and Mark VI
(with 3 main batteries and 20 missiles!). Alas, computer Ogre will not allow one to utilize these fearsome beasts, nor to fight OGRE with OGRE.
Of course, historical accuracy is not a consideration in Ogre. The game's premise is pseudo-science fiction and any resemblance to reality is
strictly coincidental.
Greg Costikyan, well known boardgame designer, called the boardgame Ogre "the ideal game
to play whilst stoned," (perhaps the "beer and pretzels" game for a New Generation?). The world and
most of that generation has changed direction (at
any rate, playing with computers and electricity
"whilst stoned" are not conducive to one's health or
even the computer's).
Therefore, even though Ogre
is a faithful adaptation of its
parent boardgame, has adequate
graphics, and can be fun, it
isn't the bargain at $39.95
that the boardgame was
at $2.95.

LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

too modest to write such a letter himself so I took
it upon myself to point this out.
The fact that I am also a game designer (King of
Chicago, ChipWits) shouldn't make you question the
purity of my motives in writing this letter. (Should
it?) Kellyn deserves to be known as one of the best
designers in the business.
A fan of your mag,
Doug Sharp
Minneapolis, MN
SELF-DESTROYER?
I have recently purchased the game Destroyer.
Sadly, I must report, I find several areas that keep
this game from being in the same class as
Microprose's Silent Service or Gunship. To be
specific, there are three areas that really hurt this
game: 1) a propensity for the ship to self-destruct
with little or no warning, while in the "Evasive
Action" or "Pursuit Mode" by running off the map
or grounding on a reef; 2) a critical absence of vital
target data information in order to properly employ
torpedoes or to make an reasonably intelligent
depth charge attack; 3) the omission of a "Combat
Information Center" screen (which by the way, is
where the Captain's real battle station is). The
C.I.C.'s function is to constantly monitor and plot
the ship status and all threats to it, while allowing
the C.O. to be in constant contact with all other
stations aboard ship. In effect, this is where the
captain fights his ship from, not by chasing from
one station to another.
Tom Cianflone
Cheektowaga, NY
Ed.: We welcome our readers comments about
games. Please try to give specific reasons (as in the
above letter) for your views and not ambiguous
comments like, "This is the greatest game since the
`Leave It To Beaver' simulation!" or "This game
stinks!"
DEFENDER OF REKNOWN!
I enjoyed your review of Defender of the Crown
but was puzzled by one point. Nowhere is Kellyn
Beck, the game's designer, so much as mentioned.
Kellyn deserves credit for his innovative use of
cinematic effects within a playable, enjoyable
game. Kellyn is a friend of mine and I know he is

Ed.: Actually, Wyatt Lee was simply abiding by
an age-old cinematic tradition, ignoring the opening
credits and leaving before the closing credits were
finished. We'll try to be consistent in the future when
we neglect to mention your designs. Frankly, Wyatt
was so interested in describing the game that he
skipped by the usual Basic Information box and got
right to the product. The product will speak for
itself, like a good film, and Kellyn will eventually
get the credit he so richly deserves. Film directors
don't usually become famous in their early efforts,
either. Look how long it took for Speilberg to get
his Oscar.

MICRO-WOES FROM MICROPROSE
I am writing in the hope of alerting your other
Atari users of problems arising from using
Microprose software with non-Atari (third party)
disc drives...Although thousands or perhaps tens of
thousands of Atari users have chosen non-Atari
disc drives for their superior performance,
Microprose software is designed to function only on
Atari disc drives, without any warning label on the
outside or inside of the software package that the
program may malfunction on non-Atari disc drives.
I have purchased programs from most major
software publishers; they all run on my Trak disc
drive except for Microprose. Anyone else out there
with problems running Silent Service with Trak or
other disc drives?
Do you agree that it is unfair to market a program
without warning that the program may malfunction
on compatible hardware?
Barry H. Jacobs, M.D.
Boston, MA

My Silent Service wouldn't work on my Rana
drive until the protection was broken. Are other
recent Microprose releases as screwed up? I won't
buy them if they are.
Don
Union City, CA

change it without telling you how to break their copy
protection.

POST AWFUL DESTRUCTION SET

There is a definite problem with non-Atari disc
drives. Microprose takes the position that the
package specifically says that this is ATARI
software and since they can't test every possible
configuration that this ought to be enough. Further,
the problem relates to the protection scheme. They
have changed it since their earlier programs (which
were relatively simple to break, according to the
company) and that is what is causing the problem.
CGW would like to see a disclaimer on the box, but
the company suggests that potential customers
simply call or write before purchasing a Microprose
program, particularly with Atari software.

The "Postal Service" has destroyed 2 of the last 3
issues of CGW (thanks for resending me #27).
Perhaps an armored box would work?
Greg Peterson
Gering, NE
Ed.: Maybe your postman is a Cray owner who is
mad because we don't have a Cray column?
Seriously, though, we'd like to be able to send the
issues with more secure packaging, but this is
problematic for us. Formerly, we used a protective
cover, but the post office kept delivering the covers
without the magazines. You think we get complaints,
now! You haven't lived until you hear from a
subscriber who paid over $2.00 for a protective
cover!

SOONER BOWL SUNDAY

PROFILES IN VERBIAGE?

The Avalon-Hill football game "Super Bowl
Sunday" is fun for doing historical replays and
keeping stats, etc. However, the graphics of the
game are not only VERY elementary (shades of
stick-man) but also time-consuming, since it is
obvious the program has produced the play results
before the graphics take the screen. Question: Is
there any way to get inside the program and
eliminate the graphics so that we can have a quick
stat-oriented replay? Even if no one here does
machine-language, I am sure we could follow a
printed direction sheet that told what to input.
Avalon-Hill, although very quick to respond to
service complaints, doesn't seem to be interested in
this sort of user inquiry.
S. Moffett
Kamitsutsui, Kobe, JAPAN

Thanks for "Designer Profiles." This is surely a
welcome addition to CGW. The interview with Al
Miller was interesting and informative. I never
knew Alan worked on the Atari 8 Bit OS (and I
thought I knew everything about the Atari OS).
Thanks again CGW for keeping your readers
informed!
Ray Forbes
Oak Park, IL

Ed.: Surprise! Avalon-Hill does care about this
sort of thing. They have already updated "Super
Bowl Sunday" so that version 2.1 allows you to
suppress the graphics with the "G" key. Owners of
earlier editions can get version 2.1 for $10 plus the
original disk. Obviously, they can't tell you how to

I really enjoyed your interview with Brian
Moriarty of Infocom.
Marian Apgar
Napa, CA
Ed.: Thanks! We think the personalities behind
the games make the games more interesting. We also
think it's important to know the players in order to
prepare our minds for future developments in the
industry. Of course, we could be wrong, so witness
the next two comments.
I love the magazine, but you should have more
reviews and game tips instead of Designer Profiles.
Cesare Foschi
Deer Park, NY

Designer Profiles not useful. More strategy tips.
R. Cary
Marmora, NJ

WHAT DO READERS AND ELEPHANTS HAVE
IN COMMON?
In your Sept.-Oct. '85 issue, 5.4, an article
written by Roe R. Adams III and entitled "Come
Cast A Spell With Me" described some software
from Japan (Black Onyx, etc.) that would be
released in the U.S. I've been waiting and looking
and haven't seen it anywhere yet.
R.A. Upshaw
Somerville, NJ

MONSTER GAMES!
Will we see computer games similar to grand
strategic board games like "War & Peace," "War in
the East" and the number of WWII Pacific Titles?
Al Figlia
APO NY
Ed.: Hmm, I don't know if we could hook that
many computers together for a game without using a
LAN! Seriously, you mean "War in Russia" doesn't
work for you on that level? I believe that's about as
close to a monster game as you can get on a
computer. You might try SSI's new "War in the
South Pacific," reviewed in this issue.

A PLANE OLD COMPLIMENT!
Ed.: It's not here, nor there, nor anywhere, so
beware! Vaporware (those announced titles which
never seem to show up) is a common problem. In
this case, Sierra Online was supposed to have the
license to market "Black Onyx" in the U.S.A. and
the company has informed us that the deal with
Henk Rogers' Bullet Proof Software never
materialized. Remember that Roe's column was
dealing with trade rumors and expectations at a
Japanese trade show. Sierra On-Line has gone with
a U. S. designer for its fantasy line. Wrath of
Denethenor is available as of this writing, as well
as the animated adventure series.

I just wanted to let you know, I en joy your
publication very much. I just received my
December issue today, and as usual, it is excellent.
Please keep up the good work.
Mike Messersmith
Compuserve Subscriber
Mr. Messersmith,
Thanks for the compliment. By the way, we love
your airplanes.

COMPUTING OUT OF THE CLOSET
In the Sept.-Oct. '85 issue, Rick Teverbaugh
mentions in his column he will be reviewing "Great
American Cross Country Car Race" in his next
column (along with others). I have missed no issues,
and still have not seen these reviews. Did the
column with those reviews not get published, or did
Rick forget? I was interested in all 3 of the
programs he mentioned but never reviewed.
Lewis J. Snyder
Jamestown, NY
Ed.: Uh, oh! Even we get caught at Vaporware!
We had to leave out the column for space reasons
and felt that the material was out of date by the
time of the next "Sports Scoreboard." Sorry for the
inconvenience.

What do the computer enthusiasts of the world
do with game software that they are tired of
playing. An avid player can accumulate quite a
large stockpile of software that will most likely
never be used again. Not to mention the
investment, money well spent I might add, that lies
idle.
Marshal L. Sudrala
Phoenix, AZ
Ed.: Actually, one can advertise adventure games
with a free ad in the "Swap Shop" in Questbusters
(the Adventurer's Newsletter published by Shay
Addams - $15 per year). CGW may well come out
with a subscriber newsletter to fill in the three "off"
months that we do not publish. If said newsletter
comes about, it will most likely have some sort of
game swapping service.

Scorpion's Tale

Continued from pg. 23
Pay careful attention to the ceiling in the southern
half of the crawl space. And don't be afraid to be
pushy.
Round about now, you should be pretty much
finished with the house. If you've been into the
hedges, you have eight goodies, or seven if you
haven't (this does not especially matter, as the maze
can be done at any time).
So you're thinking about those beach stairs, the
ones with a few steps missing about half-way
down. Terrible, how things have deteriorated since
your childhood days. Actually, it's more than terrible, since you can't jump over the gap, and there's
no rope anywhere. Life is hard.
Still, moaning about it won't do much (except
maybe put the estate in Horrible Herman's hot little
hands). I wouldn't give you a snow job; there's a
fast and easy way of going down those very stairs,
one that will get you to the bottom before you can
hardly draw a breath.
Whew! A fast trip indeed, and now you're on
the beach at last. Both the green match and the
smoldering fire are important (which reminds me: I
hope you haven't used the red match yet). Of
course, it's your job to figure out in what ways.
While you think about it, a quick stroll of the
area is in order. You'll find it to be a very small
area, at that. The only place of interest is the small
grotto. Which doesn't appear to hold anything of
interest, except water. Well, I'm sure that sometime
in the past, Herman told you you were all wet.
The only problem with being in the dark is that
you can't see. This is actually a bigger problem
than it sounds, because while you can walk around
in the dark, you can't OPEN anything in the dark.
At least you don't have to worry about Grues. On
the other hand, a light source would certainly come
in handy right about now.
And there is the trick, getting a usable light
source with you into the bomb shelter (so? what
did you think was on the other side of the hatch,
eh?). This is probably the most difficult puzzle in

the game (now watch everyone tell me later they
got this one right off). But I'm not going to wax
prolific on this one, you'll have to figure it out on
your own.
Once you can see again, a very strange sight will
meet your eyes. A large safe suspended by a rope,
a sawhorse with a plank, hooks in the wall, a hatch
and a greasy chain. What a combination! I recommend making a rough diagram of the set-up, which
will help to make things much clearer. I also recommend opening the hatch before doing anything
else.
Naturally you have a burning desire to get your
hands on the safe, or rather, its contents. This may
not be easy. Once you get the safe down (which is
not hard), you have to get it open (which IS hard).
Yes, it's another combination lock. And yes, you
have to get it right the first time, just like with the
other one.
However, there's nothing around with anything
that looks like it might be the combination. Nothing, that is, except the small plaque on the door.
Hmmmm. Could there be a clue here? Possibly
several clues? There sure are, and you can count on
that.
Now the rest is easy (or ought to be!), and before long you should be out of the shelter and up
the slope with another treasure in hand. A brief
stop at the cannon (too obvious to mention!), and
you're ready for the end game (that is, when you've
picked up the 10th and last goodie; if you haven't
done the maze yet, hop to it!).
Bet you didn't think you'd end up in a prop
vault, eh? Well, let me give you a little clue. That
buzz saw is no prop, it's for real. You don't have
much time here (you probably figured that out already by yourself), so you must act quickly! All I'll
say is: third time lucky. Good luck!
Well, I see by the old invisible clock it's that
time again. If you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the
Groups & Clubs menu). On GEnie: Visit the Games
RoundTable (type: Scorpia to get there). On The
Source: Send SMAIL to ST1030. By U.S. Mail
(please enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope if
you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Epyx (cont.)

Continued from pg. 14
bad, but I won the game within an hour after
loading it and I'm a lousy game player (maybe it's
that Epyx joystick's fault). Forty dollars is a lot for
a one-shot game.
World Karate Championship — This is an unoriginal Karate Champ clone, but it's the best one
available. Seventeen moves are available in the
quest for the black belt and the game actually does
require both physical and mental endurance. Great
scenery adds to the ambience.
Street Sports Basketball — This is projected to
be the first of a series of Street Sports games. It
wasn't available at press time, but it sounds like a
winner. Three person teams are chosen from rosters
of players with distinct characteristics and play in
"one of four different neighborhood scenes." Hazards of street play are all part of the fun.
Everything Else:
The Movie Monster Game — This game is a revamped version of the classic Crush, Crumble and
Chomp. You may control the beast of your choice
as you rampage through the metropolises of the
world in search of food, a lost child, or a good

Destroyer — This is an excellent naval simulation, set in the Pacific during World War II. (Ed. See the Letters to the Editor column for some reasons why this might not be considered an excellent
game.) Seven interesting missions invite would-be
skippers to test their mettle. There is plenty to do
and the game doesn't require a vast background in
war games. It may not be suited for novices, but
anyone who has ever played computer games and
won at chess should have a ball.
Sub Battle Simulator — Another program that
wasn't released when we went to press, this game
could be a real treat. It should be historically accurate enough for players to fight in replicas of
real World War H sea battles. Though Jet Combat
Simulator wasn't very good, I have high hopes for
this first in the Masters Collection.
Create A Calendar — I haven't seen this program, so I'll reserve judgment. The thing makes
calendars. Can you stifle your enthusiasm? There
aren't any pin-ups, either. Go to your bank (or local auto parts house) and get one of theirs for free
so you can save your money for other products.
Chapter Six

time. It gets a little - tedious after a while, but the
improved graphics and multitude of play options
should keep your interest for a while.
Graphics Scrapbooks I, II, and III — These are
data files for use with The Print Shop. The first
two offer one hundred images each, dealing with
sports and general weirdness, respectively. The
third, unavailable as yet, dealt with school. The
graphics are nice and occasionally funny, but
hardly useful. Then again, I never cared much for
The Print Shop, either.

In which the author bids the reader a heartfelt
adieu for the nonce.
——
A friend recently remarked that Epyx was like a
dinosaur and that it creates products that people no
longer want. Feeling depressed, I went to a computer store and saw a man buying six new Epyx
games. Does that say something about dinosaurs or
Epyx? Any way you look at it, though, Epyx and
action games show no signs of impending extinction.
Next month: Part Two of Five — Ardai on
Electronic Arts.

War South Pacific (cont.)

Continued from pg. 20
ginner to understand the relative strength and position of the forces. Sure, you can compile a similar
chart in 15 or 20 minutes (once you know what
you're looking for and learn the menus), but that
takes hours of study. Anyone trying to learn WITSP
deserves more help than they get.
Another factor that confuses beginners is that all
bases default to computer control. Assume you
create a new TF or two and then discover, a few
hours later, that they don't even exist, because the
computer has broken them down and reassigned the
ships to new TF's. Air groups that were ordered on
a mission end up being reassigned to other bases
and so on. It can be very disorienting. The book
does mention this and advises that beginners turn
off computer control of everything to avoid confusion. This is good advice but the warning appears
on the very last page in the very last section, 24.7
- Other Notes. Even the explanation of computer
control is buried at the end of section 21 - Miscellaneous. A section that pulls together these key
concepts is badly needed.
WITSP could also be a lot easier to play. A few
examples should prove this point. The amount of
information displayed during the most dramatic

part of the game, combat, is pitiful. After spending
hours (days or weeks of game time) maneuvering
for a battle, what you see is one line for each hit
or plane shot down which scrolls quickly by on the
four text lines below the map. When it's all over,
you have to call for orders and take the time to
examine forces in order to really see how bad the
damage is and how many planes are left. A lot
could be done to improve this. After all, when
examining TF's and airfields, the on-screen map is
replaced with a full screen of text. Why not do the
same during combat? A more narrative style of reporting would add tremendously to the suspense.
Another example is the inefficiency caused by
the way missions are assigned to Task Forces. A
fleet that has refueled at sea keeps refueling until
ordered elsewhere. A group of loaded transports
arrives off Guadalcanal and waits six hours before
being ordered to unload and, once unloaded, waits
again to be ordered back to Fiji or Truk. This is in
spite of the fact that Guadalcanal is a very dangerous place to wait around! This happens because
there is no indication that the TF has completed its
mission and needs new orders. It can be compounded by using eight-hour pulses. The solution
would be the ability to "stack" several orders and let
the computer take care of them. As it is, only considerable playing time will let you develop a sense
of how long missions will take. Even with experience, though, it still feels wrong. Did Nimitz have
to remember to call Halsey exactly at 1500 to tell
him what to do after refueling?
These should be taken as criticisms of the game
and not of the designer and developer. They are
well aware of the game's faults and, in fact, WITSP
was delayed more than a year because of them.
However, the various game modules are all within a
handful of bytes of filling the memory of the computer -- there just isn't any room to add more! Indeed, a few of the minor "bugs" noted above were
not corrected because there wasn't enough memory
to do so.
Largely because of this experience, this will
probably be SSI's last monster game for 64K computers. This bodes well for the future as there are
some very nice computers that run 256K or more
and have much higher screen resolution. For now,
though, I can only recommend WITSP to those who
are very SERIOUS wargamers, have a particular
interest in the Pacific theater, and have lots of time
to delve into it.

READER INPUT DEVICE

RID #36 (Use card at pg. 5)
On this page, a number of games and articles are
listed for evaluation, as well as some general
interest questions. When evaluating a game,
consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics,
sound, packaging, and documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, and level of interest); and
LIFE (does the game wear well?).
For each game or article which you have played or
read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding)
next to the appropriate number.

GAME RATINGS

As predicted in CGW #35, SSI's Gettysburg: The
Turning Point did very well in its first showing on
our rating list. So well, in fact, that it has landed in
the number one spot on the strategy side. As future
ratings come in, expect to see a bit of a decline
from the initial 7.97 rating for Gettysburg, but not
much. Another new member of the Strategy Top
Ten is Master Designer/Mindscape's Defender of
the Crown which has checked in with a 7.50 rating

(good for 4th).
To quote from CGW #35: "Ultima IV continues
its domination of the Adventure/Action Game
side". The new kid on the block is EA's Starflight
which joins the list with a 4th place 7.68 rating.
The big loser among top ten games was Leather
Goddesses of Phobos which fell from 10th place in
CGW #35 to 25th spot this time around.

