"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD lovember 1993 Number 112 The #1 Computer Game Magazine 100 GAMES RATED How To Win Strike Commander Clash of Steel Space Hulk Warlords II and others! Feature Reviews Aces Over Europe Lands of Lore Stronghold SimFarm On-Line Gaming Make the Leap to Cyberspace $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian Gabriel Knight Sierra's Psycho-Thriller O\"2907412158 "


"Surar of Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure !! ! .. FLOOR SCORE LIVES HEALTH ANO FLOOR SCORE LIVES HEALTH AMHO 8 4400 3 5 362 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH AMMO 172 83 2800 3 80% 93 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system * breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 14 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is 'there' like no game I've ever played...\" the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic... \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #60 "


"You Love Cars. Why Not Run Your Own Company? The Model-T originated a legend in 1908. Here's your chance to create your own! As president of your own car company, you I begin with only $60,000 and a blue print for one car. Use the latest in automotive technology to design, test and produce the cars of your dreams, and then create a marketing campaign to help sell them to the world! As your automobile empire grows, decide when and where to open new offices throughout the world, and invest in research and development to keep your creations on the cutting edge! With hard work, you could become one of the wealthiest and most powerful figures in the world! But don't just think about doing it. It's time to get behind the wheel of your own company car and drive your way to fame and fortune!  7 types of vehicles, including sports cars, luxury cars and 4-wheel drives  Research new breakthroughs in steering, brakes, suspension, safety and more. Compete against 3 human or computer-controlled opponents  Turn-based business simulation from 1908 to 2008 Historically accurate. Highly intuitive interface  Modem play. Print reports to paper Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment 1993 Impressions Software inc Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #71 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  Sê   Gabriel Knight Pg. 14 illustration by Darlou Gams Voodoo Whodunit Sierra's Gabriel Knight The Pohl Position Gateway II: Homeworld From Legend Sierra's King's Quest VI CD-ROM A King's Feast On A Silver Platter AIM Well And Fire Strategies For Origin's Strike Commander They Shoot, They Score! A Post-game Analysis Of EA's NHL Hockey The Madness of Roland An Interactive Novel For The Macintosh Let Them Eat Lead Psygnosis' Merciless Action Game, Walker Rube Goldberg Revivis An Add-on Disk For The Incredible Machine Keep Your Genes On Strategies For Space Hulk The Mekong Delta Blues EA's Special Forces Simulation, SEAL Team Give Him A Beat Tsunami's Blue Force Takes To The Streets That's How De Gama Is Played Discover EA's Seven Cities of Gold Scorpia And The Seven Dwarves? A Review Of Mindcraft's Bloodstone The Castle Owners Association City Planning And The Sword In SSI's Stronghold Return to Zork! Finally, Gamers Can CD Grues The Tilling Fields Maxis Gets Their Hands Dirty With SimFarm Greed Is Good Interplay Wins Market Share With Rags to Riches The Cardinal Ruler Bill Walsh College Football From EA Sports The Telegaming Tutor Make The Connection With On-line Gaming One Hell Of A Ride! Time Warner's Infernal HellCab Close Encounters Of The Shareware Kind Corsair Vs. UFO In Corncob 3-D GenCon '93 A Report From Gaming Nirvana Wolf 3D On The Mac? Almost. It's Bungie's Pathways Into Darkness Jam The Torpedoes! Tactics For Rules of Engagement 2 Click And Run APBA Baseball Finds A Home With Windows King's Quest VI CD-ROM Pg. 22 Return to Zork Pg. 73 Ez  120 122 126 Aces Over Europe Pg. 182 134 "


"TM pore THEY'RE BACK!!! with new skills, for a new world... 75«<NCSIS * 12 BRAND NEW TRIBES OF LEMMINGS, EACH WITH THEIR OWN SKILLS * SKIERS, SURFERS, BONGO PLAYERS, SNAKE-CHARMERS & MORE * PUZZLING PROBLEMS WITH HILARIOUS ANIMATION * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN THE TALISMAN * 8-WAY SCROLLING ENHANCED SOUND SUPPORT WITH DIGITISED LEMMING VOICES production designed by DMA * RIVETING GAME PLAY IN THE LEMMINGS TRADITION DESIGN Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 Tel: (617) 731-3553 Fax: ( 617) 731-8379 Circle Reader Service #97 "


"140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 144 152 Wayne's World! Gaming Time! Excellent! Gordon Goble Hangs With Capstone's Latest Celebs Probe On The Run Spectrum HoloByte's Iron Helix Check Six, Yankee! Spectrum HoloByte's MiG-29 Locks Onto Falcon Special Scenario Design Section Adventure Writer For Windows The Game Master Gets A Digital Assistant Kilrathi Destruction Kit Origin's Wing Commander Academy Gives You The Tools 162 166 172 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Associate Editor Chris Lombardi Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Chuck Miller Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg 178 180 182 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD Scenario Building For Empire Deluxe An Excerpt From The Official Strategy Guide Admiral Nelson And The Age Of Sail SimCan's Man Of War Setting 'Em Up To Knock 'Em Down Building Scenarios For Man Of War Alexander, Weep No More There Are New Worlds To Conquer New World's Empire Deluxe Scenario Disk Aide de Camp Design Tips The Designer Offers Advice Aces Over Europe A Preview Of Dynamix' Flight Of Fantasy The Battle Of Evermore SSG's Warlords II Offers Infinite Replayabiliy Warlord Needs Tips, Badly An Analysis Of Unit Types In Warlords II If Hitler Had Aides Strategies For The High Command Red Sky At Morning A Review Of SimCan's Game Of Modern Naval War Huns Of Steel World Domination Made Easy In Clash of Steel A Pearl Of Great Price A Sneaky Plan For Carriers at War 186 190 192 199 202 208 Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, a division of Ziff Conimunications Co., 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger. KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Zit-Davis Publishing Co.. 1993. Posonaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 601. Mt. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00 Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard. or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet CGW@WELLSF.CAUS Subscription Dept. 1 (800) 827 4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only. call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd.. Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 DEPARTMENTS 8 Editorial (Registration Cards) 164 CWW Editorial 10 READ.ME (News) (Wargame Intelligence Report) 24 Scorpion's View (Lands of Lore) 212 Taking A Peek 86 From The Cockpit 221 Hall Of Fame (Pilots Power Tools) 222 Top 100 Games 88 The Scorpion's Tale 224 What's Hot? (Freddy Pharkas Hints) 225 Patches 114 Shareware 226 Advertiser List (Adventure Creation Tools) 226 Conversions Received 138 Rumor Bag (Gabbicus Ludicrous) Printed in the U.S.A. "


"The Labyrinth of Time con c. d.) * FERN ARY DE ENREN The Labyrinth of Time. An epic fantasy of time travel and adventure, possible only on CD-ROM. The legendary King Minos has commissioned a labyrinth bridging time and space, You must overcome the power of Minos and destroy the labyrinth by manipulating the very fabric of history. But beware. the future may not unfold in quite the way you planned. *-900-288-HINE MINT 1.660.3.04 Available for PC CD. Coming soon for Macintosh CD. Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer ELECTRONIC ARTS 95C for the first minute. 75 for each additional minute. If under 18. get parents permission before calling. Requires a touch-tone telephone. Messages subject to change without notice, Circle Reader Service #55 "


"EDODORDAD w Dump The Excuses, Not The Cards SONDA REGISTRATION CO. Husque SOFTWARU 1-80-TUFF-Luc Illustration by Steve Homyak V SOFTWARE ISITATIO CARDA afraid of adverse publicity and, consequently, hope that most gamers won't notice the bug, so they keep the patch a secret until it's needed. Unfortunately, this may mean a lot of negative \"word of mouth\" publicity from dissatisfied customers that might have been avoided if they had followed through in the first place. Second, there is the greedy capitalist theory. Since the shelf-life of a game may not be very long (definitely much shorter than a business or productivity application), a company may decide that it is not worthwhile to continue to support a game after it is a \"back list\" item. tate of the Industry: The following story is true. Only the names Unfortunately, gamers do not look upon a game as having value for have been changed to protect the guilty (and to save space). Unfortunately, it is a story that is becoming more and more the length of time it is on sale. A game is of value as long as one owns it and plays it. So, when a company fails to support the gamer's frequent. A gamer buys a copy of Way Late Software's Oedipus Pecs software, that company is telling the gamer that it doesn't care about graphic adventure and dutifully fills out her registration card. Being either his/her current satisfaction or future business. a smart consumer, she elects to change the spelling of her name just a trifle, so she can monitor the number of mailing lists to which the Third, there is the value-subtracted theory. If a company can software publisher would sell her name. She plays the game over the manage to sell the registration card names to a mailing list broker, it course of the next few weeks, experiences a bug that will not let her manages to recoup some of the money it spends on data entry. If a finish the game, and erroneously believes that she just isn't smart company can send out a catalog mailing, it can recoup some of the enough to solve the game. She tries the Way Late Hint Line for any data entry expense in new sales. If a company sends out thousands of clues, but doesn't get an answer to her problem, since it is indeed a notices to customers who may or may not be continuing to play a bug and not a puzzle that she is encountering. She erases the game given game, it stands to lose money for every customer who sends in from her hard drive in frustration and, since her local software store for the free bug fix or upgrade. Hence, it does not seem to certain doesn't offer return privileges, files the game in the marketing professiondusty box with her other disappointing purchases. als that it is worthwhile She suddenly starts to receive catalogs and contest When Are Software to make the bug fixes offers from a half-dozen sources, all with the variant too well-known among spelling of her name that she put on her warranty consumerdom. card. A couple of months go by and she picks up a What should be copy of Computer Gaming World. She looks at the done? We honestly bedepartment we call «Patches\" and discovers that there lieve that software pubis an updated version of Oedipus Pecs. Her blood lishers need to bite the pressure rises as she discovers that the patch has been bullet and get the news available for weeks. Her warranty card had garnered a bonanza of junk about these patches to every registered gamer. We will continue to mail, including the latest Way Late catalog, but no word of the patch. help get out the word with our \"Patches» column, but we think it is time for the entertainment software industry to take a mature cusThe story is not isolated. One day, a gamer who knew that I was the editor of CGW simultaneously thanked me for having the tomer service approach rather than acting like a \"fly by night\" industry. There are some publishers, particularly small publishers, \"Patches\" column in the magazine (ironic, because I wasn't sure that that have really done a good job of serving their customers, even when it was a very useful column when the rest of the editorial staff proposed it cost them a significant amount. However, we think it is high time the idea) and asked why a major software company had the time to for all publishers to use those registration cards for what they were sell his name and address, but not to let him know when there were major bug fixes (ironic, because the latter is exactly what I thought designed for rather than playing \"hide and seek» with their own software companies did with the registration cards). customers. State of the Magazine: This issue features a record number of pages The same night, I spoke on Phoenix radio's \"Taking Command of and we are rather excited about the amount of material we've covered. Your Computer\" call-in talk show. Almost the first question from a Our special section focuses on games which can be customized by the caller was \"Why do you have to have that Patches column in the back gamer. We take a look at Origin's Wing Commander Academy and of your magazine? That's not your responsibility, that's the job of the Digital Alchemy's Adventure Writer for Windows. Then, we excerpt software companies.\" I answered honestly that we provided the guidelines for creating Empire Deluxe scenarios from Alan Emrich's column as a service because most of the publishers were not updating new book Empire Deluxe: The Official Strategy Guide. Emrich's cotheir customers sufficiently. Since the information was not readily author, Mark \"Skulker\" Carroll, follows up with a look at New available, we provided it. I went on record as stating that I could see World's celebrity designer scenario disk for Empire Deluxe. Then, no excuse for the publishers not sending a notification of bug fixes or bug fixes after M. Evan Brooks forms a line of battle and reviews Simulations and upgrades to their registered customers. I still don't. Canada's Man of War, Johnny Wilson offers fresh scenarios for the I've spent a lot of time trying to figure out why many of the new game of fighting sail. Designer Scott Hamilton offers designer publishers do not follow through on providing information to regisnotes on his popular Aide de Camp PBEM utility. We hope you tered owners. First, there is the damage control theory. They may be enjoy.cow Registration Cards Going To Fulfill Their Promise? Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"BUY THE BEST OF 193* And get the best of '91 & '92 FREE *As Chosen by Computer Gaming World & PC Games OVER Wizardry. TRILOGY 4.6 MILLION SOLD WIZARDRY V, VI & VIL Winner of over 15 International Awards WIZARDRY, the game that pioneered first-person perspective & defined computer role-playing for more than a decade. Now, the award-winning WIZARDRY V, VI & VII are available in 1 complete package, at 1 incredible price. Three best selling games, with over 500 hours of engaging,replayable adventure, come to you with a savings of 25% off individual suggested retail prices. (Cbronzdny. CRUSADERS DARK SAVANT Finan SATZ CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT REDEFINING ROLE-PLAYING FOR AN ENTIRE INDUSTRY 1993 ROLE-PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1992 Fantasy Role-Playing Game of the Year PC Games 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine NILIO TOHT: TALL TRU HOC CAREE ( ory: Uang STDOUX KINJA BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE PAVING THE WAY FOR THE SYSTEMS OF THE FUTURE 1991 Best Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine Best Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Top Role-Playing Game, April 1991 Computer Gaming World 1991 DEI SIELL HIRE PAKA UNE RUN ZOUTP HOVECAICEL NITED Mad Hecl in carts & SOCOADI and 1 Greater Denon appears! THE LEGACY OF HEART OF THE MAELSTROM BREAKING AWAY FROM THE WIZARDRY SYSTEM OF THE PAST haçaczim SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, P.O. Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 THE WIZARDRY TRILOGY FAX# (315) 393-1525 Scenarios I, II & III The original classics that set the trend in Available at a software retailer near you, or call: fantasy role-playing are now available at a new low price! Circle Reader Service #119 (800) 447-1230 "


"READ.ME Does 3DO Live Up To Promises? 3DO Executive Responds To CGW Concerns The Latest News From The Gaming World Atari Jaguar Unveiled—Stalks 3DO rior to the Atari Jaguar press conference, CGW interviewed Trip Hawkins concerning 3DO's plans. In particular, CGW asked if 3DO had settled upon a storage scheme for their new game system, and why a sing quotations from rival CEO, Trip Hawkins of 3DO disk drive or flash memory was not chosen. Corporation, Sam Tramiel unveiled his company's answer to this Hawkins responded that the designers had Fall's 32-bit game machines. Atari's Jaguar will use a 64-bit RISCopted for a 32K battery storage capacity on the machine itself. This would allow for a gamer to based architecture with a true 64-bit data path. It will feature both a store his/her preferences and perhaps one save graphics processor and digital signal processor for sound at 27 MIPS game state. Asked if this wasn't too limited for (million instructions per second) respectively. Like the machines to be storage capacity, Hawkins drew from anecdotal built by the competition, the Jaguar will feature a programmable object evidence concerning EA's heyday of interactive processor to handle sprites, pixels or character maps. It will also feature a stories. He said that designers were always urged to get the save states down to well less *blitter,\" a piece of hardware that provides fast Gouraud shading. The than 32K. «Anything more,\" contends Atari executive stated further that the machine would feature 32-bit true Hawkins, \"is inefficient color graphics on NTSC screens and would feature 16-bit CD-quality design.\" digital stereo sound. Tramiel seemed annoyed by Trip off cartridges (the Jaguar allows up to six Hawkins' pre-unveiling speculation that megabytes of code per ROM cartridge) the Jaguar was actually two 32-bit proces and the third playing off a custom develsors running in parallel. In classic debate opment system. fashion, Tramiel asserted that the Jaguar The basic Jaguar system will be carwould be a 240-bit machine using tridge based and will sell for around $200. Hawkins' logic. Atari also used Hawkins' The CD-ROM drive will cost an addiassertion that the next level of game tional $200 and will feature the Cinepak machine had to provide a performance digital compression scheme from level that puts the stake way out there in SuperMac that is being used on several order to stress how much they believe the platforms. Games are expected to retail Jaguar's technology is beyond 3DO. between $39 and $69 per cartridge, and Atari revealed that the launch of the CD titles may cost less. Hawkins went on to say that disk drives were too machine will take place during the holiday CGW reminded Tramiel about Atari's expensive for the small benefit they would proseason of 1993 in New York, San assertion that the Francisco, Paris and London. It will ship vide when the basic delivery system would be Jaguar was capable of CD-based. He did observe that flash memory with a joypad and one being a set-top box may be manufactured for the machine in the bundled carfor the digital | future, but said that nothing was definite. tridge from highway\" and asked their library Asked about the one port for a control pad if there were specifof five titles ic plans in the and the seeming limited capacity for multiavailable at player interaction, Hawkins pointed out that works for either launch. These interactive televithe control pads could be daisy-chained to include Club allow up to eight controllers. Showing CGWa sion connections Drive (working or ISDN hookproduction model of the Panasonic machine, title, a driving he observed that the control pad that ships ups. Tramiel game), Dino with the machine has to be at the end of the responded by Dudes (an daisy chain, but said that additional pads observing that enhanced version Time-Warner would allow for the daisy chaining. of Gametek's still owns 24% of Atari and CGW expressed concern about the need for Humans game), suggested that a television test was on a an expansion module in order to take advanTrevor McFurr in future agenda. Then, Tramiel pointed to tage of the many future peripherals expected the Crescent Galaxy (a horizontal scrolling the numeric keypad on the joypad (con for the 3DO. Hawkins affirmed that the space shoot-'em-up), Alien vs. Predator (a troller) and said that they were having dis expansion module is definitely being manufacfirst-person 3-D scroller with smoothcussions with an unspecified phone sys tured by Matsushita (and possibly other hardscrolling 3-D texture-mapped graphics); tem. Asked about modem links, Tramiel ware manufacturers) and will reach the marker and Cybermorph (a flying shooter with observed that there is a comm-link port around the middle of 1994. gouraud shaded objects). The last three for multiple machines to be connected via Regarding the promised modem, Hawkins titles were demonstrated at the press condirect connect. assured CGW that companies are competing ference with the first two actually playing for their designs to be the standardized techPage 10 Computer Gaming World "


"3D Adventures (left) and Crash 'N Burn (below) for 3DO. nology for the 3DO. He did reveal, however, that the 3DO architecture has been established so that the addition of a modem or other peripheral will simply extend the bus so that they add to the data path of the machine. Reminded that interactive television was part of the original promise of the 3DO machine, Hawkins explained something of 3DO's current strategy with regard to making the machines into set-top boxes for cable television delivery. He stated that the company could use the 3DO core technology with an analog television tuner, Genlock device with MPEG2 and a port for the CD drive. Providing a port for the CD drive saves on cost of goods (and many cable operators do not really want to spend the extra dollars per unit on a drive that they are not sure will enhance business). Queried about a digital future, Hawkins TOIR unequivocally asserted that 3DO could provide for HDTV immediately. PAMANTUL He then noted that they would be way ahead of the growth curve on that technology to build the capability into 3DO now and questioned whether cable operators would be willing to implement very many HDTV channels initially, since there is a bandwidth problem (one would be able to broadcast less HDTV channels than NTSC channels). \"Whenever there is a sufficient HDTV user base,\" Hawkins continued, \"there will be a 3DO machine to serve it. We could do it now. We'll do it better in the furure.\" Questioned as to why 3D is not the set-top box for any current interactive television tests, Hawkins observed that the company was not committed to manufacturing custom prototypes. \"That way, you can easily end up with a 4,000 unit kluge that you won't be able to use anywhere.\" After the interview, Hawkins demonstrated sampler programs on the Panasonic production unit. CGW was impressed with the Cinepak video performance and the firmware (permanently installed software). The performance was impressive on all counts, and we await the release this holiday season. Can We Talk? New Hardware Offers Voice Recognition And 3D Sound Laptops Take Flight \"Mr. Chekhov! Fire when ready.\" tar Trek fans who have dreamt of barking orders from the command chair of the U.S.S. Enterprise may soon have reason to shout out loud. Sierra Semiconductor's new Aria chipset, when teamed with Interplay's new version of Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary, may make curt, overacting Shatners of many computer gaming fans. The new Aria chipset featured in a new wave of sound cards from Diamond, Computer Peripherals, Inc. and Prometheus offers several gaming enhancements, including a voice recognition system that actually works. The chipser's Listener voice recognition is unique in that it does not need to be trained to the user's voice. It uses a \"database\" of 70 different voices to allow for a wide range of pronunciations and verbal idiosyncrasies. One need only select the Aria Listener voice recognition option in their game serup, and the game is all ears. The system, as implemented in Interplay's Star Trek game, worked quite well and impressed a skeptical CGW staff. The first three episodes of the Star Trek game will be bundled with Aria products in the future. Several other companies have committed to supporting Aria as well, among them Bethesda, Id, Impressions, LucasArts, Maxis, Sierra, and Twin Dolphin. Voice recognition is not the only Aria feature to speak of. In addition to providNovember 1993 ing OPL-2 (YM3812) FM emulation and wave table synthesis, the DSP offers QSound, a system that creates 3D audio with two speakers. A pilot in a flight sim using QSound could hear bullers stitching his tail from behind, and in a game like Wolfenstein 3D, one could hear the sounds of Nazi guards echoing from side corridors. With a decent set of speakers the effect is very realistic. The hardware power behind these fearures is a non-proprietary DSP (digital signal processor) from Texas Instruments. The DSP delivers Aria's sound enhancements without stealing additional processing power from games. Thus, a gamer could have QSound, digital audio, and wave table synthesis, or voice recognition, digital audio, and wave table synthesis running at once, without any degradation in game performance. At a projected street price under $200, the Aria-equipped sound cards may give gamers a tantalizing sound solution. And since the cards will be software upgradable, owners will not have to scrap the board in the future if they want enhancements to the FM emulation and wave table synthesis; they can upgrade with a simple software installation. For more information on the Aria chipset, contact Sierra Semiconductor at (408) 263-9300. aptop owners grounded by their portable's lack of a joystick can finally get a grip. Two companies have released products which allow a joystick to be connected into a laptop's serial or parallel port. The two products already support a number of popular flight and racing sims. Genovation's Parallel Game Port is a small adapter that enables gamers to plug a joystick into the parallel port of their portable computer. A 3 1/2-inch disk has \"patches\" for several games, making the product compatible with X-Wing, Wing Commander II, Aces of the Pacific, F-15 Strike Eagle III, World Circuit, Wolfenstein 3D, Strike Commander, Red Baron and Stunt Island. In addition, consumers receive a toll-free BBS line for downloading new game patches, bringing the total number of supported games to more than 50. The product performed flawlessly in a casual, two-hour test with Microprose's F-15 Strike Eagle III. The Genovation joystick adapter offers the potential for a highly customized joy stick. Because the product uses the laptop's parallel game port, 128 keys can be programmed for different functions in a Notebook Gameport joystick adapter Page 11 "


"30 Frames Per Second? Get Reel! game. No joystick has that many buttons, but the trend towards more buttons and greater control on joysticks won't be lost with this product. Genovation's Parallel Game Port is available now for $45. For more information, call (714) 833-3355. The Notebook Gameport from Colorado Spectrum enables joystick and mouse connection through a laptop's serial port. A disk is included with a joystick driver; installation is painless. The Notebook Gameport is supported by F-15 Strike Eagle III, X-Wing, Microsoft Flight Simulator 4.0, Mig-29 and Falcon 3.0. Support for other games is expected in the near future, including Aces Over Europe, Speed Racer, World Circuit, Wing Commander, Strike Commander, and others. Colorado Spectrum's Notebook Gameport is available for a suggested retail price of $49.95. For more information, call (303) 225-6929. \"hose unimpressed by the video quality of Many multimedia game publishers who have current multimedia products should take a had to degrade the quality of their video to deal look at Sigma Design's ReelMagic card. The with current hardware limitations are very excited card attaches to a video card's feature connector about the card. Access, Interplay, Psygnosis, and will allow gamers to view MPEG video at 30 Readysoft, Sierra and Trilobyte, among others, frames per second at full screen resolution, are currently developing titles that will take whether on a 386-16MHz or a hot-rod 486. In a advantage of the card's capabilities. Interplay's demonstration of the hardware, CGW saw a BonLord of The Rings CD-ROM, featuring footage Jovi video playing as clearly and smoothly as on from the Ralph Bakshi film, and Trilobyte's MTV, with CD-quality sound. The playback sequel to The Seventh Guest, program ran in Windows, and the CD was playThe Eleventh Hour, will both ing off of a single speed CD-ROM drive. feature MPEG video footage. ReelMagic achieves this A special version of incredible performance by Activision's Return to Zork doing MPEG video decompreswill be packaged with the sion on its own on-board initial release of the board. processor. The processor churns As it is based on the away at the video decompression MPEG video standard, the independently from the computcard with be compatible er's processor. Even on a single with an upcoming speed CD-ROM, the result is high VideoCD standard. The quality video without the annoying standard will allow movies to be played drive-access pauses associated with from a standard CD-ROM. With the current current CD-ROM titles. compression algorithms, 74 minutes of S-VHS The ReelMagic card also incorporates 16-bit video and CD-quality audio can be packed onto sound with OPL-2 FM synthesis, making it one standard silver platter. Sound Blaster and Ad Lib compatible. Sigma Look for the ReelMagic card this holiday seaDesign plans to incorporate the OPL-3 in their son at a suggested list price of $449. Sigma next generation product. Designs can be reached at (800) 845-8086. Commodore Puts In Its 32-Bits Worth DU This September's World of Commodore Amiga show in Pasadena, CA saw the unveiling of Commodore's Amiga CD32. In their traditional low key fashion, Commodore quietly introduced its new gaming console, scheduled for US distribution in November. But don't expect to run down to your local Toys-R-Us and pick one up in time for the holidays. The limired holiday season distribution will only target key cities; mass distribution will not begin until January. Commodore's Amiga CD32 is the first 32-bit game console available to consumers, and the only one currently employing a double-speed CD-ROM drive. Retailing for $399, the Amiga CD32 also debuts several hundred dollars below the 3DO and the Jaguar with CD drive. A CD-only gaming platform, the CD32 provides no cartridge slot. Based on an Amiga 1200, the CD32 employs a 14MHz. 68EC020 Motorola processor; 2MB 32-bit RAM; custom processors for video, graphics and sound; and a double-speed CDROM drive. Outputs allow for connection to NTSC composite color, S-VHS and standard RF modulared TVs, plus stereo headphones and stereo audio jacks. The custom graphic chips allow 256,000 colors to be displayed at once, with an expansion bus provided for an MPEG-1 full-motion video module (available by year end for about $200). An 11-button controller fills out the package. Supported are standard audio CD, CD+G and the new VideoCD standard for movies on compacr disc. Third party support is provided for system expansion with ports for two game controllers/joysticks, a serial porr, local and video bus connectors and several auxiliary ports. Inevitably, hardware addons will soon appear (mice, controllers, memory cards, keyboards and virtual reality headsets), provided the CD32 gains its necessary market penetration. A significant amount of software will be available immediately. Limited compatibili ty with CDTV, Commodore's earlier CDbased machine, offers existing titles that will play in the CD32, including a mix of 24 games and educational programs. Many Amiga computer titles (from floppy-based Amiga computer titles (from floppy-based products) are being converted for the new console, too. As far as new CD specific titles go, several game developers are hard at work producing games designed to exploit the CD32's capabilities. These are, among others, Maxis, Ocean, Psygnosis and Virgin. Look for Jurassic Park, Zool 2, Diggers, Microcosm, Defender of the Crown 2, Dune and SimCity in the upcoming months. Will CD32 Succeed? As with each of the new systems ready to emerge (3DO, CD32 and Jaguar), the question of the CD32's future remains open. If Commodore sticks to their traditional markering plan (of stealth-like, atrophic advertising), they could deliver their new gaming machine stillborn. Yet, as it stands, the CD32 has a good chance of gerring an early lion's share of the 32-bit and beyond console game market. It's certainly the most cost effective alternative at present, and the most expandable console device to arrive thus far. For more information, contact Commodore Business Machines, Inc., 1200 Wilson Drive, West C Chester PA 19382, (215) 431-9100. CGW Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"  IMUD y UDGETUDEA CORRUPTION INTO THE FOLLOW THE TRAIL OF Mac MOST POWERFUL CONSPIRACY LaHH!        60   l. It i with a littv heart thiat I speak to you, THE KGB HAS EVER KNOWN e ro TO  7  300  6.600             kan   500   1 800    le       ikax  /        \"  d  ,  ,    .     ,     bo ABO  co  ter 1      ,4 , THY     hu,  ,                     ,    81 d      n   , FEATURING DONALD SUTHERLAND These are the years when only dead men smiled, when Moscow writhed under the glare of Perestroika and your first murder investigation for Dept. Pof the KGB leads you straight into the disintegrating halls of power. DONALD SUTHERLAND is your father and only ally, A former KGB agent, he will shrewdly guide you through coNSPIRACY with state-of-the-art digitized speech and video. Actual TV footage of the Soviet crisis also heightens the very real peril of your assignment. But even SUTHERLAND can go only so far into the KGB. Uncover the conspiracy while you still can.., FEATURES: Extensive video of Donald Sutherland as your father gives you hints and help throughout the game. * TV footage of the Soviet crisis as it unfolded. * Movie-like storyline filled with surprising twists and Intrigue. Vitale. GAMES ROM MILIEUTE 1993 Virgin Games, Inc. All TOTETER . Vr s tandsdatkat Virgin CONSPIRACY Ia trademark of Virgin Games, Inc. . Photo at s a VIVA Circle Reader Service #127 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Between Dark And Daylight Gabriel Knight Explores The Shades of Gray by Johnny L. Wilson of the psychological horror implicit in the game, Gabriel has the opportunity to reverse the deeds of the past. Gabriel Knight is an exceptional blend of art, game and understanding. It is for mature audiences for all the right reasons. It does not use frivolous nudity, gratuitous violence or abrasive language to garner this reputation. Rather, it offers an adult and refreshing perspective on the characters and situations within the game. Take, for example, the character of Gabriel himself. Gabriel is a bibliophile who wants to write a detective novel. As such, he unfolds as the kind of person who is willing to \"use\" people. Conversations reveal that he is not beyond considering women as OS 640 ife is full of contrasts: light and darkfire boils menacingly in the mind's eye. The ness, good and evil, pleasure and pain, leopard costume of the priestess blends the sorrow and joy, life and death. Though human and creature together, evoking the most of us would prefer to focus on the primitive, the dangerous and the sensual. Perpositive side of these poles, the positive asspiration and grimaces accent the native pects would not be as attractive without the drumbeat, beating subtly in sync with the negative to cast them in relief. Sierra's Gabriel dreamer's heart. The snake, that curious symKnight: Sins of the Father takes seriously the bolic blend of evil and wisdom, death and juxtaposition of these contrasting elements. regeneration, wraps around a neck. Suddenly, Everything about the game emphasizes their is personal. The snake undergoes a meta. struggle between light and darkness, good morphosis into a hangman's noose tethered and evil, love and betrayal. From color palette about the dreamer's neck. to soundtrack, background story to puzzle Such is the dream sequence that opens Siclues, this game emphasizes personal struggle erra's Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Father. It was within the context of this dialectic. the first time I've actually experienced fear In other words, Gabriel Knight is that rarity when viewing a computer game and that's in computer games, a work that is artistic because the designer understands where enough to convey a message and present realreal horror exists within the human istic characters so that the player really cares. mind. Jane Jensen, co-designer of King's It is more of a vicarious experience than it is Quest VI and the designer of Gabriel intellectual exercise. The puzzles are inteKnight, understands horror. Shirley grated into the story line so effectively that the Jackson, Anne Rice and Stephen King gamer genuinely feels like he or she is discovare her inspiration. These novelists ering more of the story, rather than jumping should be proud of their admirer's creathrough a series of mental hoops to get to the tion. It is a study in contrasts, a fascinatnext chapter. The conversation branches feaing and, at times, frightening tale. ture so much variety and so much characIndeed, there is a possible cameo in terization that one feels that there are which an Anne Rice character may apauthentic characters rather than game conpear at Napoleon House (a location structs in the story. The dream sequences that based on an actual restaurant in New advance the story are psychologically consis Orleans). tent with the way our minds symbolize the As Gabriel explores the immediate problems with which our subconscious wrestles in sleep. problem, the ritualistic voodoo murders in New Orleans, he discovers that his For Mature Audiences Especially entire family has had a checkered past. Images of slavery, prejudice, superstition It is the kind of dream that causes stomach and hypocrisy blend together in the muscles to contract, pulling one into a sitting background story, a tale where betrayal position from out of a restful sleep. The bonconquers love. Fortunately, in the midst Sneak Previews offer early coverage of games still under development. Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"DECOR ASL REUTI 160466 Mur dans St. John's EU Cabrit Sans Cor Uvedon Houndour RM MALS Lake Fontchartais objects; one definitely gets the feeling that he breaks away from the familiar Sierra doesn't mind being inconsiderate in the tasks look and offers a nice change of pace. to which he puts his lovely assistant, and he The music is also thoughtfully intedoesn't even consider the risks he takes with grated into the game. Bob Holmes is the Detective Moseley's career (the supporting primary composer and has a theory concast member who supplies him with official cerning scene-specific compositions. police information). As the realistic characEach room in the game will have a spefers confront very difficult choices, one realcific theme, as will each of the free-runizes the mature nature of the story. Before the ning animated sequences. For example, game is over, the character may be well on his Holmes will use piano instrumentation to catch the light side of New Orleans, but strings and pipe organ instrumentation in a requiem style for the scenes that emphasize darkness. In the dream sequences, there are lots of percussion, particularly timpani. Holmes gets tremendous assistance in the sound category from professional R&B percussionist, Orpheus, who not only orchestrates the percussion and rhythm aspects of many of the pieces, but is a way to a new career with new understanding, and the mature gamer may have more sophismaster of sound effects, as well. The floppy disk version of the game will be ricated perceptions of what love and sacrifice fairly rich in sound effects, but the CD mean. The less mature will simply not get it. version may well be the most sound The graphics underscore the entire theme cffect-intense game product yet. of the game because the artists have used dark Finally, the care in which the chrome palettes for most of the backgrounds, enaof the game is integrated with the subbling the use of numerous styles of light stance can be illustrated by considering sources to illuminate the scenes. These run the casting of voice talent for the CD version they want from the detailed background and the gamut from bonfires and torches through of Gabriel Knight. Tim Curry of Rocky Horror subplots of the story in interactive conversastreet lamps and refracted light. The theme is Picture Show fame will play the part of tion mode. These are not simply conversation also visually enhanced by icon systems (the o visually enhanced by icon systems (the Gabriel. Michael Doran of Star Trek: The trees built off key words that exist simply to snake, the dragon, the medallion) which re Next Generation will play Dr. John Long advance the story. The conversations are real cur in unexpected places and implicitly retime television star Efrem Zimbalist. Ir. will attempts to enrich the concept of character in mind the gamer of the quest itself. Further, play Wolfgang, Mark Hamill will play a computer game. For example, one can inthe graphic artists on the game are aficionados Gabriel's friend, Detective Moseley, and sult Moseley and flirt with Malia (the femme of graphic novels, so they advance some of the Rocky Carroll of the television series Roc will fatale, lady of mystery), as well as ask quesstory with transition screens resembling pages play Willie Walker. tions. As Jensen observes, the interactive apfound in higher quality works of this nature. The interface is rather typical for the Sierra proach to storytelling is ideal because one can This, along with the talking profiles during icon-based system, though it does offer some con fit in a lot of material that would have to be the conversations and animated sequences new features to enhance the conversational trimmed from a more linear approach be(dreams and other free-running events), aspect of the game and a graphic look cause of pacing. Now, the gamer decides how SA 14256 consistent with the old New Orleans much of the exposition will be unveiled at a ? 1340:1 setting. There isn't any revolutionary given time. new technology in the game, just a As in the best fiction writing, the characters smooth integration of existing tools came to have a life of their own during the around a remarkably well-rounded dedevelopment of the game. There was a time sign. The game itself is divided into ded into when the plot required Gabriel's friend when the plat required Gabriel's friend various days with a series of Must Do's Moseley to be killed. Yet, as the conversations which have to be completed before the were written and Gabriel's relationship with game will advance. This keeps the pacMoseley became more integral to the story, ing taut and the frustration level down. Jensen elected to keep him alive. One of the characters was so real that she used the same There Is Nothing Like A Jane name as a real voodoo priestess in New Orleans, Jane had to quickly change the name of i ne most refreshing aspect of the the character after seeing the real-life name3:01 game, however, must be the marvelous sake on television. perspective which Jane Jensen brings to it. As a female writing about a male We like that. Arr that imitates life is art that protagonist, she injects a fair share of is relevant for those who enjoy living. Gabriel humorous needles into any male player's Knight: Sins of the Father stands a chance to ego, but she brings the strength of a be the kind of story we'll never forget. It people-oriented way of looking at probcertainly may prove a point as to whether lems. Much of the game emphasizes gamers merely want new technology or conversations. Jensen says that the whether they want an in-depth setting/story strength of this tool is the fact that to explore. Gabriel Knight certainly exceeds gamers can glean as much or as little as the standard in the latter. CGW Tel. November 1993 Page 15 "


"FABLES & FIENOS. THE HAND OF FATE IS A TRADEMARX OF WESTWOOD STUDIOS, INC. 1930 WESTWOOD STUDIOS, INC. VIRGIN IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF VIRGIN ENTERPRISES, LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 17. 17: 1 LOGIC GOODBYE Kiss CONVENTIONAL "


"Now you see I Vow you see it. Now you don't. The land of Kyrandia is disappearing piece by piece and all the evidence points toward one perilous conclusion: a curse. Thus begins The Hand of Fate, second in the Fables Fiends\" series, where you are the offbeat, young mystic who must voyage to the center of the world to break the spell. Out of sync and out on foot, your aberrant journey reveals nothing is what it seems. Everything is what it isn't. And you can count your friends on one hand. Literally. « Conspiring to push the twisted edge of cinemagraphic entertainment, Westwood Studios has designed more puzzles and gameplay in the first few chapters of The Hand of Fate than in all of The Legend of Kyrandin The most advanced graphics on the market are first pencil tested, then painted on-screen to surrealistic perfection.  Breakthrough Trulight technology illuminates each scene more cinematically for a fuller, fourth dimensional picture. The new Shadow Sunlight State of Mind System, along with superior intuitive interfacing, enables you and over 50 characters to change your mind, mood and mayhem based on preceding events. Don't just play with your mind. Change the way your mind plays. Grasp The Hand of Fate and kiss conventional logic goodbye. THE HAND OF FATE Westwood Circle Reader Service #128 "


"REVIEW jeèchee Phone Hom The Legend Lives On In Gateway Ila Homeworld by Paul C. Schuytema WE HAD Test IV Dell Ou ENARI Drop Dye aninai skin autoloc autodoc ruadent blue C rati blue dial bun spare crystal rod LEIRI RE Read Put Yo step into the shift patterns of blue light, feeling a slight tirgie au your body PA thru the force field tepotte tepa torta to unit Mait Unda Save Resture Kestart portal Rocky Area slip of paper tunin fork Rocky Rrus You aru in a rock arou that appeurs tu in all direction will it end. The area Is harron, with no sign of life, and the lunperature is a front unbearably high. A bright doublu pun boate down on the rock. Making the air shimer. To the south to a glowing blue force field portal. Activato Pain white bar Attach Attack y rhat starts out as a relaxing morning starships in perfect condition, but also eviwhat is in the immediate vicinity), a text box in 2112 AD San Francisco, sipping dence of the Assassins, a race of aliens whose for descriptions, and a small window where a little joe as you peruse the newshobby was hunting and destroying any civilithe first-person graphics are displayed. fax reports on the Phoenix cult, turns into an zation that had made the technological jump The interface is one of the most unusual I've all-out sprint for your life. You thought that into faster-than-light travel. come across in today's world of \"icons everywas all behind you; you have 50 million in Gateway followed the player on a series of where,\" and it is at once a boon and a bane. the bank, a nice condo with a private elevator, prospecting missions in the ancient Heechee The scrolling windows and traditional\" text and the smug confidence of one who has ships, and finally on a mission to set up a saved the world. Now, an alien artifact many del Serve giant, multi-planer scrambling device, aimed kilometers long has appeared at the edge of at obscuring the entire Milky Way from Asthe solar system, whipping the Assassin-lovsassin sensors. Homeworld, Legend's latest ing Phoenix cult into a frenzy and forcing the game based on Pohl's Heechee saga, takes up United Nations into around-the-clock planwhere Gateway left off. Homeworld is not ning sessions...and now they want your help. taken directly from one of Pohl's works, and Just as you begin to think it over, an anonyhe is only given a one line credit on the back mous informer tells you that you are the next of the game box, yet the game is a rich and target for a Phoenix cult hit squad, and fascinating story which maintains the proper chey're making their way to your condo right feel of Pohl's original fiction. now! Homeworld is an adventure game in which Hoe leur the player takes on the role of the story's protagonist, fleeing from an initial assassinainput line allow the player to assemble clear, tion attempt and falling headlong into a sweeping, galaxy-wide story centered on the but incredibly detailed actions, and pulling mysterious artifact which has appeared near the verbs from a scrolling list ends the oldPluto. Is it a Heechee ship, over half a million million time \"command not understood\" headache years old, or is it a tool of the Assassins, of text adventures. On the other hand, the coming to wipe out the race? interface is rather clunky, requiring the player Homeworld, with its rich prose and adto scroll through a long list of verbs to see if vanced input parser, feels like an extension of one fits, with no easy way to switch back and the old Infocom text-only forth, mid-command, berween mouse selecgames, even though it presents the player with crisp, Gateway II, Homeworld In Gateway, Legend's first offering based on Super VGA graphics. The TITLE: Gateway II. Homeworld the Hugoand Nebula-winning hard science game screen is divided up SYSTEM; IBM fiction of Frederik Pohl, Earth was blessed into a number of windows PRICE: $59.95 REQUIREMENTS: 286-16Mhz or better, VGA or VESA SVGA with the discovery of a space station left or that provide access to a graphics, supports Adlib, Roland, Sound biting the Sun some 500,000 years ago. The movement compass, a Blaster sound cards PROTECTION: None space station, called Gateway, was a treasure scrolling list of action DESIGNERS: Mike Verdu, Glen Dahlgren trove of high-technology left by the race verbs, a list of object PUBLISHER: Legend Entertainment Company P.O. Box 10810 known as the Heechee. Sadly, this treasure nouns (essentially an in14200 Park Meadow Drive came with a curse, for not only did the ventory list of what the Chantilly, VA 22021 (703) 222-8500 Heechee leave behind 1,000 faster-than-light player is carrying and U DUPLO Drup Cio Hotec autode redit bandar btw C all blue diat Cleari ters Aint Irwiataly after nur way Cleari into the ciori. I three badal allen cryptal e binding teard fron the worst. They dinosaur are ugly reptilian lizard thin , with teady Edgn of Thicket little , scaly skin, and tar t ir fullt of our lappir of wharp teith. Veuicki Oron dia! decide that tljare mit friendly. What's they are looking at an if night le Teda Lunch. You try to retreat back the way lupo mila cane, but they are www too quickly. You in e unit cursul cut off. Surrounded on all sides. You back up until are avainst the base of the natal but I tree tot donites the clearin. Jully of war Restore Restart Activate nttech Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"GLOBAL DOMINATION .@.0.0.0.0.0, The Ultimate Multi-Player Conquest Simulation inally, you can conquer your friends in state-of-the-art graphic splendor! Amass armies with your choice of units, then invade! Watch your back, though you'll need to divide your forces with care to avoid being conquered yourself! Global Domination is turn-based and features modem play; a wide variety of historic opponents from which to choose; random world generator; large number of units; spies; diplomacy & subversive activists; by far the best graphics and sound ever seen in a conquest game; and even more fun than Napoleon had at Waterloo! EPIKE USM RESOURCE SHAL CUTTURAZI DHE PRVAK 18 HEAVA Take your ego for a rollercoaster ride as you see your empire rise and fall! PAULDADUE MOLD TO ELANLARI Here's where you amass your armies and make your moves! ARNY MOVESJUNTOU SENESA Take tactical control of a battle in graphically stunning animated combat! 01993 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #72 "


"Era Hannalla Look La dlal The dar la clone. Carrier arytale that rem wurtheast to sweet. gleat robot link lisk Luxe kerthest Listen po tople hestore Restart from ide the pismo metal cost sarfew of the deck. So Latera S, I fills the rid. It was in it artiolate Relal ters that will of fluidity angre y al a late with a lie of that sim. The r e all root tens Active fein field tal. A glais e , the Retlite Ledertal. A cold watt Atte Rttech Rttack Lesing fork uite badge los Halabere scription is intelligent and rich, and even the simplest objects have color, texture and G C weight. On the other hand, it is obvious that the text wasn't written by Pohl, or a professional writer for that matter. While I was hardpressed to find any technical errors, and while the descriptions were incredibly rich, the prose still had an amateurish feel to it. The language was often \"chatty,\" and dialogue phrases like \"What do I do when I get the stuff\" didn't seem to fit the proper tone for a character conversing with an emissary from window on the world. Motivation and pertion and typing. To my mind, the interface an ancient and highly intelligent race. The sonality seem to be entirely lost from the feels like a development tool, an interface descriptions of the various alien lifeforms felt central consciousness. When he (I assume he used by designers to test the game rather than slightly ethnocentric, with phrases such as is a he, only because I am) is catapulted out a polished and ergonomic finished product. \"aliens with beady eyes» belying the awe of into space, there is no sense of hesitation, no It could be that I am just jaded from playing discovering a new species. That type of flipsense of fear or regret in being forced out of countless games with less imposing interfaces pancy goes against the grain of the hard scione's home and life, and most importantly, that don't dominate three-quarters of the ence fiction of Pohl and brings the grade level no sense of awe or curiosity when the characgame screen. of the game down a few notches. It is interter encounters the many amazing objects and By blending the use of a first-person graphic esting to note, though, that this consistent creatures in the game. A case in point is when with a text description, Legend has hit on a flaw in the text of the game relates mostly to the character runs into a robotic spider way to get the most information poswho has a penchant for sawing open sible to the player. The graphics are human skulls while the victim is still static \"slides\" of what the character alive; there is no sense of the fear, the sees, and objects disappear from the horrendous fear the character must feel scene when they are taken, but there when encountering this creature while is no animation in the standard intrapped in an alien environment. terface. Each time the character enAs far as general play goes, Hometers a new locale, a new slide is world is a science fiction lover's dream presented along with a text descripcome true. While I may have my probtion. The player can click the mouse lems with the game, I liken the experion the graphic window to pull up a ence to participating in a good, and text description of the various obYou can hear and feel the dull thunder as the powerful rocket very interesting, science fiction novel. jects, and a double click will serve as engines below you throttle up. The ship trembles for a moment as the There is a lot going on in Homeworld a \"take\" command, placing the obbooster engines build thrust, and then the ship starts moving. It rises that made me stop and think, and ject in the character's inventory. from Pad Tango Three, slowly at first, then picking up speed. As the times when I just nodded my head and While the command interface ship accelerates a giant hand begins pressing you into your seal said \"cool!\" The plot is fairly linear, in feels awkward to me, I enjoyed the which the player moves from one puzpicture/text combination used to zle to the next attempting to escape present the game's data. I truly felt situations and gather intelligence, and that I was immersed in a rich, complex world encounters with living organisms. The \"hard in which even the simplest observations, such tech\" of the game, the computers, alien inter while the puzzles are not that difficult, they as examining a leaf or a robot arm, yielded a faces and robots, are all described to the utmost do require resourceful thinking. detailed and complex description. detail, and the «pseudo-science of the game Homeworld comes packaged with a hint presents us with a wealth of detailed computer book, which is a great idea. More games While the graphic \"slides» are static, the readouts and measurements. Probably the best should have included hint books, since most game does provide some gorgeous cut-scene advice I can give to the prose authors of the players will «slam into the wall» at least once animations and scrolling pans across beautigame is to pick up a copy of Orson Scott Card's or twice in every adventure game, and having ful panoramas. Unfortunately, it's obvious Characters Viewpoint, since they have nailed a well laid out hint book will provide the that several different approaches were taken the inanimate answer without breaking the rhythm of play, to render the various scenes and animations, resulting in a lack of continuity. An example This character problem spills over to the or incurring the nasty expense of a 900 numis a gorgeous still painting of a probe ship player as well. I felt as if my \"player\" was not ready to blast into space. The detail is wonan actual individual, but more of a moving For a die-hard sci-fi gamer, this game will derful, but later, when we see a 3-D animaprovide many nights of wondrous entertaintion of the probe ship flying, only by context Teader ment. My complaints, while significant, do do we recognize it as the same ship: the color, not destroy the character of the game; it is still shape and lines are all different. quite an achievement. Homeworld has the feel The heart of Homeworld is its prose, and of a good sci-fi novel, with all of the pleasures there are two things to note about it: first, the of exploration and wonder that curling up detail and depth of the game truly shows in with a good book provides, and the \"Infothe multitude of objects the player can excom-esque\" feel of the interface is pleasantly plore and examine, and never once did I nostalgic. When you sit down to play Homeexamine something only to receive a one line world, make sure you have a cozy chair and a \"you see a bowl\" or \"you see a box\" response. bowl of pretzels, because you're likely to be Every time something new appears, the de\"in there\" for quite a while. Cow Mat de che articulated arn tee CEMESTI D ken Been slip or Alte Le > lack Broan Boon Dahill curvilimartler . Is It is a wellery Roro circular vars of the caru t o the east. There is duimte . Larp Retal coach that news front of the wall raised threatenilyn Le con il an articleletal arn It Is CORN Wils EMTS ter ere e ra Atlack Allack Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"You can outfly this guy... But can your COMPUTER? Yesterday's high speed games have pushed your personal computer to its limits. Today's games are breaking them. You need a computer with no limits, You need to fly a FALCON. Introducing the Falcon MACH 5, The latest advance in our line of high speed personal computers, the MACH 5 is the ultimate machine for gaming, personal and business use. It features new VESA Local Bus technology and the fastest 486 processor to produce over 40 VGA frames per second. 30 frames per second is flicker free to the human eye. The MACH 5 is serious hardware for serious players. The MACH 5 comes standard with: VESA Local Bus Motherboard with 256K Cache and Intel 486DX/2-66 Microprocessor VESA Local Bus Graphics Card with 1 Megabyte Video Memory VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card (4 Megabytes per second transfer rate) 4 Megabytes of RAM Upgradable to 32 1.2 and 1.44 Megabyte Floppy Drives 130 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive The MACH 5 Internal Caddyless CD-ROM Drive (350 ms) CTX 14\" Super VGA Color Monitor is Complete Including Mini-Tower Case Creative Labs SoundBlaster Deluxe Shipping For Only Multimedia Speakers Microsoft DOS 6.0 3 Button Serial Mouse 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover CH Products Flightstick Joystick and High Speed Joystick Port Backed By Our 1 Year Parts and Labor Warranty $2,499 LIIT Fractal landscape created with VistaPro 3.0. 3D modeling courtesy of Oregon Data Products. Prices subject to change without notice. Optional equipment shown. FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted. Financing Available. Circle Reader Service #58 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW bec? We CD Sea at  We . Sierra's King's Quest V Speaks Up by Charles Apdai. ike Terry Brooks' novels and Steven VI.\") The voice actors pressed into service take a cue from Prince of Persia and marry her Spielberg's films, Sierra's King's Quest here are much stronger than the amateur crew against her will. Note, however, that unlike games are probably beyond criticism at Sierra assembled for King's Quest V, though Prince of Persia, King's Quest VI is not set in a this point. King's Quest is one of computer one still has the sense that they are trying a world of relentless evil. Though Alex has gaming's few true brand names and, as with little too hard. Sierra boasts of a cast of \"inmany opportunities to perish, it is clear brand names in other fields, one has to dealternationally famous actors\" but neglects to throughout that he has washed ashore in a with the tradeoff between comfort and recogname even one; players are entitled, I think, fairly innocent fantasy land. Not only does nizability on one hand, and freshness, novelty to a measure of cynicism on this point. the game have its share of gnomes, crying and excitement on the other. It's a choice The narrator sounds like the fellow who cabbages, and sassy, talking sticks, it also ineveryone has to make for himself go for the narrated every grammar school Gilmstrip ever troduces the player to such mythical creatures known quantity or try something differmade, over-emphasizing all the goings-on in ent?--and for the most part people will make an awed, hushed voice. The actor who reads 501911 it according to habit. Those who liked the Prince Alex's lines was clearly inspired by first five games will try-and enjoy—the Disney films from the \"Escape to Witch sixth, while those who didn't, won't. Mountain\" era. Everyone breathes too much That said, there is a good deal about the and speaks with too many exclamation CD-ROM edition of King's Quest VI to recpoints. But so what? Kids will love it and ommend it even to gamers who would not indulgent adults won't mind. ordinarily pick up a King's Quest game. If In all other respects the soundtrack is fine, King's Quest is the vanilla ice cream of comexcept for the odd claim Sierra makes that it puter games, at least this particular scoop is coupled with a \"revolutionary, patented lip-synching technology.» The technology as an honest pawnshop owner and a sea capmay be patented, and it may even be revolutionary, but it's not lip-synching. At least half rain who, though nominally a rogue, waxes the time a character speaks, the voice goes one rhapsodic over how \"pure\" the princess is. I way and the lips go another. Still, the voices kept waiting to meet a polite New York cabare solid and the graphics are good; the fact bie or a truthful politician around the next that the two are not perfectly coordinated is bend. unlikely to send gamers back to the store I t should go without saying that players clamoring for a refund. seeking copious bloodshed, mind-bending A word or two about the game's plot is puzzles, or complex characters ought to look necessary, I suppose—but that's all, since elsewhere. King Quest V is a heartily inofcomes with some interesting toppings, such anything more will only expose the paperfensive game full of light touches and not a as the by-now-well-known introductory carthin storyline. Through the use of a magic great deal else. However, gamers who enjoy toon in which the brooding, hormonal Prince Wan Prince Alex hops around among the five light touches will find that few games pull Alexander goes off on a sea voyage in search \"Green Isles,\" solving puzzles and collecting them off with as much grace as King's Quest of his lost Cassima and finds, instead, shiptrinkets that will help him overcome obstatrinkets that will beloh VI. This is not exactly the highest praise a wreck, intrigue and danger. This impressively Tessively des Ouests are doled our in the meer heavycles. Quests are doled out in the most heavygame could receive, but, by all signs, it is the rendered bit of computer cinema may be handed way imaginable (\"I will give you the highest praise to which the king's Questgames laughable in terms of drama, but visually it's spellbook if you bring me a book that is aspire. For plain vanilla, King's Quest VI on incomparable—not quite worth the price of rarer,\" \"I will give you the rare CD-ROM is about as good as it gets. Cow admission, but close. book if you bring me a complete Of course, the cartoon is a holdover from sentence,» «I will give you back King's Quest VI on CD-ROM the original edition, as are the game's stoyour ring if you bring me some\"Proof that the cra of King's Quest VI ruline and all its puzzles. What the CD edithing of equal value\"), yet many CD gaming is upon us.\" $67.95 tion adds primarily are voices, speaking every SYSTEM: gamers will find this straightforREQUIREMENTS: 386SX or better, CD-ROM line of text in the game. (It also throws in a drive, DOS 5 or greater with a ward approach reassur ward approach reassuring. few bonuses, such as an art gallery» in which or greater with 4MB RAM, players can browse through all of the game's The overriding goal of the PROTECTION: background art and a short, full-motion game is for Alex to rescue PrinDESIGNER: Roberta Williams and lane Jensen PUBLISHER: mini-movie, accessible only to Windows uscess Cassima from the evil Vizier Coarsegold, CA ers, describing \"The Making of King's Quest Al-Hazared, who will otherwise (800) 326-6654 TITLE: PRICE: IBM 2MB RAM or Windows 3.0 Wings mouse None   Sierra On-line SENU Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"AVATAR\", YOU'RE NOT IN BRITANNIA ANYMORE! Foiled by your defense of Britannia, the evil Guardian transports you to a world already under his dominion. Now you must confront alien realms and powerful new enemies in a battle without allies. But wait! Perhaps more has changed than just the battlefield ...?  Incredibly smooth and lifelike animation -400 frames of art per character (1200 frames for the Avatar) and 10 times the art of any previous Ultima!  A new, more natural perspective.  Compatibility with EMS, XMS and all other common memory management systems. Twice as many frames per second, producing a richer, faster story in this luxuriously detailed world! Sau Des Pics Mar MWEZIDNISL Actual screens may vary. TUIRUGIA We crédie Worlds Look for the new Pagan Clue Book! An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Pagan and Avatar are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima, Origin, and we create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Copyright  1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. For IBM PC and 100% compatible systems. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"Scorpia main Lands of Lore Doesn't Look Back Westwood's New RPG Breaks With Tradition in Character Creation, Spellcasting and Gaining Experience protection, which changes depending on the types of armor worn. Going even further from the well-worn rut, Westwood has stripped magic down to the bare essentials. There are exactly seven spells in the game: Spark, Hcal, Freeze, Lightning, Fireball, Hand of Fate and Mist of Doom. These spells are available (once found) to the entire party at all times. There are no spell books to worry about, no frantic flipping through long lists to reach the desired incanration, and no need to give up a weapon or shield to cast a spell. Spark  aking Spark Heal Freeze Lightning 0 MET Hand of Fate mi Save thyselves! Leave this place whilst Thou still might. I am bound here for eternity as are the others. Make ye haste from this accursed place! From the folks who brought us Eye of the have been improved with interesting visuals Beholder (EOB) and Legend of Dark(my favorite is the Mist of Doom/Death moon, Westwood Studios' new Lands of Wand), and overall, Lands of Lore has a Lore offers some familiar features to players of brighter appearance than previous games. those carlier games. But Lands of Lore (LOL) The outdoors do need some work, however. also breaks new ground in a number of pleasWhen looked at sideways, trees and related antly surprising ways. scenery to have a 2-D appearance. Happily, feeding your party is not a problem in this game. You can get on with your mission without having to fill up your inventory with supplies, or worrying about starvation. Considering how often the party will need to rest up and restore themselves. this was a good design decision. Since this is an original game, not based on Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, the experience system and character creation are quite different from EOB. In fact, you do not create O NNIUGNGNUKE a character at all. Instead, you choose one of The player's mission is to seek out and four pre-created characters (all males, alas) to destroy the evil hag, Scotia, who has the be your hero for the duration. ability to change her form at will. She tried to wipe out King Richard of Gladstone, who Each comes with three skills: fighting, survived the attack, but was left in rather bad magic and thieving. These skills increase as shape. Most of your quest involves finding a they are used. The more you fight, the better they are used. The more you fight, the better cure for Richard, and then hunting down and a fighter you become; the more you cast spells, the better a mage you become. In this terminating Scotia with extreme prejudice. regard, the game is closer to Dungeon Master, This makes the game a fairly linear one, which used the same system. It is a much with the group going from one location to the more sensible way of handling ability gains next in a pre-determined order. However, the than giving improvements after 'X' number structure is open-ended enough so that you of experience points. can backtrack to most of the major areas, which may be necessary if you missed someYou do not, in fact, ever see any experience thing important in one of them. points at all, which is a pleasant change from most CRPGs. Of course, they exist under the Interaction with other characters is limited; surface, but the display only shows three bar as with the EOB series, the focus is more on graphs that chart each character's progress in hack n' slash and puzzle-solving than anythe three abilities. This helps to keep the focus thing else. Still, there are some people on \"learning by doing,\" rather than trying to around, and they give the world a bit more reach some numerical figure. depth, unlike the lifeless sewers of Waterdeep and the tunnels of Darkmoon Temple. A few In another break from tradition, there are no attributes like strength, intelligence, dexoutdoor areas and a town add reality to the world as well. terity and so on. You see only four stats: the character's hit points, which go up with Graphically, the game is a step up from fighter ability; magic points, which increase EOB. The detail, especially in facial close-ups, with magic ability; might, which varies acis finer. The animation is good, spell effects cording to the weapon equipped; and armor HORE RZECGAD3E1 In a CRPG, that's almost all you really need. Most games burden the player with 30 or 40 spells, to little advantage. For instance, AD&D has Cure Light Wounds, Cure Serious Wounds, Cure Critical Wounds and Heal. All of those do exactly the same thing, except at increasing levels of effect. The single Heal spell in Lands of Lore replaces all of these and achieves the same results by using power levels, which go from 1 to 4. The higher the level, the more potent the casting. The only thing missing in this otherwise estimable system is a protective spell or two; TITLE: Lands of Lore PRICE: $62.99 SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, 2MB RAM VGAMCGA graphics, mouse, 22 MB hard drive space PROTECTION: Documentation look up DEVELOPER: Westwood Studios PUBLISHER: Virgin Interactive Entertainment Irvine, CA (800) 874-4607 IBM Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"COKTEL VISION Part of the Sierra Family HE PLOTTED YOUR DOOM CENTURIES BEFORE YOU WERE BORN. LOSTINTIME Race across time to outwit a murderous fiend, exploring hostile jungles, luxurious chateaus, and a past fraught with danger. From the creators of Inca comes this new, interactive movie, available in MS-DOS on disk or CD. It's a captivating tale of suspense, romance, and time travel, s scenery in France and the Caribbean. Visit your favorite software store or call 1-800-757-7707. S. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"YVEL CAVE SAICS SHOP VICTOR'S ARM5 LETCHER YVEL'S COUNCIL N CRUNO FLOOGC FDOOR WIDUTTORI/LEVER CHCET a rather surprising omission, in fact. Some up Paulson, and he too remains with you to include such an irrelevant and outrageous form of damage reduction or protection the end. activity is a mystery, but we will hope that against physical or magical attacks would reAs you can see, Lands of Lore has several very they don't do it again. ally have been useful. good features. But, it also has a few that are A sore point of a different kind is the plethOutside of this, the entire system has a not so good. Combar, for example, has not ora of fancy weapons in the game. Everyone pleasing simplicity that in no way detracts improved much, if at all, since the EOB series. likes Neat Items, but we also like to know from the play of the game. It allows you to In one instance, I was disappointed that nothsomething about them. There are many get on with it without having to worry about ing along the lines of the EOB III Call attack\" named weapons here: Long Sword Entropy, a lot of picky details. This is one instance feature was implemented. While two or three Valkyrie Crossbow, Great Axe Master, Triwhere less really is more. people are certainly easier to manage in comdent Mandible, Rapier Talon, Mace Thumbat than four to six, it is still a pain to click per and Halberd Widow, to name only a few. individually on the attack icons. Some form City of Yuel What's so special about them is often diffidu: of auto-attack for hand weapons really needs cult, and usually impossible, to determine. to be added to the engine. You can learn something by equipping them; Fighting tactics seemed more limited than this will always have an effect on Might and in the COB series; the two most popular occasionally on Armor Protection, as well. methods, backing up and slip 'n slide (also Beyond that, you have no idea, even with known as the Dance of Death) usually did not experimentation, what other abilities they work too well here. Many opponents have might possess (except Great Axe Master, distance attacks of their own, so backing up which adds +thief level when equipped, and to fight from afar just gives them the chance the Valkyrie Crossbow, which raises natural to hit you with missiles or spells. Not all thief ability quickly when used frequently). critters can do this, of course, but there are There isn't any way to find out for sure, Auto-mapping is available enough around who can to make backing up cither. The game has no «Identify\" spell and (when you have the room) a poor choice. and is one of the best no one who can tell you about the item. Slip and slidehitting monsters did not fare There is a witch doctor in the swamp who says around.' any better in combat. Quite a few of the he can tell you about objects (for a price), but hostiles moved rather quickly, and there often that is just so much Muff. I showed him the Inventory management follows along the wasn't time to hit and run. Further, in many Entropy Sword, paid 50 crowns, and he resame lines. Instead of each person lugging areas, the opponents come in large groups of marks, \"Ah yes, that is the Long Sword Enaround his or her own items, all equipment five, six or more, and waltzing around is a tropy.\" End of identification. Wonderful. sits in a sliding pool, making it easy to review good way to become surrounded (and dead) what you have. Only weapons and armor in a very short time. actually in hand or worn are not part of this When critters gang up on you, expect some pool. (Undocumented command: clicking unusually difficult fights. After taking out the on either arrow with the right mouse button first two or three, you often have to run away will move the bar a complete section to the quickly to find a safe spot to rest up and left or right, rather than one item at a time. restore the party, because everyone is in bad It's quite handy for quick scrolling.) shape and out of spell power. While there are Auto-mapping is available and is one of the potions to restore hit and spell points, they best around. While it cannot be sent to a are quickly exhausted in heavy fighting, leavKOEI printer and you can't write on it, the map willing you with little or nothing for later. thfully record all doors, stairs, buttons. A few situations like this are acceptable, but chests, secret doors, pits, floor plates and Lands of Loresports too many of them, adding special locations (shops, caves, etc.), both inunnecessary frustration to the game. Lots of \"Most of the monsters in doors and out. No longer do you have to monsters is one thing-lots of them coming scrutinize every wall for a button or switch, at once from different sides is quite another. Lands of Lore are new and or fill up graph paper with your own handRelated to combat, there is one segment of original.' drawn cartographs. The map is also scrolthe game that ought never to have been in lable, allowing you to look back at any time there. Before you enter Scotia's castle, you When fancy items, especially named weapat any location previously visited. come upon two races, the Xeobs and the ons, appear in a game, there must also be Knowles, who are at war with each other. The some method for determining what, if any, new, original and full of little surprises. Some reasons for their spar is never given. Regardspecial properties they have. It isn't enough can melt armor; others are \"thumpers,\" makless, you are forced to choose to fight for one to provide the thing; players need a basis for ing the ground shake and thereby disarming side or the other; there is no way out of it and making intelligent choices about which everyone (nasty!); and there's one type that no way to bring peace. With nothing to go weapons to keep and which to discard. Going can stun you with a single blow. Always be on, most players will likely make their choice only by the might/armor protection provided careful when coming up against something based on expediency: whichever race they by the item may not be the best course. you haven't seen before. find easier to kill is the one they'll go after The party itself will never have more than This is disturbing for several reasons. First Overall, Lands of Lore is a better-than-averthree people; for a good chunk of the game, it has nothing whatever to do with Scotia, nor age game of this type. It does have some weak it will consist of one or two. Your hero starts does it advance the plot in any way. Second, points and design flaws which need to be out alone and a little later picks up Timothy, this situation is forced on you, with no altercleaned up in future products. Still, the imwho stays for a short while. He is replaced by native. Third, and worst of all, you are comproved game engine and graphics, and the Baccata, a four-armed wonder who does stay mitting genocide, wiping out a race for no move toward streamlined play make it a game for the duration (so it's okay to give him some reason other than to get on with your own worth playing, especially if you enjoyed the of the good stuff). Much later, you also pick business. Why Westwood felt it necessary to first two EOB adventures. CGW Spark Hes! Freeze Lightning Fireball Hand of Fate Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3-D ACTION SINCE WOLPENSTEINI BLAKE STONE ALIENS OF GOLD Terror has been unleashed! PARENA WARNING GRAPHIC VIOLENCE And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future. Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are:  (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. Engaglig Adub music; Intense found Blaster sound effects WAREN 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors TIN MANNEN (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K Take on dozens of vicious opponents in combat (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchaserh by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY APOGEE FRIDA. JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFTWAR P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND IX 75049 Battle through 60 levels of \"heart-pounding terror! Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #40 A001CGW "


"Tips For The Tillerman Warning: Scorpia's game solving wit cuts to the quick! Among her general hints there may be specific solutions lying in wait. Visit her lair with care. You have a choice of four characters at the start; of these, Conrad and Ak'shel are the best. Conrad is well-balanced, just as he says, and will develop nicely over the course of the game. Ak'shel is a dynamite mage; he starts with a lot of magic points, and frequent spell-casting will bring him up a couple of levels faster than anyone else. If you do take Ak shel, remember that hit points only come with fighter levels and he starts off somewhat low in hit points. After you've improved him a bit as a mage, switch around and have him do some fighting to beef up. The auto-map is a valuable tool. Check it frequently to see if you've naced any wall buttons, switches or secret doors. There are a lot of these in Lore. Be sure to save before you fool with them, as some are traps. There are several times when you will have to drop down into pits (the Draracle cave for one). When there seems to be nowhere else to go, take the down express! Damage is always minor, so unless someone is badly injured before the drop, the party should be okay. Actually, everyone should be in good health before going down a hole, as monsters are usually waiting for you. Aside from weapons and armor, there are a number of objects in the game with obscure uses. Swarms are one-shot weapons. Bezel cups both heal injuries and cure poison. Ace of Oblivion functions as a Mist of Doom spell, and Ace of Infinity restores magic points. To use such items or magic wands, pick up the object, hold it over a character's attack icon and right-click. In the Upper Opinwood forest, inside one of the locked tree stumps, is the Valkyrie Crossbow, probably the best missile weapon in the game. Not only does it shoot miniature fireballs, but frequent use of this weapon raises Rogue skill quickly...and I don't recall ever seeing anyone miss while using it. If you complete an area with keys remaining, you can dump them. Westwood indicates that some locks are harder to pick than others, and keys are provided in case you can't get them open. The early stages of the game are pretty straightforward. Be sure to take all the good stuff Timothy may have (such as his rapier) before you enter the throne room in Gladstone Keep. That's where Timothy leaves you, and you need the good stuff more than he does. It isn't necessary to buy anything at Buck's Skins; before long, you'll have quite a collection of weapons just from exploring, fighting and opening chests. Besides, you need Roland's money to buy passage back to Gladstone. The Draracle caves are where things start to get tough. The rat men are nasty opponents, so try to fight them in narrow corridors where they can't gang up on you or surround the party. Keep your ginseng handy in case of poisoning. You can only use one eye (green or blue), so don't worry that you didn't get both wall sections open. The important things here are to find the silver cup (for the Draracle) and obtain the clixir recipe from the Draracle. Rest up if you can before leaving the caves-a welcoming committee is waiting outside. When you reach Opinwood, go over it thoroughly, but be careful there are other things besides Orcs lurking about. Do not open the door leading into the mines until you have the green skull from Upper Opinwood. GUESS WHO IS COMING TO DINNER.. "


"The critters who live in the swamp have something you need, so find the chief as soon as you can. The Witch Doctor can help with the riddle scroll. The freeze spell is useful for getting around. There isn't much you can do about the swamp gas, sorry to say. The Urbish mines are nasty, so take your time. The machine on level one must be fixed sooner or later. Be sure to pick up one red heart gem (dropped after a combat). You must leave here with Paulson in the party, as he has the Vaclen's Cube that can destroy Scotia's barrier. In the right circumstances, the cube can be duplicated endlessly, which will be very helpful in the White Tower and Scotia's castle. Save the game and experiment a little. When you reach Yvel Forest, stick to the west side of the map. Greater Ores are running around in the woods, and they are tough opponents. When you get to the city, be sure to go into all the houses as many of them have useful items. The White Tower is another tough place. On level one you have to deal with the Amazons. Most importantly, you have to reach Jana, the queen, who has a mystic key you need. Remember \"ring for admittance.\" Close the two grates to stop slug creatures from appearing. Level two has the flying one-eyed chickens that toss fireballs; if you see one coming, duck around a corner fast. They only use them from a distance, so you don't have to worry about being fried in hand-to-hand fighting. Level three is the worst, being inhabited by ghosts. Use Vaelen's Cubes (very effective!) and emerald swords against them. The snakes are not affected by the cubes, and they can be deadly. Weapons work against them, but you have to be quick. Expect to take more damage from snakes than anything else. From this level, you want the ivory key that opens the door on level one leading to the sublevel. The \"faith door\" is optional. Inside are two chests; you can only open one. Save and try both to see which one you like better. In the Catwalk Caverns (after the big fight), check walls for hand marks and use the Dark Gauntlet on them. Go over the caverns thoroughly; you need two keys (one from the West and one from the North) to open the door leading to the Kowle/Xeob confrontation. These caverns are the last time you'll be needing the lantern, so you can dumpany extra oil flasks when you're done. I chose to fight the Xeobs, as they were easier. The Knowles seemed impervious to any spell below Fireball, were extremely hard to hit, and they were also thumpers, making the ground shake. This disarms and causes damage, too. Xcobs can dissolve armor, but were still casier to kill than Knowles. Both sides give you the same reward, so you might as well take the easier one. Scoria's is a mean place, as you might expect. Level one has ghosts (use the cube) and flying axes (Freeze spell is good here). Level two has flying eyes (can dissolve armor, kill these fast) and scorpion-like critters who can stun. Level three has only giant toads, but they are thumpers. Fortunately, they do not regenerate and are gone forever once you kill them off. All other monsters do regenerate, so expect many combats as you make your way around the castle. Be wary of traps. You may find yourself in a place from which there is no escape except the Restore option. Don't go putting things into niches; you may never see them again (there is an exception to this on level three). On level one, there is a section where you lose your automap. Don't panic. The area you have to map (room of pits and spinners) is small, and the compass still works; just be patient and you'll get through this. The automap is restored when you reach level two. you want to collect two figurines from level one, one from level two, and one from level three. Do NOT visit Scotia until after you have rescued King Richard. At the final confrontation, only the whole truth can help you. You muse stop Scotia from doing any transformations or you're done for. Once the Nether Mask has been neutralized, she can be killed with weapons and spells (save a Guardian for faster results). Good luck! CGW The Shadow of USERBIE Look What Sierra Brought Home! YOU ALSO GET. 30 HOURS ON-LINE FREE! IMPORT THE CHARACTER YOU'VE BUILT AND SET OUT ON YOUR QUEST WITH REAL PEOPLE FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY... Real people. Real time. Real danger. Take on enemies with a sophisticated combat system, develop a killer Tiinion, the long-awaited single-user sequel to Yserbius, and a chance to go on-line for a month and battle other adventurers from around the country. You'll build your character by completing quests, acquiring spells, and gaining experience. Then you can import your character into a multiplayer environment where you can face the Strategy Plus calls The Shadow of challenge alone or form your own Yserbius \"a champion among multiplayband of heroes. er fantasy games. \"And now the champ Buy your weapons, armor and comes home in a deluxe single-player spells at the local tavern. Then set edition, offering the same intrigue that out in search of the secret buried has already mesmerized over 50.000 deep in the heart of an ancient volon-line players. Sierra's packed cano. But play as though your life Yserbius with two additional features depends on ilor you could wind no other FRP can offer: The Fates of up someone's dinner. Circle Reader Service #116 GUEST ITE IS inventory, or form monstrous friend ships with other adventurers. Explore To see nna este a shadowy kingdom and be back in time for dinner. It's all in a day's play. «You'll be hooked long after you solve the volcanos mysteries.\" -QuestBusters See your local retailer or call: 800.75767707 SIERRA "


"STRATEGY Strike Quickly Strike Hard Tips and Tactics for Origin's Strike Commander MEDITATE PRELTFERI ZZERCELO PEEETTER TTEEEEEE NJ SIDEWINDER RDOHET ROCHET LUTEGO AIM OM SIDEWINDER R OTI by Tom \"KC\" Basham trike Commander mixes elements of a strike recon patrols are usually called for. I (beyond visual range) intercepts. However, role-playing game and a combat flight generally save games after completing cach BVR cngagements never happen. Bandits will D simulation to put the player in an acmission, then proceed to the next mission, always appear out of thin air about 8nm away, rion-packed, movic-like adventure. Because read the briefing, and fly the mission with just inside the 10nm range of the AIM-9M. of the scripted nature of the missions, the default armaments. Since each player has a very well defined goal and must mission is identical every time it execute a linear sequence of intermediate acis played, this allows me to get a complishments in order to realize it. Though good idea of what I am up against. somewhat constraining, Strike still grants its i then restore the last saved game, players considerable leeway in how they buy the appropriate weapons, and achieve these intermediate steps. Even execure the mission. Is this cheatAIM 10 10 though every Strike player has to complete the ing? By Strike's rules, maybe. But same goals in each mission, there is plenty of remember: Strike hardly follows room for individual style to shine through the real-world rules. A flight of F-16S would never attack a Allocating Resources ground targer without first going Most mission briefings give the player very over the site in detail, noting enOrder: AIM-911 little information to work with. Vague details emy air defenses, and making about the target are given, but no photosome form of tactical decision on graphs or mission profiles are discussed. Anhow Since the AIM-6M costs only $60,000 per to deal with said defenses. Besides, unit, has all aspect targeting capability, and a ticipated threats are mentioned in passing, theres an old fighter pilor saying: if you ain't reasonable hit rate, why waste an extra but the player is given no significant intellicheating, you ain't trying. gence information. It's even difficult to know $140,000 per potential kill using AMwhich weapons should be carried. Further, Air-to-Air Combat RAAMs? The 20mm cannon is far cheaper the squadron's tight budget makes it difficult than any missile (it's free, you never pay a As another old saying goes: se the right dime for 20mm rounds), but due to the to stockpile weapons. Weapons purchased tool for the job. In the case of Strike Comimmediately before a mission may deplete the jerkiness of Strike's controls, many users find mander air-to-air combat, the right tool Wildcats' bankroll while being insufficient or it extremely difficult to saddle up for a guns seems to be the AIM-9M missile. Of the four inappropriate for the planned mission. kill. Although it is possible, it takes practice, air-to-air weapons available in Strike (the AIM-9), AIM-9M, AIM-120, and 20mm a steady hand and a fast computer. cannon), the AIM-9M gives the best bang for AMRAAMs have only one advantage: you the wargaming buck. Since Strike puts you in can put two of them on the inside wing pylon charge of the squadron's finances, maximiz which will only carry one AIM-9M. By using ing available bang should be your top prior both types, you can carry up to eight missiles ity. into combat, but by using only the AIM-9M Why the AIM-OM? The AIM-9J is simply you can only carry six. It's a tradeoff. You too unreliable. Although very cheap (in relacarry the potential for two more kills (if all tive terms), its 6nm range, rear-aspect-only missiles perform perfectly), but it costs AN=96&It aspect missiler 100 targeting restriction, and poor hit ratio makes 280,000 extra dollars. If you're rolling in for a very unattractive purchase. The AIMcash, then maybe it's worth it, but I found The element of surprise is an intended part 120, although more reliable than the AIM most campaigns to operate on extremely right of the game, but those looking for flight sim 9), is the most expensive air-to-air missile at budgets, and the AIM-120's combat perfidelity rather than shoot-em-up action may your disposal. At $200,000 per unit, its 40nm formance not good enough to warrant the find the surprises frustrating. Therefore, prerange makes it ideal for long-range, BVR extra expense. Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"PILOT THE NAYY'S FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE. FLEET DEFENDER The F-14 Tomcat Simulation! Home CESTIT The cafe BW Aer on Wether EMS in COT LAIM lansis Actual screens may vary. It's all up to you! The skies are swarming with bandits. Only you stand between the threat and your carrier battle group. Lock on your radar and launch the Navy's advanced weapons to destroy the most sophisticated enemy targets ever developed for a MicroProse simulation. Roll, turn, climb, and dive to out-maneuver enemy aircraft using an artificial intelligence developed right out of Soviet and Third World military doctrine. A computer-controlled wingman responds to your every command. And, you'll interact with strike packages that include F/A-18 Hornets, A-6 Intruders, A-7 Corsairs and E-2C Hawkeye AWACS. Featuring the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological surveys, you'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. Fleet Defender from MicroProse. We brought you the F-15 Strike Eagle, now try the F-14 Tomcat featuring the most authentically modeled F-14 systems available anywhere outside of the Navy. MICROPROSE To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon Fri 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST ! or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. D10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name: ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE Address: City State:  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #84 AAS. "


"W OMAT 3 ADRE PNOCHIX IS cactus 19   STUDI perative to succeed on every sortie. This means the player has to be as proficient at bombing as dogfighting. In bang-for-the-buck terms, the Mk 82 iron bomb is probably the best value for the Wildcats' dollar. These do a reasonable amount of damage, but require accurate bombing skills and overflight of the target. CY Most targets require multiple attack passes 9 D (always a bad idea in combat), and multiple passes over heavily defended targets will alAir combat in Strike isn't too difficult if you most certainly mean damage to your aire letter, but still the mission was a failure. Antiknow the secret: computer-controlled pilots (and more money out of the Wildcats' runway missions are the most commonly rarely use the vertical. The AI loves horizontal pocket). cited example. Many times, pickling Duranturns and will crank high-g circles all day. dals until the entire runway is annihilated Simple vertical maneuvers by the human will In terms of effectiveness, the AGM-65 won't complete an anti-runway mission. The almost always confound the computer-conMaverick is the clear winner of the day. Alkey is to destroy some of the surrounding trolled pilots. For example, if a MiG-21 slides though it can't destroy some of the larger structures. After bombing a few extra buildin on your six and you just can't shake him targets, it's deadly against vehicles, air deings you'll get the familiar «Mission comno matter how many g's you pull in hard fenses and small buildings. Being fire-andpleted, let's head home\" message. In some turns, try rolling out slightly and execute a forget makes it especially useful. On the first barrel roll. As you pitch up, the bandit will pass at a given target, fire a barrage of Mavercases, direct hits on the runway aren't even icks at the air defense batteries. This clears the nearly always overshoot, and you'll finish the needed to complete an anti-runway mission. roll by diving down into his six o'clock. Loops skies for subsequent passes and allows you to In one mission early in my career, all of my rain truckloads of Mk 82s down on the target are also a great way to shake bandits. Durandals missed the runway, leaving me with little risk to your aircraft. Mavericks with only cannon and air-to-air missiles. I aren't cheap, so they should be used sparingly Air-to-Ground Combat made several strafing passes on the surroundto take out defenses, then followed by ironing buildings with the 20mm cannon. After Most missions are combination missions: bombs to take out the high value targets. destroying a handful of buildings I was told fly to waypoint 1, engage fighters, proceed to the mission was complete and to return to waypoint 2, attack ground target, fly to wayThe Target That Won't Die base! The moral of the story is: if you can't point 3, engage more fighters, etc. Since only complete the mission, or miss with your pria few mission failures (sometimes as few as Sometimes it seems impossible to complete mary weapon, don't give up! Strike seems to one) can abruptly end your career, it's ima mission. You follow the instructions to the always give the player a second chance. Cow HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED SIDELINE SOFTWARE D Foreningen WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY ARE SO UNREAL? GP Unlimid Road & Track 21.95 YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE TYPE PICTURES, NEW PC TITLES Came From the Desert 14.95 THEY FORGOT ABOUT A 320 Airbus USA RESEARCH, TESTING, & DESIGN. Fire Team 2200 16.95 Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18 95 Fool's Erard 16.95 Goy Naman Go 1095 Harpoon 14.95 Haut China 18.95 Hero Ouest 18.95 Hook 16.95 1869 War Simulation Flight Simulation Archie McClean's Pool Sports Simulation Bal. Midwinter, Cadever, Blood wych ALL FOR Ballle Isle 93 War Simulation Body Blows Arcade D-Day War Simulation Dmonsgate Role Playing Garte Fields of Glory Role Playing Game History Une 1914-1918 Strategy Simulalion Ishar 2 Role Playing Game Nippon Sales Graphic Adventure Reach for the Skies Flight Simulation Ryder Cup Sports Simulation Shadow Worlds Role Playing Game Sleepwalker Strategy Whales Voyage Arcade Strategy WWF, T2, The Simpsons Strategy Simulation World of Legends ALL THREE for only World Wresting Federation 2 Role Playing Game PC EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format. PC Review. PC Zone, or PC Plus, each only $10 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No relunds or exchanges. Delective producis exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITEDI 840 N.W. 57th Court, FL Lauderdale, FL 33309 WE DIDNT . SIMULATIONS CANADA... FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING  G G2GOCO P4Om Anck Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Kiling Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Chn d Ky 2 5 Links 386 29 95 Lure el the Temptress 1895 Mantis 24.95 Manis Bacon Typing Tulor 18.95 Micropvase Goll 26.95 Microprose Greens 27.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 1895 Monty Python 16.95 Night Anwar's Grand Prix 2195 Obilus 18.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Paparboy 2 16.95 Pet Fighter 18.95 Populus Promised Lands 24.95 Pushover 18.95 RS Betal 2 14.95 Reains 18.95 Rer Nebear 24.95 Rocket Range 16.95 Swag 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shanghai 2 18.95 Shullleuct Cale 14.95 Sim Cay Terrain Editor 9.95 Slewing Gods Lie 16.95 SANT wached 16.95 Sauce Crusade 18.95 Special Forces 21.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Sinle Flod 19.95 Storm Masters 18.95 Shund Car Racer 16.95 Super Oxl Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Test Dine 2. all datadisks 18.95 The Immortal 19.95 Three Stooges 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 TV Sports Basiela 18.95 TV Sports Baring 18.95 TV Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Verle 14.95 White Death (Ral 18.95 Winter Super Sports 16.95 Matid 18.95 Wortct 18.95 World Class Laxderboard 14.95 Zool 21.95 NAVAL COMBAT: ***New*RED SKY AT MORNING, Global Naval Strategic Combat In The Modern Era. New YMAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 1815. THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1942. THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920, IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Corbat In The Pacific, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations in the Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Combat. DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! MTD NEA NO INCOL DIUUUINI TU 4-Sports Boxing 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 A-Train 26.95 Collossus Bridge 16.95 Action Swions 1895 Command HO 18.95 Ashes of the Enpire 21.95 Cauan De Cimaros 18.95 AC (Microprose) 2495 Crisis in the Kanin 21.95 Austerlin 16.95 Defender of the Crown 16.95 B-17 bombe (Merayos) 2495 Dekat Strip Poker 16.95 Bard's Tale 3 1895 Delar Sino Poker 2 18.95 BAT 14.95 Drakthan 18.95 Battlechess 18.95 Emina 2 1895 Garnier Command 1695 F16 Fakon 14.95 ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own.\"Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #113 Page 32 Circle Reader Service #118 Computer Gaming World "


"REVIEW FIRST ROUND PICK KVARTALA EA Recruits NHL Hockey From The Cartridge League by Gordon Goble New Extition Game Next League G League Montage He Pyrene Mert Play orr Game  kon LOS ANGELES DE CHICAGO \"Les Habitants,\" the fans at Pacific Coliseum ing puck sits on-screen, flashing glimpses of (or \"Pacific Mausoleum\" to we Vancoureal player animations on both front and SCUIT ell, Danny, these Canucks are verites) have had little to celebrate. backside. The letters «N,\" \"H\" and \"L\" are certainly a game bunch. Losers of their first seven games, tonight Although curiously leading the league in everywhere, the cursor used to access the pullthey're giving the powerful Canadiens all bey penalty killing, the Canucks' real-life power down \"Windows\" type menuing system is a can handle as they look for their first victory of play woes have been digitally intensified in hockey glove, and one is left with the impresthis young season.\" this computerized league, and they currently sion that EA has spared no detail. \"That's right. Foster. An early first period sit 24th and dead last at a pitifully inept 6.1% Following the opening ceremonies, one is marked by Stephan LeBeau looked as if it would would success rating. Compare that to the 23rd plunked into Sports Central, the primary instand up until little Clifly Ronning jammed ned place Hartford Whalers at 21%, and first place terface for accessing gameplay, updating stahome a rebound at the midway juncture of the the plac place Quebec at 49%, and the sad story betistics, and managing league transactions and third to send us into this overtime.\" comes quite clear. play. Naturally, the first order of business is But the courageous Canucks will continue to leave the instruction manual on the floor AUSMES to strive forward and perhaps win some reand get into the game action as quickly as the spectability through time and experience) for whir of the hard drive will allow. NHL Hockey SPORTS one key reason: the human master of this has an exhibition game mode for just such game is thoroughly addicted. purposes. Pick a pair of likely candidates and Electronic Arts has achieved with NHL begin. Hockey a rare accomplishment in the realm of team sport simulations—a playing environment that is flush with realism, excitement and credibility. Players do what players do, action unfolds as it should, and victory is a KAY constant challenge. Most importantly, NHL \"The crowd at the Coliseum is standing and Hockey may prompt one to forget that he roaring their approval as the referee gets set to she is in control of mere images on a comdrop the puck for this five minute overtime puter screen and not much, much more. session... it's Ronning against Denis Savard on Licensed by both the National Hockey VITAJATEGIA the face-off.\" CORREDETI conced League and the NHL Player's Association, \"Marouelli drops the puck and Ronning flips NHL Hockey is far from foible-free, and these As the amiable Mr. Barr introduces toit quickly to Linden. Linden winds up and slams misgivings will be explored later, but the manight's game, a scouting report listing the a long blast... IT'S IN!!! ... HOLY TOLEDO!!jor elements work together in harmony tovarious weaknesses and strengths of both THE CANUCKS HAVE WON THE produce a cohesive product. Essentially, EAteams appears on the screen. Elements such GAME. THE CANUCKS HAVE WON has taken the quick reflex action of the Segaas goaltending, power play and defense are THE GAME!!!\" Genesis/Super NES version of the game analyzed, and an overall ranking is displayed. Being a Vancouver Canuck fan for oh-so(NHLPA Hockey), added coaching and league It is recommended that newcomers pick a many years has, until recently, been an exermanagement functions, thrown cise in frustration. Since their 1970 inception in a whole lot of statistics, and and prior to the esteemed Pat Quinn regime, allowed up to 24 human comthe Canucks' record has been anything but petitors (one for each team in the TITLE: NHL Hockey PRICE: sparkling. NHL as of 1993) to compete in a full 84 game season. REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, 2MB In the real world the Canucks' fortunes RAMEMS), 7MB hard drive space; NHL Hockey is immediately have begun to change, but on my computer Supports Adlib, Roland and Sound Blaster sound cards PROTECTION: they remain submerged in the basement of endearing. As the program opens, PLAYERS: 1-2 theach-to-head) the Smythe Division standings. It is just nine a crystal clear voice-over by EA DESIGNERS: Dave Warfield, Richard Hilleman PUBLISHER: games into the 93/94 season and, aside from sports announcer Ron Barr welSan Mateo, CA (415) 571-7171 this glorious home ice overtime triumph over comes one and all, while a twirlSYSTEM: $69.95 IBM None Electronic Arts November 1993 Page 33 "


"Zhitijk Hardy powerhouse squad such as the Penguins or and digital rinks. Getting a perfect line on a trolled personnel changes. Hockey purists Canadiens, while offering Mr. Computer the puck-carrying opponent and then forcefully will want to handle line changes themselves, lowly San Jose Sharks or Tampa Bay Lightclosing the deal will most often result in a and although keeping one's best players on cning. NHL Hockey is anything but easy, and momentous collision, complete with a rethe ice all night is a nice idea, even the game's in the early stages any advantage is welcome. sounding \"OOF!\" or \"UGH!\" and the appresuperstars are human and will eventually tire. ciative cheers or moans from the crowd, The energy level of current on-ice skaters is depending upon their allegiance. In some displayed on a small bar graph at the bottom TOILGEMS DINE-UP instances, a penalty may be called or oppoD i of the screen, and the idea is to keep the best ENDE PAIRINGS religion nent injured, but that's the chances taken in talent involved in play until weariness begins such circumstances. For the most part, pento take a toll. Line changes are accomplished alties are obvious, although the actual infracvia a single keystroke, and this procedure Mosorleyse ike Huddy tions are quite randomly assessed, and the couldn't be simpler. controversy of fighting does not seem to be Once a little on-ice exactitude and knowlpart of the NHL Hockey world. Sadly, one of edge has been attained, experimental exhibithe most nail-biting elements of real hockey, tion contests will undoubtedly be shed for the penalty shot, seems to have been excluded league play, and NHL Hockey provides a entirely from this program Following a pre-game display of line-ups number of options. Although the default and scratches (which can be altered if one Thoughtfully included in NHL Hockey NHL setup will be the choice of many, one wishes), the final few strains of the American however, are such niceties as delayed penalties can custom-tailor any number of teams and or Canadian national anthem are played, the and offsides, the ability to \"pull\" a goalie at leagues to their liking. The statistics of each appropriate billowing flag flown, and the anytime for an extra attacker, referees that and every 1992/93 NHL team and player any contest is underway. The player has one view skate with the players, «Player of the Game\" (including a digital rendition of each player's of the ice, and one view only, a 3/4 angle from selections that acrually make sense, and the photograph) is available to prospective manathe end of the rink, although when action ability to choose specific power play and pengerial candidates, and they can be moved moves down ice, the screen pans with it. As alty killing personnel combinations. Berween about and re-grouped as desired. One cannot, fans of Bethesda's Wayne Gretzky Hockey will periods, game stats are disclosed, highlights however, make up their own team names and tell you, this perspective (brought about just from other games shown, and an our-of-town players. last year in Wayne Gretzky 3) conveys much scoreboard updates one on other happenings As league play progresses, NHL Hockey will more of the unfolding action than an overfrom around the league. update the latest stats on both players and head shot was ever capable of doing. teams, and if one shows considerable skill, a berth in the Stanley Cup Playoffs will be the A joystick is highly recommended for NHL reward. At any time during the season, the Hockey as almost every action can be controlcurrent team and individual leaders in a numled through the stick and its two buttons. The ber of categories are at the ready, and this is player will have personal control over just one helpful in determining who's doing what. of his players at any given moment (while his After all, a forward with a lot of goals may be other charges will behave in an intelligent lacking in other areas, or a team (like the manner), but depressing Button 1 will shift aforementioned Canucks) might get that control to the skater currently closest to the much better with a little concentration on puck. Furthermore, anytime a player gains NIELERAT certain areas of their game, such as the power possession of the puck, he then will become manually controlled. Button 1 is also used to A fast moving sport like hockey is made for play. Individual trophies are also handed out make a pass, and Burton 2 to blister a shot. the instant replay, and NHL Hockeyallows for at season finale, and judging by the level of Unfortunately, NHL Hockey does not allow 25 second segments. Replays can be viewed competition in NHL Hockey, having one's for velocity modifications to either the shot full speed or in slo-mo, then saved if wished own star forward snatch the Art Ross is ceror the pass. but are categorized only by game time and tainly a feather in his or her cap. The bad n date. Therefore, one cannot, for instance, is that all this information will forever remain The pace of play is quick, and even the access \"That great play when Lemieux inside the computer, as no facilities have been shoddiest of opposition will pass and sweep walized around the entire Flyer team and allowed for printer connections. down the ice with remarkable precision. Early popped it into the right corner,\" or even on, it behooves one to slow the play down LEMWALTZ.REP. When reliving incred 0004 Chicago when needed and get a solid grasp on passing ible moments from the past, it may be hard #27 Jeremy Poenick without losing possession of the puck. to find the right incredible moment. Unassisted Thankfully, there are no guaranteed set plays in NHL Hockey upon which one can alwaysAdding to the visual feast of NHL Hockey is depend (as there seems to be in most team an admirable audio selection, including musport sims), and a full game with evenlysical selections and crowd-rousing drum beats matched opposition will tax the mind as such as the opening to Queen's \"We Will much as the reflexes. Each athlete, ream and Rock You\") during stoppages of play, blaring game will have its own distinct flavor, and horns mixed with crowd noise, goal signaling most players behave in much the same mansirens, and all the appropriate thuds and Electronic Arts' NHL Hockey offers both ner as their real life counterparts. Hockey fans bonks that players and pucks make when they the frustration and the glory of professional may have the odd quibble with a specific do what they do. Never annoying, these hockey's highest level. At times, players will attribute here and there, but overall, the Pavel sound effects only enhance the mood and stir lose themselves in the simulation and feel Bures of the league are quick and deceptive, the soul toward victory. they are in control of a televised NHL broadwhile the Bob Proberts are punishing and Punismy and Several pre-game options are available. Incast. It simultaneously puts you inside the solid. fractions such as icing and a two-line pass head of both coach and player...and that is Speaking of Probert, there is no substitute offside can be toggled on and off, and one can an experience well worth the price of admisfor a crunching body check in both the real choose between manual vs. computer consion. CGW AVAT L63 Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Close encounters nightly. ILUU There's only one way to find out. Sign up and meet us in Federation II available only on GEnie\". For the cold reaches of space, there's an awful lot of chummy people here. That's because Federation II isn't one of those shoot-the-ship computer games. This is a universe full of people. Real people, online, working with other real people in real time: busily building their fortunes, planets...nay, empires. And they'd love to throw some work your way so you can do the same. Of course, there's a lot of bargaining, buying and bulling that goes into it. We're social creatures, after all. But if you're one of those special individuals who understands that creating an empire is ever so much more interesting than destroying aliens, maybe you can thrive in our space. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 8IN or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#prompt,enter XTX99225, NIGHTLY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Federation II on ORG GEnie multi-player games Mut . Federalio 100% Organic Opponents. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Circle Reader Service #63 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW A Story Far Che Sung AreHeart: Symbols And Sorcery In The Madness of Roland by Maxwell Eden he Madness of Roland, a CD-ROM based multimedia novella by HyperI Bole Studios, offers a dynamic medium for interpreting the written word, while exposing the intriguing tapestry of medieval sing the intriguing tapestry of medieval knights, sorcery and romance to an entirely new, computer literate and mature (rated R) audience. Combining an electronic book format with clements of a movie, The Madness of Roland is a pastiche of technology, interwoven with a rich use of language, classical works of art and contemporary images. Beginning with the siege of Paris in 778 AD by Muslim infidels, the reader is transported into the medieval French legend of the paladin Rooriginal film and music, 256-color graphics, land, a knight in service to Charlemagne, Monty Python and MTV-style animation, king of the Franks. sound effects, plus character narration per\"The Muslims have surrounded Paris beformed by actors-a technique that made the cause they want revenge against Roland, the radio dramas of the 40s come alive. \"demon\" knight who won the magic sword The opening title sequence is immediately Durendal in a battle with the Saracens. This gripping. A grating, lumbering noise of what begs the question: If Durendal was an encould be a huge stone door slowly grinds chanted weapon, how was it won over by open. Next, an ominous, war-like drumroll Roland? Perhaps the sword magically transbeats, setting the stage for passion, magic and fers its ownership to the more deserving warmadness. rior as it goes about its life of merry \"Widowmaking.\" Speculation is what Roland The main screen displays finely rendered is all about, and trying to determine what Tarot card icons for each chapter, and each actually happened, and why, is a major part chapter opening presents the reader with yet of the story's appeal. For example, Charleanother set of individual Tarot cards. Each magne's account of why the card represents a character and their distinct Muslim's «really\" laid siege to The Madness of Roland the city adds quite a different spin to the story. TITLE: The Madness of Roland Primarily text-based, Roland PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: Macintosh with CD-ROM is creatively embellished and REQUIREMENTS: Mac LC or better, 4MB RAM for color, specifically designed to take 2MB RAM for B&W, CD-ROM drive, System 6.07 or better advantage of the mass storage PROTECTION: None capability of CD-ROM, feaAUTHOR: Greg Roach DEVELOPER: Hyper Bole Studios turing QuickTime video DISTRIBUTOR: Compton's New Meclia (which lets the Macintosh play Carlsbad, CA (800) 862-2206 back movies like a VCR), JhoMadness of Rolanus CD-ROM Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"Beyond fantasy. Beyond legends. If you've been looking for the mother of all fantasy role-playing games, we know where you can find it. Online, in GemStone IIITM This is no kill-the-dragon-thank-you-verymuch computer game. And it goes far beyond any of the other so-called legends in the online arena. Here in GemStone III, you're joining real people, in real time for your online quests. Some of the best role players and game masters in the country all meeting together in a vast and constantly evolving world, rich with fascinating characters and demanding adventures. It's a place you can play forever. GemStone III makes every other fantasy game history. And your friends are already here. So sign onto GEnie\" today, and welcome home to GemStone III. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99224, FANTASY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. GemStone III'M: Shadow World on GEnie multi-player games GemStone III is a trademark of Simutronics Corp. Shadow World is a registered trademark of Iron Crown Enterprises, Inc. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Optional graphic front-end program available for IBM PC only. SIMUTRONICS 100% Organic Opponents. Circle Reader Service #64 "


"Tile Chapters Characters Options ?da 16. RA The Madness of Roland SM I never forget it. Therection or that that to the sur 39 beet, others. The cries Parts sittched my car path ng con through the widele Such grace for atce and muscle of ng days that is the cheapest es, why should that be time strange for me to Thank you for the city the rett freund the che Turpin tred to stop was so they se t store y the story aloud, colored text on the screen indicates different types of speech: white-narration, blue-thoughts, orange-speech by the narrator of that chapter, and green-words spoken to the narrator of the current chapter. The main text also includes key words or phrases that are boldfaced. Clicking on a key word retrieves a pop-up hypertext link in the form of an explanation, a graphic or some amusing aside. With so many potential enhancements to the tale, jumping about Multimedia Land can por disobedens. As the rate and my chirshed out and usloped . Asterone outside the sterworts and verick side by side into the darkness Dich is the 197 :00 Lung Foung through there i bosted on that de s n t ot easy. They set e they esteth their hands. 3. HChapa end 2 S bu Gree toach We c ate and prayed point of view, including those of Charleple, it's easy to read ahead of the narration and starr clicking on key words, an approach that interferes with the flow of comprehending the story. Reading on-screen text can also be tiring; listening to the narration is much more entertaining. With at least several hours and even Roland's magic sword Durendal sort of a female Excalibur with a lust for Roland's hand. Hearing of the characters' desires, doubts S and experiences, which often provide conflicting accounts of events, the reader feels compelled to search out the truth, or perhaps all of the truths\" there are to consider. Presenting a dramatic account from different points of view has been done in classic films such as Kurosawa's Rashomon and, in literature, The Alexandria Quartet by Lawrence Durrell. But neither of these previous works enabled the reader to switch between characters at will, or to access special features like a brief film of Roland's writer and producer, Greg Roach, explaining how he came to develop this story. Clicking on one of the Tarot icons begins a sequence of scroll-like pages that tell the story of the chosen character. Accompanying the text is a sound track with music, sound effects and actors reading their words as they appear on the screen. Bordering each page is a Tarot icon of the other characters in the chapter, plus tools such as bookmarks, text searching functions, and a map showing just where the reader is in the story. A special finale awaits those who read each page of every chapter. Every time a new chapter opens, the Tarot icons shuffle about the screen into new positions, as if a new hand of cards were being dealt and the outcome might somehow change this time around. As the actors read The Madness of Roland is a pastiche of technology, interwoven with a rich use of language, classical works of art and contemporary images. In addition to the different points of view, there are two layers of commentary that enhance the dimension of the story. There is a Sun and Moon icon found at the beginning of every chapter and for each character within a chapter. Clicking the Sun icon brings up an eclectic range of textual commentary from Sun Tzu, Carlos Casteneda, Anais Nin and Carl Jung (characters in Roland are archetypal—king, knight, magician), that elaborate, often cryptically, on the story so far. Selecting the Moon icon takes the reader into the visual realm with QuickTime movies intended to evoke moods, and not necessarily illustrate the text. A complex, adult tale, Roland is thoughtfully presented with provocative ideas and images that make the production artistically compelling. Roland, however, is no more technically perfect than is the technology, Depending upon the computer model, available RAM, and CD-ROM drive access speed, performance varies from near seamless to glitchy. A set of external stereo speakers such as MacSpeaker by Monster Design is a big plus in appreciating the audio segments. In a marketplace known for pandering to the lowest common denominator and the almighty bottom line, the intellectually and emotionally stimulating experience Roland provides stands out as an example of artistic integrity and vision. Roland won't replace the concept of a traditional book or movie; it is an innovative multimedia form of expression, pioneering the evolution of electronic fiction. CGW File chapters Characters Options worth of storyline, Roland is best experienced in small doses. Going through the story sevcral times while paying attention to cach multimedia facet separately allows the subtleties and richness of Roland to surface. As each character reveals their own perceptions of events, the reader can skip from one character to another for comparison. Which character the reader encounters first can be meaningful since readers can be easily swayed—the dialog and actors are very convincing. Roland's courage in defending Paris from the superior Muslim forces may sound heroic until Charlemagne's version disputes not only the locarion of the battle, but calls into question Roland's level of intelligence. Of course, whose perception comes nearest the truth is anyone's guess. When Roland begins his spiral into darkness, readers can revisit the different points of view while trying to unravel the cause of his descent into self-doubt and lunacy. KOThe Madness of Roland There is o nly ttle Iron about the rest sure or on One 3ten to the Itaal. There 11 euats IRINGIN been a n soldier, or that he dit tot all. orby incorrection oth the Chanson de Rond part of the Chansons de Gests. Songs Deeds. A 69333 -3355 detailing the Old and New Festartinthe Song of u Ge Reach Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"We don't know from friendly skies. the-loop, look elsewhere. If you're interested in a career, sign on to Air Warrior only on GEnie\". You've beat all the flight sims? A furball doesn't raise a sweat anymore? Ten minutes of WWI combat isn't even challenging? Hmm... Maybe you are ready for Air Warrior\". That is, if you think you can handle the most realistic combat flying there is. Because Air Warrior does more than correctly model 28 different WWII aircraft, complete with spins, stalls and buffeting. It puts you up against other human beings. Online, in real time, for as long as you care to play. That's why Air Warrior attracts the aces. So if you're just looking to do a friendly loopSign up : 1. Set communication software for 8IN or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the Uh=prompt,enter XTX99223, AIRCRAFT then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Air Warrior on 09Crie * GEnie USIWEP multi-player games ASS Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Graphic interface required and available for selected machines. KESMAL 100% Organic Opponents. corporation Circle Reader Service #65 "


"REVIEW This Mech Is Made For Walker... ...And That's Just What It'll Do In Psygnosis' Latest by Jeff James 11 beso ILS T Then most MS-DOS computer owndigitized samples used in the game, with the ers think of Psygnosis, they think of pilot of the player's Walker occasionally Lemmings: the cute, cuddly, insufshouting «Die, Scumbags!\" after eliminating ferably stupid critters that face certain extinca particularly large batch of enemy soldiers. tion without the aid of a sympathetic gamer. Walker will run on any Amiga with at least Yet, as many Amiga owners know, Psygnosis 1 MB of RAM, including the Amiga 1200 and got its start doing entertainment products of 4000. Unfortunately, Walker does not supa more mercenary nature-games in which port hard drive installation, forcing players to the player destroyed everything that had the swap the three program disks during play. temerity to walk, crawl, fly, lurch or otherwise One particularly irksome foible was the lack poke its pixels into view on the game screen. DANGERO of level passwords or save game options; this Underneath the warm, fuzzy exterior LOCK ON would allow less-dexterous gamers (such as Psygnosis portrays with such cutesy titles as unfortunate enemy soldier who happens to be myself) and anyone over the age of 12 to Lemmings, Lemmings II and Creepers, there directly in the center of the Walker's path. complete the game without having to restart beats a dark, brooding heart of unmitigated Unfortunately, only a very narrow portion of when the last continue has been used. The arcade carnage. With the release of Walker, Mikel, the screen can be used for tramp the screen can be used for trampling; troops graphics and sound effects are up to the usual Psygnosis returns to the gaming meanstreets on the edges of the screen are immune to such Psygnosis standards, although the new AGAfrom whence it came, giving Amiga gamers a a tactic. chipset (found in the A1200 and A4000) is healthy dose of non-stop arcade excitement. The premise for the Walkergameworld—as not used. Walker is essentially a side-scrolling shootlaid out in the brief introduction in the 10em'-up, with the player's Walker (looking page instruction manual—is a murky setting 206700 much like a steroid-pumped Locust 'mech that sounds like a bizarre cross between Dr. from FASA's BattleTech) positioned on the Who and The Terminator. The player must right edge of the screen. This mechanical time-travel to four distinct time zones to batbeast stomps into action with a unique birdtle the enemy. At the end of each level is a like gait reminiscent of a hungry Jurassic Park \"boss\" enemy that must be defeated to advelociraptor, swinging its head to face the vance to the next time zone. The first level location of the targeting cursor. takes place in 1944 Berlin, where the player The keyboard or joystick is used to move is assaulted by tanks, horse-drawn artillery, the Walker from left to right, while the mouse P-51 mustangs and other WW II-era military is the ideal control device to move the target hardware. Next up is Los Angeles 2019 AD, (LOCK OFF g cursor about the screen. A left-click of the where the player is pitted against hi-tech milimouse fires the cannons, while the right tary hardware suspiciously reminiscent of the Fans of earlier Psygnosis action classics such mouse-button locks onto an enemy unit, diTerminator films. Finally, the last two levels as Menace, Blood Moneyand the Killing Game recting cannon fire onto the targer until it is involve trips to the recent Persian Gulf war Show will find that Walker employs the same destroyed. To mete out punishment, the and a final blast into the vear 2420, respec. frenctic arcade formula found in those games. Walker boasts a gruesome twosome of death tively, to complete the game. It does eventually become tedious, as each of ing appliances: twin cannons which spew While each time zone has its own unique the four levels are remarkably similar in gamethe four levels are remarkably similar ing depleted-uranium tipped 30mm shells, able military vehicles, one ass military vehicles, one assailant is ever-present: play. With level passwords, hard-drive instalto shred through the toughest enemy armor. the infantryman. These tiny troopers can be lation, AGA chipset support and a wider As a secondary weapon, the Walker sports a seen in each of the four levels, covering the variety of scenarios, Walker could have been pair of exceptionally large feet. Using what I game screen like insects and harassing the an outstanding game. In the final analysis, call the \"trampling two-step,\" the player's player with rifles, grenades and other handthough, Walker ends up as a pleasant diverWalker can dash forward, squishing flat any held weaponry. Ironically, the tiny hordes of sion long on gaming sizzle but short on gamsoldiers that the player must oblitering substance. CGW ate en masse scurry about the screen W alker in Lemming-like fashion, racing to their inevitable doom. It's as if the programmers at DMA Design Walker PRICE: $49.99 cracked under the sickening sweetSYSTEMS: Amiga ness of their previous games, and the REQUIREMENTS: 1MB RAM; hard drive installation not supported ensuing psychosis traded the altruisPROTECTION: Disk-based ric bliss of Lemming salvation with a DESIGNER: DMA Design PUBLISHER: Psygnosis bloodthirsty desire to exterminate Brookline, MA anything under 20 pixels in height. ZAYNOSIS (617) 497-5457 LOCK OFF This bloodthirsty zeal extends to the TITLE: DANGER Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"officially Sanctione di TM RACT N G 2 INDYCAR. MOVE OVER DHE FUVOS Racing To Real IndyCart Racing IndyCar Racing is the real 3-D thing. Blast through the corkscrew at Laguna Seca. Dopplershifting IndyCar engines scream to the max. Suddenly, someone spins. Blam! Parts fly everywhere. You slip by. Whew! Caution light. Time to pit. Take on fuel. Right side tires. Adjust front wing. Too late! You finished 2nd. Get 'em at Michigan. Feel too real? (Almost.) REPLAY DIE 40.375 RIGHT FRONT COMPOUND PRESSURE CHANGE TIRE DONE SOF. 26 PS 16 Stefan Joharfsson 99 11757  11r| 10.175 11926 6  Real Graphics: Experience all new Papyrus 3-D Super Texture technology. Bit-mapped cars, tracks, terrain and scenery, accurate down to the last detail; including billboards, paint schemes and decals on actual IndyCars. Tread marks \"groove\" every turn to help you find the line.  Real Game Play: Gobs of Newtonian physics calculate real car behavior...speed, chassis, engine set-up, tire temp and wear, fuel load, track bank, etc... hundreds of calculations per second. What you do makes a real difference.  Real Set-Ups: You choose wing angles, tire types and pressure, suspension, camber, gearing, and more. Adjust turbo boost, brake bias, roll bar settings from the cockpit. Custom tune engines in the dyno room. (Or take the default car and hit the track running.) From the creators of Indianapolis 500°. The Simulation First in a series of Real World 3-D Racing Games PAPYRUS PUBLISHING, INC. 126 1925 390 2914 ] Distributed exclusively worldwide by GAMES Virgin Games, Inc. me Papyrus Publishing Body Care in  Real Race Tracks: Michigan International, Laguna Seca, Milwaukee Mile, Long Beach... you get it all in IndyCarl Racing...right down to the grass, fans, stands and six real TV camera-type replays from car-cams to blimps. Available November 1993 The Indianapolis 500 is a registered trademark of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. Indianapolis 500 : The Simulation is a trademark of Electronic Arts Inc. Actual IBM PC screens shown. Circle Reader Service #96 "


"REVIEW @K 2 % po 908 JIOD O That's Even More Incredible! Dynamix Develops More Devilish Puzzles by Ed Dille Ja 0 iddle: What do a bowling ball, a tramThe Scientific Method? lationships of kinetic and potential energy, poline and an alligator have in comFor those who have never played The Inthough one need not be a physicist to appremon? ciate these aspects of the game. The simplest credible Machine, some background is in orAnswer: They are all puzzle pieces in The der. Even More adheres to the scientific example of the exchange of these energy Even More Incredible Machine. principles of gravity and air density. The puzforms as depicted in the game is provided via Anyone who has ever enjoyed the board zles provided have preset values for these a fulcrum (see-saw) and two bowling balls. In game Mousetrap, or delighted in Rube Goldsettings, which determine the physical behavaddition to these types of energy transfer, hat go to extravagantior of the obiects in the game, but users of the players may also adopt some standard and lengths to accomplish a simple objective, will free form model can specify their non-standard motive forces. For the convenappreciate the effort that Dynamix has put own preferences. Gravity can be into The Even More Incredible Machine (Even The Even More Incredible Machine altered from normal to complete More). Even More is an extension of the origiweightlessness, and atmospheric TITLE: The Even More Incredible Machine nal The Incredible Machine, offering 10 more PRICE: $49.95 pressure, which determines air playing pieces and considerably more chalSYSTEMS: IBM, Macintosh (IBM Reviewed) resistance, can vary from what REQUIREMENTS: 386SX or better, VGA graphics, MEGHI lenging puzzles. Whereas the original had 75 1.2MB hard drive space, mouse pre-generated brain teasers, Even More offers one would experience on the PROTECTION: Documentation look up bottom of the ocean to the vacDESIGNERS: 160. As before, there is also a free form mode Jeff Tunnell, Kevin Ryan PUBLISHER: Dynimix that will allow users to design and save their uum of deep space. Eugene, Oregon (503) 343-0772 own puzzles. Even More also respects the reBANGLENE ODUR ZQUIFRED ARENALI 000 200 OFF LIGH S unt 160 60 SET GE "


"DOWS phisticated puzzles require the user not only to find the proper arrangement of the pieces, but to employ elements of timing as well. Many of the early puzzles are designed to allow players to learn the functions of different objects without having to consult the manual. The role of pulleys in translating the direction of pull for ropes may seem apparent to most, but some younger players will appreciate the puzzles which illustrate them. Exclamations of \"OH, now I get it,\" are not uncommon from these players. Indeed, though Even More isn't billed as an educational product, it is a valuable tool in developing analytical thought and an appreciation of physics in young minds. V BONUS ole BONUS 2 -1-81-8. and find the correct path on the second, or even third pass. The free form area allows players to hop on the other side of the screen, as it were, and release their creative side as designers. The potential objectives and types of machines one can create are virtually limitless. The only constraint seems to be that they must be confined to one screen size. With this feature, users design fully functional machines, then remove whichever pieces they desire to form the puzzle. After this, additional non-functional pieces may be added to the mix to throw players off track. The Even More Incredible Machine lives up to it's billing, surpassing the original in terms of play value, if not presentation. Registered owners of the previous release can upgrade to the new release for $19.95. Cow tional, there are electric generators, motors, solar panels and similar devices. For the more esoteric, machines may be powered by rars running in a cage wheel or monkeys pedaling bicycles. The latter are motivated by a banana dangling in front of them, but the player must contrive a way of opening an intervening window blind to get them to start pedaling. Mind Warp Brainstorming Every puzzle begins with a stated goal (such as \"make all five guns go off\"), a preset arrangement of pieces on the screen which cannot be moved, and several pieces in a box. The player's goal is to find the proper arrangement of the pieces in conjunction with the existing arrangement to accomplish the objective. Sometimes, more objects than are necessary are provided, such that the \"red herring\" factor may come into play. Also, the more soEvery puzzle is presented with two bonus values. The first is for speed of completion, decreasing as time passes. The second is a preset value based upon the difficulty of the puzzle. Early puzzles are easy for most adults, later ones can be cruelly mind bending. Gerting a bowling ball to progress over a series of trampolines may sound easy, but the angle of attack is the key (Pool players will love this game). One hint is in order here: in puzzles that require these types of actions, allow the machine to remain in motion as long as the ball is active. An incorrect first trajectory will often rebound along the series of obstacles SCORES BONUS FUBONUSZ JMCO P ROMET BONUS mimin THE ONLY THING IT DOESN'T SIMULATE IS EAR POPPING. If it were any more real, your chair would be in a 30° bank. Our new Microsoft Flight Simulator has four planes, each with its own instrument panel created digitally from actual photographs. There are storm clouds and sunsets to fly into. Crashes are scarily real. And you can fly to airports anywhere in the world. For even more detailed flights, there are New York and Paris scenery enhancements. Everything is at your reseller. So, take off. Microsoft BICHT ROBES Circle Reader Service #86 OILF TOP  New York and Paris et enhancements coming the fall Hischt Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick 1993 M enu Com All rights reserved. Microfi Red m ark of Mics Camp EOT "


"STRATEGY not your everyday Bug Hunt Tips And Tactics For Space Hulk Exterminators by Jeff James Therefore, it is vital that a Space Marine commander keep his charges continually moving at all times. In any mission, taking advantage of a lull between Genestealer wave attacks to move Marines towards the objective is a sound strategy. Think of the duel between Space Marine and Genestealer as a tortoise vs. hare situation: Marines may plod, but persistent plodding serves them well. s far as careers go, that of a Space is essential. Once as much data as possible has Marine in Electronic Arts' Space Hulk been collected about the mission, an overall can be one of the worst. After endurstrategy should be formed to achieve the goals ing years of back-breaking labor, mindof the mission as quickly and effectively as numbing training, and the sadistic possible. If the mission requires that an area ministrations of a commanding officer, be destroyed with a heavy Flamer, the mission they're unceremoniously stuffed into an inshould be structured around that goal: the terstellar spacecraft and sent off to do battle Terminator with the flamer should be prowith a race of unfriendly xenoforms. Not only tected at all costs, shielded from enemy attack are these aliens (called Genestealers) averse to until the mission is completed. Tenderfoot polite small talk, they have a bothersome Marine commanders must fight the urge to tendency to rear Space Marines into fish bait. use random search and destroy tactics with To make matters worse, the Space Marines every mission. Always keep the objective in are often loaded into torpedo-like craft and mind and achieve it as quickly as possible. launched into the depths of derelict spacecraft, known to be the favorite hangout for Genestealers the galaxy over. 2. Move it or get munched. As vicious as the Genestealers may be, a As advanced as the Space Marine combat good Marine commander can even the odds exo-armor is, it possesses one glaring flaw: for his troops. Sitting aboard the command slow speed. Terminators may be able to wade ship at a safe distance from the conflict, a through hectares of enemies with impunity, commander sees with the eyes of his men, endure a cold vacuum with glee, and emerge thanks to tiny cameras mounted in their helfrom any conventional weapons attack unmets. This gives the commander the unique scathed, but they can only move at one of two ability to direct his troops as he sees fit, speeds: slow and slow enough to be eaten. ow enough to be eaten matching the savagery and physical superiority of the individual Genestcaler with PGSBS sound group strategy and tactics. We offer the following tactical tips and strategic suggestions to aid prospective Space Hulk commanders in their fight with bug-eyed aliens RITSIIT everywhere. 3. Cover the brothers. Learning how to advance a sluggish squad of Terminators towards their mission objective without having them gobbled by Genestcalers is a skill essential for victory. Rookie commanders often will rush every Marine at their disposal helter-skelter towards the mission objective, hoping that enough Terminators survive the ensuing slaughter to complete the mission. Other players may adopt a rigid defensive posture, making it difficult to advance through the mission area. The answer lies between these two extremes. two ex Immediately upon arrival into the combat area, a defensive perimeter should be SLPGSB immediately established. Space Marines with longrange weapons (ideally RR Storm Bolters) should be moved to seal off all approaches to the entry point. After the entry point is secure, the remaining Terminators should be moved a distance past the TerminaFREEZE E tors providing covering fire to a new defensive position. RPGSE ARADIEL 1. The mission is everything. Before accepting a mission, the player should fully understand the objectives of that mission. As part of this process, a thorough study of the information—especially mapspresented in the Space Hulk missions booklet Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"CIAL Advanced Dungeons Dragons 2nd Edition COMPUTER GAME SHATTERED LANDS DARK SUNSET Come and get it! IBM Clue Book available! TO ORDER BY VISA/MC: Call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada). SRL ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, DARK SUN, the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names and the distinctive likenesses there of are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc. 1993 TSR. Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"3 PG SB Then the first set of Terminators should be Genestealers. Conversely, Mamoved past the positions of these Terminarines in Overwatch seem to tors in a tactical game of leapfrog. This tactic lack the intelligence to turn should be used all the way to the mission and face an enemy or plot a objective. Of course, some mission objectives course around any obstacles. X GO require that the player adopt a more defensive Players must learn to jump in posture, such as defending an area or killing and intervene when a Marine is FREEZE a required number of Genestealers. For offenin dire straits. Players with a sive operations, however, a fast-moving (well, Sound Blaster (or compatible) relatively fast) squad of Space Marines that sound card get the added benecan simultaneously advance and provide covfit of hearing the Marines call ering fire will have the odds in its favor. out their numbers when they're under attack, making 4. Master the planning screen. rescue just the press of a function key away. Learn to balance Controlling Marines directly may be satisOverwatch mode with direct control for sucfrom the hulk, a Terminator equipped with fying, but the slow reaction speed of any cess. Power Gloves is a necessary evil. Remember, human commander ensures that some MaTerminators (with the exception of those rines will have to fend for themselves. When equipped with Lightning Claws or Thunder 6. Trust your Storm Bolter. controlling more than one or two marines, Hammer/Storm Shield) are destined to lose using the planning screen is a must. Of all the ranged weapons in a Space Manearly every close encounter with a Genestealer. Using the planning screen, Space Marinerine's armory, the Storm Bolter is the most commanders can essentially program individvital. Other weapons are more glamorous: the ual Marines to perform certain pre-defined Assault Cannon and the Heavy Flamer can 8. Control is key. actions, such as moving to a certain location, eliminate aliens with awe-inspiring displays opening a door, or flaming an objecrive area. door. or flaming an obiective area of destruction. As effective as those weapons Mastering the finer points of controlling Since a complete squad of Marines is imposcan be, they both have the same fatal flaw: Marines is key. Using a combination of the limited ammunition. Only mouse and keyboard is the superior playing the trusty Storm Bolter method: put a hand on the cursor keys for never runs out of ammo. movement and one on the mouse for firing, Space Marines using Asswitching squads and selecting objects. Hitsault Cannons and Flamers ting the function keys (F1-F10) is the best are nothing more than way to move between individual Terminaquick and easy meals-ontors, while a tap on the 'F'key is an alternative the-go for angry Genestealto clicking on the 'Freeze' button. In addition ers when their ammo has to mastering the controls, developing good been expended. Storm fire and movement tactics can also be helpful. Bolters can jam with conBeing able to fire while moving backwards is tinuous use, so they should important, as is learning to pick Genestealers be fired in short, controlled off by aiming at the corners of corridors, OGLII bursts to minimize jameliminating them before they have a chance FREEZE BEN UIT ming. Finally, wise Space to rush a player's Marines. Marines aim at the chest of sible to control all at once, having a well-proan approaching grammed set of tactical instructions for the Genestealer when firing. Shots aimed at the 9. When all else fails—cheat! bulk of a player's squad is vital. It's usually a head or extremities of the enemy are more For commanders who don't mind a little good idea to have the player directly control likely to bounce harmlessly off their hard bending of the rules to achieve victory, makonly those units that are under attack-Maexoskeleton. ing multiple copies of Space Hulk's single save rines under human control fire more accugame file can be a godsend. In the Deathwing rately and jam weapons less often than 7. In hand to hand combat, campaign, information about the squads used computer-controlled troopers do. Placing is contained in the file C:\\HULKI the right tool is everything Marines on ready status-called OverDAT_DIRISQUADINF.DAT. Making a watch-will cause them to shoot at any en Every Space Hulk commander realizes that backup copy of this file (renaming each emy that crosses their line of fire. Without Genestealers are deadly in hand to hand combackup something like SODINFI.DAT, mastery of the planning screen, any aspiring bar. Simply put, the best tactic for fighting SQDINF2.DAT, etc. can be helpful) will Space Hulk captain will be sending the solGenestealers hand to hand is don't: keep allow Hulk commanders to venture into new diers under his command on very short, very them at bay with ranged weapons as long as missions with impunity. Some missions are bloody and very unsuccessful missions. possible. If close combat with the aliens seems impossible to complete at the first attempt, inevitable, equipping Space Marines with any especially in the Deathwing campaign. Using 5. Overwatch: use at your hand to hand weapon is preferable to using saved games as insurance, players can run a Power Gloves. Lightning Claws and Thunder squad or two through the mission to reconown peril. Hammers are ideal for mission areas consistnoirer the area and get a feel for the strength As vital as mastering the planning screen is, ing of short, twisting passages, where ranged of the enemy before bringing in the \"real\" players must realize that Marines in Overweapons will have little effect. Chain Fists troops. Since individual squads do gain expewatch mode fight poorly. Overwatch mode and Power Swords work well with Storm rience (and commensurate increases in shootdoes have its uses: a Storm Bolter-equipped Bolters, giving a Space Marine both longing and close combat ability) by surviving Marine in Overwatch mode at the end of a range punch and better odds in a melee. If the missions in Deathwing, backups can ensure a long corridor can destroy dozens of mission requires that an object be recovered skilled and deadly squad of space grunts. CGW Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"The Eastern Front, Gary Grigsby style JULY DRUGSSYS Ilth I'Mart RUSSIA Funer Wonen Uus 11 Simulation, 1941-45 WAT2 SEL ary Grigsby's WAR IN RUSSIA is the most comprehensive simulation of the World War II campaign that pitted Hitler's superior forces against Stalin's 5 million-man army from 1941 to 1945. One or two players can re-enact this epic struggle with four campaigns, eight historical scenarios and one hypothetical scenario. An all-new Scenario Editor allows you to revise the existing maps, units and equipment creating the potential for unlimited play. This massive game offers unmatched complexity in scale and detail as you would expect of Gary Grigsby; however, the mouse driven interface makes it a breeze to play! WAR IN RUSSIA is an advanced game, but novices can enjoy it too three difficulty settings make this simulation accessible to players of all skill levels. Available for IBM/COMPATIBLES. To Order: Visit your retailer or call SSI Direct Sales at (408) 737-6800. To receive our complete product catalog, send $1.00 to: SSI, 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201, Sunnyvale, CA 94086. 01993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved SEL "


"REVIEW SEAL TEAM illustration by Michael Winterbauer Patrolling The Mekong Delta With EA's Elite Forces by Jeff James Praca Picein Next rliecion Rescue Feb Yomputer simulations of small-scale inpresented in the same order: first is the intelfantry combat have not been a popular ligence briefing, giving the player a brief sumtopic for game developers. While other mary of the forthcoming mission and its segments of computer wargaming have expegeneral location. The mission briefing screen rienced considerable growth in recent years, is up next, offering more detail on the objecstate-of-the-art simulations of small unit actives of the mission and the latest intelligence tions have been few and far between. Microreport. A short animated briefing is available Prose's Airborne Ranger and Special Forces from this screen, visually displaying the obleaned towards arcade action, foregoing realjectives of the mission and describing the ism for instant shoot 'em up gratification. 1969 FREE insertion and extraction methods used to get Interstel's D.R.A.G.O.N. Force offered more the team into and out of the area. Players can MILO: \"An F-4 Hild Heasel pilot aiding the B-52 bombing north of Saigon went down.. tactical depth, but is now sorely outdated. use the marching orders screen to choose Into this open genre, armed with state-of-thewhich members of the team will be part of the cuss their concerns and fears make them more art technology and backed by a veteran team four-man mission squad. Weapons and supbelievable and more human. After the bull of developers, jumps SEAL Team (ST), a plies can be selected for each SEAL from this session ends, an animated sequence shows the first-person, squad-level simulation of special screen as well; nearly two dozen types of team clambering onto the insertion vehicle, team operations. With its excellent graphics, pistols, machine guns, grenades and light usually a river boat or helicopter. Soon after, sound, and rigorous attention to detail, it anti-tank weapons are available for arming a the squad is inserted into the objective area. seems that the genre has been \"reborn hard.\" SEAL to the teeth. Here the program gives the player the option After the squad is armed and ready, the boys of re-inserting the squad at another map loMission Briefing engage in a time-honored military tradition: cation, making it possible to make feints and the bull session. In this segue sequence, a false insertions to confuse the enemy. In SEAL Team, the player directs the acdigitized animation of SEALs preparing for tions of an elite squad of U.S. Navy SEALs in In The Mud the forthcoming mission is shown while a Vietnam's Mekong Delta, from 1966 to series of rumors, tactical tips and soldierly After the player has accepted an insertion 1969. The simulation begins with the selection of a character from a group of SEAL banter is displayed at the bottom. The advice point, the game switches to an impressive presented during the bull sessions is worth viewing perspective: a first-person, mud-onrecruits to serve as the player's on-screen alter paying attention to. Some of the SEAL chatyour fatigues viewpoint where the player sees ter is somewhat ironic: in one bull session, the everything the SEAL point man would. PressOnce in Vietnam, the player and his squad SEALs discuss what it would mean to fight in ing the Fi key brings up this visual perspecreceive their first mission. Each mission is the Middle East. Aside from tive, while a press of the F2 key calls deciding that the hot climate SEAL Team forth an above-the-shoulder view of would allow them to work on their fans, they conclude that TITLE: SEAL Team the SEALs would be as fearPRICE: $49.95 some a fighting force as ever. SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386DX-33MHz, 2MB RAM, Although a relatively minor VGA graphics, 4MB hard drive space; piece of the game, the bull sesdisk compression not supported PROTECTION: sion added considerably to the DESIGNERS: Andre Gagnon, Howard Hays-Eberts depth of simulation. As highly PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts San Mateo trained and disciplined as the (415) 571-7171 SEALs are, hearing them disego. None Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAME Dungeons & Dragons SANT EMPIRES Lead a Kingdom. Conquer an Empire! FANTASY Tempire IBM 256-color VGA displays. Create alliances, defeat enemy kingdoms -and rule Mystara! Build your own empire as you play the first D&D\" game to feature a comTM puter DUNGEON MASTER, who mediates all elements of game play. Thanks to superior animation, 256-color VGA display and sound effects, the DM virtually comes to life on the screen. Face one to four adversaries, either human or chosen from among twenty computer-controlled opponents. Interact with fantastic races, command dozens of troop types, deploy special forces and construct a variety of buildings: Extensive character interaction, utilizing advanced AI and Neural Network technology throughout the game, provides for diplomatic tactics. When combat occurs, the game switches to one of the most spectacular tactical views yet! Available for IBM/COMPATIBLES. To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. To receive our complete product catalog, send $1.00 to: SSI, 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201, Sunnyvale, CA 94086. SESEI DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D. DUNGEON MASTER, FANTASY EMPIRES and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc. 1993 TSR, Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"the player's point man. Using either a joystick, mouse or the cursor keys, the player can direct his SEALs to move at one of three speeds: stop, slow and run. Pressing the 'l key causes the entire squad to hit the dirt and crawl; a press of the '2' key calls for a crouch; and 3'causes the SEALs to stand upright. For most missions, play involves traveling across some distance of terrain to reach the objective points. True to the varied real-life missions of the SEALs, a large variety of objective types are offered, including patrols, having to patrol a village, demolish a bunker and snatch a high-ranking Viet Cong official, all in one operation. As the point man, the player's SEAL gives orders to the rest of the squad by the way of authentic SEAL hand signals. Since surprise and stealth are the hallmarks of a SEAL, these silent battle gestures ensure that the player can communicate with the rest of the squad noiselessly. Using these hand gestures, the player can make his squad assume one of four marching formations, issue a variety of firing orders, and perform a number of other commands. When used, a tiny window appears on the screen with an animation of the hand signal in question. Combat is usually fast and furious, with Vier Cong (shown on-screen clad in black garb) soldiers usually opening fire—with every weapon at their disposal—on sight of the SEALs. When viewing the action through the first-person point man view, a targeting reticle will appear on the nearest civilian, Viet Cong soldier or building, indicating range to the target and the probability of a successful hit (indicated by the color of the reticle). Hitting the tab key advances the reticle through available targets, while a tap on the fire button, enter key or left mouse button fires the currently selected weapon at the target. The Devil In The Details The graphics used in ST are taken right vietcong from the leading edge of flight simulator technology, with polygon-filled graphics representing the foliage, buildings and geographical features of the game world. The SEALs, enemy soldiers and civilians are all rendered in bitmaps, making them more realistic. Several other graphic touches add depth to the game, including the addition of birds and insects which fly across the players field of view. Occasionally a bomb-laden Phantom will streak across the objective area, en roure to some off-screen target or objective. Although the polygon graphics are rather plain, especially of the foliage (vegetation seems scarce given the setting is Vietnam), the addition of the aforementioned graphic touches help draw the player into the game. This detail extends to other game elements as well; the SEALs are only allowed to use weapons historically available during the same time period. For added detail, the game offers cight difficulty and realism settings, ambushes, demolitions, rescues, recoveries, snatches and observations. Rescue and recovery missions require the SEALs to rescue downed U.S. pilots/POWs and recover certain supplies. Observation missions require the SEALs to designate a target-such as a bunker for destruction by attack aircraft. Depending on the mission, the player may have from one to several objectives, such as IF YOUR IDEA OF A GOOD TIME IS SITTING ALONE IN THE DARK, SE FIGHTING OFF EVIL FORCES 'TIL THE SUNT COMES UP... E Circle Reader Service #135 Page 30 "


"deficiencies are minor ones. Through this product, designers Gagnon and Hay-Eberts have not only succeeded in making an enjoyable piece of computer entertainment, but an educational and enlightening one as well. Like many CGW readers, I wasn't yet born when the missions described in SEAL Team were carried out. For those of us who weren't there, SEAL Team offers a tiny glimpse at what the veterans of the Vietnam conflict went through. The designers adroitly sidestep any political stance on the Vietnam War, focusing instead on the men and the difficult missions they had to accomplish. Although not perfect, ST is unarguably a major tactical victory for the infantry-level computer commander. The author would like to thank Cpl. Kevin N. Lawson, U.S.M.C., for his assistance in preparing this review. CGW 15:43:02 1 Feb 1964 12.4t Support Unit allowing adjustment from the effectiveness of fleshing out the polygons and bitmaps of the enemy intelligence to the time it takes to game with real human drama. reload. Sound and music (composed by As novel as some aspects of the game are, George \"The Fat Man\" Sanger) are excellent, SEAL Team does suffer from a number of with the digitized report of automatic weapminor foibles. Screen updates can be choppy ons fire and exploding hand grenades. Turneven on the fastest 386 machines. Although ing off the music and leaving on the sound the game will run on most 386 systems (the effects brings on a host of natural noises, such designers recommend at least a 386 running as the rustle of flying birds and the chirping at 33 MHz), a 486-level machine is almost of insects. essential. Although the game only occupies a TL ULU frugal 3.8 megabytes of hard drive space, disk access is often lethargic: thankfully, hard drive access is minimal once the player has his SEALs in the mission area. I salute the artificial intelligence of enemy forces, which seem to act with almost human cunning, crouching behind obstacles and lying in wait for the ideal time to strike. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of the player's support craft. On several missions, I DIRA S Sty Bry a ng peito watched my riverboat support team come under fire as it calmly stationed itself right As mentioned previously, detail is a hallnext to a village full of VC. Although not a mark of SEAL Team. The designers reportveteran of combat, I would think that having edly consulted with Navy SEALs who served a support unit station itself right in front of in Vietnam, in addition to consulting the the objective area is an exercise in tactical UDT-SEAL Muscum Association, for facts suicide. Strangely, support units never and mission details. The manual is filled with seemed to take any damage from being maexcerpts from the book Point Man, a novel chine-gunned or struck by grenades thrown written by Chief James Watson, one of the by the enemy. first operational SEALs, describing his experiences in Vietnam. The excerpts add an imDebriefing measurable amount of substance to the game, Admittedly, most of the aforementioned TCEN DOORS rire et 111 ble Pictop ustavy SCLC 250 trs ZOO typond u it Extraction YOU NEED PROFESSIONAL HELP. CYBERNAN A mouse and keyboard are fine for tackling spreadsheets, not teeming legions of blood-thirsty marauders. Stateof-the-art Cyber Man\" puts an unlimited range of motion within your grasp: three directions (x, y, and z] and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll]. 3D INTERACTIVE CONTROLLER Just move or twist it any way you want to go. Plus it's the only controller with vibrating feedback that lets you feel the action. Cyber Man is 100% compatible with conventional mouse applications, and comes with 3D game titles that will pull you into the next dimension in PC entertainment. Cyber Man is available now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928. t\" Trademarks belong to their registered owners. LOCATECH The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #135 "


"REVIEW UNNECESSARY FORCE A Performance Review Of Tsunami's Blue Force by Charles Ardai raving \"acquired\" Jim Walls, the excop who created the Police Quest series I lof games for Sierra, to write their first police game, Tsunami Media appears to be trying to go head-to-head with the big boys. And that's not just Sierra, but also ex-Los Angeles top cop Darryl Gates, whom Sierra brought in as Walls' replacement for the next Police Quest game. The jury is still out on how Gates will fare in the role of game designer, but Walls may not care for the verdict on Blue Force. It is simply not as strong as Walls' previous games. Force Majeur In Blue Force, the player steps into the shoes of Jake Ryan, rookie motorcycle cop in the town of Jackson Beach. Ten years earlier (or possibly 11, depending on whether one trusts the game or the game box), Jake's parents were gunned down by a mysterious, longhaired assailanr. Now, by a sequence of coincidences too enormous to describe, Jake is about to end up on the trail of their killers. game. A near, little, improbable packagepunch, he can; if he tries to take the flares he what more could one want? is told, «You have no need for flares.\" Why A coherent story, to begin with, I suppose; put them in the picture, then? and, second of all, a story over which the Even characters must endure this disreplayer has some control. In Blue Force, one spect. At one point, I spent several minutes rarely knows, between episodes, where to go trying to click on Lyle Jamison and wondernext; but it rarely matters because some charing why the computer kept saying things like acter or event always comes along to lead the \"That serves no purpose. Eventually, I figplayer by the nose into the next sequence. ured it out the computer didn't know Lyle Experimentation is discouraged. If the player was in the room, since in that room Lyle was tries to go anywhere other than where the merely part of the background graphics. computer wants to go, he either finds nothing when he gets there, or he isn't allowed to ger there at all. As in Electronic Arts' The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes, one travels around the city by clicking on hotspots on a city map. Also, as in the Holmes game, a trip to any location other than the one the computer wants the player to see is a waste of time. The player will only find a locked door or an empty room KAD your hands in the air and turn around, when he arrives, or an admonition from the computer and nothing else. Try to take Jake It gets worse. When one clicks on objects in a to the \"Bikini Hut\" while he is on duty and Sierra or LucasArts game, one usually gets clever the computer says, \"No time for pleasure. or interesting descriptions. When one clicks on Try to take him there after hours and the objects in Blue Force, one is lucky to get descripcomputer says, \"No time for pleasure.\" It tions at all. (A bulletin board: \"It's the usual sinks in slowly: the computer is just not going boring stuff.\" Jake's badge: \"It's your I.D.\" The to let Jake in, ever. Bikini Hut: \"It's the Bikini Hur.\" A mobile Eventually, one realizes that many of the home: \"It's a delapidated [sic old trailer.\") locations in the game simply don't exist exConversations with characters are mostly a cept as prop-up facades. There is no bowling matter of \"Hello,\" \"Gotta run,\" and \"See ya,\" alley; one can go into the Alley Cat as far as or else they are strings of silly obscenities hanthe main counter and no farther. The police dled clumsily and inconsistently: \"damn\" is station consists, essentially, of one room. The spelled something like \"d*#!*\", but \"pig ass,\" jail consists of two. After a while, it becomes \"sheeit,\" and \"puck off\" (when Jake is rebuffed clear that Tsunami hasn't even bothered to by an air hockey player) stand as they are. simulate a game world. The planning and structure of the Objects in the game get simiBlue Force game's dialogue are also abysmal. lar treatment. At one point, TITLE: Blue Force Jake opens the trunk of a car PRICE: $69.95 to reveal two boxes. The box SYSTEM: IBM & IBM CD-ROM REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, VGA graphics, on the right can be opened; as 11 MB hard drive space, mouse, far as the computer is consupports Adlib, Sound Blaster, Roland, Extemal General MIDI cerned, the box on the left PROTECTION: does not exist. Opening the DESIGNER: Jim Walls PUBLISHER: Tsunami Media, Inc. box on the right reveals some P.O. Box 790 flares and a spring-loaded Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 245-7744 for orders only punch. If Jake tries to take the ELA H ere The game is divided equally between routine police activity (answering a domestic violence or drunk driving call, booking suspects and evidence, showing up for inspection) and Jake's personal investigation into his parents' death, for which purpose he enlists the help of his father's ex-partner, Lyle Jamison. When, midway through the game, Jake is in a random motorcycle accident, his subsequent time off from the force allows him (and the player) to concentrate on the latter. Not to worry, though: in the end, Jake's private investigation ties into the domestic violence call he was sent on at the start of the None Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"\"My Most Dangerous Adventure Of All Will Never Be Shown 4 On TV.\" \"I've had some close calls. But this is crazy! In The Challenge of Racer X\" you'll face danger two ways. First, you'll take on the mysterious Racer X in a 200MPH free-for-all. You'll need everything in the Mach S's arsenal just to stay close... Autojacks to leap clear of danger, chopper-blades to cut through obstacles, even a new on-board CRT that allows you to receive messages from Pops, Trixie, Spridle and Chim-Chim. And that's just the half of it. You'll also race against me from the cockpit of Racer X's incredible Shooting Star. But it won't be easy. Because Snake Oiler, Captain Terror, and all the evil villains from my TV show are UOMI 20 out to send you over the guardrails. So fasten your seatbelt. Because you're gonna rip around blind curves on icy mountain roads. Leap over rocky chasms. Witness horrible fiery Crashes! Gosh, I hope no one gets hurt\" Coming soon for Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis.\" To order, visit your favorite retailer or call 1-800-245-7744 9000 AED ad el Available for the IBM PC and compatibles. 1993 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved 1993 Speed Racer Enterprises, Inc. Speed Racer and Racer X are trademarks of Speed Racer Enterprises, Inc., and are used under M is a registered trademark of Inter. License national Business Machines. All other trade. marks and registered trademarks are properties of their respective owners. SuperNES is a regis tered trademark of Nintendo of America Inc Sera and Genesis are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd HOLDE GAMES WITH PERSONALITY Circle Reader Service #34 "


"have arrested a perp, beaten him up, and stood trial for brutality. Making matters worse, when two characters are on a screen, each moves separately: first Jake begins the slow trek across the screen, and only when he is finished does Lyle start. As in Tsunami's Ringworld, the command interface has all the icons placed on a pop-up window. This device is fine, but for it to work 110810 1 910 11211 the pop-up window must pop-up immediFor example, if the player clicks the \"ralk» ately when one calls for it. There is no excuse icon on the duty officer when Jake returns to for the game to chug along for up to three the police station after recovering from his seconds before deigning to give the player his broken leg, the ensuing conversation is of the command options. standard \"Got things to do, see ya» variety. Nor is torpidity the game's only technical Only if Jake shows a cocktail napkin to the flaw. As in Ringworld, the player's character duty officer does the game produce the occasionally moves to locations on the screen proper, \"Welcome back, how's the leg?\" diaother than the one on which the player logue. Later, Jake asks Lyle, «Does the name clicked. In ar least one sequence this is disasCobb mean anything to you?\" immediately trous. I wanted Jake to look at a bookshelf. after Lyle finishes telling him who Cobb is! after Lyle finishes telling him who Cobb is! Instead, he exited a room a) that contains All of the above contributes to the game's something the player needs in order to get further in the game, and b) that the player generally cheap feel. It's sketchy, like a rough cannot reenter (without good reason) if he draft or a preparatory drawing. For the amount of money it costs, players deserve better. exits it prematurely. In addition to its technical flaws, one has Insufficient Force no choice but to take note of the game's appalling spelling errors and factual inconsisFrom a technical point of view, Blue Forcetencies. Was Tsunami so hard up for cash or is more of a scooter than it is a policeman's pressed for time that they couldn't hire an Harley. Even on a 486/33 it runs painfully editor to change your\" to \"you're\", \"parslow. In the amount of time it takes for Jake ent's\" to \"parents, and \"bartenders\" to \"barRyan to walk across a screen, a real cop could render's\"? Couldn't someone just decide 040090 2 +1 when the murders took place and make sure that the same date was used throughour the game? (The date is given, variously, as 21 March 1983, 14 June 1983, and 16 May 1984.) For a company that wants to be taken seriously to put out a product this shoddyand needlessly so—is insane. May The Force Not Be With You While playing Blue Force I was reminded of Capstone's Stephen King-derived game, The Dark Half, which loyal CGW readers will recall I deemed the worst adventure game of the past ten years. While Blue Force is not in that category, that's a little like saying that pneumonia is not as bad as cancer-true enough, but one wouldn't want to get either. Jim Walls and Tsunami both have better work in them. I take comfort, as should they, in the knowledge that they have nowhere to go but up. Cow COM P U T E R SPORTS GAMES IBM  APPLE IL C-64 CD DRIVE ON THE MARKET THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! ID-Ft Hous MAC/PC SPECIAL BUNDLE 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts. Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule 766 teams included, NFI, WFL, USFL, WIAF & College from 1925 to present  Trade ,draft or input teams. Standings and League Leaders FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams. 45 man roster. Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/ printer . Auto scheduler Input your own teams, draft or trade players. Wind/Weather Option. You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal Standings and League Leaders! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 cach. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 IBM/MPC Chessmaster 3000 Loom Secret of Monkey Island Stellar 7 RCA stereo Jacks Front head phone Jack Personal head phone set Two stereo speakers Double enclosure door Automatic lens cleaner Plays audio CDs With purchase of drive! Fast 200ms access time 330 KB/sec transfer rate Multi-spin technology Photo CD capability MTBF 50,000 hr's Two CD-Roms LOOI WIELI Call for a FREE CO-Rom catalog filled with our complete line of CDs & Multimedia accessories! NCHIMENER GAME P.O.BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 Circle Reader Service #75 1-800-777-3642 oly Compulers -Circle Reader Service #101 Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"Bad Day in Bagdad! MOODLOTT You've been cast out of the palace as a beggar. The princess has turned against you. The palace guards want your head on a skewer. And you haven't even had breakfast yet. This is not good. It gets worse. One minute you're fleeing for your very life across roof tops. The next, you find yourself washed up on a desert island...or amidst ancient ruins, face to face with a disembodied head (and boy is it hungry!). This is really not good. You stumble upon quicksand, serpents, spikes, magic spells, a skeleton with a sick sense of humor, and then...well...things get just a mite tricky. Introducing Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & the Flame\" Some call it a dozen tad Arabian Nights movies rolled into one. Actually, it's your worst Arabian nightmare. So get some sleep. Once this arty swashbuckler begins, you may never sleep again. PULSE-QUICKENING ACTION. RICH MOVIE-LIKE STORY AND SOUNDTRACK . INCREDIBLY REALISTIC ANIMATION A CINEMATIC ACTION GAME BY JORDAN MECHNER SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE: $69.95 (MS-DOS VERSION). SEE YOUR LOCAL DEALER OR CALL 1-800-521-6263 AND REFER TO CODE 262 TO ORDER AT A 25% SAVINGS. REQUIRES 10 MHZ 286 OR FASTER MACHINE. HARD DRIVE AND VGA REQUIRED. 01993 Bredestund Software, Inc. Prince of Persia is a registered trademark and The Shadow & the Flame is a trademark of Brader und Software. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #144 "


"REVIEW BAR Topfdam De opzons For An Old Wo Archipelagus 7448 inular Panexo Inf. Tortucard AM dinamas BASTA per Electronic Arts-Rediscovers the Seven Cities of Gold «R ng days of You have discovered a New World As U by Ed Dille mikk crurn with us now to those thrill and expand the Spanish Empire indefinitely, porate the others on later voyages. Several ing days of yesteryear\" still echoes provided one's voyages remain profitable. horses are important both as a mode of rapid in the minds of the \"baby Seven Cities has three levels of difficulty: transportation and to pack import and export boomer\" generation. The opening line from Novice. Journeyman and Expert. Victory goods more efficiently. As for Old World \"The Lone Ranger\" television series has just conditions are consistent throughout the levcargo, animals, old world plants and weapons the right amount of nostalgia to re-introduce els, but the amount of support one receives The Seven Cities of Gold. This classic game has from the Crown decreases at the higher levels. a perfect combination of clegant design, inTo start off, the player selects a desired diffitriguing subject matter and solid play balancculty level and determines whether the New ing to hit the mark in today's market. World will be historically correct or ranSo, return with us now to those thrilling domly generated. The latter option exists to days of early computer games, ca. 1984. Bill keep Seven Cities infinitely replayable. and Dan Bunten introduced a joystick-diWith the world established, the player is rected game of exploration, economics and transported to an adventure-game-like disconquest that captured the imagination of the play. Here, the first order of business is to visit computer gaming world and proved to be the the palace and receive the Crown's charter. Buntens' biggest seller ever. The graphics Upon each return from the New World, one were blocky, the colors were limited, and the must visit the palace for updated guidance can be used for trade with tribal chieftains. interaction was basically limited to pixel and receive any promotions. The second stop Food can be used as a trade commodity as avoidance (as one frantically tried to avoid is the Commissioner's office. Here, one can well, but is primarily used to keep the party natives) and number swapping (balancing the view the latest map of the New World and on its feet. right number of gifts in order to purchase review a written record of the voyages. The valuable commodities). Still, The Seven Cities log book contains information on the victory Shoving Off of Gold managed to lure players repeatedly to conditions, profit records for each voyage. the role of Christopher Columbus, discov and a cumulative record of the percentage of Leaving Spain, one is transferred to an overerer\" of the New World. New World discovered, the number of ships head view which forms the backdrop for all and men lost, and any special discoveries. navigation and exploration in the game. A The final stop before setting out for Terra single ship icon represents the group while at Incognita is the Harbor Master's office. Here, sea, but several men move across the terrain one can buy all of the provisions, men and once landfall is made. Players use either the equipment necessary to undertake the jourkeyboard arrows or a joystick to control ney. Initially, it is best to stick with one ship movement; mouse support is not provided. and provision it well in lieu of leaving with Upon making landfall, a pop-up menu alhalf laden ships. Profits from the initial voylows the player to drop off men and equipI ages should allow one to expand the transportation base rapidly. The Seven Cities of Gold Explorers are the cheapest men to hire, though they consume TITLE: The Seven Cities of Gold food faster than their more stalPRICE: $49.95 SYSTEM: In historical terms, the game begins in 1492 wart compatriots, soldiers and REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGA graphics, 3.3MB hard drive space and may continue indefinitely if the player clergy. Keeping in mind that PROTECTION: meets the required victory conditions. In esexplorers are necessary to map DESIGNER: Michael Kosaka; original design by Bill & Dan Bunten sence, the player has 10 voyages to establish the new world, and one needs Electronic Arts at least one Colony, one Mission and three to establish settlements quickly, San Mateo, CA Forts in the New World. If these conditions it is best to begin almost exclu(415) 571-7171 are met, the player may continue to explore sively with these men and incorIBM None PUBLISHER: Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"Fulfill The Ancient Prophesy Forgotten Castle The Awakening ZET Your Father, the last king of Alonia, failed his OP quest to liberate the realm from inhuman tyrants. Now it's your turn. As Tris, the last heir to the throne, it's your destiny to match sword and sorcery against the foul Ruzakian Hord. Seek incredible magicks to augment your power as you delve into the conquered city of Hedburg. A virtual 3-D fantasy world awaits your next command Explore the dangers of the Old City, pit your awesome might against horrible creatures in a dark dungeon. Fight well and you may free the kingdom. Discover the Forgotten Castle and you may learn of your father's fate... Cinematic animation sequences unfold stories of mystery.  Fully digitized musical score and sound effects.  Combat system has adjustable skill levels.  Monsters, characters, magic items and props are rendered with full 3-D effects. A smooth scrolling virtual world, complete with unparelled realism for TWIN DOLPHIN die-hard fantasy role playing enthusiasts! Circle Reader Service #114 GAMES, INC. 1993, Twin Dolphin Games Inc. Forgotten Castle and Twin Dolphin Games are trademarks of Twin Dolphin Games, Inc. IBM Is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"ment for the overland expedition. If some of the party strength and whether or not they the crew is to remain with the ship, one mustare brandishing their weapons. The latter is a ensure that there's enough food for both pardecidedly hostile gesture, but it may be necties before departing. Once established, the essary when trying to establish trade with a expedition will begin movement ashore. If at tribe that is less than welcoming to the Euroleast one explorer is present in the party, these peans. The level of hostility or suspicion of travels will be mapped permanently. The rate the tribe is denoted by the tempo of the tribal drums; the faster the beat, the greater the levels of aggression and the speed at which natives will pursue 008 the player icon. The objective of the player rule by force, the design team at Electronic is to explore the village, find Arts has limited the player's ability to do so. the chief, and begin trade Tribes now possess a tribal memory that negotiations. Until the chief encompasses a fair portion of the area suris approached, the other narounding their serrlements. If ne rounding their settlements. If neighboring tives will pursue the player settlements are treated harshly, the player will and try to \"bump\" into him. receive a cold or hostile response upon return Such contacts cause casual to other villages in the area; likewise if burial ties to both sides and inmounds are desecrated. Further, when crease the level of hostility. ers insist on remaining aggressive, one of two As such, players intent on outcomes result: either the natives engulf and peaceful trade will enter the destroy the expedition or, upon return to village without brandishing Spain, the player is called up short for his of travel is affected by the mode of travel their weapons and avoid all un-Christian treatment of the native populas is naturally the fastest contact with the wandering natives until the tion and thrown in jail. and the various terrain types. Movement is chief is found. fastest on rivers and over plains, desert and beach, slightly slower in forest or jungle Powwowwing With The Chief squares, and very slow over mountains. The By approaching the chief, a separate screen party's food is consumed based on the passage pops up for negotiations. The player's objecof days, so the more difficult the terrain to be tive is to develop the relationship to the point traversed, the more time and food is conthat the Chief will agree to trade. One can try sumed. to amaze the chief with technology (generally As the party travels it may stumble upon only effective against the most primitive burial mounds or gold mines in addition to tribes), threaten him with violence (usually native civilizations. The desecration of burial not a good idea), or give him gifts. The chief's mounds is an easy way to gain some artifacts reaction to the gift can be seen in his facial to return to the Old World, but it can have a expression. Animals and horses tend to be the decidedly negative impact on the local popumost effective gifts for quick trade, as two or On the whole, much of the original design lace. Gold mines are wonderful discoveries, three usually constitute sufficient tribute. yielding some quick profit as well as a new Old World plants are less effective, as the has been retained and those modifications feature. In the old system, mines generally Chief may become too tired to continue newhich have been made enhance, rather than had more than the party could carry in one gotiations before he has received enough of detract from game play. Seven Cities of Gold trip, so they were visited several times, but these items to allow trade. Arms should be is still the fresh, simple, playable game that once the initial supply of gold was exhausted offered only to warlike tribes, otherwise the broke ground in the early days of computer the mine was considered tapped. In the new passivistic, aggrarian chief may be disgusted gaming. Players will delight in exploring system, the player may leave men behind to by the offer. Once trade is granted, the player countless new worlds, building fame and forwork the gold mine and keep it productive has access to all the gold, artifacts, spice and tune, and extending the glory of the Spanish and profitable for a longer period of time. As new world plants of the tribe, as well as some Empi before, one must ensure such groups are well food and native bearers. In this provisioned such that they don't starve before sense, it is not trade at all because the player returns. it is unnecessary to provide any further Old World items to strip \"Savage\" Culture the tribe of all its resources. Interaction with the native civilizations is This ability to get Manhattan The chief greets you, anticipating gifts essential to success. On the overhead explofor a string of beads, as it were, is imported from your ration map, their settlements are depicted by the only holdover of the less than World various icons ranging from crude huts for adequate portrayal of Native warrior and hunter tribes to the elaborate Americans in the original game. pyramids of advanced cultures. Upon collidThe first game made it somewhat ing with one of these icons, the player's pereasy, and even fun, to go on Indian spective changes to the tribal screen. pacification war parties, someThe tribal encounter is a close-up overhead times eliminating whole tribes. view centered on the player character. Boxes While some may justifiably argue in the lower right corner of the screen show that the Spaniards had a history of U VW Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"THE RED CRYSTAL en The Sevente Secr \"The Seven Secrets of Life» QQP. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. NOREM Seek out the seven secrets of life .... Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or with a partner. Simply, one fine adventure and role playing endeavor.  MODEM PLAY  1 OR 2 PLAYERS WORKING TOGETHER OR IN HEAD TO HEAD COMPETITION BREATHTAKING GRAPHICS FASCINATING ECONOMIC SYSTEM LARGE VARIETY OF MONSTER TYPES OVER 50 DUNGEON LEVELS AUTO-MAPPING FEATURE The \"Red Crystal: Seven Secrets of Life\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"REVIEW Hi Ho! Hi Ho! It's Off To Tarq We Go Mindcraft's Dwarven Tale Comes Up Short by Scorpia BAS AY ANG DANAS 000 RECAUT Notes 19 NYI012 KA GAUGEN Your starting comthese monsters also hit very hard. For exampanions are chosen ple, Ranak (whom we picked up early on as from a group of eight. another party member) had 51 hit points, There's plenty of time Dwarven chain mail and a bronze helmet. He to look them over and took two hits from a Taldor and was deadchoose, as the action just like that. Ouch! doesn't begin until the This means you can't depend on your arparty is complete. mor for much protection, at least not until warves of legend—not of Walt Disney Each companion you take also comes with 30 you can afford steel plate and steel helmets. movies—are stout folks possessed of points that you allocate to his or her skills and There is little point in upgrading anyone's decidely hot tempers. On the island of attributes, allowing you to adjust them to armor before then; the party will have to rely Targ, the two largest Dwarven clans are waryour liking. on nift to keep them safe from physical blows. ring for dominance and seeking allies among Magic is very important in this game, so at Nift should be active at all times for everyone, the smaller dwarf factions. They didn't pick least two, perhaps three, companions should indoors and out. the best of times for this dispute, as the land have decent magic abilities. All come with a is being invaded by Taldor and other nasty limited number of spells and no spell books 851 24 IAIS L. creatures. Mindcraft's Bloodstone is the \"epic (called \"totems\" here); to make your friends 112036 Dwarven tale\" of their battle for survival and truly effective, you'll have to buy some rorems control of the isle. when you find the people who sell them. In 2poral 43 Your character belongs to one of the smaller the meantime, you can pass around your own clans that the larger ones are trying to win totem to other members for spell learning. over to their side. In this case, the matter is a moot one, since the game begins with your oct 24 10 55 2 clan being massacred by the Taldor. Only you 12038 ZAN OHI NOUS gat GWAY! and three companions make it out alive. At this point, the player may feel a little Auto-mapping is present and still as crude aimless, but the introduction in the manual as it was in the MC series, being a blocky, makes it fairly clear that the hero's destiny is USC RECALE low-res display of the immediate area, with to unite the clans behind one leader to repel Attack Magic no scrolling. In dungeons, the auto-map the invasion. In fact, the game has parallel VICTORY! doesn't work; you need a map flask and spequests: finding the ancient artifacts to be cial pearls to get a look at your environs. You given to the leader of your choice, and finding may want to draw your own maps on paper a way to reach the fabled home of Rohrkhad, The usual array of potions, mushrooms and from the display on screen, as pearls can be God of Dwarves and Creation. herbs is available, and you certainly want to used up pretty quickly in big dungeons where You'll learn the 'hows' and 'whys' of this as stock up on them, especially nift, gonshi, the map does not show the entire level at the game progresses, mostly by talking tomirger and sermin. There are many new once. people and doing some research. In between, monsters in Bloodstone, and they are all nasty. Auto-notes are here, too, with user-selected there is the usual dungeon-delving for imporMake no mistake, these critters will be tough. detail levels allowing you to capture everytant items and treasure. The game plays much Most come with hit points thing or just the most important like any of the Magic Candles, and in fact uses in the hundreds (some in the the same engine as Magic Candle III. The the high hundreds) and events in Bloodstone, however, take place in high armor protection. TITLE: BLOODSTONE the remote past, long before the lands of Quire a few of them have Bloodstone: An Epic Dwarven Tale PRICE: $39.95 SYSTEM: IBM Deruvia are even known of. spell casting ability as well. REQUIREMENTS: 286-12MHz or greater. 2MB RAM for sound, As usual, your character comes pre-created VGA graphics, 5MB hard drive space, mouse You are going to need all PROTECTION: the help you can get, and DESIGNER: Anthony F. Osterman with a set group of attributes and skills, but without those herbs, you PUBLISHER: you do get to choose the gender and name. Mindcraft Torrance, CASS You also begin with a very nice magic axe, an (800) 525-4933 won't last long. heirloom of your clan. As you might expect, Parat 327 HALAN 5 83 Bloodstone None Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"HPIRS TO THE THRONE A14 QOPQuantum Quality Productions, Inc. The King is dead. His brother is returning from the crusades. The barons are vying for power. It is your job to challenge the rogue barons and bring the kingdom together. The others have made their stand. Now you must lead your troops to victory over mountains, swamps, deserts, and through forests. You have the potential ... it's up to you and you alone. SUPERB GRAPHICS UP TO 4 PLAYERS SIMPLE AND INTUITIVE INTERFACE GREAT COMPUTER OPPONENT 30 DIFFERENT OPTIONS FOR EACH GAME (You control it all) UNLIMITED VARIETY OF LAND TO CONQUER MANY TERRAIN TYPES (Effecting Production and Combat) HALL OF FAME The \"Heirs to the Throne\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #99 "


"023357 DANA TOVAL 3HALAN 5 SI FARVER MAGIC Car MAEN conversations and information. Redundant handed over displays two male characters, and no one has a word to say about it. You entries can be deleted, and the notes are and again at the end, where the concluding might think it doesn't exist. searchable by keyword. You can also insert text includes such phrases as \"Scorp passes bis It turns out that there is one store that sells your own notes at any time, as well as run off knowledge on... Since the playtesters were the canvas, and that's in a town you won't be a copy of everything on your printer. While all male, it is likely none of them tried a visiting for some time in the game. You won't the auto-map may be primitive, the autofemale hero; otherwise these gaffes would even know it's for sale until you actually ask notes (which very few games have) are quite have been caught and fixed. If the designers to buy something; even the shopkeeper himgood. are going to offer the possibility of a female self doesn't mention anything about canvas. main character, they should provide An item this important (and it is important) 25 9:00 m. the appropriate text and graphics. should have been clued somewhere in the Further slip-ups occurred when I game; it is too easily overlooked otherwise. received wrong information at two The big flaw, however, comes at the end. PHYNZA points in the game. One person told Most of the party's activities have been dime the magic Tlengle sword was in rected to retrieving Dwarven artifacts to give 34 Make 35 89 a certain dungeon, when it was actuto one leader or the other. That doesn't have ally in the possession of a hermit far to be done at once; you can hold on to them RECAL from any dungcon. while you decide which one to favor. The last Notes ITAIR In Haraza, the Loremaster gives of these artifacts is the mighty axe Khamalkka PASS Draw W SPENS you a teleportal combination that is had, buried below Rohrkhad's castle. You'd MAKA SEES AN Obelisk. LOOK QUTE supposed to send you to Shatlam, think that after gerting the axe you would sail but actually drops you into South back and present all the items to the leader Balat, not a good place to be if you you want, who would then unite the clans, Dungeons follow the rooms/corridors pathave a low-level party. throw out the Taldor, erc. tern of Magic Candle, and you can bet that Magic, as an offensive weapon, is hardly No. It doesn't work that way. The moment most doors will lead to hostile confrontaworth considering. What good is a spell that you take the axe, the game is over. It goes tions. It is best to be prepared for the worst does 50 points of damage against a monster automatically into the ending sequence, and before opening any doors. In fact, be ready with hundreds of his points, when one you do not have the opportunity to give for a fight at any time, as you never know fighter, pumped up with mirger and using a anything to anyone. If you have given even when an ambush might occur. As before, magically-sharpened weapon can do 300. magically-sharpened weapon, can do 300+ one artifact to a leader, he becomes the chosen oneartilact to a leader dungcons that are cleaned out stay that way, damage with one blow? Even with turpin (a one. If you still have them all, then the game so if you need to leave to restock supplies you magic-enhancing plant), spells did nowhere makes a default choice which may not be the won't have to fight your way back in again, near the damage they should have considerone you wanted. and empty rooms are good places to rest up ing the power of the opponents. When that happened, I sat there thinking, and memorize spells. Most of the time I used such spells as Dis\"I spent most of the game collecting these One major change from the MC series is appear, Jump, See, Sharpen, Weaken, Quiver items, and for what? I still have them and the that Bloodstone does not require eating. Anand Time Stop. On those rare occasions game is over.\" The whole focus of the game other is that energy levels do not drop while when offensive magic was used, it was mainly is made pointless, even irrelevant, by this walking around. In previous games, the party to polish off already-weakened enemies. gaffe, which is right down there with the \"quit usually tired rapidly during outdoor treks, Poor design shows up again with the place and win\" finale of Realms of Arkania. requiring frequent rest stops or the use of ment of a very nasty dungeon mushrooms to revitalize everyone. Now, enclose to the starting town. No ergy is used up only while fighting or casting magic word is needed to enter; the Oct 25 9:00 spells. However, as many combats will be party can just walk right in and get extended ones, a good supply of sermin for all trashed by a succession of power1223KXE 032 is still necessary By: 058 HAN ful monsters. This place was GEMCutter Teleporters are also in the game, although meant for an advanced group, nor DO CAD DANAT chere seems to be fewer of them than in the beginners, yet it sits right there MC products. Typically, there will be one on MAKA 35 where the party starts out, a vithe last level of each dungeon to get you back cious trap for the unwary. our quickly, and a few teleportals can be The real \"starter dungeon\" hapfound in the outdoors. pens to be Pradaqa Tower, halfWhile the game ran cleanly, it had some way across the island, and it is minor and major flaws that, taken together, much easier for a new party. It is will pay you 5 co day. Woula you like to seriously detracted from the experience. For thoughtless planning, to say the work for ME? one thing, while my character was supposed least, to put an advanced dungeon to be a Dwarf, she looked distinctly human (easily entered. ver!). ar the start and the To avoid this, you must hand off all artifacts on screen. It's hard to take all this Dwarven beginner dungeon so far away. It would not be not collected to the clan leader of your choice stuff seriously when you don't even look like look like surprise me if some players gave up right before sailing to Rohrkhad's castle. Mindcraft a Dwarf. has put inserts into the game boxes, advising there, thinking, \"If this is the beginner dunThe town of Rulaan is inhabited entirely by players of this same thing. Too little, too late, geon, what are the rest of them like?\" Amazons, and as you might expect, they have perhaps, but better than no warning at all. a low opinion of males. They also appear to Another problem I had was finding the Overall then, Bloodstone turns out to be a be extremely ncar-sighted, since their remarks \"all-weather canvas.\" You need several items disappointment. The interesting story and clearly showed they thought my character was to build a ship, and all but one are found in improvements over MC II/are overshadowed male, not female. dungeons. For most of the items, someone, by design flaws and inadequate playtesting. This problem also shows up at the beginsomewhere, will give you a clue to the locaVery likely, only dedicated Magic Candle fans ning, where the graphic of the axe being tion. But the canvas is not in any dungeon will want to slog through this one. CGW Clear S oral 45 Aggo ogg 260cm sur essere 000 90 IS SUCh thet Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"CASINO ADVENTURE 33 ZI Welcome to DO CITY LIMITS Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. It is vacation time... you can sit at home watching the grass grow or enter our world ... LUCKY'S CASINO ADVENTURE. This could just be your lucky break. Everyone can \"win\", but only the best can hold out for the full three weeks. Travel between the many casinos, have a bite to eat and rest in the hotels. Nothing has been left out in this state of the art experience of a lifetime. Games Included: 5 Different Pokers, 8 Different Slots (all completely different), Paigow, Bingo, Keno, Baccarat, 3 Different Video Pokers, Money Wheel, Blackjack, Casino, Craps, Red Dog, Roulette, Caribbean Stud (ALL REAL CASINO QUALITY) Supports All Major Sound Cards 256 Spectacular Colors Tournament Play Scoring History 640 x 400 VESA VBE 1.2 Compatible Three Week Adventures to experience The \"Lucky's Casino Adventure\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #100 "


"REVIEW City Planning And The Sword SSI's Stronghold Moves The AD&D Line In New Directions D.E. Sims / o Corel by H.E. Dille tronghold is a unique release for SSI, having a greater kinship to strategy games like Populous or Powermonger than to other titles in the AD&D line. As such, many fans of their role-playing games may be baffled by the play mechanics and objectives of Stronghold. Rather than lead a party of characters into another dank dungcon, players must direct five central characters as they build and support a vast kingdom. Computer-controlled opponents are building kingdoms in the same territory, and the player must expand and control the entire map to carn the title of Emperor. VISCOUNT ULAR, NEUTRAL FILMIE STR FOFULATKIFox FFD, FOR STOF.ED MIT 1 HARIS 57 FAGSTOFASE 4511 WEXALKAS TERUTDUCON choose to play on a randomly generated map, central character. Four other characters will be or on one of five pre-generated maps, each of created subsequently; these are used to found which poses a unique challenge. Unlike some Keeps to support the main castle. Standard other games with a map generator, the coheAD&D rules are used in the character rousiveness and logic of the maps created by tines, though players must consider facrors Stronghold are sound. Using this feature, one beyond the normal combar bonuses if they can expect a lot of replay value. wish to succeed. Character alignment deterWith the geography of the world established, players must select the level of hostility they desire. The Peaceful, Aggressive and Hostile worlds have different starting values for initial gold, total gold storage, rate of promotion based on morale values, and whether or not auto-build features will be KOD enabled. A Custom option also allows the user to specify the total number of monster oppoYearl ANCUTESLICE cenu! nents which will appear in the world. Al destroy all enemicsauachicus the rank of EMFEFF. though the manual states that a maximum of 60 are possible, the addendum sheet contains mines the final outcome of the game. Lawful a small note limiting this figure to 30. characters must progress through nine proWith these preliminary issues resolved, the motion levels to reach Emperor or Empress player begins the game on the main display. status through proper management of their Two views are possible in this window-based kingdoms. Chaotic characters must destroy interface. The first is an overhead map of the all enemy strongholds to win. Neutral characentire region; the second is a \"postcard\" typeters must achieve both objectives, making this view of the cursor location. The latter is a option the most challenging scenario. t-person, 3-D polygon view with bitEach character race has different bonuses mapped images of objects. An arrow between and liabilities. Successful players will balance the two displays allows the player to quickly their five characters to complement one an swap these views in the main window. other. Dwarves are a good choice for the CHA 14 BALD ULT STORAGE FWO ACESS cort+994 FORO FOULAUTY CUFFEHT TO FRONTE 527 1.53 CITY ELODICE O TETOFETY ISTOTROCCASOS TALPROPERTY THELE TOON TURGICE AGORATION M B /s WIDY VODCE Scave USKORIS the figUp2023 1000, Goto 100 The resources available to the player are extensive and exciting. Players can build over 100 structures, including a castle, factories, dragon hatcheries, armories, schools of magic, forges, guilds, outposts and temples. As players construct new buildings the populace and kingdom grow stronger. Factors such as the farmland, population and taxes can be controlled by the player or delegated to the computer, providing a flexible management system. Players will know how well they are doing based on morale. Content peasants are productive; demoralized peasants boo, hiss and throw tomatoes. Stronghold STRONGHOLDS Human (and Elven and Dwarven...) Resources The first task is to tour the terrain and select the location of the main castle. Once satisfied with the locale, selecting the \"Create Baron or Baroness\" option will create the TITLE: Stronghold PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386 or greater, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, 6MB hard drive space, mouse: supports Adlib Gold, SoundBlaster/Pro, Pro Audio Spectrum and Roland sound cards PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNERS: Mark Buchignani, David Bunnell, Don Daglow, Chris Green and Cathryn Mataga PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, California (408) 737-6800 Laying The Foundation When beginning a game, the player may Page 6+ Computer Gaming World "


"EMPLOI 0 The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic Availas Windows Version  An Addictive Strategy War Game  Network and Modem Compatible  Super VGA Giaphies  Advanced Scenario Editor  Superior Computer AI.  Digitized Sound Effects  Various Difficulty Settings c-Golupletely Re-Playdle Scenario Pack By Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky 2010 KAMI C6 colors) LIIN AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818-999-0607 outside U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302) 1992 New World Computing, Inc and White Wolf Productions. Empire Deluxe is a trademark of New World Computing, Inc, New World Computing is a registered trademark of New World Computing, Inc. IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary. Circle Reader Service #92 NEW WORLD COMPUTING "


"UUT OFF LOYAL TO ULAR UOLELLA NEUTRAL EXPERIENCE PARTE 623543.000 HUT PORTS 16/16 fo AFP CLASS LEATHER FROM URCVIOUS FLEADER THESE DOME My lord, familie At SUCCE together in tiny room throughout the neighborhood. We acca mone honsing ARAYERHE D RASSTOROLA id 1669) 99 benefit to the populace (remember, this is aspect of this process. If one is successful in similar to the Dark Ages and are expensive to destroying an enemy stronghold, any survivmaintain over the long haul. Likewise, City ing monsters will rush off to storm the battleWalls are only minimally effective against maments of the player's kingdom in a mass rauding monster groups, have an exorbitant kamikaze attack. As such, one should not construction cost, and their maintenance is draw off all of their armies to pursue these debilitating to even the most productive king. offensive campaigns and leave the kingdom doms. As such, city walls are best placed in undefended. Also, if one had to build bridges areas where their effect is maximized, such as across the water to attack the enemy, it is best strategic mountain passes. to burn the bridges before pursuing the main atrack. In doing so, one delays the counteratfirst settlement, as their mining bonus will The Power Of The Pyramid tack. yield quick income if one places the settlement in a mountainous area. Halflings are : With the five central characters in place and The Emperor's Diary wonderful food producers and are capable of initial construction underway, the player supporting a vast kingdom if two conditions must begin to influence events using control In addition to the situational strategies disicons known as \"pyramids.\" Each character are met. First, their settlement should be built cussed thus far, the player will do well to keep has its own pyramid located on the right side close to water, allowing a double bonus in three other considerations in mind. First, one food production. Second, other settlements of the screen. Each pyramid invokes one of should use characters in cooperation to demust build granaries so that the food may be three actions in the area the player is distributed equitably. currently viewing: Recruit, Train and Build. With a Dwarf settlement promoting cash flow and Halflings feeding the masses, the The yellow portion of the pyramid repplayer may want to consider sending the resents the amount of recruiting desired. Dwarf character to the Halfling settlement to The more intense the recruiting, the build other buildings that they can sublarger the existing units will become and sequently claim. Ownership of buildings and the more new units will be attracted to resources ties the income and maintenance the stronghold. The light red part of the costs to the respective character. In this fashpyramid represents the amount of trainTm3 Ten/BoyHelawekeler ion, wealthy characters can aid struggling ing. The more power one allocates to this portion of the pyramid, the faster the units will increase in level. Naturally, higher level units perform better in comvelop well rounded and self-supporting settlebat, possessing more hit points and betterments ments. Second, it is better to upgrade existing spellcasting abilities. The final portion of structures than to build new ones; large, the pyramid, colored dark red, controls sprawling kingdoms tend to be unstable later the rate of construction. in the game. Finally, one will lose if training Movement Combined, these three settings reflect halls are not built. The more training halls per TRUSET 100% of the populace's effort. As such, it character, the greater the rate of advancement. With multiple halls per character, levels will is necessary to alter the settings to reflect Ulart Sad M the changing situation. In the beginning, advance very fast. Also, one should ignore the The. E incorrect annotation in the manual concernneeva-e a heavy emphasis on construction helps ing a maximum of ten Marketplaces. While the kingdom get off to a good start. Later, Dorance the farm bonus will only apply to the first ten communities. Also, one should make the one must allocate a major portion of the third character an Elf and send him off across effort to building and training new units; that Marketplaces, additional ones are still cheap the land claiming every tree in sight. Trees is, unless one wants to tempt neighbors with sources of income. produce money and resources for the owning a wealthy, undefended kingdom If one builds a stronghold with Dwarves in ripe for player, but unlike buildings do not degrade if plunder. the mountains and Halflings near water, and unattended. uses sound strategy, it is almost impossible to The Call To Arms lose. This one play balance flaw is the only The Planned Community notable weakness of Stronghold. Players will Considering that no kingdom has ever have to avoid this powerful character combiAs one considers the types of buildings to thrived through pacifism alone, it is no surnation as they become more skilled with the construct in each of the settlements, several prise that Stronghold requires a mastery of the other portions of the program in order to factors should be kept in mind. First, farms combat arts. Combat occurs whenever units maintain a challenge. Otherwise, Stronghold are necessary, but one should skew farm pro of opposing sides occupy the same block of offers a new perspective to players of SSI's duction toward the Halflings, who are the the map; it continues until one side has conother AD&D products and is highly recomonly ones capable of making bakeries. Second, trol. From the overhead view, combat appears mended. Cow Marketplaces are essential to every settlement. as flashing red and white dots. To draw addiThey are quick producers of income, they tional friendly units into the battle, the player increase the productivity of farms, and they goes to the first-person view and turns up allow the distribution of goods from other «magnets» that attract readied units immedimanufacturers. If one only has 500 gold, then ately and others as time passes. An overview one could do a lot worse than produce five of the battle's progression is provided via a red Marketplaces with these funds. and white sliding bar, the dominant color Some structures are never worth the redepicting the side with the advantage. sources required to build and maintain them. Successful combat is essential if one has CRAZ TRZETRO ST899 The two main culprits in this area are public chosen any alignment other than Lawful. UnG 10% aimagiran baths and city walls. Public baths provide little fortunately, the manual does not address a key FECEMI Toit Asich ZAUSE Ular Sacs M That I nevne Dom E 85% E ine scanngia Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"KEVIN DESIGNED A GAME WITH 56 TOOLS. 160 PUZZLES, AND THOUSANDS OF POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS. KEVIN'S GOT WAY TOO MUCH TIMEN HIS HANDS. teeter-totters to shoot some The Even More Incredible Machine. Even more incredible than the original. We're talkin' Computer Game Review's \"Puzzle Game of the Year.\" It's our form mode so you can create your own puzzles and drive your friends crazy. Just like Kevin did to you. Kevin's crossed that fine line between hoops, pop some balloons, or fill some buckets. Before you know it, genius and insanity. Why not join him? latest puzzle contraption game for the obsessive-compulsive lurking within you. you're spending hours shooting goldfish, It starts off innocently enough. Creating pushing cats off cliffs. even more elaborate contrapand feeding little men to alligators. Yes, alligators. THE INCREDIBLE tions by rigging conveyer belts, bellows, and And as if that's not enough, there's over MACHINE 70 new puzzles, 11 new tools, and a free Available at retail for IBM / compatibles, Windows, Macintosh $19.95 updates for registered owners. Call 1-800-757-7707 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY IM OR ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSED TO DYNAMIX, INC. 1993 DYNAMIX, INC WINDOWS IS A TRADEMARK OF MICROSOFT CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #107 "


"YOUR BELLY TANK IS ON FIRE. YOUR RADIO IS GONE. YOUR AIR FIELD IS 135 MILES AWAY. GODSPEED. CREATEIX WAR PLANESA Circle Reader Service #108 "


"DOAR THROUGH FLAK-FILLED SKIES IN THE COCKPIT OF YOUR SUPERMARINE SPITFIRE. OR ONE OF 15 OTHER AIRCRAFT FROM THE INFAMOUS SECOND WORLD WAR. TV Forces Acting on an Airplane Thrust Drag Il Gravity Gravity ACES OVER SHIPS BURN IN THE WATER. OIL DRUMS BLOW ON THE HORIZON. YOU'RE FLYING FOR THE BRITISH RAF ONE DAY. THE GERMAN LUFTWAFFE, THE NEXT. EUROPE FLY ALL NEW AIR-TO-GROUND MISSIONS, TAKE OUT ENEMY BRIDGES, AND STRAFE ARMORED VEHICLES. FACE OFF AGAINST FAMOUS WWII ACES SUCH AS ADOLF GALLAND AND HUB ZEMKE. DYDALOUS AVAILABLE AT RETAIL FOR IBM / COMPATIBLES. OR CALL 1-800-757-7707. ACES OVER EUROPE THE LATEST IN THE GREAT WAR PLANES SERIES. BB 159 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY IM AND ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSCED TO. DYNAMIX, INC.  1993 DYNAMIX, INC. Circle Reader Service #109 "


"JIIIIIIIIII M ITTITTINTI MTTTTTTTII IIIIIIIIII 224 MILLION SQUARE FEET OF FORESTS, SWAMPS, MOUNTAINS, BLACK MAGIC AND BLOODBATHS. VITITITETIT IIIIIII ITTA MITTTTTTTT ITTTTTTTTT! MT111 WELCOME "


"Ker \"A rare gem! Betrayal At Krondor sets new standards for Fantasy Role Playing games!\" -Jay Kee, Computer Gaming World, October 1993 Betrayal Eat Krondor T not how at Jinn RE EMPAH Solin u rod PRESS CHE NEL ili Betrayal At Krondor is a nine chapter virtual fantasy universe of magic, advenure, and bloodshed Digitized actors and scenery combine with our fanous a Space technology to create -a labyrinth of worlds within worlds. Spend orez 100 Hours building your skills, atings, and strengths as you battle bloodthirsty 1 armies at every turns Betrayal At Krondoris based upon best-selling 2 author Raymond E. Feist's Birtwar Legacy, Experience the betrayal. Welcome to Krondora PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Avallable at retail for IBM/compatibles. Or cell-800-757-7707 and are trademarks of, or licensed to DYNAMIX,INC.  1993 DYNAMIX INC. Circle Reader Service #110 "


"COMMIT  EXCELLENCE FRONT PAGE SPORTS IT'S MINUS 25 DEGREES, WINDS ARE HOWLING AT 45 MPH AND THERE'S TWELVE FEET OF SNOW ON THE GROUND. FOOTBALL ANYONE? your team, call the plays, and watch your players spin, flip, dive and risk career-ending injuries. [ 17 Os Front Page Sports: Football Pro. So real, you'll wish you were wearing a helmet That's right. Football. Yeah, in this weather. What are you a wimp? This is how football was meant to be played. Front Page Sports: Football Pro is the real thing. For the die-hard fan who lives for Sunday afternoons and can't stand the thought of the off-season. You're not just coach for a day. You run the whole league for the whole season with real NFL rosters and stats. You're in charge. You're the coach so you control everything, from designing your own plays to signing free agents and making trades. UITLES ASSOCIA There's even a college draft! Sub in and out whenever you want. Design uniform colors. This is your chance to prove you can coach your way out of a paper bag. So pick FOOTBALLPRO Available at retail for IBM/compatibles Or call 1-800-757-7707. Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Officially licensed product of the NFL Players Associaton TM OR ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSED TO DYNAMIX, INC.  1993 DYNAMIX INC. Circle Reader Service #112 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Little White Houses For Grue And Me Activision's Return to Zork by Charles Ardai The designers, aware of these concerns, devised an ingenious and satisfying manner to allay them in the very first scene of the game. Contrary to expectations, Return to Zork opens with white text on a black background, just as an Infocom game should. Nor is it just any text-it's text lifted straight from the opening of Zork I. A few seconds after the text appears, a full-screen image fades in behind it: the white house where the Zork legend began, drawn with such fidelity to the original description that no old-time gamer could fail to recognize it. ployed to capture the human actors), one is left soaring over a fractal-rich landscape while the soundtrack throbs ominously and Hollywood-style credits roll. It's a stunning opening scqucnce, on par with the opening of King's Quest VI, and it is sure to win even reluctant players over. By the time players land at the mountain pass where time plavers land at the mountain pass where the game begins, they are ready to be taken on a fantastic ride. What follows is only occasionally fantastic, but when it falls short it is never the video or audio that is at fault. The designers could stand to hone their storytelling and puzzle-writing skills, as well as their game engine—but as for the game's multimedia rendering, producer Eddie Dombrower and his crew have pulled off a performance that leaves its competitors far behind. There is a white house in the middle of the woods that adventure gamers know well. Unlike Robert Frost, they do not know «whose woods these are» —or whose house, for that matter, standing there all boarded up and abandoned. What they do know is who the Great Underground Empire located beneath the house belongs to. It belongs to all the creatures of the night who lurk in its dark tunnels and caves; it belongs to the Flatheads, lords and rulers of the land of Zork; it belongs to Marc Blank and Dave Lebling, the \"great implementers» of Infocom who dreamt up the original Zork trilogy more than a decade ago; and it belongs to all the adventurers who have played the Zork games over the years, painting wondrous scenes in their minds to illustrate the words Blank and Lebling put on the screen. In attempting to revive and modernize Zork, Activision is treading on sacred ground. It's a little bit like daring to remake Casablanca-or worse, since what Activision has undertaken is no mere remake. Return to Zork utterly transforms the most famous of Infocom's all-text universes, turning it into a cine matic showcase for cutting-edge graphics and sound. There's hardly any text at all in the game, which is sure to make diehard Infocom fans cringe; and the parserless, point-andclick interface resembles the latest offerings from Tsunami or Sierra much more than it does the classics from Infocom. Gamers have had every reason over the past several months, since advertisements for Return to Zork started appearing, to wonder whether Activision's wholesale renovation of their favorite fantasy world would render it unrecognizable. 1. Hu  HAHA nhh8 tikai Where Have All The Flowers Gone? The game is divided into three sections. First, for a few screens, one finds oneself on a The text fades out shortly thereafter, never mountain by a river; then, for a few more, in to return, but the point has been made: the what remains of a town; and finally, for most writers behind Return to Zork haven't lost of the game, in the Great Underground Emtouch with their roots. Gamers who have pire itself. The dominant characteristic of all been worried can rest assured that the Zork three sections is emptiness: though one meets legacy is in good hands. characters here and there, the bulk of the What of those gamers who are new to Zork, locations are deserted. This is more disturbthe graphics-hungry generation to which Reing than it sounds, since according to the turn to Zork is presumably intended to appeal? storyline the player goes to Zork expecting to They get their fix in the opening scene as well. find a flourishing community After a moment, when the house starts to The player's task is to find out what is going rotate, one realizes that the image is not static on. The town of West Shanbar has vanished, and flat, as in a conventional graphic adventure, but a de Return to Zork tailed, three-dimensional rendering around which the TITLE: Return to Zork \"camera\" is able to swoop PRICE: $79.95 SYSTEM: IBM, IBM with CD-ROM and glide, as in the best ZORK REVIEWED ON: CD-ROM REQUIREMENTS: 18M and 100% compatibles (386 scenes from The 7th Guest. recommended), 580-600K free RAM, DOS 5.0 or higher, VGA Following a bit of business and sound card, CD-ROM drive CD-based version) or 3.5\" HD suggesting a magical abducfloppy drive and 23MB hard drive tion (giving the designers a space Uloppy-based version) PROTECTION: chance to show off a sample DESIGNER: Eddie Dombrower PUBLISHER: Activision of the full-motion video and Los Angeles, CA spoken-word audio em(800) 477-3650 None November 1993 Page 73 "


"More general command icons, including \"save,» «restore\" and \"look at map,\" hide just off screen along with one's invenclicking on any blank portion of the screen. If the game's system of selecting icons from nested menus is not entirely comfortable, it is less because it is novel than because the designers define their commands in counterintuitive ways. One must pick up\" an object before one can the Road to the South has become a pestilenuse it, even if it is in one's inventory; if one tial No Man's Land, the \"Valley of the Sparinvokes the \"use» icon, one is given the rows\" has turned into the \"Valley of the choices «pick up,\" \"drop\" and \"examine.» Vultures, and someone called Morphius has Consequentially, one finds oneself using\" been terrorizing the few souls who are left by objects and then «picking them up.\" To furinvading their dreams. Only a fearless and ther confuse matters, «picking up an object resourceful explorer-hardy enough to wield is not the same as putting it in one's invena sword, dogged enough to map mazes, and tory\"—the latter requires a separate step. clever enough to solve puzzles will get past all the obstacles and uncover the land's seAccording to Activision, these are deliberate choices made with the intention of mimcrets. crets. As in earlier Zork games, the storyline here is often incidental to the goings-on. One spends most of the time dealing with the random obstacles laid in one's path, which can usually be overcome by making clever use of the objects one finds along the way. A simple example: there are quite a few locked doors in the game, certainly more than there are keys. So, other objects have to be pressed into service. Other puzzles include standoffs the player has to end, such as one between a blind archer and a petulant, frisky fairy (played by the aptly named Robin Lively) who is pelting him with acorns; and icking the feel of a text adventure; but, delib \"relationship\" puzzles which involve figuring erate or not, one cannot escape the feeling out how to get certain characters (a staggering that they could have been better thought out. lush played by Harold Smith, a timorous waif The fact is that no icon-driven interface, howplayed by Edan Gross) to part with objects in ever complicated, can replicate a text parser. their possession. There are interlocked puzI can't count the number of times I wanted zles that the player has to solve in sequence, to type in a command that was not on my and one even encounters a few traditional menu of options: one finds a box but is not puzzles, hearkening back to the likes of the allowed to \"open\" it, one finds a frame with treasure room maze in Zork III: a sliding-tile buttons but cannot \"push\" them, and so on. puzzle, two mazes, a boardgame, and two pop Failing to offer the depth of a text-based parser, Return to Zork's interface regrettably quizzes on GUE trivia. also loses the too-simple-butAside from some special interfaces for these agreeably-intuitive quality of, \"puzzle puzzles, one interacts with the game say, Sierra's icon-driven sysin fairly conventional point-and-click fashtem. It's the old story about ion. One moves around by clicking on directional arrows that appear when the cursor trying to sit on two stools and passes along the border of a screen. One falling in between: the intent was commendable, but the handles objects on the screen or in one's execution leaves much to be inventory by clicking on them and then selecting from the menus of action icons that desired. appear; which icons appear depends on the Similarly excessive is the situation. For instance, clicking on a whistle complexity associated with by itself will produce, among other icons, movement which stems from \"blow\" and \"examine.\" Clicking the whistle Activision's ambitious attempt on the cow will produce, among others, \"feed to simulate a three-dimenwhistle to cow\" and \"throw whistle at cow.\" sional environment. Each location in the game has up to four \"views\" associated with it: at the location, facing forward; at the location, facing in the opposite direction; at a distance from the location, facing it; and at a similar distance, facing it from the other direction. Not all \"exit\" pathways are visible from all four views, meaning that one has to treat each view as a separate location. The main problem with doing so is that it makes mapping the game a real headache. Tripping the player up further is the fact that movement within mazes is different from movement elsewhere in the game. In general, clicking on a left-pointing arrow means \"go left.\" In a maze it means \"pivot to face left.\" One is not warned of this distinction, however, resulting in much unpleasant fumbling when the player finally gets to the mazes. The third way the player interacts with the game (after using objects and moving) is by holding conversations with the characters he meets. In conversation, one is supposed to be able to influence the path one's discussions take by clicking on the emotion icons (fascinated, bored, threatening, apologetic) that appear on the side of the screen. Unfortunately, in the interest of realism, the designers deliberately do not have the characters stop talking to wait for the player's input-one just has to jump in and hope for the best. In some cases the icon one selects only alters the conversation by a few words; in many it has no effect at all. Alas, one is never sure that this isn't one's own fault: one might have selected the wrong icon or clicked on the right one, but at the wrong instant. So, one tries again, and again. In time, one realizes that there just aren't that many different conversations in the game; much of the time, one can click all one wants and still never get a character to say anything substantially different. In the process of learning this, however, onc ends up sitting through every conversation four or five times. No matter how exciting one finds the prospect of watching human actors in a computer game, and no matter how good the actors are most here are excellent), four or five is too many times to hear dialogue that is Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"Most People Can't See a Single Reason to Try Something Besides SimCity. We See 2000. Coming this Christmas. MAXIS Circle Reader Service #83 "


"SUMO HEAD BUTTS, SONIC BOOMS, WHIRLWIND KICKS, DRAGON PUNCHES, BUTT CRUSHES, FIREBALLS, SPINNING PILEDRIVERS Street Fighter Mis a registered trademark of Capcom Co., Ltd. "


"WILL YOUR PC SURVIVE? WILL YOU? TM FOR THE PC CAPCOM Distributed by Hi Tech Expressions Available at your local software retailer or call 1-800-447-6543 to order by MC/VISA/AMEX Circle Reader Service #68 "


"use fara not all that sparkling even the first time comedy club, when one around. reaches it, looks just like the None of the above makes Return to Zork Improv, complete with brick unplayable, but the gameplay is less smooth. walls, stand-up microphone, and the learning curve somewhat steeper. and patrons in modern attire. than one would ideally want it to be. Return The gag value of each of to Zork takes some getting used to. Because of these scenes is considerable, the game's good qualities it's worth it, but but the net impact of so many players should be prepared to invest some anachronisms packed into a time in the process. small space is somewhat disappointing. Again, the designers Zork, Sweet Zork are trying to straddle two The new look of the Great Underground horses: they don't want to give Empire also takes some getting used ro. up Zork's traditional fairies, Gone, for the most part, are the dank caverns trolls and dwarves, but they see and convincingly subterranean settings of the no harm in repeatedly breaking the illusion hand to the process as well. Though none original. In their place is a mixture of, on one with modern references and settings. Maybe except the prating Wizard Trembyle (Will hand, semi-Tolkienesque outdoor scenes other gamers will mind less than I did; I McAllister) has more than a handful of lines, and, on the other, florescent light-strips, found the \"anything we want to throw in\" all do a creditable job of bringing their charmodern furnishings, and giant signs saying tone disorienting. It is hard enough to imacters to life. Michelle Dahler is a fine witch, things like \"Welcome To The New Westmerse oneself in a fiction unfolding on a with a hint of Sigourney Weaver about her: Shanbar. computer screen without the added distracA.J. Langer plays Rebecca Snoot, one of the tion of a milieu that shifts from Midgood guys, with the role's requisite spunk and dle Earth to Middle America and mild) sexiness; Jojo Marr does a fine job as back again in the blink of an eye. the peculiar, scruffy Canuck; and Howard Adding to the sense of disorienta Mann lends some welcome comic relief with tion is the confused storyline which his turn as the garrulous Lighthouse Keeper. continually leaves the player wonThere are plenty more, all of them fine, exdering just what he is doing. Is the cept semi-celebrity Jason (The Wonder Years) game about finding Morphius? Is it Hervey who plays the part of a troll in a scene about figuring out what happened TV Guide properly singled out as embarrassduring the much-talked about Great ing. Diffusion of magic? Is it about finding «Rooper,\" the fellow whose Beyond Zork sweepstakes mailing is what lures the The good news: Return to Zork is not bad. West Shansa player to Zork in the first place? Is it It's a flawed game full of great visual moThe player's first clue that things are going about the disappearance of Westments, well worth the attention of anyone to be different is that he starts the game in Shanbar? Is it about none of these possession of a Polaroid camera, a pocket tape things? All of them? Some? Which? recorder, and a box of matches from The answer, I think, is \"all of \"Chuckle's Comedy Club.\" The camera and them,» which is example number tape recorder are really just convenient ways three of Activision trying to do too to let the player keep track of where he has many things and ending up with a muddle. If ever a game would have been and what he has heard, but they set an they set an benefited from some judicious paremel unexpectedly modern tone that persists ing down, this is the one. Yet what a throughout the game. gorgeous muddle it is! For all the Mixed in with the usual ruins, forests and criticism the game merits, and for all wooden buildings are an armorer whose sign its oddities and excesses, Return to includes a laser-sighted rifle, an inn which Zork persists, scene after scene, in looks more like a Holiday Inn than anything satisfying the gamer, largely because that belongs in Zork, and a trailer with a of its extraordinary effects. who wants to see what the future of computer refrigerator, oven and running water. The The mix of digitized backgrounds, foregaming looks like. If the Zork legend had to gaming looks like. If rhe Zark la. ground action either com rest on this game alone, there probably puter-rendered or videotaped, wouldn't be any Zork legend; but as an addifull-motion video sequences, tion to the series, Return to Zork is more than and genuinely thrilling comsatisfactory. puter-generated \"movie\" scenes will leave the most jaded The better news: Activision is still working player breathless. One's climb on their design, their technology and their down the Cliffs of Depression, interface. They are learning from their misone's boat ride to East Shanbar, takes and refining their successes, so that their and even such simple sequences next Infocom game should be even better. as one's trip across a gift shop \"The best news: their next Infocom game is to get to the cash register are all going to be a sequel to Planetfall. I'd predict exquisitely rendered. that with Steve Meretzky calling the shots, First-rate actors lend their that's going to be one to see. CGW Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"EWING commAREEF JUNE Relentless Space Combat For Naive Rookies or Hardened Vets FEKET SE s a student at the TCSN Academy, you customdesign and fly unique combat, rescue, and search and retrieval missions from the CyberSchool's holographic simulator. In the Wing Commander tradition, the game features a dynamic musical score, improved rendered, bit-mapped graphics, and a dazzling array of customizing options. But Wing Commander Academy is not another cinematic extravaganza — it's an intense dogfighting marathon. DOEL PETE BE OBIE Custom-design a variety of missions that match your skill level as you place fighters, capital ships, data pods and ejected pilots up to 10 in each of the four action spheres. Save up to 24 games to disk and trade with your friends or upload them to bulletin boards to challenge others.  Request random missions where each action sphere yields an unknown number of enemy ships with pilots of varying skill levels. KORAN SELECTION EUTE NORD HARGA ACCEPTCANCEL Climb into the cockpits of the new Confederation Wraith or Kilrathi Jrathek fighters for a new combat experience. Select a cybernet wingman from a frightened cadet to a hotshot veteran. Fly from the cockpit view or try the chase-plane view for a new perspective on the dogfighting action. Sharpen your combat skills as you compete for high-point honors. E 110 CM2 E BEBOP Actual screens may vary. Engage the \"Gauntlet\" a dogfighting marathon with 15 progressively difficult levels of attacking ships including three flights of fighters in each level. Build missions so tough that even our professional Wing Commander pilots can't survive. ORIGIN We create worlds. A Stand Alone Game No previous Wing Commander experience necessary, An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 For MS-DOS 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. Sound Support: Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, Roland LAPC-1 or 100% compatible sound card required for music. Requires: 256-color VGA, 2 megs RAM, 5 megs hard drive space free, joystick. Circle Reader Service #122 Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, We create worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Academy is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. "


" To read Kasparov's mind, simply refer to the second board. Ready to raise your game to a suggests. higher level, are you? Meet Garry You can Kasparov, reigning king of the also customize most aspects of your opponent's [BEFORE] chess game, giving you world. And your a virtually Infinite new private tutor. KASPAROVS pool of challengers. To make sure While you play Kasparov's Gambit you don't outgrow his digitized Image Gambit any time and voice (Russian soon, we power it accent and all) will with the very same  on your engine that won the screen. He'll warn 1993 International you of imminent Computer Chess WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP CHESS danger. Question Championship. Not the tactics you exactly what use. And constantly challenge you to seek | you'd call a pushover. So pick it up. out fresher and deadlier lines of attack. Play it. And who knows? There's even a second After spending a few weeks or so board, which allows learning the ropes from Kasparov, you you to visualize the may just find that you're finally strategies Kasparov I ready to take on, well, Kasparov. [ AFTER] As you improve, you can customize opponents to suit your game. Kangarov's limbi is n trademark of Flatmale Arts 1998 Huuristi Softwara All rights remated "


"YOU DON'T WORLD CHAMPION OVERNIGHT IT TAKE YOU A COUPLE WEEKS. Circle Reader Service #137 Gambit's engine won the world title, so watch your step. ELECTRONIC ARTS "


"REVIEW 1 SIM FARM The Best Game On American Soil An Old Hand Jaws About Maxis' SimFarm, SimCity's Country Cousin by Randall Black Towdy! You're the feller what took over is, sometimes it seems like that's all you end drag it over to the crop you want to plant. I'm the old Sim homestead, aren't ya? up doing in SimFarm. But there's enough partial to strawberries, but you can make Well, I've seen 'em come and go. other stuff to keep it purty interesting. money on just about anything. It's real imSeems like some city slic...I mean sophistiNow let's see what else you're going to portant that you plop down your crop in a cated urbanite like yourself is always coming need. Well, you've got to harvest your crops spot that gives you a little bit of elbow room out here to try their hand at farming. Come so you'd better get a harvester, a truck and a around the edges for roads and irrigation on in and I'll try to give you an idea of what trailer. That's the minimum equipment ditches. The minute you plant a crop, your SimFarming is all about. Get off that chair, you'll need to get a crop in the ground and problems start. Nobody said farming was Freddy! Dont mind the hog, have a seat. gerir harvested. Once you've bought all that easy. There's a pretty good chance you're First off, you need to understand that farmvou can turn off the \"autolease\" option. going to see a picture of a wave on one corner ing ain't no dag-blasted hobby. It's all about That's bunch of fellers from rown who'll of your field. That's bad. Unless you and money. You don't have any chew on you do come and do the work for ya if you don't have ya? I didn't think so. Like I was saying, it's all the equipment to do it yourself. But they 602733201 about money. You start out with $40,000 charge a lot of money and farming is all about klau dollars, a homestead and nine plots of land. money. Did I say that? That's when you design your own. There's here s Now if you leave ve Now, if you leave your equipment out in DARRON another way to get started and that's to take the rain, it's going to rust. So you'd better buy over one of the eight farm see-narios that're yourself a shed. While you're at it, get yourself already up and running—from an apple ora couple of silos to store your crops. If you chard in Washington State to a cattle feedlot don't have silos, you can't store whatever in Michigan to waves of amber grain in Iowa. you've growed, and that means you have to But the best way to learn farming is to start take whatever price the dag-blasted comfrom the ground up. There's a saying around modities market in Chicago says your corn or these parts: \"Teach a man to fish and you just tomatoes or sorghum is worth on the day it's might ruin him for farming.\" Freddy, I can harvested. You're going to find out that the Annette Funicello plan to go surfing, you've hear you trying to get into that cookie jar! Can price you get for your crops makes all the got to get rid of that wave. It means your crop 22E22 on difference between makin' a go of it and is being flooded. The best way to do that is having the tax man come and yank your land click on the picture of an irrigation ditch and right out from under you. So buy some silos. run a line of trench around one edge of this HON HONEY That gives you a little time to think about field to drain it. The best place to put irrigaBOND how much they're offering and how much tion ditches is on the right side or the top or NUN you want to get. bottom of a field 'cause you want to leave the Now you're just about ready to plant your left side available for a road. If your farmi first crop. If you were smart, you'd put your a dry climate, you should hook up your irrisheds and the like off to the side, maybe near gation ditches to a windmill or a water pump your homestead, so as they don't take up that you put in next to a river or lake. Figgergood ground that can be put into production. ing out how to connect up all your irrigation gagnamento LLLLLLLLtddd A big part of making your farm productive is ditches can be a right interesting puzzle laying it out right. You may of noticed that kind of like hooking up electricity in SimCity. you believe that dad-burned hog? your land is covered with rocks Building roads that go to your Now, what you want to do is make money and trees. Before you can plant arm crops is real important 'cause if you by growing crops and livestock. «So what's you're going to have to bulldoze the first thing I should do?\" you're probley them. Unless, of course, you set TITLE: SimFarm asking. Well, you're going to need equipment your options for «autodoze.\" In PRICE: $49.95 SYSTEM: IBM to farm your land, so you should buy a tractor. that case you can plunk down a REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGNEGA graphics, And you need something for the tractor to crop without worrying about hard disk, mouse; supports Ad Lib. pull so you'd better buy a plow and a planter rocks and trees. But then there's Sound Blaster, Roland, and Tandy sound cards and especially a sprayer. You're going to be those that like to do it themselves. PROTECTION: doing a lot of spraying, let me tell you. Do Eric Albers \"The next thing to do is click PUBLISHER: Maxis you like to spray? Well, that's good because your mouse on the plant icon and Orinda,CA you're going to be doing a lot of it. Fact (800)336-2947 sau EUROWATEUR Vida 182 WUM WED a duc UPUJU MUUUUU urm None DESIGNER: Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"Kimus Ransom Oru nou hrlag allar GOODS The evil approaches. The future of the kingdom is bleak. The people are begging for a miracle. The kingdom has turned to you to stop the evil Lukhan from seeking revenge Imagine... in his crusade to ravage the land. 2500 frames of animation, 500 Battle over 40 different types of creatures with your choice of weapons and different characters to interact with armor. Travel to six cities and visit over 150 locations including the Travel to cities, dungeons, temples, mysterious forest of Zur, the twisted Mazes of Kheas and the Crypt of the shops, armorers and more Lost Soul. Your quest will ultimately take you to the Mountain of Kandor to Countless unpredictable scenarios battle the vengeful Lukhan in the final struggle. and excellent graphics The King's Ransom awaits you, valiant warrior... take the ultimate adventure Stunning movie-like soundtrack with and wear your bravery with pride! sound effects and speech Hundreds of hours of adventure ReadySoft Incorporated gaming 30 Wertheim Court Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (416) 731-4175 Fax: (416) 764-8867 King's Ransom is a trademark of ReadySoft Incorporated  ReadySoft Incorporated Circle Reader Service #105 "


"HUISHED P 28. RIPT 00200 uw close DIS 02 VORARLIDAXL 2222ZEZE pops your crop's time line with gauges at the sons-of-guns will sell your assets, and even bottom showing how it's doing vis-a-vis your land, and that's after they've blowed up pests, weeds, disease, water and soil quality. all the buildings on it. When you do manage You didn't think a clod hopper like me could to pay taxes, the town will grow and you ger use a phrase like vis-a-vis in a sentence, but to vote on whether you want the Sims to put there's a lot of things you don't know about in residential or commercial districts or us Sims. Depending on the kind of crop you maybe a fairgrounds or airport. When you do selected to plant, about now you should be real good, your homestead gets fixed up and seeing some problems with pests or weeds or you get to see a cow with fruit on her head do disease. There are a couple of ways to get your a little dance, which is something I hadn't crops sprayed. One way is to just click on the personally never seen until that implement spray you want and then on the field you convention in Fresno. want sprayed. Another way is to go into the Once you get a little money, you can try don't, your going to wear out your machinery crop's timeline and set up a schedule for your hand at raising cows, sheep, pigs or faster. So click on the dirt road icon and run spraying ahead of time, but golly if that ain't horses. You build a corral and put in feed and a stretch up the left side of your field and tedious! connect it to the shed where your equipment But there's still another way to spray. When 226226202900 is stored. Just between you and me, the farm your farm gets big and the town has growed hands that operate your machinery are enough to get an airport, you can buy a crop dumber than possums. They'll drive all over duster airplane. You buy fuel and whatever tarnation looking for a road, and half the time kind of spray you want to put on your crops they can't figure out how to get around a and then you fly it yourself using your keydurned silo and end up wearing out your board. As a flight simulator, it's pretty primitractor. But then again look at what your rive, but the first few flights are fun 'cause you payin' them: room and board and all the have to worry about running out of gas and electrons they can eat. Nobody said Sims not crashing. Don't tell my wife, but I had a were smart. good time crashin' crop dusters into different By now the irrigation ditches should have stuff, just to see what happened. I blew up the gotten rid of the wave, but there will still be town real good! Once you get the hang of it, a picture of fertilizer sitting smack dab on though, spraying with the crop duster gets to water troughs, which are kept full if you have your field. That means the soil quality is poor be as much of a chore as any other way of a water tower. Keep 'em fed and watered until and you need to spray your field with fertilspraying. they're big enough to have babies—that's izer. Do you like to spray? Here's your when the real money starts rollin' in, leastIt's a darn shame there ain't no \"autospray\" chance. Click on the spray button, drag over ways that's what I hear. Livestock are dumber option 'cause a body can sure get tired of it. to the fertilize option and let go. Your pointer than farm hands, so don't be shy about piling Seems like what really keeps a person from now looks like a spray can and any field you on the feed. Before they can eat or drink, they buyin' lots more land and puttin' in lots more click on will receive a dousing of the very best have to run smack into food and water and crops is knowin' that he's gonna have to spray electronic manure money can buy. You'll they move so randomly that a horse looks like it all. Heck, once my farm got big enough, I'd notice that your tractor will pull the sprayer a Brownie-in-motion. Livestock car less and even be willin' to pay a percentage of the crop do better if they have a barn to go in. If they on cach acre of land that was being sprayed 2276 run out of food or water, watch out. They'll for me, sorta like hiring a manager or a sharebreak down your fences and run through cropper. Maybe the folks what dreamed up camed up your fields, eatin' up big patches and gettin' our this game might consider it. run over by farm implements. Once you've planted the right kind of crop Well, I've got chores to do so you're on your and irrigated and sprayed, there's a good own, neighbor. It's not perfect, but learning chance the harvest will come in with a \"high\" how to SimFarm is a lot of fun. The manual's or at least \"fair\" quality, and now we're talka humdinger, real top shelf, with plenty of ing pay dirt. If a crop is poor, you'll still make advice and just the right amount of jokes. a little money, but if it's bad, you're not going And somebody took a lot of time making to get diddley squat. To make any real SimFarm look real purty. Sometimes it seems money, you have to keep an eye on the comlike you can almost smell the gladiolus modities market. You can store your harvest blooming. You'll appreciate the sound efback and forth across the field real fast and and wait until the price for a particular crop fects, especially if you know what a real pig then head back to the shed. Did I tell you to goes up, or you can do something call sounds like, isn't that right, Freddy? CGW click on the hand icon and move all your futures contract where you lock in a price equipment into the shed yet? Oh well, a little while the crop is still in the field. A big part AZERBA rust gives machinery that quaint, rustic look of SimFarming turns out to be checkin' prices so beloved by city sl...sophisticated urbanites. all the time, and it would be nice to have a You can also make the soil more fertile by «business page\" or a «broker» option that rotating your crops. No, I don't mean going would let you know when the price for peaout and twirling your sugar beets. I mean nuts or almonds or apples or whichever of the planting different stuff, like soy beans, every 24 crops has reached a high price. Still, it's few harvests. not a big problem. Okay, now your crop is growing. You You can borrow money if you don't mind might want to check on how it's doing by payin' some goll-durned banker 15% interclicking on the magnifying glass and then est. But be careful that you make your loan purring it on the field and clicking again. Up payments and pay your taxes 'cause those tekens RUIRE BIQLERING Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"Ivy od 1 2 M, 31 Yo H I V8 m2m x? ROSEMARY WEST'S HOUSE OF TM | FORTUNES EduPGRAITHW UX WT u ZGA NIIH UK WTWORNICI Urugi 2002 ANIH UNUTD *Astrology * Crystal Ball Numerology I Ching Tarot a doRN, HW un vino HD VILLA CRESPO SOFTWAREX YO HIVY For IBM PC and TANDY compatibles. Supports EGA/VGA/SVGA graphics. SRP $49.95 Made in USA. Let Rosemary be your personal computer advisor. Unveil the mysteries of your future. = The stars may have a clue about your destiny. Seck your fortune in the Tarot card room. Villa Crespo Software za Vivid, animated SVGA, VGA, and EGA graphics.Available at Software Sellers Everywhere! Display, print, and save past, present, and future For more information, call 1-708-433-0500 predictions. Digitized speech and music with or fax 1-708-433-1485. Sound Blaster. Easy-to-use, with mouse or keyboard, on any IBM-compatible computer. Circle Reader Service #125 Villa Crespo Software, Inc. 1725 McGovern Street, Highland Park, IL 60035. 1993 Villa Crespo Software, Inc. Equipment mentions are Trademarks Registrations of their respective companies "


"FROM Power Tools For Pilots | cOCKPIT Organizing Your Flight Simulator Workspace by Timothy Trimble Zip Listing ZIP FILO Directorio S O 1 Flight Planner ID 3 IFT Pro ver. 5.0 4 Rdu Factoru Compitur ID 5 = Scenery Enh. Editor ID 6 Elight Asunnot ATV Shift.12 Shirt 13 Shift Shift15 DALDTW.ZIP DALLAS.21P DOLSAC ZIP DTWDAL.ZIP TC DFMia TXSDFW ZIP TXSELP..ZIP TXSHOU.IP TXSSAT.2TP 21S CALIF CANADA CARIB EUROPE MEXICO OTHER PACIFIC Shift F7 SET HUUTOSITE Shift 18 New Generation Of Adventures One of my favorite aspects of PPT is its ability to convert flight plans into adventures for use with AAF. Using the Flight Planner portion of PPT, an armchair pilot can create a complete flight plan consisting of departure point, waypoints, destination point, speed and altitude en roure, and weather conditions. PPT will then run this flight plan through the adventure generator that comes with AAF. The end result is an adventure in which Air Traffic Control will stay in touch with the pilot and issue directions for the planned flight. Deviation from the \"filed» flight plan will result in a scolding from the controller unless the pilot has requested permission to deviate. The generated adventure allows for deviation, repetition of ATC instructions, ATC radar check, and flight plan autopilot. Final Approach PPT is a DOS-based program with its own graphical interface. It requires a minimum of 590K of available memory (more if it is going to be used as a shell for loading Flight Simulator 4). All of the program options are presented via pull-down menus and pop-up windows; a mouse is preferred but not required. Before PPT, I don't know how I was able to manage 50 megabytes of Flight Simulator related files. I highly recommend it for anyone who is suffering under the weight of their Flight Sim fanaticism. Until next time, this is the Timinator saying, «Remember to turn your head before spitting from an open cockpit biplane!\" For more information on Pilot's Power Tools, contact: Drives Saint >> | << Un-Solunt If you're like me, a die-hard Flight Simulathe three files, and then fly from Mexico to tor 4 fanatic, then you probably own a The Bay. Lhorde of add-on accessories for the product. Aircraft and Scenery Designer (ASD), AirASD Utilities craft and Adventure Factory (XAF), a bunch of PPT also provides a set of utilities and scenery packages, scenery utilities and tons of reports for use with Aircrafi and Scenery Deflight adventures--in total, over 50 megabytes signer. Reports can be generated that will list of files--overpopulate my hard drive real esall of the navigational aids within a specific tate. Organizing this much data can be a real scenery file. Another report will show the bear. Either you stuff everything into one coordinates, radius and all of the navigational directory, or you try to organize it through aids. The navigational aids include informamultiple directories. In either case, locating a tion on all of the runways, VORs and NDBs. specific file or group of files can be quite a Another report will show the amount of overchore. What we need is a utility that Pilot Power Tools will organize all of our FS4 files and TR IP Tool ASD Tool To Run Settings Window Het free up some hard disk space. The folks ar Mallard Software, who FLICHT happen to produce most of these FS4 add-ons, have developed a good solution for managing scenery, aircraft, adventures and other associated FS4 files. The package is called Pilot's Power Tools (PPT), and it includes file management utilities, ASD utilities, AAF utilities, and the Mallard Flight Planner which has been previously released as a stand-alone package. lap between various scenery files. The utilities will allow a scenery designer to change the Zippidy Do Dahs boundary radius and the center of a scenery file. A graphic plor can be produced that will PPT uses PKWare's PKZip file compresshow a single scenery file or multiple scenery sion utility to group and compress files into files showing navigational aids and areas of packages that are casier to manage. PPT will overlap. This can be quite helpful for somekeep track of the files and will allow access one trying to trim down unnecessary territory and execution of any program within a within a scenery file. \"zipped,\" or compressed, file. For example, you could \"zip\" the entire directory containAAF Tools ing Mallard's Japan Scenery and view the contents of the zipped file within PPT. You could then rell PPT to run Flight Simulator with the tory package will also enjoy a set of utilities selected zip file. PPT will unzip the needed and reports. The reports are designed to assist in \"programming adventures for FS1. PPT files, then load and run Flight Simulator with can generate a cross-reference report that the selected scenery. When you're done flyshows a list of functions, variables, frequening, PPT will rezip the scenery files and deletecies and North/East coordinates that AAF is the uncompressed files. And you're not limusing, and which lines of code the references ited to just one file; a group of zip files can be appear on. PPT will also count the number selected and launched with FS4. So you could of labels that are being used by an adventure, select the San Diego, Los Angeles and San which is important to track since AAF will Francisco scenery files, uncompress and load only allow 4000 labels for each adventure. PUIUM of 10 Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Rd. Flower Mound, TX. 75028 (214) 539-3481 Voice (214) 539-6676 2400 baud BBS CGW Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"EVEN THE BEST EQUIPMENT NEEDS SOLID SUPPORT. SOUNDMAN 16. THE BEST SUPPORTED CD-QUALITY SOUND BOARD IN THE BUSINESS. SoundMan 16 is endowed with 7 day-a-week technical support, a 3-year free replacement A warranty, a limited lifetime warranty, and discount hardware upgrades. SoundMan includes 16 bit, 44.1 kHz sampling/playback, a 20-voice Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis chip, sound-enhanced jumperless installation, and a bundle of multimedia titles including MCS MusicRack, Screen Craze Il and ICON Hear-IT Lite. It's guaranteed 100% SoundBlaster« and AdLib compatible, and is the only 16-bit sound board backed by Logitech's LOGITECH reputation for quality and service. Pick one up at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2959. M/ Trademarks belong to the respective owners The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #80 SOUND MAN IR "


"Scorpion's Tale The Scorpion's Tale is a warm and comfortable tavern of the mind, complete with a cozy fire of vibrant images. Our resident storyteller conjures up illuminating hints about games, so if our gentle readers eschew hints, let them beware? Go West Young Scorpia! Our Adventure Game Expert Ropes n' Brands Freddy Pharkas h, it's autumn again, and none too cian around. Okay, now you can fix up MaWhat do we know about snails? Well, salt soon. That wasn't one of the better dame's medicine. would work, but there's none around. Nothing you can brew up in the lab for this, either. grumpier than usual (and that's grumpy!). macy. No sooner docs Madame leave than I tell ya, problems like this are enough to drive But if you think the weather was bad, you another customer waltzes in. No mixing this a man to drink, or maybe even religion. ain't seen nothing until you take a little trip time, though; off-the-rack stuff is what you Okay, the snails are taken care of, but now out west to Coarsegold, CA... now there's a need here. (Freddy did look over all his stock, there's that Indian (a real, from India-type place with problems! right?) Indian) you have to get off that anthill. This Yessiree, buckaroos, it's time for high jinks Uh-oh, here comes the Sheriff...and he just puzzle is mere child's play, and soon Freddy and Lowe (very low) humor in the wild and closed down the pharmacy! Something sure has a devoted friend and assistant (optimistic, woolly west (the wild is provided by the jokes, is rotten in the town of Coarsegold, and our Freddy, taking on help when his store is and the wool is provided by the sheep). ccp): Freddy's gonna have to do something about out of commission). There's more adventure in being a frontier that 'cuz no one else is. pharmacist than you ever imagined This is no time to take it easy, though, But first it's time for Freddy Pharkas, Fron'cause there's more problems ahead. All you One thing to keep in mind is that the mouse tier Hero. You thought being put out of gotta see is half the town lined up outside the \"hot spots\" can be troublesome. Sometimes business was bad? Hah! Act II opens with the single outhouse to know it's trouble on the you have to click on exactly the right spot to Deadly Equine Gas Attack...well, we know run (ahem). Good thing your handy handget a reaction or accomplish something. If where flatulence comes from, so let's just book has just the solution. Remember this is you're sure you're trying the right thing but move right along here. potent stuff, so make sure it's watered down. nothing happens, move the cursor around and keep trying. 9290097 It's been a busy day. Bet you're ready for a good night's sleep, ch? Forget it! You've got Okay pardner, before things start to get SHERIFE E L PR beharkas Pharmac more work to do—like putting out the fire interesting, mosey on through the town. It before the pharmacy (and maybe the whole helps to know where everything is, and nothtown) goes up in flames. ing much will happen until Freddy enters the pharmacy, so take the time to learn your way Now, being a smart pharmacist, you probaround. And remember the Golden Rule of ably figured out that's what the baking soda Adventuring: Snarf everything you can get is for, and you'd be right. But simply tossing your hot little hands on because you'll probthe sacks on the fire by hand isn't gonna help ably need it sooner or later. a whole lot. Using that method you can only do one sack at a time. You'll have to dump So it's rime to get cracking. There's not First thing Freddy-boy needs is a way to the load at once, so get into the swing of much to say about Act 1 of this saga. Freddy breathe. He's not gonna last long in that things and hop to it, because there isn't much just does his job, filling prescriptions. It is all gas-saturated air. Check out that blacksmith's time left. pretty simple—just look up the formulas in very carefully, and drop in on Mom's, too. the handbook. All right, it was simple until After all that excitement, Freddy's too Madame showed up with that illegible preNow ya gotta make the antidote, and that pumped pumped up to sleep, and that's only natural. requires a sample (the things a hero has to scription (personally, I wouldn't trust any Hev. doesn't Madame owe you a little somedoctor who's drunk most of the time). do...and it doesn't get any better from here thing? This could be a good time to collect on). After that, just analyze the stuffand whip on that debt. Better visit Doc about this one, Freddy. But up the right medicine. Be careful where you put it, though. I wouldn't try stuffing it down So, the Big Boss, the person who's out to Doc's no help there. Maybe there's some way a horse's throat. destroy the town, is gonna bring in some you could see things the way he does. (Had Whew! Everyone can breathe easier now. heavy guns. That doesn't sound too good, your eyes checked lately, Freddy? Could be Good work, Freddy! Wait, what's that? Freddy, especially for you. It's time to head you need glasses, eh?) into Act III, the big disguise extravaganza. Someone just came running in with dire Hold on, you're not done yet. Check your news: A snail stampede is heading right for So whaddaya need? New clothes, a new ear, handbook on that stuff. Like I said before, the town! You gotta head em off at the pass, a pair of six-guns...some ammo would help, this doctor isn't the most trustworthy physiFreddy, or the whole place will be slimed! and them shootin' irons could use a good lidhiwa TETE Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"Beat The NFL Coaches At Their Own Game. Wanafun U11 ! Blit, sackie and pass your way to the playoffs Subayburtacemask graphics Use winning strategies designed by actual NFL coaches and players SWA Create your own NFL team dynasty and head to the Super Bowl. Marv Levy. Jimmy Johnson. Bill Parcells. Chuck Knox. Marty Schottenheimer. Bill Cowher. These are just a few of the sideline strategists waiting for you on the gridirons of NFL Coaches Club Football, the most authentic football game ever created for the PC. Each gameday, you'll go head-to-head against NFL coaches. Coaches that will be cursing themselves as you create your own trick plays, bark out any of 80 offensive and 80 defensive plays, and hand-pick the players that will carry your team to the Super Bowl. This is NFL action so real you'll be scraping the mud from your face. You'll plow through the trenches. Shake off bone-crunching tackles. Perform acrobatic catches. And choose players based on true-to-life characteristics like blocking and coverage skills, height, weight, and speed. No other football game brings more to the playing field. Full 3-D field display lets you view the action from every conceivable angle. Detailed instant replay function lets you quickly analyze plays. And individual plays or entire games can be saved so you can view your greatness (or learn from your mistakes!). NFL Coaches Club Football from MicroProse. Your chance to learn from the best. Then beat them at their own game. Choose players based on skills, size, and speed. MICROPROSE To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. D10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE Name: SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Address: 1993 MicroProso Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED NFL Coaches Club is a trademark of the National Football League and is licensed exclusively by Leader Enterprises, Inc., Orlando, FL | City: ------State: ---Zip --LAAT Circle Reader Service #85 "


"cleaning. Whittlin' Willy can give you some advice-listen carefully to what he says. Bet Freddy's had his cyes on Mom's pie for awhile now. Maybe a \"trade\" of sorts could be made here. What has no wheels and flies around? (An old joke revamped just for this.) That should do the trick. Don't forget to do a little digging (this is a grave matter, after all), and be sure to take a souvenir, too. Gun practice can be easy or hard (I went for medium difficulty and did okay), whichever you want, just so you get through it. All right, Freddy's spiffed up, fancy outfit, new ear, and all. It's showdown time! Well, not quite yet, but at least ya made it to Act IV. There's a couple of things to take care of before meeting the Boss, like that cheating gambler in the saloon, for one. Don't figure on a straight shoot-out with this guy you'll never make it, Freddy. This is where trick shots are better. Put a little bounce into your bullet, so to speak. Ya never know what ya might bring down with it. No sooner is Ace out of action than a bunch of drunken cowboys decide to hurrah the town. You needed this, huh? Well, walking out the front door isn't the smartest move you can make, unless you're looking for lead poisoning. Once more, you gotta be devious (which reminds me, been to the barber's yet?). Good, that puts the cowboys out of action. Hey, what's this? Yes! It's what you've been waiting for-the gunslingers. No more fooling around! This is real slap-leather time. And just because it's done up as a shooting gallery doesn't mean it isn't serious. Blow them varmints away! \"That'll show the Boss that Freddy Pharkas is no one to fool with. Still got that old gunslinger touch, he does. Wait...coming up the streer...it's (gasp) Kenny the Kid, the same guy who sent Freddy to car-ly retirement way back when. Uh-oh. Can our boy handle this? Not quite. Sorry Freddy, there goes that other ear. And you got better things to do other ear. And you got better things to do than lie there in the street, bleeding to death (you took everything from the bank box, right?). Kenny let slip who the Boss is, so you better skedaddle right on over there. Oops, the Boss got the drop on you. Good thing it's a one-shot gun; grab something quick, and maybe you'll still have a chance Or maybe half a chance, 'cause now Freddy's down in the cellar, tied to a chair, and the building's about to go up in flames. Hey, after everything else so far, this should be easy. Right? en: R ight! So don't just sit there singing \"Rocka-Bye Baby.» Get a move on to cut those ropes and vamoose before you're Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Fat Spot. Remember, every cloud has a silver lining. Finally, it's just you and the Boss in a fair fight. Well, kinda fair. What does a gunslinger know about swords? Not much, I'll bet.\" (I have to admit, I couldn't get through this one, even in easy mode, so I chickened out and bypassed it altogether. Perhaps you can do better.) And just after you win over the Boss, who should sashay in but Kenny the Kid. There's no time to go looking for your guns, you'll have to take him out another way. Poetic justice, I call it. Yay! It's done. You've saved the town, cleaned up the bad guys, and you'll even have customers again! Whew! And that's about it for now. Remember if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups & Clubs menu). On Genie: visit the Games Round Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! Cow NEW PRODUCT What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS And.. FCS (Joystick) ThwrustMaste Controls Hand, OR 97223 0937. RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (503)699-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #131 Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"INTERACTIVE HORROR MOVIE DC R E HERE NO ONE RESTS IN PEACE. Over 90 minutes of captivating video and an original gothic soundtrack draws you into the center of the action. Dracula is back, driven by revenge and a hunger for human blood. Follow a trail of vampire brides, corpses, and wolf tracks through the streets of London. You direct the drama, suspense, and passion as you are drawn into a world of evil where every decision and action you make is inextricably tied to the fates of those you love. Over 150 riveting scenes propel you down multiple pathways toward the final confrontation. From the creators of Sherlock Holmes Consulting DetectiveTM 1998. Viacom New Media. All Rights Reserved. Consulting Detective is a licensed trademark of Sleuth Productions, LTD. Dracula Unleashed is a trademark of Viscom New Media Dracuja Unique interactive experience that you've never encountered before. U N L E A S H E DTM VIACOM NEW MEDIA Contact your local retailer or call 1-800-877-4266. AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM FOR PC AND MAC Circle Reader Service #133 "


"REVIEW POVERTY'Sucks Go For The Green In Interplay's Rags to Riches by Ken Hill Cash: $4314056 31 VACATION ideaway Options Thu 3416 STOLENS H OVAT Buy lo much Chips? Tinancial games have been popular since Success cannot be had without a the early days of computer gaming. I dedicated staff of professionals. The have fond memories of spending hours game provides the player with staff creating financial empires with such classic members who will perform their dugames as Millionaire and Tycoon. In recent ties quickly and efficiently—for a years new entrics in this field have been few price. Hiring personnel involves a and far between. Sure, a player could build a call to your favorite head hunter; railroad empire, build a city from scrarch, or he'll send his candidate for each pos YOL NEW HOME! conquer the known universe, but an updated sible opening on your payroll. financial simulation has not been forthcomSix types of employees are availing. Interplay's new financial marker simulaable, the most important for the tion, Rags to Riches, attempts to fill that void. budding J.P. Morgan being pit runThe premise of the game is simple. The ners. These fellows actually make the Sold player takes the role of a budding financial transactions on the trading floor for genius fresh out of college who borrows the firm. You cannot play the game $2000000 0,000 from his parents to get into the without pit runners. Secretaries are EXITI brokerage business. Starting with this meager needed to run your office and screen information abour their performance. Clickcapital, the player can start to build his or her or hold your phone calls if you can't be ing on the computer screen will cycle through financial empire. disturbed. Then, to keep on top of the four types of securities available for tradThes your financial position, you can hire ing. The screen also shows the current price an accountant. Having an accountant of the security and information about the on staff allows you to get an up-to player's position in the market. A running the-minute financial statement for graph at the center of the screen shows the your firm on demand. Apprentices daily price trend for this security. It's easy to are needed, as well, to do some of the tell at a glance how well this item is doing mundane trading activities and allow S t 59192 llow today by checking out this line graph. you to attract clients and additional Clicking on the graph portion of the screen cash to your company. Finally, on the seamier side of the business, you can takes you to another full screen of information about that item. It shows a daily price hire informants, who will keep you trend graph, a monthly trend graph, and a up to date on your competitors and the SEC, and lawyers, who can keep graph showing the player's current position you out of trouble if the SEC gets on in that security. Information on the player's profits over the last 30 days (as compared to your case. the computer players) and his client base are The interface for the game is nicely also available. The game offers a choice of two scenarios. designed. The main office screen proThe game mechanics work in a way very The first is that of the 1929 stock market vides access to all of your employees, trading similar to life. You arrive at your office at 8 crash. This allows the player to participate in information, telephone and other important a.m. (or whenever you chose if you like a the giddy speculation and tragic disaster thar objects. To use an object, such as the phone, relaxed lifestyle) after a good night of sleep. the player simply clicks on the phone book to occurred in that year. It's also a good scenario select the number to call and clicks on the Once in the office, you can take phone calls, for beginners since there are fewer variables Watch the newspaper and television news reinvolved in the financial model. Players can phone to be connected. There are also keyboard equivalents ports, eyeball the ticker, and trade four of the hottest blue-chip stocks from that cra: GE, AT&T, RCA and U.S. provided for every possible Stecl. command, but the interface is TITLE: Rags to Riches clearly designed for the mouse. PRICE: $59.95 The other choice is a modern-day environment. In this scenario, players trade portfolios The office screen is where the REQUIREMENTS: 286-10MHz or better, SVGA/VGA graphics, 15MB hard drive space based on blue-chip stocks, bonds, oil and gold major activities take place. The PROTECTION: futures. Not only is the pace much faster than heart of the operation is the DESIGNERS: Thomas R. Decker and R. Leigh Ardrey PUBLISHER: the 1929 scenario, but players can trade in trading computer which allows Interplay Software Irvine, CA one of three world-wide financial markets: you to buy and sell the various (714) 553-6678 New York, London and Tokyo. financial instruments and get 100 bara = Sin100 laura ke so w $1920 Chips SI091 158 $1612 $2898 $ 1090 SYSTEM: IBM None Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'i; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add\". Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Alr Mall $25 1st item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM SIMULATION MITEN TIE CIAS 59 Velo 'MECHWARRIOR 2' Climb into one of 16 Battle Mechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100-ton machine that can annihilate a squadron of F-15s in a heartbeat. And you're about to battle your way across the planetary terrain. From ice to desert to urban land. $42 DHEID $48 COLD $36 $39 Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42 $159 Acou Research P570 $319 Acou Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $34 Adlib Gold Sound Card $99 Adv Gravis Ultrasound $129 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Flight Stick Pro Joystick $59 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Labtec 105 Powr Speaker $21 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Maxx Control Yoke 554 Maxx Flight Pedals $39 Media Concept $59 Pilot Control Stand $20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $159 Pro Audio Spectrm Plus$149 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $219 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 SBlastr Discovery CD 8$399 SBlastr Discovry CD 16$469 SBlaster Edutainment 8$448 SBlaster Edutainmnt 165519 Sound Blaster Pro Dix S129 Snd Blaster Voice Editor S54 Sound Galaxy BX2 S65 Sound Galaxy NX2979 Sound Galaxy NXPRO S119 Snd Galaxy NXPRO 16 S169 Snd Galaxy Multimedia S399 Snd Galaxy 16 MMedia S499 Sound Machine $94 Thrustmaster FCS $59 Thrustmaster FCS Pro 999 Thrustmastr Game Card S27 Thrustmaster Rudder CS599 Thrstmastr WCS Mark II 599 Thunder Board $79 Thunder Board WIN $89 Video Blaster $349 Virtual Pilot Voice Blaster $64 AIRBUS 'A320 AIRBUS' is a true pilot's flight Simulator. Start out as a trainee and go through an intensive program designed to help you understand the laws of flight physIcs and apply them to actual flight experience. Features authentic navigational system and exact simulation of actual A320 instrumentation. $44 Return of the Phantom S42 Rodney's Funscreen S46 Secret Monkey Island $39 Secret Weapn Luftwaffe $42 Shadow of the Comet S48 Shelly Duvall It Bird Kife S42 Sherlock Holmes 1 S44 Sherlock Holmes 2 $44 Sherlock Holmes 3 $51 Shuttle $24 Sim Ant S48 Sim City S48 Sim Earth Slater & Charlie $42 Software Toolworks Ref $79 Space Quest 4 Spirit of Excalibur $32 Star Trek 25 Anniversary$46 Stellar 7 S42 Street Atlas USA $108 Stronghold $36 Talking Classic Tales 560 Talking Jungle Safari $60 Team Yankee 2 U.S. Atlas 3.0 Multimdia $52 U.S. Atlas with Automap $64 U.S. President $32 USA Wars: Civil War $32 Ultima 1-6 Bundle $59 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 $52 Under a Killing Moon $48 Velveteen Rabbit Childrn $58 Video Cube $45 Vitl Sign:Good Helth Res$61 Wayzata World Fact Bok $32 Where in the World Dix $59 White Horse Child $29 Wing Commander Dlx $48 W.Commander/Ultima 6 557 W.C./ Ultima UW Winning Elections $83 Wolf Pack World Atlas World Vista Wrath of the Demon $33 Tula menda USL levy JL Tecom om the TRST reallole 3D battelied for the PCI Conquests Robin Hood S42 Crossword Cracker $50 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Space $38 Day of the Tentacle $45 Desert Storm $32 Discoveries of the Deep $37 Don Quixote $24 Dracula $48 Dracula Unleashed $51 Dragon's Lair $36 Dune $54 EcoQuest Search Cetus $42 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 Eric The Unready S36 European Racers $44 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 F15 Strke Egle 2 w/B17 $44 Family Doctor $51 Fantasy Empires Fascination WIN Fatty Bear's Funpack $34 Fatty Bear World Games $44 Fatty Bear B-Day Surpr $38 Goblins $30 Goblins 2 $30 Gofer's Winkel Advet $29 Great Cities World Vol 1 $52 Great Cities World Vol 2 $52 Gunship 2000 W/ Scen S44 Guy Spy $29 Guy Spy Terror Deep Hell Cab $52 Hi-Tech Aircraft $43 Impressionist Sources $49 Inca $42 Indy Jones Fate Altantis S52 Interactive Storytime V1 S30 Interactive Storytime V2 $30 Interactive Storytime V3 S30 Iron Helix S60 Jack and the Beanstalk $34 Japanese Alive $118 Jersey Devil $34 Jones In The Fast Lane $42 Jungle Book WIN $24 Jutland $52 King's Quest 5 WIN King's Quest 6 $48 King's Ransom $38 Labyrinth $39 Laura Bow 2 $42 Learn to Speak Spanish $64 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Library Art: Renaissance $60 Loom $39 Lord of the Rings $38 Lost in Time Lost Treasures Infocom $39 Lost Treasure Infocom 2 $29 Mammals S92 Mantis Exprimntal Fighter 55 Mario Teaches Typing S48 Microcosm S51 Mosaic Magic $34 Multimedia: Vivaldi WIN $34 Myst $64 Omar Sharif on Bridge Oshkosk '92 $39 Phantasmagoria $59 Pilgrim Quest $64 Presidents:Start George $94 Putt Putt Goes to Moon S44 Putt Putt Joins Parade 948 Putt Putt's Funpack S34 Rebel Asault $44 $48 Conqueror Multi Tank S6 Crash Course S9 Cyber Race S42 Das Boot Submarine Delta V S48 Design Your Own RR 519 Elite Plus $19 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stealth Fighter S42 F15 Strike Eagle 1 S7 F15 Strike Eagle 2 915 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Scen $17 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces $52 F15 Strike Eagle III $44 F19 Stealth Fighter $12 F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 Falcon 3.0 $48 Falcon 3 Scent $24 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Mig 29 $33 Fleet Defender F14 $48 Flight Simulator 4.0 $42 Great Naval Battles $44 Great Nav Bat Amer Atl $21 Great Nav Bat Sup Ship $19 Great Nav Bat Scn Build $28 Gun Boat Gunship $12 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 Gunship 2000 Scenario $24 Harrier Assault $32 Harrier Assault SVGA $48 Hawaiian Odyssey $16 Heatwave $6 Heroes of the 357th $15 HoverForce $31 Hyperspeed $12 Indy Car Racing Infiltrator 2 $28 Iron Helix $49 Japan Scenery Disk $19 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Fighter 2.0 Miss Disk $19 Jump Jet $39 Jump Jet Aces Pack Killing Cloud $19 Knights of the Sky Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Land Sea Air Trilogy 2 $29 Life and Death Life and Death 2 $24 Lightspeed Mantis Experimental Flr $28 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Maximum Overkill $44 Max Overkill Mission 1 $28 Max Overkill Mission 2 $28 Max Pac $19 Mechwarrior 2 $42 MegaFortress $12 Megafortress Misson 1 $26 Megafortress Misson 2 $26 MegaFortress Mega Pak $38 Miami Enforcer $39 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $49 Mig 29 Fulcrum New Facilities Locator $18 Orbits $37 Pacific Strike $52 Power Boat Simulator $39 Power Hits: Battle Tech $32 Power Politics WIN $34 Privateer S52 Rapcon $29 Reach for the Skies $31 Red Baron VGA $36 Red Baron Mission Disk $24 NOV CGW 1 $59 'SEAL TEAM Lock and load! Relive the exploits of the U.S. Navy SEALs through 4 separate campaigns with 80 realistic missions based on actual combat reports. Callin Air, Gunboat, & Gunship strikes. Choose from 35 different pistols, rifles, machines guns, rockets, & grenade launchers. S42 $69 $29 IBM CD ROM IBM SIMULATION S19 59 $42 12 Roads to Gettsyburg 548 7th Guest 7th Guest 2:11th Hour $65 A Christmas Carol $18 Adv of Willie Beamish $39 Aegis: Guardian of Fleet $54 Aesop's Multimdia Fable $30 Airworks Music Library $34 Alone in the Dark $48 American Vista $52 Americans in Space $41 Atlas Pack $71 Atlas of U.S. Presidents $26 B17 w/ Silent Service 2 S42 Backroad Racers $43 Barny Bear Goes School$23 Barny Bear Goes Space $23 Battle Chess Blue Force: Next of Kin $44 Bodyworks:Adv.Anatomy$52 Britannica Family Choice $64 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 California Travel Campaign S35 Capstone CD Collection S45 Castles 2 $50 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan $21 'CH PRODUCTS FLIGHT STICK PRO' is the ultimate battle stick for computer pilots. It can activate radar, arm & disarm weapons and view your aircraft without ever removing your hand from the stick. The trigger & 3 fire buttons gives you full range of combat while the viewer gives you total command, S59 ATP Flight Simlator 2.0 $29 A.T.A.C $30 A10 Avenger 1993 S46 A320 Airbus $44 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces Over Europe $42 Aces Europe Mission 1 S27 Aces Europe Mission 2 $27 Aces of the Pacific S42 Aces Pacific Miss Disk $27 Aces of the Deep S42 Air Combat Classics $45 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Aircraft Scenery Design $35 AirportFacilities Dir Allied Forces $9 Armour Geddon $32 Armoured Fist $52 Attack Pack $42 B17 Flying Fortress Battle Command $9 Birds of Prey $32 Blue Max Aces Great War 56 Car and Driver S26 Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Coaster $32 $12 S46 $39 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with samo product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 "


"Cash: $ITINN SUS 9101 BLU be ready when the market opens at 9 a.m. position is where the player sells shares During the day, prices of the securities go up he doesn't own and waits for the price and down based on the events of the day. Thc of the security to fall so he can fulfill player can buy and sell by simply clicking the those obligations at a later date. In the buy or sell buttons on his office computer. A carly going players will be forced to \"go trusty pit runner will execute the order if short\" because they simply don't have possible and inform the boss of the results. enough money to buy many shares. The player can leave the office at any time to Once you've started to earn money, take an early lunch, go to the mall, grab a you can go to the mall and spend it on newspaper, or hit the golf course. At 6 p.m., useful and useless items to flaunt your the alarm sounds, allowing the busy executive wealth. Nothing is out of your reach: to head home after a satisfying day. expensive cars, newer and more elegant So, how does the player know when to buy offices, electronic gadgets, vacation and sell securities to increase his profits? In homes, even sport franchises are availKEXIT Rags to Riches, like real life, this is no sure way able for a price. The scoring system in to predict the future. But the game provides the game actually takes into considera ual gamer can become frustrated quickly with hints and information in several forms. The tion how much conspicuous consumption a game that is too hard to master despite their model for the game is clearly event driven, you manage over your career. best efforts. and an asture trader must watch for signs that The player needs to be careful not to spend While realistic in some ways, Rags to Riches might signal a rise or fall in the price of a given beyond his or her means, because making doesn't have enough options to be a true security. money in this game is extremely difficult, and \"financial market simulation.\" You can't, for keeping it is even harder. Game time example, use margins to leverage a good long passes by quickly, and even at the slowposition. Your initial stake of $200,000 is h 613147536 est speed you must move fast to catch woefully small and to make big money the profitable trends. One bad decision quickly (the kind you need to build a staff and can put you out of business and out on ger rolling in the game system requires that the street sleeping under a blanket of you go short. This makes the 1929 scenario newspapers, especially early on. This is very difficult because prices are going up in a not a game for the faint of heart or those speculative bubble right from the first day. interested in a light simulation. To sucInterplay should have considered upping the ceed in Rays to Riches, you must be initial stake in the beginner level to dedicated to the task and be willing to $1,000,000 or more to help novice players get spend plenty of time to learn the game. a better understanding of the system and Rags to Riches has all the supporting avoid the initial frustration. elements of a good game. The interface Clearly, the creators of the game walked a is easy to use, and the screens are wellfine line between «simulation\" and \"game\" drawn and colorful. The sound support QS9OOOOOOL when working out the details of the design. EXIT is top-notch with crisp music and excelThis balance is important in any complex First, there is the ticker. This constantly lent voices (particularly the secretary game. Unfortunately, it is too difficult to moves across the top of the screen when the asking \"Will you take a call please?\"). The attract the casual marker is open. The information displayed documentation is good and even includes a fortunes during an evening's relaxation, and ranges from the very helpful to the extremely concise history of Wall Street. However, the ise history of Wall Street. However, the it is also to it is also too simplistic to attract the attention simplis silly. Next, there is the office television which game doesn't work as well as it should. of the financial enthusiast who wants the in the modern scenario can be tuned to any First, the game is entirely too long. It can challenge of running a Wall Street portfolio. one of four news channels which occasionally take several hours to get a game underway, If you are willing to spend the time to learn flash bulletins that can affect the market. and to play an entire year of game time (the the game and understand the limitations of Also, you can go out on the street and purrecommended game length) can take 40+ the system, Rags to Riches can be a rewarding chase a foreign or out-of-town newspaper. hours. There are many times, especially early experience. For most players, though, the Sometimes these articles can tip you off to in the game, when the player will spend an return on the time investment needed to trends before they start to affect the market. entire day doing nothing except waiting for enjoy the game will be too small to justify the Finally, you can talk to the insiders who the market. There are ways to waste time expense. Cow specialize in the four issues being traded. quickly (like catching some sleep in your Talking to insiders can be extremely rewardoffice), but a weekly time scale might ing, but players should be aware that they are have been used to pick up the pace of not always right, and many times different the game and make it playable in an informants will give conflicting information. evening or two. If you spend too much time on the phone Also, the financial market simulation with insiders, the SEC can get suspicious and might be too realistic. You can have a start an investigation on your firm. The SEC hot tip from an insider, spot a news can fine you big bucks and even bar your firm flash on your office TV (not an easy from trading in certain securities for a period thing to do considering you have to be of time. on the right channel and be watching Players can take either long or short posiit instead of some other part of the tions. A long position is the standard way to screen) and still be wiped out because make money in the market. The player buys a security did the opposite of what the a security and hopes the price goes up so the pundits predicted. Realistic, yes, but it shares can be sold later for a profit. A short makes for a frustrating game. The casEXIT Cash 63193756 HOPE ITAL TODO Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Shipping to US PRAK, HI,APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + S2 ea. add'I; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling S1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mall S19 1st Item + S6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment, IBM SIMULATION IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE 'SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD Freelance animal police partners Samand Maxteam up to solve the mystery of the missing Bigfoot. Bruno. Contains full screen graphics, full talkie intro duction, a free activity book & built in mini-games.$38 Available Now! X-Wing Mission 2: B-Wing Fighter Where in Space CSD DIXS44 Where in Time CSD S32 Where in USA CSD Dix S45 Where in USA is CSD S29 Where in World CSD S32 Where in World CSD Dix S52 Wonderland Yserbius $24 S9 S16 $37 IBM ADULT $32 $24 $21 $26 $42 Red Storm Rising ODCP $12 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Sailing Sim 3 East Coast $32 Sailing Sim 3 W Coast $32 Sea Wolf S52 Seal Team $42 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $34 Secrt Weap Exp D0335 $21 Secrt Weap Exp He162 $19 Secrt Weapons Exp P38 S21 Secrt Weapons Exp P80 $19 Shuttle S26 Silent Service 2 $19 Sky Chase Speed Racer $36 Strike Commander $48 Strike Comm Spch Pak S24 Stunt Driver S15 Stunt Island $36 Sub War 2025 $42 Syndicate $39 Tank $16 Task Force Admirals Pck$52 Team Yankee $29 Team Yankee 2 $24 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2:Collection $19 Test Drive 2:Euro Chal $6 Test Drive 2:Muscle Car $12 Test Drive 2:Supercars $12 Test Drive 3 $29 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $12 Thunderhawk Tie Fighter S48 Top Gun Danger Zone $20 Tornado $49 Tracon 2 $29 Tracon 2 WIN $34 Tracon WIN $28 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Vette $15 Voice Commandr F117A $18 Voice Cmmandr F15SE3 $18 Wing Commander $19 WC Secret Miss 1 & 2 $20 Wing Commander Delxe $48 Wing Commander 2 S48 WC 2 Operation 1 S22 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 W. Commander Acad S42 Wolfpack $15 World Circuit World Circut Champ Ed $45 X-Wing S40 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $20 Yeager's Air Combat \"FLEET DEFENDER F14' Whether on routine Fleet defense duties, air to air combat engagements or special intercept mis. sions, the F-14 Tomcat leads the field. Features state of the art 3D visuals, accurate flight modeling of all planes, authen. tic radar and weapons system, & campaigns. S48 $32 $12 Codename Iceman S15 Colonel's Bequest S15 Conquests Robin Hood $36 Conquests of Camelot S15 Conspircy Deadlock File $34 Covert Action Crime Does Not Pay $9 Crime Wave Cruise for a Corpse $19 D Generation S28 Dark Half S9 Dark Heart of Uukrul S34 David Wolf Secret Agent $15 Day of the Tentacle $39 Deja Vu 1&2 WIN $28 Diehard S28 Discoveries of the Deep S37 Don't Go Alone S6 Dragon Knight 3 $49 Dragon's Sphere Dreamweb $36 Duck Tales $15 Dynamix Bundle $29 Earthrise $9 East vs West Berlin 1948 S9 Elf $24 Epic Eric the Unready $32 Flashback $29 Floor 13 $15 Fool's Errand $12 Freddy Pharkas $42 Free DC $6 Future Wars $9 Gabriel Knight S42 Galleons of Glory $19 Gama Force $6 Gateway $24 Gateway 2:Homeworld $34 Godfather $29 GrailQuest $12 HUMANS S26 Havoc for Hire $42 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall Hired Guns S32 Hired Guns $38 Homey D. Clown Hook $32 Hound of Shadow $17 Inca $29 Inca 2 $42 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $36 Innocent Until Caught S38 Inspector Gadget S34 Isle of the Dead $38 Jack the Ripper $39 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 King's Quest 6 VGA $42 King's Ransom $38 Kristal Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $42 L.A. Law $9 Laffer Utilities WIN $24 Lane Mastadon Laura Bow 2 S36 Leather Goddesses S12 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGAS12 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA$19 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $42 Leisure Suit Larry Bndle $39 Loom $19 Adult Reference CD Adv Brad Stallion CD $39 Busty Babes CD $32 Centerfold Squares Ecstacy CD $32 Femme Fatale Femme Fatale DD 1 $18 Femme Fatale DD 2 $18 Femme Fatale DD 3 $18 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Lovely Ladies CD $39 My Private Collection CD$39 PC-Pix CD $39 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX S24 Planet of Lust $12 Sex Olympics Sex Vixens from Space $12 Strip Poker 3 $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1 $19 Strip Poker 3 DD 2 $19 Strip Poker 3 DD 3 $19 Strip Poker 3 DD 4 $19 Strip Poker 3 DD 5 $19 Strip Poker 3 DD 6 $19 Strip Poker Professional $33 Strip Poker Pro DD 1 $16 Strip Poker Pro DD 2 S16 Strip Poker Pro DD3 S16 Strip Poker Pro DD 4 $16 Strip Poker Pro DD 5 $16 Strip Poker Pro DD 6 $16 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost File Sherlock Holmes26 Lost in LA S37 Lost in Time Lost Treasure Intocom $39 Lost Treasure Infocom 2 S29 Magic Pockets $18 Manhole $25 Manhunter New York S28 Manhunter SanFrancisco$15 Maniac Mansion S18 Martian Memorandum S19 Metal Mutant Mixed Up Faery Tale $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Murder Club Murder by the Dozen $15 Nebulas $27 Out of this World $36 Pepper Adventure Time $29 Plan 9 from Outer Space $31 Police Quest 1 VGA $24 Police Quest 2 $15 Police Quest 3 VGA $29 Police Quest 4 $42 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $45 Return of the Phantom $39 Return to Zork $46 Rex Nblar Cos Gen Ben $36 Rex Nebular Master Ed. $52 Riftwar Legacy VGA $37 Ringworld $36 Rise of the Dragon VGA $34 Robocop 3 SDI $7 Sam & Max Hit the Road $38 Screen Antics WIN $19 Search for the King $24 Secret Monkey Island $23 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster $52 Shadowgate WIN $34 Sierra Adventure Bundle $39 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA S36 Space Quest 5 VGA $34 Space Quest Bundle $42 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Star Trek 25th Annivrsry S36 Star Trek:Judgment Rite $38 Starship $38 Stellar 7 $21 Surf Ninjas $37 Terminator 2029 $42 Term 2029 Oper Scour S19 Term 2029 Rampage S38 The Dig $45 The Prophecy $36 Time Quest $12 S32 STAR TREK BUDGMEISTRITES 'STAR TREK: JUDGMENT RITES' Captain's Log stardate 6238.4. You're being watched. By whom or what is unknown, but strange events are happening. You're a long way from Starfleet command and only you can discover what is challenging your mind beyond your nightmares. $38 $17 IBM ARCADE S27 S32 S4 S9 ZORK IBM ADVENTURE $17 RETURN TO ZORK' is the next generation in the classic Zork series. Return to Zork is an amazing interactive adventure of danger, intrigue, and low cunning. Filled with fascinating puzzles, it features a cast of Hollywood stars, a revolutionary interlace, over an hour of spoken dialogue and music. S46 Airborne Ranger $9 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $19 Amazing Spiderman $9 Arachnaphobia $12 Armor Alley $15 Artura Back to the Future 2 $19 Back to the Future 3 S12 Bar Games Bart's House Weirdness S31 Battle Storm S32 Bill & Ted's Excel Ady S19 Blackout $28 Budokan Cogito Windows Colorado Cool Croc Twins Crackdown Crazy Cars Creepers Dark Century Day of the Viper Dognapped Double Dragon 2 Double Dragon 3 Dr Doom's Revenge Dragon's Lair $22 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 NOV CGW2 Trolls $43 $36 S6 $6 007 J Bond Stealth Aflair$12 Adv of Willie Beamish $24 All Dogs go to Heaven $17 Alone in the Dark $36 Alone in the Dark 2 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon Amazon Trail $32 An American Tail $21 Batman Returns $32 Beverly Hillbillies $30 Bloodnet $42 Bloodstone $34 Blue Force: Next of Kin $42 Castle Wollenstein $37 An Epic Adventure S29 Underground Under a Killing Moon Uninvited Uninvited WIN $34 Universe 1 $34 Universe 2 $34 Universe 3 $34 Walker $32 War in Middle Earth $12 Warriors of Legend Weird Dreams $9 Where Amrica Past CSD $37 Where in Europe CSD $29 933 INFOCOM $19 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash, Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 "


"REVIEW EA COMES OUT WITH THE WALSH Electronic Arts' Bill Walsh College Football by Wallace Poulter within five yards of the line of scrimmage, throwing off the pass pattern of even the best receivers. Game options include Exhibition, Playoff and All-Time Playoff. In the latter, \"AllTime\" reams of the last 15 years match up. Here the Bulldogs of Walker and the Tigers of Jackson can be found, along with the Boshough I can usually be found tethered While there were the occasional first round to my computer playing one sports blunders (Todd Shell, anyone?), his ability to game or another, occasionally I have pull quality starters from the middle rounds reason to venture into the living room. There was ultimately the foundation of the Niners resides the SEGA Genesis, and beside it a dynasty. small stack of SEGA sports games that have the return of Walsh to Stanford was someearned my respect. Electronic Art's NHL and thing of a coup for the college ranks. In his NHLPA Hockey for the Genesis are two of the first year, Walsh not only made Paterno and berter sports products on the market. In fact, Penn State look silly in a Blockbuster Bowl if you have a friend around, the two-player blowout, but to the ever grateful millions of version of NHLPA Hockey is excusc enough Notre Dame-haters, he well and truly pur to purchase a Genesis machine. I've recently Lou \"Give him some Stilton and he could added another game to my stack, Bill Walsh have his own Whine and Cheese Party\" Holtz College Football, the latest sports product in his place. As the biggest name in college from EA. Here is one more reason for sports football today, it was inevitable that we would junkies to consider the Sega Genesis, for Bill see a Bill Walsh licensed game. Getting this Walsh College Football provides the best sports license was quite a coup for EA and a great action yet to be seen in a cartridge product. boon for cartridge sports games. While EA took pains to point out this was TIROOTSCHOOL TORTUTL HATIZO LEOOR ZOHL a new engine, players of John Madden Football 989 P will feel right at home. Character animations DRIP 99 Dog HORSTER BUTES PAR LEST PAT ZONE EMPIRE and the effects of different field conditions are very similar to Madden, and the standard Madden all-time great and playoff options are included. However, it is the AI that sets SEMINOLE 87 this game head and shoulders above any other sports game. Simply put, it reacts. Most sports games, especially cartridge ones, have E FICOUTTER PHOTOSS-2958 CR laughable artificial intelligence. Usually a single play can be found that will generate a first down, or even a touch down, every single time. In the case of Bill Walsh College Football, Walsh, the man, has always been an interthe AI adjusts to your play calling. If you esting character. Known primarily as a tutor continually try to run a play up the middle, of quarterbacks like Ken Anderson and Dan you will soon notice that appropriate defenFouts, Walsh was passed over for the Bengal's sive formations will be called and the head coaching position in one of Paul linebackers will start to edge their way Brown's more forgettable decisions. His first toward the line before the snap. stint at Stanford was a reasonable success, but Moreover, each segment of the team it took Walsh until his third year as an NFL has a rating. Some defensive backs will coach just to win more than two games per have excellent coverage, while others year. However, multiple Super Bowl victories will be only so-so. This means that a later and an induction into the Pro Football play that is routinely successful against Hall of Fame, the tag of Genius seems approone opponent will not be so against priate. Though a great coach, Walsh's grearanother. In addition, some teams will est gift is his eye for player personnel moves. be more aggressive at hitting a receiver S.C.79 PLAY SCUOLTO KO ist Qir DETEROPT.L. STUD.BCOVRETE ton College team of Flutie and the Marino team of Pitt. (I remember Marino was pretty good, but I don't think his Pitt team could be called \"great.\") There are some pretty nice marchups. The standard EA playoff tree is used. While this is enjoyable, it would be nice to have some kind of league option. Most fans wish to have a college playoff system with the Bowl Games being used as playoff sites. A number of ideas have been put forward which would include the top 16 teams in a Bowlbased National Playoff. This would seem an ideal format for Bill Walsh College Football otba SPORTS TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: # OF PLAYERS DESIGNERS: Bill Walsh College Football $59.95 SEGA Genesis 1.4 Jim Simmons and High Score Productions Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (415) 571-7171 COLLERE PUBLISHER: 10THRIL Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Shipping to US.PR.AKHI APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling 51 per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI S121st item + $2 ea. add'I; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shlpment! Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall S25 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE Advanced Dungeons Dragons IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS EYE E BEHOLDER TRILOGY S29 $15 'EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 1 3 COLLECTION 3 titles that make up the best selling 3-D graphic fantasy adventure is now available in one box! Each game in the series is a critically acclaimed mega-hit! Now you can experience AD&D computer fantasy role playing like never before. $52 Ultima 5 $10 Ultima 6 $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 and Underworld $16 Ultima 7.5 S16 Ultima Avatar Adventure $16 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 S12 V Victory $16 Wasteland $10 Wizardry 6 $12 Wizardry 7 $16 Yeager Air Combat $16 $9 S12 S9 MPC $5 IBM EDUCATIONAL OOO \"DAY OF THE TENTACLE' Dr. Fred's mutated purple tentacle is out to take over the world. Travel through time with three outrageous characters. CD ROM version has full digitized speech. 3.5\" $39 CD-ROM $45 Available Now! X-Wing Fighter Mission Disk 2: B-Wing Fighter S10 $15 $21 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Tengen's Arcade Hits $12 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe S34 Terminator $34 Dragons Breath S27 Terrorpods $24 Eagle's Rider $29 The Light Corridor Eight Ball Deluxe $38 The Tinies $29 Fast Track $25 Thexder 1 Fire & Forget $19 Thexder 2:Fire Hawk $15 Flintstones Tristan Pinball $19 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs $19 Vaxine $12 Galactic Conqueror S31 Volfied $19 Galactic Empire S27 Wild Wheels Gauntlet 2 Wrath of the Demon $21 Gobliiins 3 $24 X-Men 2 $10 Gobliiins VGA $24 Xenocide Gold of the Aztecs $12 Xiphos $9 Gremlins 2 56 Zool $34 Guy Spy $24 Guy Spy Terror Deep $36 Hard Drivin' 2 $38 IBM HINT BOOKS Highway Patrol 2 Home Alone $27 688 Attack Sub $10 Incredible Machine 2 $30 A-Train $16 Incredible Toons $25 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Indy Jones Act Game $17 Altered Destiny $10 Infestation $19 Bard's Tale 1 $10 Innocent $38 Bard's Tale 2 $10 Jetsons $15 Bard's Tale 3 $10 Jetsons $9 Bargon Attack $10 Laffer Utilities $21 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Larry's Casino $9 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Laura Bow Parlor Games $9 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Loopz $24 Champions of Krynn Marvel Trilogy $12 Civilization $16 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Codename iceman $10 Monty Python Colonel's Bequest $10 Ms Pacman $6 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Mystical S27 Conquests of Camelot $10 Never Ending Story 2 $9 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Never Mind $9 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Night Breed Darklands $14 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Darkspyre $10 Ninja Rabbits $9 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Nova 9 S21 Dragons of Flame $8 Obliterator Dungeon Master $10 Oil's Well $12 Dynamix Great Planes $16 Pac Man EcoQuest $10 Paper Boy 2 S27 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Pick'n Pile S6 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $10 Pit Fighter Eye of the Beholder $10 Power Drome $9 Eye of the Beholder 2 S12 Power Hits: Movies Eye of the Beholder 3 S10 Power Hits: Sci-Fi $19 Fascination S10 Predator 2 $7 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm S8 Prehistorik $29 Gateway Savge Frontier S10 Psychic War Global Conquest Strat $21 Punisher Gobliiins $10 Quix Gold Rush $10 Robocop $28 Gunship 2000 Rollerbabes $25 Harpoon Rotox $12 Heart of China $10 S.C. Out Hero's Quest $10 Savage $9 Hillsfar Sierra Arcade Bundle $24 Immortal Simpsons:Arcade Game $31 Indy Jones 4 Sliders S27 Island Of Dr Brain Space Ace $32 Jetfighter 2.0 Space Ace 2 $34 Keef the Thief Stellar 7 $21 King's Quest 1 Street Ball $12 King's Quest 2 Street Fighting Man $3 King's Quest 3 Super Space Invaders $25 King's Quest 4 $10 Swamp Gas WIN $38 King's Quest 5 $10 Take-A-Break Crossword$24 Take-A-Break Pinball $29 Knights of Legend $10 Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29Laura Bow 2 $10 Taking of Beverly Hills 99 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $10 Lemmings $21 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 S10 Lord of the Rings V2 S6 Lost File Sherlock Holme$10 Lost in LA $10 LucasArts Adventure $16 LucasArts Air Combat $16 Magic Candle 2 $10 Magic Candle 3 S10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhuntr San Francisco $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 1 $10 Might & Magic 182 $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Patriot $16 Pepper's Adventure Time $8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Protostar S8 Quest For Clues 2 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 S21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Railroad Tycoon $10 Railroad Tycoon Off Gde $10 Realms of Arkania $14 Rex Nebir Cos Gen Ben S14 Rise of the Dragon S10 Savage Empire $10 Search for the King $10 Secret Monkey Island S10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 S10 Shadow Caster $14 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simcity/Simearth Book $20 Simearth S16 Simlife Official Strategy S16 Space Quest 1 S10 Space Quest 2 $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 $10 Spellcasting 101 $10 Spellcasting 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Starflight 1 $10 Strategy Plus Iss 10 or 11$8 Strategy Plus 12-35 Ea S5 Strike Commander S16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prop Shadw$12 Time Quest $10 Treasure Savge Frontier $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4 $10 $26 S32 $39 \"PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 The evil magician is back. this time he assumes your identity, steals your beloved princess and casts you out as a beggar. You must battle through 15 treacherouslev els encountering serpents, spikes. spells. skeletons, and swordsman. Then things might get murky. S45 $6 $9 2nd Math $32 Ace Detective 530 Ace Explorer:Sequncing $36 Ace Inquirer $40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 Adventures Astronomy $51 Alcohol: Making Choice $102 Alge Blaster Plus $32 Aloeb Algebra $52 Algebra 1: 1st Semester S32 Algebra 1 :2nd Semester$35 Algebra Concepts $39 Algebra Made Easy $26 Algebraic Proposer $52 Alien Addition $30 All About America $52 All About Light & Sound $39 All About Matter S39 All About Simple Mac S39 All About Solar System $39 Alligator Mix Anatomy of a Fish Anatomy of a Shark $39 Animals With an Attitude $32 Atlas Explorer S32 Audbon Widlfe:Griz Bear S39 Audubon Wildlife Whales $32 Auto Map $49 AutoWorks S49 Axis Or Allies $76 Basic First Aid Babysit $32 Batalla de Palabras $32 Battle For Europe Berlitz Interpreter Biology Body Illustrated Body Works Boom Box $19 Bubble Gum Machine $16 Bull's Eye Math S21 Calculus Calculus $58 Castle of Dr Brain EGA $25 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Chaos $39 Chemistry Works $45 Civil War $57 Cleo is a Dragon $30 Clock Works $19 Coin Changer S16 Comic Book Maker $32 Connections $45 Crossword Magic $29 Cuckoo Zoo $32 Days of Knights & Kings $58 Decimal Dungeon $23 Dernolition Division $33 Designasaurus 2 $26 NOV CGW3 $22 $17 S57 must gostam $16 $16 S52 *SPEAR OF DESTINY' is a Castle Wolfenstein graph ics adventure game. Your mission is to recapture the Spear from Hitler, which legend says that no man can be defeated when he has it. Journey through 20 different levels with secret doors & levels in the most important mission of WW2 $37 $10 teleed. Check compatrice & availability SAGE 8 FOR DETAI Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 "


"FIRST DOWN! PASS TO #83 FOR 22 YARDS 85 79 67 89 where the player would have to play well enough during the season to be ranked in the Top 16, and then would try to make it through the playoffs. A number of options are available prior to the start of the game. The Walsh Report is part of EA's continuing and pretty hokum *EA Sports Network» idea. The lame \"advice\" and \"information\" that Walsh gives remind us all why he left the broadcast booth in the first place. Weather can play a significant part in the game, especially with a windy day and a passing team. Snow seems to be more like ice, as players slip and slide out of each others grasp. (As one who has played rugby in snow, I can attest to how little it affects the running and tackling: ball handling, of course, does not exist.) The team Matchup report is a little more useful. Here cach segment of the team (line with only the snap of the ball controlled by backers, secondary, etc.) receives a rating. As the player. The Wishbone is rather difficult you can see below, Michigan is given an to run manually, so coaching the wishbone overall ranking of 85, with an 83 on defensive can often yield more success. Receivers too line, 79 for the linebackers, and a team low can be manually or automatically controlled, 70 for the secondary. Obviously, an attack on and the ball handler has a variety of spins and the secondary should be in the Tallahassee dives up his sleeve to evade his pursuers. game plan. Defense too, has multiple formations and Michigan 85 Tallahassee 87 plays. Unlike other sport cartridge products, Quarterbacks 66 an \"all or nothing\" strategy will usually leave 83 Running Backs 93 the defense with nothing. Sound, defensive Wide Receivers 77 play calling must be used to our-play the 87 Offensive Line computer opponent. Defensive Line Linebackers 85 The replay mode has two standard perspec70 Secondary tives: offense and defense. While useful and 75 Kicker 90 entertaining, the replay still has the tendency 77 Punter Punter 72 to \"skip\" a little too much. This is one of the Once into the game, the animation is few areas where EA could do some work. smooth and crisp. The standard EA format for choosing defensive and offensive plays is Much to my chagrin during one game I had used. Eight offensive formations are available, forgotten the College rule of not being able ranging from the Shotgun to the Wishbone. to advance a fumble. In this case a Wishbone Each formation has a number of plays availQB had thrown the ball away and nothing able within it, allowing for a reasonable repstood between my player and the end zone. resentation of the vast differences between Other college rules, such as the two point college game plans. The interface in particuconversion, are also available. lar is well designed. To run a play manually, Sophisticated PC-based games still rule the the QB snaps the ball (one button push), roost in the battle of sports simulations. looks at the receivers (second button push), However, Bill Walsh College Football joins a and throws the ball (third button push). It is growing list of quality sports products that simple, smooth and intuitive. Coaching is make the purchase of a video game system also an option. Plays may be called and run more than worthwhile. Cow THE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer.. JUST GOT BETTER! Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention. Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. [European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!) Circle Reader Service #59 "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Shipping to US.PR.AKHI.APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mall to Canada s6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order: PR. HI $12 1st Item + S2 es, addr: AK $19 1st item + $2 ea. add. Handling S1 per shipment, Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st item + S6 ea. add'l Handling S1 per shipment IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLE PLAYING NDS LORE \"LANDS OF LORE' The dark army encroaches. King Richard falls and Scotia beck. ons you... laughing. In her mad quest for power, Scotia has rav. aged the Kingdom She seeks the throne yetit eludes her. She's getting desperate and mean. Can you stop her? Do you even dare to? $36 $29 RED CRYSTAL \"The Seven Secrets of Life\" $25 $22 \"RED CRYSTAL Seek out the sev. en secrets of life. Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers & the savage countryside? Play alone or modem it Features over 50 levels, breathtaking graphics and an auto-mapping feature. $38 23% $3 Speedreader WIN $30 Speedreader WIN DD A $12 Speedreader WIN DD B S12 Speedreader WIN DDC $12 Spell it Plus $31 Spell-a-Saurus $27 Spelling $31 Spelling Wiz $22 Stickybear ABC Stickybear Math $26 Stickybear Math 2 $26 Stickybear Math Tutor $32 Stickybear Opposites $23 Stickybear Parts Speech $32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Read Comp $30 Stickybear Read Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes $29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor$32 Stickybear Typing $29 Stickybear Wd Problems $32 Stickybear WD Scramble $32 Story Sketcher $42 Storybook Weaver $29 Super Munchers $29 Super Slurs: Midnite Res $30 Super Solvr: OutNumber $32 Super Solvr: Spellbound $31 Super Spellicopter Texas Revolution S57 The Baby Game $32 The Pap Test $160 Treasure Math Storm $39 Treasure Mountain $39 TreeHouse $39 TrueSTAT $52 U.S. Atlas Action $31 Understanding AIDS $32 Video Jam $34 Visifrog Volcanoes $38 Wacky Funster $18 Weather Brief $32 Weather Wizards $51 What's My Angle S32 Word Attack Plus! $32 Word Attack Plus!French$32 Word Attck Plus!Spanish S32 Word Master $26 Word Munchers $30 World Atlas $45 World Atlas WIN $39 Yobi Magic Spel Trick $30 Young Math $26 $24 Destination Mars S39 Dinosaur Discovery Kit S26 Dinosoft Add & Subtract S12 Dinosoft Begin Algebra $12 Dinosoft Multi & Divide $12 Discover The World $58 Discrete Math $52 Dragon Mix $32 Dyno-Quest $36 EZ Cosmos $45 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 Earthquakes $38 Earthworm $39 Easy Street $36 EasySearch Sci: Diet $32 Eco-Adventures:Oceans $61 EcoQuest 2 $34 EcoQuest VGA $32 Evelyn Wood Dyn Readr S24 Fatty Bear B-Day Surpr $32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Forty-Niners $57 Fraction Action $23 French Assistant $52 French Grammar $16 French Pronunciatin Tutr $58 French Word Toture S26 Geometry Concepts $39 German Grammar $13 German Vovabulary $16 German Word Torture $26 Grammar Gremlins $32 Grammar Gremlins DD1 $13 Grammar Gremlins DD 2 $13 Great Bio Know Race $55 Great Chem Knowledge $55 Ground Water $38 Hmwork Help:Word Prob $32 Hmework Helper: Writing $32 Incredible Machine VGA $29 Indian Wars $57 Infant Saltey $32 Intro Psychactive Drugs $26 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Italian Word Torture S26 Jenny's Journey $26 Kidworks $30 Kidwriter Gold $32 La Guillotine $21 Land of The Unicorn $39 Life Cyclea Sea Lamprey$39 Linguist $34 Linkword-Dutch S21 Linkword-French $21 Linkword-German Linkword-Greek S21 Linkword-Hebrew S20 Linkword-Italian $20 Linkword-Russian $20 Linkword-Spanish $21 Marine Invertebrates $39 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 $30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 $30 Math 1:Mech Word Prob S26 Math 2:Build Word Prob $26 Math 3:Adv Word Probs $26 Math Blaster Mystery $39 Math Blaster Plus WIN $39 Math Climbers $12 Math Climbers 2 Math Magic:Count & Add$39 Math Mechanics $26 Math Rabbit : Early Math $26 Math Twister $26 Math Wizard op. Math Zone $32 M.Beacon Teach Typing $29 M.Beacn Teach Typ WINS34 Meteor Multiplication S32 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Storyteller Vol2 $30 Minus Mission S32 Monster & Make Believe $26 Moving Crust $64 Mozart Magic Music Mac$18 Munchers Bundle $29 Mutanoid Math Chal $32 Mysteries In Th Making $32 Nor'Westers to Pacific $58 Number Munchers $32 Number Maze $39 Operation Neptune $39 Orbits:Voyage Sir Systm $39 PC Globe $45 Pacific Theater $57 Personel Trainer SAT $34 Phonics Plus Physical Sci Laboratory$165 Picture Perfect $32 Pilgrim Quest $39 Play Room Pollution Patrol Power Hits: Kids Pre-Calculus Principles of Biology $64 Principles of Calculus $26 Principles of Chemistry $26 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Prnt Shp Dix Bus Graph $29 Prompt $64 Protozoa $39 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Puzzle Storybook $26 Quarky Quaysoo Trb Sci $29 Quest for Canada $58 Race Car \"Rithmetic Race the Clock $39 Read \"n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme Reader Rabbit 1 Reader Rabbit 2 Readr Rabbit Read Let $37 Ready, Set, Read $30 Rebellion in the West $57 Rhyming Notebook $26 Robomath, Multipliy. Div $39 Robot Writer Plus $30 Rock A Doodle S9 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Science 34 Science 56 Science 78 Science Adventure $52 Science1: Environment $32 Science2: Geology $32 Science5: Fire Safety $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Scrt Island Dr. Quandry S38 Senses $39 Sierra Family Fun Pak $29 Slatr & Charlie Go Camp $30 Snapdragon $29 Snoopy's Fun Pack $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Spanish Assistant $51 Spanish Grammar $16 Spanish Pronun Tutor $58 Spanish Word Torture $26 S12 $39 Companion of Xanth Conan $16 Corporation $14 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $16 Cyber Space $39 Cybercon 3 $29 Cybergenic Ranger $9 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Sun $52 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp $34 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Edition S51 Daughter of Serpents S19 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Dragon Strike $12 Dragon Wars Dragons of Flame Dungeon Master Dungeon Master 2 Dusk of the Gods Elvira Mistress Dark Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $19 Eternam $29 Eye of the Beholder 1 $16 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $46 Eye Beholder Collection $52 Eye of the Horus Fire King Flames Freedom MWII $12 Four Crystals of Trazere $19 Gateway Savge Frontier $32 Gods $26 Gryphon Masters Havlar $38 Immortal $17 Joan of Arc $12 Keys to Marimon Lands of Lore $36 Legacy of Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $38 Legend $31 Legend of Valor Legends of Drakka Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Loremaster $29 Lost Tribe Lure of the Temptress Magic Candle 1 $19 Magic Candle 2 $12 Magic Candle 3 $19 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Martian Dreams $37 Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller:Zhodani S9 MegaTraveller 2 Mega Traveller 3 Metal and Lace Midwinter Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 5 Mines of Titan Mission: Impossible Murder Obitus No Shirt Pirates Pirates Gold Planet's Edge Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness Protostar $39 Quest for Glory 3 $42 Quest for Glory 4 S42 Questron 2 S12 NOV CGW4 netic $32 DELTA-V' In the worldof Netrunner, genetically en hanced humans interface with the Net. You are the most agile racer known to man as you fly the 256 color 3D polygonalshaded landscape at speeds where thought and action are one. Mistakes are deadly. Modem and network playable. $48 $39 $38 $31 $37 $20 IBM ROLE PLAYING $13 $13 83% \"LINKS 386 PRO offers Super VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer oppo. nent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game Play at Harbour Town or use the add on course disks. $36 2400 AD $9 ADD Collecter's Ed.2 $46 ADD Starter Kit $29 Bard's Tale 2 S19 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale Construction $27 Black Crypt $32 Bloodwych $15 Buck Rogers Countdown $12 Captain Blood $9 Captive $30 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $16 CHAR. EDITORS Each $16 Cobra Mission $49 Address Grij! SU Straight Chipuie: $32 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Monoy Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 "


"ON-LINE GAMING 6 Play It 0:12 On The line Illustrations by Steve Hornyak dan Multi-player games via modems may be the next big wave in computer entertainment. How do you make the leap to cyber-space? Step in the virtual offices of the DataComm Council, your \"off-line\" source for \"on-line\" information. by Jerry Golick reetings fellow travellers of cyberspace. Modem Gamer is \"Artificial Intelligence two machines, we can signal a binary value (1 Welcome to the DataComm Council, stinks! Give us brains!\" But hooking up brains or 0). Too complex? Think of it this way, back Jyour friendly stepping stone into the requires that you «jack-in.» Today we will in the days of the telegraph the only data that new virtual realities. Here you will find techshow you how to get started. could be sent was a dot or a dash. The \"order\" niques, advice, and useful tidbits to make your of the dots and dashes conveyed information. electronic explorations a more rewarding exHow Do Computers Communicate? The same thing happens with computers, perience. Before choosing the right mix of hardware only much, much faster. Instead of using dots As this is our first day of operation we are and sofre re and software for communications, you should and dashes, computers use tones. If you listen offering, free of charge, a review of basic inforhave some understanding of how computers in on the conversation between two compurmation that will be essential to the telecomcommunicate. While there are many variers you will hear a high pitched warble. This munication novice. The recent CGW issue on ations, we will concentrate on something is the computers varying the frequency on the telegaming (May'93) may have tantalized you called \"serial\" communications. line. One tone is used to represent the value with many of the game opportunities available in scrial communications, data is transferred \"zero\" and another is selected to represent through the networks, not to mention the ever between computers one bit at a time. In other \"one.\" The speed of the computers' conversaincreasing number of games that offer direct words, by changing some characteristic (gention will be governed by how quickly this modem-to-modem play. The battle cry of the erally the frequency) of the phone line linking transition can occur. Generally we refer to the Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767—3033 Shipping to US,PR.AK,HI,APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order; PR, HI S12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'I; AK S19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + S6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st item + S6 ea. add'l. Handling 51 per shipment. IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS GUARDIAN T FLEE  AEGIS : GUARDIAN OF THE FLEET is a modern naval warfare simula tion that lets you control the U.S. Navy's AEGISclass Cruiser This CD ROM game takes you from the Falklands to Lib ya to the Persian Gulf. $54 $34 55 CITY 2000 SIMCITY 2000 is the long awaited follow up to SimCity that takes urban planning into the next century. SimCity 2000 adds a new level of realism & sophisticated gameplay. Features like undergroundwater and transportation systems, 3D views and SVGA graphics. $42 $15 Ragnarok $34 Bo Jackson Baseball $12 Realms of Arkania Carl Lewis Challenge Red Crystal Cycles Grand Prix S28 Rings of Medusa S19 Daily Dble Horse Racing $19 Rome: Pathway Power D. Robinson NBA Action $44 Savage Empire S34 Dirk's Baseball Encyc $19 Sea Rogue S29 Face Off Secret Silver Blades $15 Front Page Football $36 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Front Page Football Pro $42 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Greens Shadows of Mordor S19 Hardball 3 $34 Sleeping Gods Lie $19 Hardball 3 Players Disk S17 Sorcerian $15 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $19 Space 1889 $12 Harlem Globetrotters $15 Space Inc $34 Hole In 1 Mini Golf $6 Spacewrecked $19 Hole 1 Mini Golf Crs Disk $3 SpellJammer:Pir Rim $16 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Delux $12 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $38 Interntional Sports Chall $24 Star Saga 2 $19 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S6 Star Trek: Next Gen 546 Jack Nicklaus CD 1 $15 Stonekeep $52 Jack Nicklaus CD 2 $15 Stronghold $39 Jack Nicklaus CD 3 $15 Summoning $16 Jack Nicklaus CD 4 Tales Magic:Prop Shdow$16 Jack Nicklaus CD 5 $15 Terran Envoy Jack Nicklaus CD 5 S6 Treasure Savge Frontier $12 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 1899 Trilogy S15 Jack Nicklaus SE CD 1 $9 Twilight 2000 VGA S24 Jack Nicklaus Sign Ed $42 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Jack Nick SE Clip Art $24 Ultima 5 Warrior Destiny $35 Joe Montana Football $31 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Ultima 7 Black Gate $18 John Elway Quarterback $6 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue S18 LH Boxing Contenders S16 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle S48 LH Football 1989 Teams S16 Ultima 7.5 2 Silver Seed S18 LH Football 1990 Teams S16 Ultima Trilogy 1-3 $39 LH Football 60's Teams S16 Ultima Trilogy 4-6 $48 LH Football 70's Teams S16 Ultima Underworld S19 LH Football 80's Series S16 Ultima Underworld 2 546 LH Football L Leaders S16 Uncharted Waters $42 LH Football Utilities S16 Unlimited Adventures $38 LH Pro BBall 91 Team S16 Veil of Darkness LH Pro Baskeball Util S16 Vengeance of Excalibur $12 LH Pro Basketball War of the Lance $9 LH Pro Basketball 74-83 S16 Waxworks $19 LH Pro Basketball 89/90 $16 Wizardry Trilogy 1-3 $32 LH Pro Basketball Util S16 Wizardry 4 $19 Lakers vs Celtics Wizardry 5 S26 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Wizardry 6 $34 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $42 Lance Haffner Col BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football $36 Lance Haffner Hockey 936 IBM SPORTS Links $12 Links Courses Bountiful $17 4D Boxing $17 Links Courses Firestone $17 4th & Inches $4 Links Courses Bay Hill $17 APBA Baseball $24 Links Courses Pinehurst $17 APBA Baseball Gen Mans29 Links Courses Dorado $17 APBA Baseball Stat 2.0 S29 Links Course Bartn Creek $9 APBA Baseball Wiz 2.0 S29 Links Course Tron North $17 APBA Basketball S34 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 APBA Bowling $14 Links Pro Mauna Kea $19 APBA Col Basketball $32 Links Pro CD Pinehurst $19 APBA Football $34 Links Pro Banff Spring $19 APBA Micro Manager $32 Links Pro Course Belfry $20 ATP Tennis $32 Links Pro Course Disk 5 $20 Action Sports Soccer $19 Links Pro Course Disk 6 $20 All American Col Ftbil $36 MUDS All Star Sports Pak S9 ML 1950s World Series S17 American Gladiators S21 ML 1960s World Series S17 Baseball for Windows $46 ML 1970s World Series $17 Basketball Challenge $28 ML 1980s World Series S17 Bball Chal 1987 Team $9 ML Baseball 4 Fan Man $25 Bball Chal 1988 Team $9 ML Baseball 4 Gen Mngr$19 Bball Chal 1989 Team $9 ML Baseball All Stars $12 Bball Chal 1990 Team $17 ML Bball Atlanta Braves $20 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Pga Tour Crs 1 WIN $17 Playmaker Football $12 Power Hits: Sports $19 Pro League Baseball $18 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 ProFootball Analyst 92 $19 QuarterPole $39 RBI 2 Road to the Final Four $37 Shufflemania Sporting Triangle Summer Challenge $19 Smmer Chal World Class$15 The Games Winter Chal $34 Tie Break Tennis $9 Tom Landry Football $24 Tom Landry Football Dix S32 Tony LaRussa Baseball $16 Tony L Fantasy Manager$15 Tony L AL Stadium S15 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 S15 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 S15 Tony L NL Stadium S15 Tony LaRussa 1901-68 S15 Tony L Classic Stadiums S15 Tony LaRussa Bball 2 S36 Tony LaRussa 2 Team S16 Tony L 2 Fan Man S14 Tony LaRussa 2 Stad S18 W. Gretzky Hockey 2 $34 Wayne Gretzky League S26 W. Gretzky Hockey 3 $36 W. Gretsky Leg Sim 2 $29 Weaver 2.0 $41 Weaver Commissioner 2 $16 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Class Soccer $28 ML BB Baltimore Orioles $20 ML BB Boston Red Sox $20 ML BB Brklyn/LA Dogers $20 ML BB California Angels $20 ML BB Chicago Cubs $20 ML BB Chicago W Sox $20 ML BB Cincinnati Reds $20 ML BB Cleveland Indian $20 ML Bball Detroit Tigers $20 ML Bball Houston Astros $20 ML Bball K.C. Royals S20 ML Bball Manager's Ch $19 ML BB Millwauke Brewer S20 ML BB Minnesota Twins S20 ML Bball Montreal Expos$20 ML Bball New York Mets $20 ML Bball N.Y. Yankees S20 ML Bball Oaklands A's S20 ML Bball Philidelphia PhilS20 ML BB SanDiego Padres $20 ML Bball SanFran GiantsS20 ML BB Seattle Mariners S20 ML BB St Louis Cardinal S20 ML Bball Texas Rangers S20 ML BB Toronto Blue Jay S20 ML Football 2 S39 ML Personal Pro Golf 528 Madden Football S12 Madden Football 2 $17 Madden Player Stats 90 $18 Magic Johnson Fast Brak S6 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Michael Jordan Fight Sm $38 Micro League Footbil Dlx $39 ML 82 Baseball Season $17 ML 83 Baseball Season $17 ML 84 Baseball Season $17 ML 85 Baseball Season 517 ML 86 Baseball Season $17 ML 87 Baseball Season $17 ML 88 Baseball Season $17 ML 89 Baseball Season $17 ML 89 FB Season $17 Microleague Baseball 4 $31 Microleague Basketball $28 Microleague Football $20 Microsoft Golf Windows $39 Mike Ditka Powr Football $34 Mini Putt NFL Chal Col Almni Team $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 S9 NFL Challenge $60 NFL Chal 1984 Team $15 NFL Chal 1985 Team $15 NFL Chal 1986 Team $15 NFL Chal 1987 Team $15 NFL Chal 1988 Team $22 NFL Chal 1988 Team S9 NFL Chal 1989 Team S9 NFL Chal 91 Pre Sea S9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chal Dream Teams $9 NFL Chal Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club $36 NFL Coaches Club LTD 548 NFL Football $31 NFL Proleague Football $12 NFL Pro League FB 92 $19 NFL Video Football S29 NFL Video Football NHL Hockey 539 Nascar Challenge $31 Over the Net PGA Tour Golf $21 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 IBM WARGAMES S36 \"TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL DE LUXE Tom Landry is back and better than ever. The deluxe version offers powerful en. hancements over the original like a league editor, individual's player names and abilities, track season leader in stats, and more. $32 Deluxe Edition TITUVOD DUNLU STRATEGY FOOTBALL S17 Action North Atlantic $19 Action Stations Scen 1 $9 Action off River Platte $26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Banzai $9 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz $12 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blood & Iron $52 Blue and the Grey S42 Borodino Naplon Invade S29 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 Campaign $39 Campaign Mission 1 $19 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Charge of Light Brigade $19 Civil War No Great Glory S21 Conflict S12 Conflict in Vietnam $9 Conflict: Korea S16 Conflict: Middle East S14 Decision at Gettysburg S12 Dreadnoughts $34 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 NOV CGW 5 $9 'CARRIERS AT WAR 2' offers more tension and excitement Features eight new scenarios, some hypothetical, others controversial: an improved war room intelligence system, and tougher artificial intelligence. S50 $9 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Weeks, Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. *SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 les Fineroduct. Compatibil shipped "


"speed of the line in terms of the people may pick up an extension in number of bits we can send the house by accident and break every second. So if you see 300 your connection at some critical bit/s, you know that you are point. Also, when you are having a sending 300 bits every second. problem using the computer, a Serial communications is diseparate line allows you to get vided into two broad groups: \"voice» help while the computer asychronous and synchronous. stays on-line. A separate line should Synchronous is used for very not cost too much and would be a high speed, industrial-strength worthwhile expense. communications. We're not goDo you own two computers? You ing to talk about it right now. may have heard of direct connect\" Besides, 99.99% of all modem gaming. This is when two computgames are written for asynchroers are physically adjacent to each nous communications. other, and the two communication In asynchronous communicaports are attached directly to each tion, data is transferred in logical higher speed modems is if you intend to transother without the use of modems. groups called bytes. A byte is normally 7 bits fer (download) large files to your compurer. However a special type of cable is required. Tong. Surrounding the byte is a small \"enveSince the file transfer is done more quickly, Ly This is referred to as a \"null modem\" cable and lope\" of three bits. The first bit, called the your total time connected is reduced, and you sh red is reduced, and you should be available in any computer store for \"start bit,\" signals the modem that communiwill save a considerable amount of coinage under 20. cation is about to start. This is followed by the that can be applied to the serious pursuit of For the ultimate in high speed connections, byte (also called the seven data bits). Followgame playing. consider a local area network (LAN). With a ing this are two more bits: one is called the Bu the way, low speed modems are generally LAN you will be operating at speeds of 10 stop 2400 bit/s and slower. High speed modems Mbit/s and beyond. Certain flight simulators bit.\" The pariry bit helps the remote computer start at 9600 bit/s and up. Expect to pay Day (Falcon 3) and combat games (Robosport, Specverify that it has correctly received the byte, berween $50-150 for a low end modem and tre) already support LAN play. Unlike the null and the stop bir marks the end of transmission. $175.400 for the faster models. As a general modem which limits you to two players, a Why do you need to know all this? Cyberrule, ensure that the modem you purchase is he modem you purchase is LAN can support 30+ (assuming they develop space is a tricky place. At times you will be \"Haves-compatible.\" This means that the ingames for that number of players and you asked to set the communication parameters to structions used to communicate with the mohappen to have 30 computers laying around). access a particular network service. You may dem match an industry standard developed by Those of you working in offices with LANS be asked to set the number of data bits, parity Hayes. may have already experienced the thrill of high bits and stop bits. For example, \"8-N-1\" i Should you get an internal or external moshe mw speed gaming. Expect to pay about $400-500 would mean cight data bits, no parity bits and dem? Good question. Here at The Council we to get started and about $100-150 for every one stop bit. In all communication software machine after the first two. nication software are traditionalists. We like to see lights flashing rare there will be an option to set these parameters. on our modems. It gives us a sense of security Okay, enough theory. After all, we're here to know that something is happening. This Do I Need Any Software? to have fun. Let's see what we need to get will only be available with external modems. started. Please have your credit card handy. While most multi-player games have builtHowever they do take up desktop space, rein communication software, you may wish to quire more cables, and are generally more consider What Do I Need? a are generally more consider buying a communication program. expensive than their internal cousins. There are many of these available and they are The critical piece of hardware is the modem. Internal modems are nice and tidy: one generally less than $100. A communication A modem is a device that MODulates and phone line connects directly to your comprogram will allow you to contact bulletin DEModulates (hence \"modem\"). It converts puter. But you will have to open up your boards, other microcomputers, and may even the digital signals from your computer into computer to install the internal modem, so if allow you to access the computer at your office tones, and back again into digital signals. Moyou're not comfortable with the inside of your assuming that you have any time after game dems come in many shapes and sizes, and computer, keep it simple and use the external playing). The selection of a communication choosing the right one is not always easy type. program depends on what operating system To start you should have some idea of the We also recommend considering a portable you are using. Ask at your local computer store primary uses of your modem. In general, modem. These modems come in very small for advice. highly interactive gaming (such as flight simupackages and can travel. If you have a laptop While out getting your communication lators, car racing, etc.) will require a high speed you may want a portable modem to stay in software you might want to consider a \"starter modem. On the other hand, if your interest is touch with cyberspace while you're on the kit\" from America Online, CompuServe, GEin strategy/wargames (Empire Deluxe, Comroad. Expect to pay a premium for these wonnie, ImagiNation or Prodigy. Since all of these mand H, Conquered Kingdoms, etc.) a slower ders of technology. kits include some free connect time, the cost speed modem will probably work well. You'll need a few other things to link you is minimal. These kits simplify connection to If you are considering connecting to a cominto the world of cybergamers and other netthe service and generally provide introductory mercial service (CompuServe, Genie, Prodwork travellers. You will need a telephone line. tutorials. A word of warning: Multi-player igy, America Online, ImagiNation Network, While it is possible to use your home line, you telegaming and bulletin board communicaetc.) a low speed modem is probably best. may want to consider a separate line just for tion are highly addictive! Massive credit card Most of the games on these systems have been the computer. Why? Because we have shares charges are a distinct possibility. We saw one designed to work with 2400 bit/s modems, so in AT&T that's why! Actually, the problems fellow post a note on GEnie saying that he had having a higher speed does not bring addiwith using the house line are numerous. You spent $15,000 over a three year period playing tional performance. In addition, all these servwill be on the computer for long periods of games! While this might have been an exagices charge you extra for a high speed time; this will upser family members as well as geration, the $6/hour connect charge can add connection. The only reason to consider the make it difficult for people to call you. Other up in a hurry. Be careful. You've been warned. Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI, APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI 512 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment Europe, S. America Alr Mall $19 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM WARGAMES IBM WARGAMES IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY S32 S34 ORION MASTER MASTER OF ORION' Build an empire that will stretch across the entire galaxy. Start with a single planet. Develop resources and design ships for your alien population to colonize nearby. Now start building a fleet of ships ranging from shultles to dreadnoughts. Now conquer the universe. $41 $39 $36 $34 $14 HICROPROSE $42 $38 $36 S37 $32 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD COMMEMORATIVE EDITION' Explore the 15th century New World and more. Accomplish many tasks on your way from un. proven explorer to Viceroy: map uncharted territory. sel up outposts and establish trade relations. Become the most notable explorer. S38 $29 Sim Ant Sim Ant Windows Sim City 2000 Sim City Classic $27 SimCity Classic Win $37 Simcity Graphic Set 1 $18 Simcity Graphic Set 2 $23 Simcity WIN $34 Simearth Simearth WIN Simfarm Simlife Simlife WIN Space Hulk Spaceward Ho! $38 Spaceward Ho! WIN Special Forces $39 Spoils of War $34 Star Control $29 Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions Starfleet 1 Starfleet 2 Strategic Forces Strike Squad Sub Version Sword of Aragon $28 Task Force 1942 $39 Tegel's Mercenaries $19 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 S44 Theatre of War S12 Theatre of War Set 1 $21 Traders $15 Utopia S29 Vikings Fields Conquest $37 Visions of Aftermath $24 Walls of Rome $39 War in the Gulf $34 Warlords Warlords 2 $42 When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War S36 Battle $20 $9 S9 SEVEN CITIES E GOLD Onun $6 $36 $26 $9 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Drums of Glory $44 Victory at Sea $46 Fall Gelb S36 War in the Falklands $26 Fifth Eskadra S22 Warship Change History $26 Fire Brigade Waterloo $19 Fleet Med $27 Western Front $36 Frontline S9 White Death $19 G. Grigsby Pacific War $48 World War 2 G. Grigsby's War Russia $48 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Turning Point$36 IBM STRATEGY Golan Front Grand Fleet $36 A Train S34 Grey Seas, Grey Skies S19 A Train Construction Set $23 Halls of Montezuma $24 Air Force Commander $16 Harpoon $25 Airbucks $36 Harpoon Battle Set 2 919 Ambush at Sorinor $42 Harpoon Battle Set 3 S19 Ancient Art War Sea $29 Harpoon Battle Set 4 S24 Ancient Art of War $29 Harpoon Chal Pak SE $49 Ancient Art of War Sky $34 Harpoon Designer Series$17 Archon Ultra Harpoon Designer 2 $25 Are We There Yet $17 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 Armada 2525 High Command S45 Ashes of Empire $48 In Harms Way S36 Bandit King Anci China $32 Kampfgruppe S59 Battle Isle $32 Kriegsmarine $36 Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 Kursk Campaign Battles of Destiny $36 Line in the Sand S12 Bermuda Square Long Lance $39 Big Business MacArthur's War $9 Breach 2 $12 Main Bat Tank C Germ $36 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Main Bat Tank Mid East $36 Breach 3 $36 Main Bat Tank N Germ $36 Buzz Aldrin Race Space S39 Malta Storm $36 Caesar $36 Man of War Campaign 2 $36 Mare Nostrum Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Carrier Command Midway $12 Carriers at War Moscow Campaign $36 Carriers at War 2 $49 Northern Fleet $36 Carriers at War Const Kit$29 Operation Overlord S29 Castles $18 Pac Storm Midway Cpg 536 Castles 2 Pac Storm Solmon Cpg $36 Centurion Defende Rome $17 Panzer Battles $12 Civilization $32 Patriot Civilization Mastr Edition $48 Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Clash of Steel Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Cohort 2 $19 Patton Strikes Back $14 Command HQ $19 Prelude to Jutland $26 Conquer for Windows $39 Red Lightning S12 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Red Sky Morning Conq Kingdoms Scen 1 $25 Return to Falklands $28 Conquest of Japan $36 Rising Sun Crime City $13 Road Sumtr Appomattox $45 Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Rommel Battles N Africa $24 Dark Seed $19 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Dark Star $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Defender of the Crown $12 Second Front $21 Designasaurus 2 S28 Seventh Fleet $36 Detroit $36 Squad Leader 94 $48 Dino Wars Stalingrad Campaign $36 Diplomacy $12 Storm Across Europe $12 Discovery Stp Columbus $34 The Great War $36 Dominion: 1 King's Life $41 Third Reich $39 Dominus To The Rhine S36 Dragon Force Typhoon of Steel $12 Dragon Lord UMS Original $14 Dune UMS 2 $19 Dune 2 UMS 2 Civil War $24 El Fish UMS 2 Desrt Storm Scn $24 Empire Deluxe $36 UMS 2 Planet Editor $16 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Under Fire $12 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 V Vetry:Gld, Juno, Sword $44 Epic Dwarven Tale $38 V Victry: Market Garden $44 Fantasy Empires $39 V Victory: Utah Beach S44 Fields of Glory $36 Fighting for Rome S12 Final Conflict $12 Fireteam 2200 $24 Fireteam 2200 Constrct $25 Fort Apache Gemfire Genghis Khan Global Conquest Global Domination Global Effect Gobliiins 2 Gold of the Americas $24 Harpoon 2 $52 Imperium $26 Inindo $37 Koshan Conspiracy S32 Kye Deluxe WIN S26 L'Empereur Laser Squad S29 Lemmings ODCP Lemmings Datadisk S19 Lemmings 2: The Tribes S32 Liberty or Death S37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced S44 Lost Admiral Scen Disk S23 Lost Patrol S6 Lost Vikings Maelstrom $38 Master of Orion $45 Medieval Lords $12 Mega Lo Mania $29 Merchant Colony $17 Millenium MoonBase $24  New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $25 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Nuclear War $9 Objection $29 Objection Enhanced S42 Ogre Operation Combat $12 OutPost WIN $42 Overlord Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $36 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General Scen 1 $21 Perfect General Scen 2 $23 Populous $17 Populous 2 $26 Populous Promised Land$14 Powermonger Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon Classic $22 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars S24 Realms S16 Red Zone $32 Rnegde Legion Intercptr $12 Riders of Rohan Robo Sport WIN Romance 3 Kingdoms S42 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 S42 Rules of Engagement $12 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN S34 Seven Cities Gold 2 S38 Shadow President $34 ShadowGate WIN $32 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Siege $12 Siege Expansion Disk S19 Siege With Exp Disk S24 $24 $12 $19 $19 \"WARLORDS 2 brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. S42 $36 $21 IBM BUNDLES $23 $42 S36 $26 S6 ADD Collector Edition 2 $46 ADD Starter Kit $29 Air Combat Classic $45 Allied Forces $12 Allied Forces $9 Capstone CD Collection $45 Combat Classics $24 Dynamix Bundle 1 $29 Eye Beholder Collection $52 Game Pak 1 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Land Sea Air 2 $29 Leisure Suit Larry Bndle $39 Lost Treasures Infocom $39 Lost Treasre Infocom CDS39 Lost Treasure Infocom 2 S29 Lost Treas Infocom 2 CD$29 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Marvel Trilogy $12 Max Pac $19 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Power Hits: Battletech $32 Power Hits: Kids S9 Power Hits: Movies $17 Power Hits: Sci Fi Power Hits: Sports $19 Prime Time Hits Prime Time Hits 2 $24 Scrt Weap Luftwaffe CD $42 Sierra Adventure Bundle $39 NOV CGW6 $39 S34 \"HEIRS TO THE THRONE' As Baron of your army, your mission is to conquer the continent and become King of your empire. You must control your armies supplies and morale as well as fend off multiple attacks from your enemies. 536 $25 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Dolectivos replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 "


"One thing that you may want to change is tions on installation. If you have game softWhat's a duplex? It doesn't matter. What does your operating system. If you use a Macintosh ware already loaded on your machine you may matter is that you find the place in your softyou may want to upgrade to System 7. IBM have to run the setup program again to get ware that allows you to change it (sometimes PC users should consider OS/2, Windows or your modem working. For example, Empire its called \"Local Echo\" or just \"Echo\"). There Windows NT. Why? Preemptive multitaskDeluxe requires you to run ECONFIG.EXE are E are only two settings, so change to the other ing that's why! We hear the groaning out to inform it that a modem is now available. le. and everything should work fine. there; okay, no long technical discussion. To Regardless of the software you are using, there make a long story short, the new operating are a number of parameters that you must set systems allow you to perform more that one before you can start playing. Make sure that the But I Have More Questions! thing at a time. This is very useful if you are speed set in the software matches your modem. in the middle of a large file transfer and still Also make sure that the software has selected the Of course you do. That's why the Datawant to play games, or perhaps play multiple right COM port for your modem. Generally the con Comm Council was formed to help people games against multiple opponents. Here at the serring of 8-N-1 will work for access to most like you jack-in to cyberspace. Drop us a line Council we've been using OS/2. It's not bad, services. All of these par not bad, services. All of these parameters can be adjusted and we'll see what we can do to help. Once but you should have a powerful machine with through a single screen in most programs. Check you're up and running, drop us a note on lots of memory to run it properly. your instructions. GEnie or CompuServe. If you're having Ok, you have the hardware and the software. Some programs also provide you with the trouble then write us care of this magazine. What's next? capability of creating directories of commonly Interested in a particular topic? Let us know. Get Up, Set Up, Dial In called numbers. This is a great place to keep The services of the Council are available to all. all the numbers that you are going to call. This is just the beginning. Already there are You have your modem, cables and software With some programs you can even change all ready to go. What's next? There are three how your modem will operate when switching video conferences, audio conferences and steps that must be followed before you can between services. For example, you might use combined multimedia networks up and runjack-in. You must 1) Install the modem, 2) \"2400 8-N-1\" when calling a friend but 9600 ning. How about 100+ players flying combat Install the software, and 3) Configure the 7-E-2\" when calling your office computer. It missions in WWII? How about football simusoftware. Let's take you through it. also means that you don't have to keep all lators where every position is played by a Installing an external modem is relatively these phone numbers on little pieces of paper telegamer? How about strategy games where simple. Generally there are three connectors at that get lost. cach side can have multiple generals? Tired of the back of the modem. Two of these are Is there more? What do you think? Of playing against computer logic that is either telephone jacks like the ones we use for the course there's more! There are script lantoo easy or too hard? Jack-in to the net. We're phone. These jacks are normally labeled guages, uploads and downloads, error protowaiting for you. \"Line\" and \"Phone.\" The idea is that the cols, data compression, and...well you get the modem will sit between your telephone and idea. But we don't have time to cover all that the wall connector. Unplug your phone from today. Jerry Golick is a freelance consultant and the wall and insert the jack into the \"Phone\" slot on the modem. Then, using the phone One last freebie. If you get connected, but writer who specializes in data communication cable that is normally included with the mocan't see the letters as you type them, or each issues. He is based in Montreal, Quebec. He may dem, connect the \"Linc\" slot to the telephone letter is showing up twice (ie: DDOOUUBbe reached at 71175,1011 on CompuServe or connector on the wall. Ok? Now it's time to BLLEE) then your duplex is not set correctly. J.GOLICK on GEnie. CGW connect the data cable from the modem to the computer. Take a look at the connectors and Basic Connection Diagram External Modem notice that they will only fit a certain way. Do not try and force these connectors or you will break them. The connectors on the data cable Rear of generally have screws on either side that you Computer can use to secure the connector to its socket. We suggest that you use them. See the \"Basic Telephone Connection Diagram\" for derails. Installing an internal modem is a little more complex since you will have to open up your computer. Follow the manufacturer's instructions. You will see that the modem card only has telephone connectors. Install these as we described with the external modem. Rear of Phone A quick note about «COM ports\": Almost @ MODEM Wall Jack all microcomputers come with one or more ports, or connections, for serial communicaPhone tions. On IBM-compatibles these ports are Parallel Port TO Keyboara X Cable referred to as \"COMI\", \"COM2\", etc. If you To Printer RS-232 Cable are using a mouse on an IBM compatible, then COM 2 you probably have it installed on COMI. To Modem Make sure that you follow the instructions and COM 1 set your modem to operate on COM2. To Mouse That's it. Your modem is installed. Onto the software. If you have purchased any communication Keyboard software, follow the manufacturer's instrucLOR, ELE bo @ D WITHTHILIKLAUSAN Mouse Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada S6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. addT; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling S1 per shipment, Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + $6 ca, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Handling si per shipment, IBM BUNDLES IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM BUDGET $26 S4 1 Sierra Arcade Bundle $24 Sierra Family Fun Pak $29 Space Quest Bundle $36 Space Quest Bundle $42 Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $59 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Wing Commander Dlx $48 Wing Commandr Dix CD $48 Wizardry Trilogy GUD -SN Tetris Classic Tetris Classic WIN $26 Trump Castle 2 $9 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 Trump Castle 2 DD 2 $4 Trump Castle 3 S29 Turn-n-Burn Vegas Entrtnmnt Pak $20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Video Poker WIN $12 Video Poker by Masque $9 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $49 Wayne's World $19 Welltris $15 Wheel of Fortune 56 Wheel of Fortune 2 S9 Wheel of Fortune 3 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Word Tris $27 World Champ Bckgmmn $24 World Champion Cribbge$24 \"GAME-MAKER' lets you create action adventure games as unique as your imagination. Design your own animated characters, monsters, and scenes. Create sounds and import images. No programming. New version has SB support. $49 IBM TRADITIONAL 89 $5 OR WINDOWS IBM BUDGET *TAKE A BREAK! PINBALL' is eight different fast and furious games for windows. Score big points with Leisure Suit Larry, pilot Nova 9 through 2 different missions, challenge Mordack in King's Quest, bustle through the universe with Roger Wilco, and help Willy Bemish save the city. $29 SA  Go Master Tool Kit WIN $79 Go Master Ver 4 S34 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grand Master Chess Dix $37 Grandmaster Chess S19 Home Alone 2 S26 Home Casino Spectacular$9 Hong Kong Mah Jong $32 Hoyle's Book Games V1 $21 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Ishido $17 Jeopardy Jeopardy 2 $9 Jeopardy 25th Aniv $15 Jeopardy Junior Jeopardy Sports Edition S7 Jeopardy. Super Talking $21 Jones Fast Lane $24 Joseki Genius S39 Klotski: Polish Puzzles $9 Laffer Utilities WIN Lexicross Lotto Gold Mental Blocks Monopoly Monopoly Deluxe $29 Monopoly Deluxe WIN $29 Oligopoly Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Sharif on Bridge $34 On Target $10 Pictionary $12 Pool Shark $15 Positronic Bridge $30 Positronic Bridge SE $60 Price is Right $15 Prime Time Hits Prime Time Hits 2 Puzzle Gallery 1 Puzzle Gallery 2 Puzzle Master Puzznic Risk Risk WIN Rodeo Games Russian Six Pack Sargon 4 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble $19 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Scribler $34 Scruples $28 Sesame Street Shanghaii 2 $29 Sharkey's 3D Pool Shogi Master $34 Solitaire Royale $16 Solitaire WIN $32 Solitaire's Journey WIN $38 Solitaires Journey $34 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables Spot Super Jeopardy Super Tetris Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Terminator Chess $34 Terminatr 2 Chess Wars $37 Tesserae WIN $16 Tetris $15 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Laura Bow Parlor Games $9 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $12 Line in the Sand $12 Lost Patrol $6 MUDS Magic Candle 2 $12 Magic Johnsn Fast Break S6 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed Mines of Titan S9 NFL Proleague Football S12 Never Ending Story 2 $9 Ninja Gaiden 2 Oil's Well Over the Net Pirates Planet of Lust Power Hits: Kids Puzzle Gallery 1 Puzzle Gallery 2 Red Storm Rising Rock A Doodle Rules of Engagement S12 SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Sharkey's 3D Pool Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Storm Across Europe $12 Street Fighting Man $3 Taking of Beverly Hills $9 Tengen's Arcade Hits S12 Test Drive 2:Euro Chal S6 Test Drive 2:Muscle Car S12 Test Drive 2:Supercars S12 Theatre of War S12 Tie Break Tennis Treasure Savge Frontier S12 Trump Castle 2 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 S4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 S4 Typhoon of Steel S12 Vengeance of Excalibur S12 Video Poker Villa Crespo S9 Video Poker WINDOWS $12 Video Poker by Masque 59 War in Middle Earth $12 War of the Lance 59 Warlords Western Europe Disk Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 2 Wheel of Fortune 3 3D Pinball $10 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 3D Pool $12 Acquire $9 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slim 7 Crd Stud $10 American Tail Coloring $19 Armada Villa Crespo CB $10 Backgammon By George $9 Baseball Card Collector $18 Baseball Facts Bat Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $32 Battle Chess $19 Battle Chess WIN $29 Blackjack $9 Blackjack WIN $12 Bridge 7 $24 Bridgemaster $29 Caesars Palace WIN $15 Casino Craps $10 Casino Game Pak WIN S32 Casino Master WIN $25 Casinos of the World S29 Checkmate $36 Checkmate WIN $36 Chess Net WIN S9 Chess X Colossus ChessManiac 5 Bil & 1 $39 Chessmaster 2000 $27 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $34 Classic 5 $32 Classic 5 WIN $32 Clue $12 Combination Lock 99 Cribage King Gin King $19 Crossword Creator Dealer's Choice $29 Demon Blue Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $22 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong Jacks & Video S9 Ed O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Electric Jigsaw S12 FS-Pro $21 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Pzzle $28 Gambit $38 Game-Maker $49 Games Master WIN $6 Game Pak 1 $19 Games People Play S21 Go Master Dix Ver 4 $89 GO Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Go Master Dix V5 WIN $79 Go Master Junior Ver 4 $19 Go Master Junior Ver 5 $19 Go Master Jr Ver 5 WIN $19 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Farm $9 007 J Bond Stealth Affairs 12 3 D Pinball $10 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 4th & Inches Action Stations Scen 1 $9 All Star Sports Pak $9 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Armada Villa Crespo CBS10 Back to the Future 3 $12 Backgammon By George $9 Battle of Austerlitz $12 Blue Max Aces Great War $6 Bo Jackson Baseball $12 Buck Rogers Countdown $12 Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Carl Lewis Challenge $9 Chess Net WINDOWS $ 9 Chess X Colossus Conflict in Vietnam S9 Conqueror Multi Tank Crime Does Not Pay S9 Das Boot Submarine S9 Decision at Gettysburg $12 Defender of the Crown $12 Dinosoft Ad & Subtract $12 Dinosoft Begin Algebra $12 Dinosoft U.S. Geography$11 Don't Go Alone $6 Double Dragon 3 Dr Doom's Revenge Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dragon Strike $12 Dragons of Flame East vs West Berlin 1948 $9 Eye of the Horus F15 Strike Eagle F19 Stealth Fighter $12 Fighting for Rome $12 Flames Freedom MWII $12 Games Master WIN S6 Gold of the Aztecs S12 Hole In 1 Mini Golf S6 Hole 1 Mini Golf Crs Disk S3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Delux S12 Home Casino Spectacular $9 Jeopardy Sports Edition $7 Joan of Arc S12 John Elway Quarterback $6 Keys to Marimon $12 Klotski: Polish Puzzles $9 'SIM FARM is an intuitive strategy game in the style of SimCity that challenges players to build a small family farm into a profitable and responsible business. Success depends upon not just production, but also preserving the environmental health of the land. Supports Sound Blaster card. $41 $9 $12 The Lost MACINTOSH $12 $6 WANDD 'LOST ADMIRAL' is a production na val strategy game. Features 9 scenarios, a random map scenario. 15 campaign games, flag. ships with special abilities, very strong artificial empire, in depth officers ranking system, accumulates your career history as you play Also has a 2 play. er option. $19 %% 4th & Inches 4th & Inches Team Const $6 Battle Chess S24 Bridge 7 $24 Dragon's Lair 2 $24 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe $24 Dragon's Lair $24 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Hardball 2 $24 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $19 Harpoon Scenario Editor $19 Jack Nicklaus CD1 Jack Nicklaus CD 2 Jack Nicklaus CD 3 Jack Nicklaus CD 4 Jack Nicklaus CD 5 $6 Lexicross $19 NOV CGW 7 $6 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs 56. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 8 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #46 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW GET YOUR KICKS ON ROUTE UNGU RX TY 444033 Time Warner Interactive Group's New CD Takes You for a Ride by Andy Eddy SOLO MITI NOW GOOD DEARE The traveler's tales of New York City \"and Raul seems friendly enough. I always cabbies are well known: running wanted to see the Empire State Building.\" He through red lights, U-turns at 70 mph, apparently overlooked the 666 on the license and shortcuts over pedestrian-filled sidewalks plate and the company name, Hell Cab. This are the horrifying stuff of which they're made. won't be the average, everyday white-knuckle Even cabby names have come to possess a thrill ride through the Big Apple. certain notoriety. Jerry Seinfeld described one W hen he's short a few bucks to pay the fare, as \"something like the letter G and the symthe quick-thinking Raul (surely, he's done bol for Boron.\" this before) whips out a piece of paper-a contract that pays his fare out of the player's soul. No, the local ATM won't help much, because money isn't the key to this payment plan. Just sign on the dotted line and enjoy a tour, one that spans the ages, from the cab's back seat in New York to the Roman Coliseum, from those roaring Jurassic days to the battle-scarred fields of World War I. Hit The Road, Jack Hell Cab, designed by artist Pepe Moreno, is constructed with a point-and-click interface that is reminiscent of previous multimeAnyone who's been there and paid the fare dia adventures like Manhole and Cosmic is certainly ready for a trip with Raul, the Osmo—and thar pair fast-talking hack who picks our jet-lagged were less games than adventurer up at JFK Airport in Time Hell Cab. Even with Warner Interactive Group's Hell Cab. Our gaming elements, commuter has just arrived in New York City though, Hell Cab on his way back home, and the plane is late comes up short in profor the trip's last leg that will take him to his viding durable enterBudget Gourmet and a warm bed. When tainment for one main Raul shows up in the lobby and says he'd be reason: It's v-c-r-y slow. happy to give the player a quick visitor's jaunt Quicktime, Apple's around Manhattan, he warms to the idea. \"movie\" extension, is a \"Heck, what would be the harm,\" he decides, good application for WRX HELE GERT CANCEL creating movies on the Mac, but even with a fast machine the access time can really bring the action down. This is no arcade game, to be sure. Every event hangs on each mouse click to be registered and new data streamed in from the CD. Maybe a lesson could have been learned from Drew Pictures' Iron Helix (by Spectrum HoloByte for the Macintosh), where certain cssential files were held on the hard drive. All of Hell Cab, with the exception of the Quicktime extension, comes off the CD on the fly. TITLE: Hell Cab PRICE: $99.99 SYSTEM: Macintosh REQUIREMENTS: Mac Il with a 13\" color monitor, 3MB RAM, CD-ROM drive and System 6.0.7 or higher (System 7.0 recommended); PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: Pepe Moreno/Pepe Moreno Productions PUBLISHER: Time Warner Interactive Group 2210 W. Olive Avenue Burbank, CA 91506 (800) 593-6334 Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Shipping to US.PR.AK HI.APO & FPO S4 por order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order: PR. HI S12 1st Item + S2 ea. add\"I; AK S19 1st itom + $2 ea. add. Handling $1 por shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19.1st item + $6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. MACINTOSH AMIGA NEO GEO TURBO DUO Secret Monkey Island $19 Shark Attack Ultim Golf S6 Ski or Die Stryx Targhan Tengen's Arcade Hits Test Drive 2:Muscle Cars $3 Dark Queen Krynn DEMO $6 Time hine Total Eclipse Treasure Trap UMS 2 $19 Untouchables Yeager's AFT 2.0 Zoom $9 RoboTech Lov Sng SCD $47 Shadow Beast SCD $42 Shape Shifter SCD 942 Sherlock Holmes 2 SCD $42 Simearth SCD 542 Splash Lake CD Spriggins CD Terraforming CD Valis 3 CD Vasteel CD Wizardry 1 & 2 SCD World Heroes SCD Xak 1 & 2 SCD Ys 3 CD Ys Book 1 & 2 CD $36 36 Life and Death $24 Monopoly $19 Oids S6 Out of This World S36 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $6 Pick'n Pile S6 Puzzle Master S6 Railroad Tycoon $36 Reach for the Stars $19 Risk $19 Robo Sport S24 Shanghaii 2 $19 Sim Ant $35 Sim City Supreme $46 Simcity $29 Simcity Terrain Editor $9 Space Ace 2 $24 Spint of Excalibur $19 Startlight 1 $29 Super Tetris $24 Test Drive 2 $24 Test Drive 2:CA Chal $6 Test Drive 2:Supercars $6 Vette $24 W elitris S19 Where Europe CSD $24 Where World is CSD S24 Wordtris Yeager's AFT \"LABYRINTH OF TIME' is an epic fantasy of time travel on CD. The legendary King Minos has commissioned a Labyrinth bridging both time and space. To stop him, you must enter the Labyrinth and manipulate the very fabric of history. $39 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Football Frenzy $149 Ghost Pilots $149 King of the Monsters $149 King of the Monsters 2 $179 Last Resort $149 League Bowling $149 Magician Lord $149 Mutation Nation $149 Nam 1975 NG $149 Ninja Combat $149 Riding Hero S149 Robo Army $149 Samurai Showdown $199 Sengoku $139 Sengoku 2 $199 Soccer Brawl $139 Super 8 Man $149 Super Sidekicks Soccer$179 Super Spy $149 Survivor $199 Thrash Rally $139 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf $139 View Point $199 World Heroes 2 $199 S42 3DO FREE GAME OFFER 33333333333 \"THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM MARK II Brings the function of the keyboard into your left hand while your right hand controls the joystick. All functions are fully programmable. Plug your FCS into the back and program all its functions as well. The ultimate control! $94 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Of fer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 15th through November 30th or while supplies last. TURBO DUO SPEND $75 AMIGA Aces over Europe Battle Chess Crash & Burn Demolition Man Dragon's Lair Jurassic Park Lemmings Mad Dog McCree Madden Football Megarace Microcosm Oceans Below Out of this World PGA Tour $49 Road Rash $49 Shock Wave $49 Star Trek Next Genertion$49 Stellar Fire $49 Syndicate $49 Total Eclipse Troddlers Twisted Wing Commander WorldBuilders, Inc $18 $6 WALES OF RG ME 4th & Inches 5.25 Airborne Ranger 5.25 Artura Backgammon by George Big Business 5.25 Bravo Romeo Delta Gunship 5.25 Obliterator Pirates 5.25 SC Out The Tinies Xenocide $9 \"WALLS OF ROME' gives you the experience of Siege warfare as the ancients knew it. Play single battles or extended campaigns of conquest & defense against an unpredictable computer. Stunning graphics and sound effects. \"SPECIAL:BUY 1 MINDCRAFT GAME AND GET 1 FREE! $39 $9 JAGUAR SPEND $100 $249 $9 $54 Artura $9 Atomino Blue Max Aces Great War $6 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $3 Bride of the Robot Checkmate $12 Crackdown Darkman $3 Das Boot Submarine Day of the Viper $6 Dragons of Flame F29 Retaliator DEMO Fast Break $3 Fireteam 2200 $12 Gateway Savage Frontir $24 Gun Boat $6 HardBall Hawaiian Odyssey $6 Heatwave HoverForce $3 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $3 Jack Nicklaus CD 1 S6 Jack Nicklaus CD 3 S6 Jack Nicklaus CD 4 S6 Jack Nicklaus CD 5 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 1886 Jack Nick Unlimited Golf $9 Knights of the Crystalion $6 Leisure Suit Larry 1 Loom $12 Matrix Marauders Mean 18 Golf Megafortress MD 2 DEMOS6 Night Breed $3 Night Shift Populous 2 Challenge $9 Populous World Editor RVF Honda Red Storm Rising Renegade Legion Interceptor Robocop 2 $6 Search for the King $6 Jaguar System Alien Vs Predator Baseball Basketball Battle Zone 2000 Cyber Morph $54 Jaguar Formula 1 Racing$54 NFL Football Raiden S54 Tempest 2000 $54 Tiny Toon Adventures S54 Turbo Duo $289 TurboDuo Adapter S13 Turbo Duo Pad Turbo Duo Tap S18 A Train 3 Super CD S47 Addams Family CD S34 Beyond Shdowgte SCD 547 Black Hole Assault SCD $47 Blood Gear Super CD $47 Buster Brothers SCD $42 Camp California SCD $46 Cosmic Phantasy 2 CD $46 Cosmic Phantasy 3 SCD 546 Cotton Super CD $44 Dragon Slayer SCD $42 Dungeon Explorr 2 SCD $46 Dungeon Master CD $44 Dynastic Hero SCD $44 Exile 2 Super CD $46 Fantasy Star Sldier SCD $44 Fighting Street CD $34 Final Zone 2 CD Forgotten Worlds SCD $43 Gao Super CD $45 Gate of Thunder CD S48 Godzilla Super CD $46 Gradius 2 CD $46 It Came From Desert CD $45 JB Harold CD $37 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $34 Jim Power Super CD $47 King Monsters 2 SCD $46 Loom SCD $39 Lords of Thunder SCD $44 Lords of Rising Sun CD $39 Madden Football SCD $44 Magical Dinsaur Tour CD$42 Might & Magic 3 SCD $47 Mystic Formla Super CD $45 Nexzar SCD $47 Pomping World CSD $44 Populous CSD $48 Prince of Persia CSD $39 Rayxanber 3 CD $48 Riot Zone SCD RoboTech 2036 SCD $44 $54 SOUND MACHINE Blackjack for Windows Covert Action Dark Half Defender of the Crown Dragon Force 5.25 Grandmaster Chess Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix MacArthur's War Operation Combat Panza Battles 5.25 Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon 3.5 Sentinel Worlds 1 Video Poker for Windows War of the Lance $6 NEO GEO 'SOUND MACHINE' brings to gether 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output. full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp, volume control, a pair of 3 speakers, and a joystick. $94 SPEND $200 Neo Geo Gold System $569 2020 Super Baseball $119 3 Count Bout $199 Alpha Mission 2 $149 Andros Dunos $199 Art of Fighting $199 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Baseball Stars Pro $129 Baseball Stars Pro 2 $149 Blues Journey S149 Burning Fight $149 Crossed Swords $149 Cyber Lip $149 Fatal Fury $129 $6 Allied Forces Bridge 7.0 Cardinal of the Kremlin Command H.Q. Dune F15 Strike Eagle 2 Lost Admiral Red Storm Rising Warlords 5.25 NOV CGW 8 $9 **SPECIAL OFFER: Buy Walls of Rome, Bloodstone, or Strike Squad and get one other Mindcraft game free. Coupon enclosed in game. $44 Circle Reader Service #46 "


"Inventory NY the halls and click on picture frames to bring up Quicktime movies. These \"films» range from plugs for other animators (such as John Ludtke, who helped on Hell Cab, but has also worked on another interactive CD, The Freak Show with the music group The Residents) to satirical clips from \"The Dead Sullivan Show,\" to advertisements for upcoming products, and even one for Wired magazine. The trip through the Empire State Building also features accurate images from around the 86th-floor observation deck. If With that in mind, it's hard to categorize players pull out a quarter and toss Hell Cab as a game, though it is certainly it into a telescopic viewer, they might even be interactive. One starts with three lives, and able to see Baltimore! lives are lost when poor decisions are made. The player also has a quantity of soul (registered on the Soul-O-Meter, Raul's dashboard device that measures one's fare) that must be carefully monitored. The interface requires the player to click at the screen edge to turn 90 degrees or click straight ahead to move forward. As in games like The 7th Guest, the pointer changes to another symbol when an action can be accomplished. At certain junctures, one can pick up items, click on text buttons to speak to other characters, and hit   Mini MI the mouse button to achieve a particular motion (like swinging a sword). It was disapOverall, though, everything in Hell Cab pointing to not have these few movements tends to drag out. For example, when one duplicated or expanded upon via the keyreaches the Coliseum, no matter how the board. conversation with Nero goes the player ends Graphically, most of the display is simply a up in jail. In jail, the conversations must take two-dimensional image with characters laid place with the same characters. At other over the top. Most characters move in jerky times, one can't decide if timing of the mouse cel animation and their mouths aren't closely clicks is important or if placement of the lip-synched with the audio. This serves to pointer is the key. After a while, it all just give Hell Caba very surreal look and feel, but seems to be a long, one-way street with little also weakens its claim of being a state-of-thevariation and not much in the way of enterart CD adventure. And though the game is tainment. It's all a bit tedious. filled with digital audio, there are sections where the sound is sparse or non-existent. A Journey Of Sight And Sound It's hard to lump Hell Cab in the same Movie Magic group as The 7th Guest, Iron Helix and JourEven with those hindrances, Hell Cab has neyman Project, which were all actual games. Hell Cab is more like an interactive tour book some highly entertaining moments. Visiting and variety show lumped into one-the the Empire State Building, one can wander and sights and sound of Hell Cab. I had the most fun clicking on the Empire State Building's curtain displays to bring up cool Quicktime movies, but things really started to plod along when I started playing what I felt was the «game.\" This is not hard to understand when one reads Pepe Moreno's bio (located in any ATM in the game). His background is in comic books and stories, having been published in such magazines as Heavy Metaland Epic. He's also responsible for DC Comics' Digital justice, a Batman graphic novel created totally on the Macintosh. His expertise is the visual, leaving the reader to expand on the pictures in his mind. But gamers have gotten used to having less left to the imagination and facing more immersion by the game software. A good game is one that makes the player forget he's at his computer playing a game. Too frequently, Hell Cab brings one right back to his scat in front of his keyboard. When one is waiting for a mouse click to bring about a new visual, the delays can be interminable. The future of CD gaming is quite up in the air, though products like Iron Helix take the weaknesses of CD-ROM and push them to the back. Hopefully, the medium will quickly mature and Moreno will be able to create a world of sight and sounds that will truly entertain and offer smoother immersion into his creative vision. CGW \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Forcign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. NY Circle Reader Service #95 Computer Gaming World Page 108 "


"Buy One! STRIKE SQUAD\" WALLS OF ROME\" K'kistik forces have destroyed Bao, your once beautiful home planet... killing your loved ones. Siege Warfare. From the plains of Carthage BORDER to the forests of Britain, from Greece and Persia to Rome herself, experience siege warfare as the ancients knew it. Role-playing strategy. K'kistik forces have destroyed Bao, your once beautiful home planet... killing your loved ones. Assemble a mercenary squad and head to Trindor on your first step towards revenge. NOWww They're in your local stores now! If you send us Proof-of Purchase for irrike Squad Bloodstone or Walls of Rome, we will send you the game of your choice FREE from the five titles below. Five dollar freighr charge. BY POPULAR DEMAND. Purchase must be made befe EXTENDED TO DECEMBER 31, 1993 E220 5105 g BLOODSTONE 2 013 Role-playing fantasy. You go in search of Wales magical treasures from the days of legend, when gods walked in the world with their children. Distu . GP WOON MOUP PART FREEL Xing Renard or MAGIC   strange Ich has Isio Osheruan MAGIC CANDLE II\" CANDLE III\" Role-playing fantasy. Prepare a campaign to free the guardians of the Magic Candle. Learn the secret of the four and forty. Role-playing fantasy. The ancient lands around the Solian Sea have been stricken by a mysterious blight. Can your hero find the source? STAR LEGIONS SIEGE A game of strategic planetary conquest. With each victory you gradually ascend to the highest Krellan honor-the rank of Imperial Tribune! Castle Warfare. Study ongoing maLIST neuvers, then direct your troops to repel the advancing raid or to surge forward and take the castle.  MINDCRAFT TEGELS MERCENARIES Role-playing strategy game. Assemble a strike force of soldiersfor-hire. The mission must succeed at any cost. 2291 205th Street, Suite 201 Torrance, CA 90501 CALL 310-320-5214 OR 1-800-525-4933 Fax 310-320-1522 Circle Reader Service #89 "


"REVIEW Unidentified Flying Vegetables? A New Spin On The Flight Sim In Corncob 3-D by Bryan Walker genre. satchel charges, calling in and protecting resplayer. The static targets consist of fuel An avid computer game and light simulator fan, the author is also an AH-64 Apache pilot and cue vans, leaping from structure to structure, dumps, antenna arrays, construction faciliArmament Officer for the U.S. Army. A combat and even destroying friendly buildings are allties, and generator orbs that power various veteran of Desert Storm, he's currently stationed possibilities in any mission, at any time. Todefensive force fields. While some players at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. He can be reached tal, virtual, freedom is perhaps the greatest might consider these targets casy pickings, on Genie at B.WALKERIO, or America Online strength of this game. Landing a chewed-up there are insidious booby-traps just waiting to at WALKER34. plane, climbing into another, and taking the snare the unwary pilot. The active enemies fight right back to an enemy that doesn't range from three-wheeled ground transports, Tew ideas are hard to come by in flight magically regenerare provides a \"suspension simulator games. While, technologiof disbelief that few titles can approach. T Vcally, simulators have made huge The filled-polygon graphics of Corncob 3D strides over their ten years of existence, conceptually they haven't budged. With the are rendered in 16-color VGA. Despite the commercial software houses starting to fly in limited palette, the animation is smooth as a loops, it's refreshing to see a new entry from soft-serve cone, and the effects simulating flak the shareware sector, Corncob 3-D: The Other and secondary explosions may be the best I've Worlds Campaign, putting a new spin on the seen. The outside world is displayed via the traditional external cockpit views, which are animated to simulate actual head-turning. A Weird War II rear-view mirror is continuously displayed, making it easier to avoid the guided missiles Gamers who remember DC Comics' old and view the effects of a bombing run. An to flying saucers, guided missiles, and the Weird War title will feel a bit of déjà vu. In overhead «radar\" view is also provided, giving alicns themselves. The formidable anti-airCorncob 3D, the past as we know it never took the player a 360-degree perspective on the craft defenses include invulnerable barrage place. WWII never happened. Instead, aliens aircraft. balloons, flying debris called «bec swarms,\" swept down on the Earth in 1938 and rapidly W hile Corncob 3D has been released in articulating cannon turrets, mortars used to began setting up bases. After a fierce war, smaller versions, the \"Other Worlds Cam deny low-altitude approaches, and the permankind liberated the earth. Though win paign\" has 130 forays and a mission-building ning a brief respite, humanity realized that sistent guided missiles. The quality and leutility. There's also a \"Secret Mission» for the truly determined for the total victory could only come by ridding the laver. The challenges thality of the alien devices is indicated by a allenges of variety of colors. For instance, a brown object cosmos of the alien scourge. Now, the player the numerous theaters of conflict range from takes the fight to the enemy on many differ isn't much of a threat, but bright white obthe very easy to the astonishingly difficult. ent planets, flying wildly modified \"Cornjects are simply bad juju. Despite the overThe different atmospheres and gravities of cobs\" (an old nickname for the Vought each planet require players to constantly alter whelming superiority of the alien forces, a F-4U1 Corsair of WWII fame) and expericlever pilot can use the cager enemy's their tactics. Though the number of enemy mental Stealth Fighters against incredible types is somewhat limited, the incredible vastrengths to advantage. Nearly everything can odds and superior technology. be destroyed, and it doesn't matter whose riety of emplacements repeatedly calls for new tricks and fancy flying. weapon does the damage. Virtually Unique Even the best sim jocks Corncob 3-D: The Other Worlds Can The term \"virtual reality\" has been abused could spend weeks finishlike nothing else in computer entertainment. ing the entire campaign. TITLE: Corcob 3-D: The Other Worlds Campaign However, Corncob 3D delivers one of the best At first glance, the small PRICE: $23 SYSTEM: IBM attempts at a VR-like \"living environment\" roster of targets might REQUIREMENTS: 286-12MHz, VGA graphics, in a fight sim so far. In the Corncob 3D 2MB hard drive space PROTECTION: None universe, destroying the enemy is all that ever, the game uses clever DESIGNER: Kevin Stokes of Pie in the Sky Productions counts. Rarely is there a required sequence, mixes of target types and PUBLISHER: MVP Software, Grand Rapids, MI order, or technique to winning. Kamikaze qualities to challenge the (800) 968-9684 attacks, dashing around on foot to place Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Dominion How long can you survive in a constantly changing world of alliance and intrigue? Will u b a minor player in the politics of the age, or push the limits of empire and dominance? Coming soon from Mindcraft. Circle Reader Service #90 "


"Causes For Grounding Perhaps the greatest weakness of Corncob 3D is the total lack of terrain features. Each planer is, for all practical purposes, a big pool table rife with bad guys. While this keeps the game running smoothly on lower-end machines, the flat landscape is a step backwards for those of us spoiled by Falcon 3.0 and Comanche: Maximum Overkill. With much of the game spent skimming the ground ro avoid cannon fire, the absence of terrain features detracts from the experience. Corncob 3D is not designed to appease those gamers who demand the utmost in realism. While both the casy and advanced fight d Flight models are smooth and believable, many technical details have been omitted (landing gear, for instance). Designer Kevin Stokes explained that the main effort behind Corncob 3D was to make it challenging yer enjoyable for casual PC gamers. Effectively unlimited ammunition, forgiving flight characteristics, rechargeable rocket boosters, rapid repair, and even the ability to remotely control the plane after bailing out makes Corncob 3D patently unrealistic, but lots of fun! With a $2000 486 system required to truly enjoy most of today's flight sims, those with lower-end machines are getting the fuzzy end of the lollipop. If the cause of the lower-end machine could have a champion today, Corncob 3D would be it. While it doesn't run with quite the smoothness of a higher-end system, it's still an enjoyable game on a 286 or 386SX. There are many other minor fearures built into Corncob 3D, ranging from comprehensive intelligence reports, time compression, teleport portals, a \"boss\" screen, sound editor, map mode, congratulatory sequences and others. They all contribute to a good game. Even so, there are some limitations and overer sights that could be corrected to improve the quality of play. to find that Corncob 3D doesn't offer anything resembling the air-to-air combat of other flight sims. Since the only aerial opponents are the erratically-maneuvering flying saucers, \"turning and burning\" doesn't happen. While most of the simulator industry is embracing numerous control options such as the Thrustmaster accessories, Corncob 3D has no provisions for anything other than a single joystick and keyboard control. This omission becomes significant when trying to land a badly damaged plane under the advanced flight mode option, or in the heat of battle when many actions need to be taken quickly. Hopefully, any future version of Corncob 3D will make allowances for alternate control options. Share And Enjoy Those who think of shareware games as second-string entertainment will be pleasantly surprised with Corncob 3D. This game is intelligently designed, easy to learn and just plain fun. While it lacks some of the chrome and graphic \"wow-power\" of high-dollar titles, Corncob 3D offers some new ideas that will certainly be seen in future games. If some sort of price/challenge/fun formula was developed to measure the worth of today's games, Corncob 3D could stand nose cone-tonose cone with any flight simulator out there. OBOC The mission builder is powerful, but it's certainly not easy or intuitive to use. Gamers without programming experience will probably find designing scenarios for Corncob 3D to be very tedious. Fortunately, the missions available on-disk offer plenty of variety and challenge. Steely-cycd dogfighters might be dismayed CGW GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES also Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used game * 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title avai THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit 30 of the games listed below (including Might and Magic 1-4 Ultima 4-7, all SSI AD&D games, Bard's Tale 1-3, Wizardry 6-7 and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game.  CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3, 4 or 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5. Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell. Ultima (3,4,5,6,7 or 7 pt. 2). Savage Empire, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Eye of the Beholder (1) 2 or 3), Darklands, Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1, 2 or 3), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Planets' Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania.  HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. MasterCard Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. SUSRET 1. WE ACCEPT VISA/MasterCard Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air \"Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota Circle Reader Service # 62 Page 112 57105 GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #67 Computer Gaming World "


"On final approach to the United States 320 Developed in cooperation with Lufthansa and Deutsche Aerospace Airbus Trademarks \"AIRBUS\" and \"A320\" registered (applied for). Circle Reader Service #127 "


"BEST If I Had A Hammer... OF THE Building Your Own Games With Shareware Tools REST RECHERCK Camp (sleep) 6 Get object L Look at object N Nuoke scroll.ge 1 151k to.. V-Vacite (Lezve P 2 Zapkuse staff 0 Display Grouy 1 Select Player by Chuck Miller T ynless you've been initiated into the Softworks, 43064 Via Moraga, Mission San Puzzled Expressions mystic cabala of computer programJose, CA 94539. Orders can be placed by ming or have invested mega-bucks in phone using MasterCard or VISA at (510) With the remainder of this column we'll software development tools, game design has 659-0533, 9:00am to 5:00pm PST only, look at several puzzle games that have drifted been out of your reach. Game construction Monday Thursday, Saturday and Sunday: across my desk. These games are Boogle Dekits have appeared in various forms over the fans of the early Ultima games should take luxe (a Boggle clone), Trio (a Solitaire card years, but all, with the possible exception of a look at DC Software's game building sysgame) and Puzzle Pits (a logic puzzler), and SSI's recent Unlimited Adventures, have met tem, DC Games (DC). With it, gamers can they are addictive. You have been warned. with little success: either they are too difficult build graphic adventure or role-playing Those familiar with the classic word game to use or they do not offer enough power to games similar in form and function to Ultima Boggle will know exactly how to play Seacreate anything resembling an interesting TT-V. While more difficult to use than AGT board Software's Boogle Deluxe, a game of game. Fortunately, there are always excepit also allows the creation of more graphically word construction against the clock. While tions. The exceptions in this case are two pleasing productions (the reverse of AGT the \"trial version\" is rather limited in play popular and powerful game creation systems value (only four unique games are available) that have cropped up among the grassy roots Choose une and soon becomes repetitious, it offers of the shareware realm. Drop object enough play for one to decide if he or she wishes to put up cash for the registered verI Inwentory Adventures By Number sion. Quaff Ceal drin Adventure Game Toolkit from Softworks R Remove iter As expected, play is similar to the original $Spell cast) table version of Boggle, the goal being to and DC Games from DC Software are two of U Uge/Unlock objec \"discover» as many words as possible within the leading shareware gaming construction Hear Hield iten X eMit uehicle the set time limit. These words are conkits. They both allow the non-programmer to structed by connecting letters vertically, horicreate computer games, though they apzontally and diagonally and must be at least proach the task from different angles. three letters, but no more than 18 letters in The Adventure Game Toolkit (AGT) is pri You are in Medan length. Each letter can only be used once per marily a text adventure construction kit, word. available in one of two versions: the Classic DC Games Boogle Deluxe, however, does the old Edition and the Master's Edition. The Classic Edition has been available for six years, undertextual richness is DC's weak spot). Support standby one better by allowing the player to is provided for extensive worlds, over 500 ve worlds over 500 going a constant process of refinement. It is adjust certain features. Grid size can be togrelatively simple to use, requires no program objccts and characters per world, virtual gled between four-by-four and five-by-five dicated ming knowledge, and has a very dedicated squares, the time limit may be set from one memory and VGA graphics (SVGA support memory eds following of designers and players. Hundreds to five minutes, and opponent skill can be will be available shortly). Also supported are selected from average, smart or genius. Being of games have already been created with Sound Blaster's voice, music and text-toa relatively competent Boggle player, I easily AGT, many still available on most major speech drivers. beat the computer opponent on the lower networks. Versions of this edition are availDC has gathered a faithful band of users two levels, though it severely trounced me at able for MS-DOS, Macintosh, Amiga and around its banner and is being continually genius level. Most players will find a \"smart\" Atari ST computers, and adventures created refined to meet their needs. Future versions PPonch Chang competition. on one of these systems can be easily re-comwill support SVGA oraphics. GIF and LBM piled for use on any of the others. A modest graphic files, and data compression. If you The only major drawback is the $30 regisshareware fee of $20 is required. would like to try your hand at developing an tration fee-steep for what the game offers. RPG in a style reminiscent of the carlier Though the VGA graphics are pleasant Those desiring more substantial creative options may be interested in the Master's Ultima titles, DC may take the route to take. For a moderate registration fee of $40, plus Edition of AGT. Available only for MS-DOS Consentrerercedes $5 shipping and handling, you can skip the machines at present (though compatible with SUKPC all games developed for the Classic Edition), Edit ) night school programming class and \"create E ECSE worlds» of your own. Registration should be this version gives game designers the power sent to: DC Software, P.O. Box 866771, to create larger games than previously alGDONT Plano, TX 75086-6771. lowed, includes graphics (EGA Or VGA). Ad.   Lib and Sound Blaster music and sound While neither of these construction kits will effects, special fonts, pop-up hints, a customenable the fledgling designer to create an ALPZC ized interface and menu-driven player input. Ultima VII-or Lands of Lore-style game, they For $50, the Master's Edition offers the game will provide the opportunity to learn the baauthor more power and creative options. Assics of successful design and create an original 3:18 piring designers with a yen for adventurequest. If you want to get your feet wet, they games in the classical mode should contact: provide safe wading pools. Boogle Deluxe Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"The best simulator I've ever seen!\" Rick Zalud, Computer Game Review \"Makes the term virtual redundant!\" Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment REALITY BEYOND THE EDGE OF THE ENVELOPE \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations!\" Arnie Katz, Electronie Games \"Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics!\" Computer Gaming World from Novalogic, the creators of WOLFPACKIM COMANCHE IMUM OVERKILLIM IS the promise of Rulation action come true! You comm the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Helicopters the Boeing Sikorsky RAH-66 Comanche, not just aver, but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to NovaLogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACE which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar through pulse-pounding combat in stunning cloud-filled skies. Soggi rudy for awesome gapios. F esten dute, and denipling, hell elenching whilcoldbacitetost unike Beaving wave certenchecon A dal computer. The 21 jaar anders dealer and cat Imioa non tenlity! 6 REATED BY NOVA CHES BENIDO S E first simulator with real-time controls of RAH-66 Comanche Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability u Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data One-minute learning curve Superb musical score and sound ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS CH49:33 FLASE 3 FLARE: 30 Kam 18M PA 25 SX ar greater 382 mur game will mmgabytes wa rew Wolpack. Cuance. Maximum Overki VOXEL SPACE Novatours, and the Novalogic logo are trademus Novalogic, Voce 19570 Ventura Blvd Ste200. Turzand. CA 91356 1997 UV NovaLogic Inc. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #93 "


"PE03 Pia Faur HBO 00 Cantiloft 69 SCOTRO Trio enough, there is no music or sound effects, context of a quest to rescue the player's brothnot even that of the letter blocks falling into ers from the evil Dulak, a wizard who has STOP place. Still, Boogle Deluxe is a good game, turned them into stone. Apart from the conoffering Boggle fans a capable computer transtrived fiction, Puzzle Pits is basically a series lation of this wordy\" favorite. Registrations 197ZLE of logic puzzles in which the player must should be directed to: Seaboard Software, move barrels onto colored squares without 302 North Jefferson Street, Arlington, VA blocking him or herself from future moves. 22203-1200 in U.S. funds, check or money Objects such as crates also need to be pushed order only. out of the way, while gems possessing magical properties must be found. Tile Me Help In addition to the game itself, Puzzle Pits 000 NIE includes a level editor and a simple programming language to design one's own levels. A Puzzle Pits stock Amiga with 512K is required, though 000 IMB of RAM is recommended to enjoy the it with the author. Until next time, great OOO OO game to its fullest (and hear the music and gaming! sounds provided). To register and receive the 00 complete version with 30 levels, send $10.00 Send Us Your Best (in U.S. funds drawn on a U.S. bank) to: Abe Pralle, P.O. Box 2059, Chinle, AZ 86503. If you have authored a shareware or public Once again, this concludes our look ar domain game for MS-DOS compatible, shareware titles. Games reviewed in this colGames reviewed in this col Macintosh or Amiga computers and Macintosh or Amiga computers and would Trio umn are available through numerous dislike to have it considered for review in this tributors of shareware and public domain emain column, please send two complete copies Trio, a one-player card game from Toren software, as well as on many national and (preferably on 3.5\" disks) with documentasoft Consulting, challenges the gamer to private on-line networks. If you do not have tion and a cover letter to: match groups of three cards comprised of access to these networks. you can usually Best of the Rest symbols (circles, ovals and squares), colors write or call the game developer for an evalu Computer Gaming World (red, blue and green) and shadings (solid, ation copy. And remember, if you find a 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 striped and hollow) out of a hand of 12 cards from a deck of 81 cards (a short game of 24 shareware program enjoyable, please register Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. CEW cards, and a half game of 48 cards are also available). However, locating trios is not always clear cut. To form a trio, each attribute must be the same or different on each of the PEHTENMANT three cards. For example, one trio could be comprised of one each red, blue and green solid square. Thus, while shape and shading are the same, colors are different. Another trio might be made up of a red hollow oval, two green solid squares and three blue shaded circles. In this case, the shape, color and shading of each card is different. Scoring is based on the total number of correct trios located and the time it takes to complete each game. On-line hints are available, though their use will hurt the player's score. Though Trio is a simple game with a simple presention (it has no sound or fancy graphics), it is a fun and addictive diversion. Those wanting to sharpen their logic skills should give it a try. For a modest $10 U.S. ($12 Canadian), the player gains the registered version and the next release, Trio Plaid. Reg. istration should be sent to: Torensoft Consulting, 475 Elgin Street, Suite 1007, Ottawa, Ontario K2P E6, Canada. The third game, Puzzle Pits, is an Amiga game by Spartan Design. It could be described as a derivation of the old slidingsquare puzzle, where the baffled player had to arranged numbered tiles in sequence. Though timed, the emphasis is clearly upon thinking one's way through each puzzle. \"OH YEAH, AND TRY NOT TO ENTER THE WRONG COPY Puzzle Pits is comprised of 30 levels (addiPROTECTION CODE\" tional levels are available) and is set in the The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"LASER-GUIDED MISSILES THAT CAN PINPOINT A WINDOW. A 10-TON BOMB LOAD THAT CAN LEVEL A TOWN. MAYBE THE BRITISH AREN'T SO CIVILIZED AFTER AL 01993 Spectrum HotoByte, Inc. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Tornado. Now in the States. One The Tornado. The plane that shredded runways Integration and Spectrum HoloByte, you'll sit and totaled buildings during the Gulf War. The plane in a cockpit where the analog dials actually work. that can scan the You'll operate the Thermal terrain ahead and Imaging And Laser Desig. automatically hug nation (TIALD) system every hill and val which zooms in on targets ley at just 200 as small as the turret of a feet. And the plane tank from as high as with wings that 20,000 feet. And you'll Come in low and fast, and you can actually see sweep forward to even control a squadron with the cables in the bridge you're about to raze, maneuver a mission planner so through tight bombing runs and sweep back accurate it's used to be to outrace even the fastest fighters. train real Tornado pilots in the RAF. Digital Integration Now you can climb into Britain's hottest Fly this devastating aircraft once, plane without joining the RAF. With Published by and you'll be glad the British Tornado, the flight sim from Digital are on our side. For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9PM-5PM Pacific Time). Circle Reader Service #121 "


".95 MACH, NINETY FEET ABOVE THE GROUND. BOTH SIDES TRYING TO SHOOT HIM DOWN. WOUNDED IN THE ARM, KAPITAN ALEXANDER ZUYEV GUIDED HIS MiG-29 TO FREEDOM LEFT-HANDED. COULD YOU? Turkish air defenses to land safe ly on a civilian airfield in Turkey. On May 20, 1989 MiG-29 pilot Alexander The pilot who wrote the book on the MiG-29, Zuyev began Alexander Zuyev, tells a desperate his harrowing story (including authentic plan to steal Soviet dogfighting tactics) in Fulcrum the Soviet from Warner Books. Union's most advanced combat aircraft and fly it to political asylum. LOG THE FINEST TECHNOLOGY RUBLES CAN BUY The plane he flew is the MiG29 Fulcrum, the crowning achievement of Soviet aeronautics. Now, with NOTHING WAS LOST IN THE TRANSLATION The flight model was patterned after actual MikoyanGurevich (MiG) design specs. So you can be sure that every system and every control is painstakingly accurate, all the way +315 toms Com Shot in a life and death struggle with the sentry, Zuyev managed to take off. Then, flying dangerously low to avoid radar, he eluded pursuing fighters and deadly Soviet and MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0;\" Spectrum HoloByte's add-on to Falcon 3.0, you can climb into the cockpit of the F-16's nemesis. down to the Russian-accented cockpit warnings. IT'LL TEST YOUR SKILL AND YOUR PATRIOTISM Unlike the F-16, the MiG-29 isn't a fly-by-wire aircraft, so a For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). Circle Reader Service #123 "


"Next time you have an F-16 glued to your tail, try the MiG-29's \"Cobra\" r. 1) You ull up past a 90 alpha climb. Now you can choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. And you can 3) You abruptly pitch the nose go head-to-head back to level flight. Now over a modem or you're on his with up to six sic, with a little score to settle. 2) Your airspeed drops rapidly; the F-16 zooms past. computer never limits your control inputs, whether inspired or foolish. Its twin Isotov RD-33 engines produce 36,600 lbs. of thrust, to the F-16's 25,000. And superb aerodynamics make it controllable at low speeds and high angles of attack that would have enemy pilots The most fear. SPECTRUM fightsome opponent ing to is a human HEAD one. With avoid EBS, up to six players can go a spin. head-to-head. HOLOBYTE THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE CYBER-BATTLEFIELD EBS is the first series of interconnecting simulations. Each title works with the others to bring you closer to the real thing players over a network. It all begins when you add on MiG-29 to Falcon 3.0. Anything more realistic wouldn't be a simulation. MiG-29 FALCON DEADLNE Sagotan Nelly Spectrum Malobyter THEY WON'T EVEN INTRODUCING MIG-29 KNOW WHAT HIT THEM Your MiG's IRST (Infrared Search and Track) system OE NOS Tv Choose your weapon. can track an F-16 without The Falcon is lethal at long distances. The revealing your presence on Fulcrum, deadly closein. Now you can fly for his threat display. So you can either side. get on his six o'clock before he even knows you're there. Once in range, you'll be able to lock on to the Falcon just by turning to look at him MiG-29 add-on requires Falcon 3.0. Available on IBM compatibles. with the MiG-29's helmet mounted sight. Then call \"pusk» (launch) as you fire missiles or \"ogon\" (firing) as you ventilate him with your MiG-29 FALCON computer-accurate 30mm gun. Either way, his plane will ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES gun. Either way, his plane will make a satisfying crunch when it hits the ground. The fight of your life. Spectrum HoloByte "


", are Video Games, Virtual Reality Outlandish Tales and Fascinating Sights from Gen Con '93 no the right of the main entrance sits a classic black hearse. Standing beside it is a caped Old World noble, draped in black and adorned with both sideburns worthy of Elvis and a pallor that would befit Bela Lugosi. He admires his oversized canine teeth in the reflection of the hearse's window and, literally, vamps for anyone passing by. Ten feet away the huge TSR castle that has dominated the exhibit hall for two straight conventions has sprouted a minor outpost in front of its main entrance. There, CapCom has prototypes of their new Dungeons & Dragons coin-op game. The game features large figures a la Golden Axe, but has enough buttons to allow gamers to use special attacks and spells according to their D&D character class. DO COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The never cometer Gengar U.S. and Canada to check out the latest games \"The Avalon Hill Game Company was and try their skills against other players. sporting a brand new image with regard to computer games. With Atomic Games (deWho's Who In Computer velopers of Three-Sixty's V for Victory series) Entertainment? signed to develop Squad Leader for the computer and a new IBM version of Third Reich The computer game industry is becoming well on its way, the company is making a more and more of a presence at gaming conserious commitment to computer games. In ventions. Even software publishers who fact, we are told that some of the new inchoose not to exhibit or sell at the convention house have representatives present to scout the new boardgamers, but experienced military simuboardo boardgame and role-playing designs that are game and role-playing designs that are lation programmers. This bodes very well for lation pro launched there. In addition, Strategic SimuAvalon Hill. lations, Inc., Westwood Studios, The Avalon Hill Game Company, GEnie, MPGNet, Data East, Sega, Hero Software, noun Thrustmaster, Virtual World Entertainment (Battle Tech Center) and Dream Park (a virtual reality company) exhibited at the convention. Computer Gaming World also offered its usual seminar, but more on that later. The SSI booth was packed with gamers who lined up around a bank of computers and avidly played a pre-release version of the long-awaited Dark Sun CRPG. SSI was takDEEC ing advance orders for a deluxe edition and doing quite well. Event Horizons (now DreamForge Software) was demonstrating Sega's Shadowrun role-playing game for the their Dungeon Hack game at the booth. It is Genesis mixes cyberpunk and fantasy. a Rogue-like CRPG that is infinitely replay At the MPG-Net booth, gamers were disable since it creates random dungeons for covering the Kingdom of Drakkar multiplayer gamers to explore. Of course, the new game RPG. In Drakkar, gamers traverse a beautithat really had gamers oohing and aahing was fully rendered world and run into real charDreamForge's upcoming Ravenloft game for acters as well as computer controlled ones. SSI. This is a 3-D, first-person scroller based on the exploits of ultimate baddie, Strad the One of the great delights of Gen Con is Vampire. running into some of the folks you've already met on-line as various characters in an on-line Aaron Powell, leader of the Dune II design game. This year was no exception. Although team, was both selling the current hit and we didn't manage to meet any of the charactalking about the new incarnation of the systers in our guild, we did meet some from tem at the Westwood Studios booth. As reported in an earlier \"Rumor Bag,\" the new other groups. game will get away from the Dune license Other gamers were being introduced to the (mostly because the programmers are tired of fastest way to play Empire Builder (on-line sand) and feature new terrain and enemies. It with MPG-Net) and the network's newest also looks like the design team is serious about game, Operation Market-Garden. In addition, doing a multi-player version of the popular the network is expected to unveil a new title game, but derails are yet to be determined at this year's Fall Comdex. A squad of editorial yahoos (I to r, Mike Weksler, Alan Emrich, Johnny Wilson) holds down the CGW fort. A Klingon guard escorts a prisoner past the front of the castle, herding her human charge through the crowd toward the detention facility. Ever mercenary, the Klingon service personnel have managed to get gamers to spend money to have their friends arrested.\" Fortunately, all such funds will go to charity at the close of the convention. Such, along with numerous rooms full of tournaments, open gaming sessions, used game auctions, seminars and film festivals, are the sights and sounds of the annual Gen Con Gaming Convention held in Milwaukee, WI. Thousands of gamers come from all over the Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"Gume Hard Drive Special Seagate 130meg drive $197 Conner 170meg drive $206 Seagate 261meg drive $260 Samsung 252meg drive $241 Seagate 341meg drive $341 Western Digital 340meg $348 They're not Virtual reality was present in three modes. Virtual World Entertainment had several BattleTech cockpits set up in the computer gaming room for the enjoyment of would be 'mech pilots. The set-up was essentially the same as in a BattleTech Center. Dream Park had some new ideas for VR games with cruder graphics. In one, the player is trapped in a virtual spaceship and must escape before the time runs out. There were also Dactyl Terror VR games in the computer room. Finally, Simutronics was demonstrating the VR version of CyberStrike in the GEnie booth. David Whatley had a prototype of their VR goggles which are designed for home use. The beauty of this approach is that one can play against CyberStrike players on GEnie that do not have the goggles. So, Simutronics doesn't have to program an entirely new game in order for VR aficionados to enjoy their goggles. The VR players get to play in a virtual world, while the 2-D players get the same quality game that has already garnered CGW's On-Line Game of the Year award for 1993. Editorial Response CGW's Johnny Wilson and Alan Emrich hosted the seminar on the future of computer games for the second year in a row at Gen Con. The duo concocted a bogus debate to introduce trendy topics in the world of computer games, trying to draw the audience into the discussion. Some said the presentation resembled Phil Donahue meeting Rush Limbaugh, but others said that the two hour program touched all the bases. This year, Wilson contended that the digital highway of interactive television would benefit even hardcore gamers, and Emrich suggested that the trend of developing for the mass media would steal the software industry's soul. The bottom line, of course, is that everyone conto Mother Boards 486/33 Vesa 128k Cache $462 386140 128k Cache $151 Sound & Video Cards Sound Blaster Mono $97 Sound Blaster Pro DX $146 Sound Blaster 16 $195 Video Blaster $398 CD-ROM Systems SB CD-ROM Upgrade $361 SB MultiMedia Upgrade Kit $723 Aztec CD-ROM 16bit Kit $543 CD-ROM 16bit Business Kit $511 Sound Galaxy 46 CD-ROM Kit $443 Tape Backup Colorado Jumbo 250 $206 Software and other Hardware Large Inventory Order Toll-Free Computer System Solutions 1-800-666-5590 Circle Reader Service #51 DRACULA, Kesmai uses Thrustmaster cockpits to take players for a spin in their SVGA Air Warrior. Sega and Data East had game consoles set up in the FASA booth, home of a large miniature city that had suffered so much entropic decay that it was immediately recognizable as a setting for their Shadowrun role-playing game. Shadowrun is a mixture of cyberpunk and fantasy that is tremendously successful among the Dark Future set. Both Data East and Sega have built products based on the Shadowrun universe. Data East's SNES game allows gamers to play a street samurai and traverse the city in top-down mode as in any action game. Sega's Shadowrun game for the Genesis has lots more role-playing elements and, in spite of the real-time combat, should have plenty of depth and appeal for traditional role-players. The skills definitely mean something in the Sega game and players can observe their character's improvement in each area. We were also impressed with the patron-based missions and some of the openended opportunities for exploration. Speaking of role-playing, the Hero Software booth was located directly across the aisle from the Hero Games booth. Naturally, the software booth featured demonstrations of the new Hero Maker character generator for the Champions role-playing system (see \"Taking A Peek» in this issue). The GEnie booth featured representatives from both Simutronics and Kesmai. Again, ir was interesting to meet some of the real people behind the characters one battles, cooperates with, or woos in the on-line cyburbs of Gemstone III, CyberStrike, Multi-Player BattleTech, Federation Iland SVGA Air Warrior. New Games Manager Bruce Milligan, an experienced designer for both Avalon Hill and MicroProse, told CGWthat the network version of Harpoon was rounding the last curve and heading for beta testing and that on-line Mega Traveller shouldn't be too far behind. Meanwhile, he expressed his desire to develop a more significant on-line Diplomacy community on GEnie. Meanwhile, Kesmai was using Thrustmaster cockpits to demonstrate the improved graphics for their SVGA Air Warrior game. Although they readily admitted that the modern cockpits might be stretching the envelope of suspended disbelief when gamers were flying in Spitfires and Mustangs, they were justifiably proud of some of the smoother curves and more authentic look of the planes. In London BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface, sounds! Count Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his evil menace. Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the renowned metaphysician or Minn Harker, the alluring young schoolmistress. Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more... SICAS CGW's editor is arrested by Klingons. The charges: assault with a deadly pun and failure to pay taxes on his 25-cent words. seemed to have fun at Gen Con and that many of us left better informed and with lots of new game goodies) and delightfully tired. Gaming conventions put the human factor back into gaming, and we particularly love meeting the folks who read our magazine. Sce ya' next year at Origins '94 in San Jose. CGW $29 cach. Mail check, cash or World Renowned money order to: Requires: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Windows 3.1 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. VGA graphics St. Louis, MO 63131 386 25Mle or faster Supports Sound Blaster (314) 966-5602 (Evenings Only) Easy to Install Not available in stores. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back. Circle Reader Service #104 Page 121 November 1993 "


"REVIEW PYRAMID POWER! Pathways Into Darkness Channels The Energies Of The Macintosh Photo courtesy of Terri Mahurien by Richard Mulligan anshees and zombies and goo, oh my! R Get back, Dorothy. The Wicked Witch of the West looks like Chiquita Banana next to these guys. Even Margaret Hamilton would be toast for a headless creature that shoots deadly green goo from its neck, much less zombies that throw femurs like Nolan Ryan throws the fastball. And there's so many of them! If there's a motto to Bungie Software's visually beautiful new game for the Macintosh, Pathways Into Darkness, it would have to be, \"So many monsters, so little time.\" Before you can solve puzzles or move on to another level, there always seems to be at least DA FTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTDATEEEEEEEEEETTTETTELITEETEED ruin of Earth itself: An ancient god is beginearth the pyramid's secret for Hitler. ning to awaken, and it has an attitude. If not \"Though the action supposedly takes place destroyed before it can come to full conin a pyramid in the Central American jungle, sciousness, humankind is doomed to a life of Pathways is a dungeon crawl, pure and simslavery, if not worse. ple. It exhibits all the standard features of that As a member of the American Special genre, but has a tendency to get bogged down Forces team, your mission is to take a tactical with an array of monsters that must be fought nuclear device into the bowels of the pyraor avoided-mostly fought. All the creatures mid, set the timer, get out and then signal rece... IGUA UA your pickup chopper with one of three radio beacons. Insertion day is Sunday; the team has until 1400 hours on Friday to detonate the nuke. After that, all is lost and you might as well sign up for your first class in Colloquial Zombie 101. Unfortunately for you, the parachute drop is botched and you're separated from the rest of the team, landing hard in the bush. Your M-16 didn't land well, either; it looks like a steel noodle and you can't find the ammo for your .45. The spare ammo, as well as the tac-nuke and radio beacons, are with the are highly aggressive and never wait for the team. All you possess is a map, a flashlight, a ght, a player to attack first. If the player manages to survival knife and your wits. As you arrive at clude a monster in the tunnels, it hangs the pyramid, you can tell that your fellow around and may attack (read: \"Probably will berets have been there before you. Now, all you have to do is find them. The door is atrack\") later on. With only a survival knife open.... for protection, things get hairy quickly. If one manages to successfully slice through the If It Looks Like A Duck.. Pathways Into Darkness Within the pyramid are creaPathways Into Darkness tures both fantastical and danPRICE: $69.00 SYSTEM: Macintosh gerous that must be overcome REQUIREMENTS: 68020 processor, 8-bit 256 color, 2MB RAM, System 6.0.5 or higher or avoided. There are also the DESIGNER: Jason Jones remains of the poor souls who PUBLISHER: Bungie Software PO Box 7877 have gone before, most notably Chicago, IL 60680-7877 the mangled leftovers of some (312) 493-2849 Nazi soldiers who tried to unCall:45 PM bu WWER (HV) Survival Sunday 052631 WELCOME Water one more creature to kill. And though the game features an incredibly fine graphic interface more than faintly reminiscent of Id Software's Wolfenstein 3D—and a wry sense of humor, getting past the early dangers to the actual game play can be tedious. TITLE: The Game's Afoot! In the jungles of Yucatan, at the site of an ancient meteorite crash, sits a pyramid. It houses a dark secret, one that could mean the Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"OBERCE  DREAM 8\" CYBER DREAMS\"         CYBERRACE A REVOLUTIONARY 3D COMBAT AND RACING SIMULATION DESIGNED BY WORLD-FAMOUS FUTURIST SYD MEAD, WHOSE DESIGN CREDITS INCLUDE BLADE RUNNER, TRON, 2010, AND STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE, TUTENTIC SOLINE Available for the IBM PC and Compatibles (August 1993). Commodore Amiga (March 1994) and Apple Macintosh (March 1994). For further information please contact: North America (818) 348-3711  Europe (071) 328-3267 (U.K.) Cyberdreams and CyberRace are trademarks of Cyberdreams, Inc.  Cyberdreams, Inc. Illustration 01992 Oblagon, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #53 "


"File Edit Actions Illindows Never Stop Firi Dag after the zombie th PATHWAYS INTO DARKNESS Graphics resolution can be set at either high or low. The high resolution graphics are gorgeous, but they do cause movement and co bat to be slow and jerky. The low resolution graphics are equally as lovely as the high, and using low-res speeds up the game enormously. each level where saving the game is allowed (usually placed about as far from the entrance to that level as possible), the player spends a lot of time looking at the same old walls. After a while, the tedium of constantly having saved games restored might make even the most hard-core (or-corps) gamer wish for a cheat sheet to the higher levels. With some 30 levels in the game, getting past the 6th or 7th level can be a trial, even though that's where the puzzles begin to take off and the game begins to be fun. All The Old, Familiar Faces... You Are Here Save Rune Sunday, 07586 You see me Ne Walter P4 Plage load You Maddodies. You see less waves of missile-throwing uglies on the first level, there is the body of a Nazi soldier to search, and what a bonanza he is; he's carrying a Walther P4 automatic pistol and several magazines of ammunition. Now the player can eliminate the Undead Threat in a more efficient fashion. Of course, one must become familiar with the weapon before one becomes really good with it. You can waste a lot of bullets that way, and every bullet you can lay your hands on won't be enough, believe me. The MacInterface Is A MacJoy The true strength of this game lies in the graphic interface. It's simple, elegant and easy to use. Designer/programmer Jason Jones obviously knows his way around Apple's Macintosh Developer's Toolkit, and graphics man Colin Brent has done an excellent job on the art and graphic routines. Particularly well done are the dead bodies and the creatures; Te Retrance You'll want that speed when it comes to dodging creatures or objects thrown by them. There are specific commands to dodge left or right and, as the manual notes, practice early on with them can save a lot of restarts on the lower play levels. They are less useful in the higher levels of the pyramid, however. The manual and accompanying release notes emphasize the importance of dodging and the fact that dodging doesn't work in corridors; unfortunately, most of the higher levels are nothing but corridors or enclosed spaces that make dodging difficult. Creatures can and do approach from all sides. Amazingly, there is no way to look directly to the rear; at more difficult levels, this makes it easy to get ambushed from behind. Round Up The Usual Suspects PATHWAYS INTO DARKNESS Walther Pantal ville 646 LAPO where he All The Old, Familiar Places... The bodies of previous explorers are part of the mystery, and there are a couple of puzzles that must be solved to win. The first usable object the savvy player will locate is a yellow crystal; this crystal allows the bearer to actually converse with the spirits of the departed, each of whom has at least one important piece of information to impart. One might look about for other useful crystals, as well. The problem, of course, is that each level must be cleared of nasties to get to the bodies; even then, there's a tendency for them to climb out of the mortar work, literally. And, with boring regularity, each of the first few levels of the pyramid contains an ever-increasing number of beasts, until it's casy to become overwhelmed by sheer numbers, regardless of the amount of ammunition available. Since there arc at most two rooms on In summary, Pathways is a technically wellrendered product. It makes full use of the Macintosh and has a good sense of humor, However, it is somewhat weak on actual game play, especially in the lower levels. Players looking for depth and breadth early on could easily get frustrated with round after round of monster-bashing to reach the puzzles and endgame. Those looking for a simple product emphasizing hand-eye coordination and a sense of humor will enjoy Pathways, the initial promise of the interface kept this writer wishing for more game earlier on, however. To Bungie's credit, though, the game is honest and never pretends to be something it isn't. Overall, a job worthy of a strong recommendation. Cow O e Never Stop Firing . ... CAPE COD CONNECTION YOUR SOURCE FOR Competitively priced used & new entertainment software. A Consignment Shop through which you can sell your used software call 1-508-457. 0738 for info or a used software for SALE listing! Tabletop war & role playing games & sports apparel FIVE (5) years of good, reliable & honest customer service. S&H flat $5 in cont. U.S. Other areas adjusted according to actual weight. Defective replacement only: sales final. Overseas dealers welcome! 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 24Hr Ordering 1-800-729-6733 Info 1-508-457-0738 Fax l-508-457-4558 they're so detailed, one can almost forgive they're so detailed, one can almost forgiv that there are so darn many of them. The sound sound is also excellent, allowing configuration for either the one channel of the Mac's built-in speaker, or three channel stereo played through external speakers. As the sounds of approaching monsters give the player advance warning, the game should be played with at least one-channel sound. The visual portion of the interface is a smooth-scrolling, 3-D point of view. Movement is accomplished either with the mouse or with the keypad, at the player's preference. Using the mouse to move is a bit tough to get used to; the keypad gives the player more control of facing, exact movements and combined movements, such as moving to the rear and right simultaneously. This is important when it comes to combat, either handto-hand or with a firearm; a bullet or blade have to be very close to dead-on to get results. Circle Reader Service #45 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"FOR WINDOWS ! Limitedl-time offer $3995 Incredible Value! HIGH:SPEED 3D ARCADE ACTION FOR WINDOWS ! FORSTUH IT 0202020 DOLBHBE THREE COMPLETE GAMES IN ONE ! :  INCREDIBLE PHOTOREALISTIC 3D GRAPHICS. STEREO SOUND EFFECTS AND MIDI MUSIC **OVER 30 LEVELS OF PLAY AND 5 DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY NOW AVAILABLE AT SOFTWARE RESELLERS THROUGHOUT AMERICA OR CALL 800-545-7677 or 310-793-0600 TO ORDER MASTON MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 301 POLITIETS BISDI PRODULTIUNJ INL. Circle Reader Service #32 "


"STRATEGY Missiles, Fire On The Up-Thrust! A Captains' Guide To Space War In Rules of Engagement 2 by Hosea Battles s the enemy's heavy cruiser closed on his chin. Captain Christoph de Cour or I dered the helmsman to execute a Head Long Pass maneuver. \"Set EBW to 100 percent. Set Auto EBW at range 300,000 kilometers. Execute!\" The FW Dreadnought Lion Star targeted the enemy cruiser and began moving toward it. Captain de Cour continued. \"Helm. Set position at 39,000 kilometers, 180 degrees.» Within 300,000 kilometers both ships opened fire, launching missiles and EBWs. As the Lion Star veered past, it inflicted heavy damage upon the enemy vessel. Tactics showed enemy shields down 40 percent, weapons down 45 percent and drives down 60 percent. TACHAR HD ho PILTELEE TEEN DIL TS Cunt VEC AND D625136513 + ZOTE COR TVEN U COUL ERTON ACQUISITION B 021 726 5721 IDONEUNITEOKSEN MICROINTECOMPUTER H INOINTTUI SUTART -LE -20 HPARELSE    52 Gagmen007 TIBOO 000 DAN PIKAPORE .. 000 BRESCOS DE OBD be used to exploit the enemy. You may also and order ships under your command to discover that the enemy will use some of those «Destroy Enemy Ship X.» As you enter a same maneuvers and tactics against you. range of 300,000, set EBW to Auto, I usually This article provides tactical hints that will use the Pinpoint Weapons setting on the work against any enemy. You may find that EBW and set it between 70-100 percent. Ar some work well against one opponent, but your closest point, (usually between 10not another. This is because each enemy has 20,000) fire as many missiles as you can. Your distinct personality traits. Also, some tactics ship will then begin turning to place you at may not work well because you may have I may have 180 degrees behind the enemy. Continue placed the wrong captain in charge of a shir placed the wrong captain in charge of a ship. firing until you destroy the targeted vessel, or Captains, like opponents, have distinctive you are forced to break off the attack. personality traits and react differently in each The Switch: Target one enemy ship in situation. Tables 1 and 2 give numerical aspanel A and another in panel B on the sessments of both FW Captains and enemy TACFIR panel. Set your direction on the factions. This information is invaluable when TACMAN panel to a desired heading and the making crew assignments and when sizing up distance ar 30-50,000 kilometers. Do not an enemy's force. place TACFIR on Auto. Click on Position In general, you would do well to remember and move toward the ship in the panel setwhere you are at all times on the battlefield. ting. For this example, we'll use A as the first Are you near an enemy outpost that can fire targeted ship. As you close to under 300,000 upon your fleet? Are crew members dying, kilometers, set EBW to Auto and select the but your ship has taken no hits? (You may be type of missile you want to employ. Once you in a radiation field. Above all, remember that are within 30-50,000 kilometers and have your best tactics are only as good as your ure only as good as your damaged ship A, immediately select panel B captains! on the TACFIR panel and click Position on the TACMAN panel to move toward ship B. Basic Maneuvers Turn off Auto EBW until you close to under 300,000 kilometers. After damaging ship B, There are three mancuvers that have proven select ship A. Continue switching until you successful in most situations. Precisely how disable or destroy one of the enemy ships, or each fares depends upon which enemy you until you have to break off the attack due to are facing and the number of ships in your sustaining heavy damage. fleet. There are times, too, when all three are fleet. There are times, to needed in one battle. Before using any of DATEL Hath_ Fasa these maneuvers, however, ensure that your shields have been raised, you have assigned missile point defense (EBW or Jamming), you have selected a target, and you have set FDM the configuration panels. In all maneuvers, I usually set Auto EBW within 300,000 kilomerers and communicate mission orders to the ships in my fleet. Head Long Pass: On the TACMAN panel, set direction to 180 degrees and ser distance Truelo TREto 39,000 kilometers. Target a ship at a range Side Swing: Target an enemy ship on the greater than 500,000 kilometers on the TACFIR panel. Then, on the TACMAN TACFIR panel and select the strongest Genpanel set distance to 40,000 and helm to 90 eral Damage missile in your arsenal. Click on or 270 degrees. For this example, we first use position and head toward the ship. Then, 90 degrees. Select a target on the TACFIR select the Communication Transmit Panel panel. Choose Pinpoint EBW, targeting RHEUTRITI 1 OSTOTNE DE CEE INCLING 23 KILPOS WONOV CENETTO \"Damage Control!\" bellowed Captain de Cour, \"Report!\" \"Lion Star shields down 25 percent, weapons down 45 percent. Computer down 22 percent, Sir.\" As the Lion Star wheeled around behind the enemy, tactics reported an enemy Dreadnought heading toward them bearing 225 degrees. Captain de Cour immediately ordered all other ships in the fleet to target the incoming Dreadnought while continuing his pursuit of the heavy cruiser, hoping they would protect his flanks. This account is typical of the star battles fought in Rules of Engagement 2 (ROE). Captain de Cour employed several different maneuvers that are essential for success in ship-to-ship combat. As you play ROE2, you will find a varied bag of tactical tricks that can 1-AUFEP STATI MIN) DATUBI IT CAPTURE 1 ENEMY SHIPS ONEUTRALIZE E ENEMY SHIPS T UT BDO INTO MISTRE HOTTIENEETING ENCACEMENT, VOW HAVE SHIPS UNDER YOUR COMMEND MIT NG BPERATIONEL PH SHIPS IS PLCETERIBE SUBLEREDEED NOE CHROND Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best for less legends OF FUTURE PAST\" ATM \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) \"...no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches — even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. New Lower Rates: $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dialups. No surcharge for connecting at 9600 baud or during daytime hours. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support. All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink.  American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. ...and you can try it free! .ARUL YUu a la Y AL RAGG Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City-State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice — or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant Knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. Novalink. Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info P.O. Box 11, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 Circle Reader Service #73 "


"Table 1 FW Captain Personality Assessments 79 83 47 93 77 60 27 68 81 BAS 3038 8 36 86 86 27 09 18 38 67 90 69 mss 7 g 88888B%E8888588 os 12285 2 8 8 8 2 a 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 888 = 88 88 99 Name Aggresion* Bravery* Diplomacy Experience\" Humility Ingenuity* Leadership* Loyalty Stamina\" Temperament Ahr Anhdi 68 28 42 42 Akiri Mustafa 70 74 85 75 62 86 60 Ambrus Osaszar 44 84 Anna Quintana Arnell Alejandro 7 6 Chanhn Minh Christophe De Cour Cynthia Gibbs 52 Deneal Mabusso 74 Dren Anderson 72 Francis Globel Ignacio Moreno James Chappie 80 75 Jaques Quinte 44 53 83 Mancino Foote 99 Mikhail Aidian Mishai Singh Natasha Genov Niles Garrovick 68 86 10 Ophelra Bresheliah 74 Renata Kwella 18 35 67 72 Sharae Qiana 82 82 70 70 Srini Patel 784650 78 Takako Kurosawa 68 38 26 68 Telifero Lawson 92 70 708640 40 38 Thomas Cichowicz 12 32 94 Trevor Ender 88 William Baines 44 52 58 92 76 34 Wolf Chareten 7762 Notes:' = Crucial traits for combat: Average rating = 50; HUMILITY: Affects Surrender Factor. The lower the number, the higher the chance the Captain will surrender to the enemy. LOYALTY: Affects the likelihood of following orders. The higher the number, the more apt the Captain is to carry out orders. DIPLOMACY: Affects how the Captain interacts with neutral outposts. This determines if the neutral outpost will allow the ship to dock for repair and resupply. 1623888868 32 88 322888238 2888 89 8 59 75 GO 98 66 u 70 20 72 70 88 35 85 72 72 67 28 46 60 80 73 67 44 44 84 36 * 68 88 44 80 2010 SAVE CINCH BOLETCBL STATE, STO TERDIPSYCH FRASF FOEH 129638 INTELLIGENCE BRIEF FILE 300 OVAN PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILE HAFTSYSTDORLD weapons or drives, and select missile #6 (targets drive system). Ser Auto EBW when you are under 100,000 kilometers and fire missiles at your closest point to the enemy. As you swing to the 90 degree setting, continue firing. After about one minute (game time) of firing on the enemy, set heading to 270 to swing around to the other side of the ship, Continue firing until you disable the targeted vessel or until you are forced to break off the attack. I FRAVERY U !! LEADEESHIP 75 ! : EXPERIENCE U 75 STAMINA LEARINS SOCIALISM LEANING DIEINTEREST : ADMITES MOST: CUILE ADMIRES LEASTED COMPASSIONE General Tactics Deciding which tactics to employ during a battle is one of the most important concerns in ROE2. As such, the first action of a good commander is to know the mission objectives. Read the mission briefing prior to each mission, and look for clues as to the size of your force and that of the enemy. Know the capabilities of your captains and make assignments according to your knowledge of the forthcoming mission. Also, give yourself several options in the first communications to your fleer. Finally, don't be a stationary target. You should begin moving as soon as your fleet is deployed. Each ship in ROE2 has pinpoint defenses. These defenses target incoming missiles. If it seems as if your missiles are not hitting their target, then the ship's pinpoint defenses (EW and/or Jamming) are knocking them down. Knocking out a ship's weapons system will destroy the pinpoint defenses. to-ship combat. We will discuss ship vs. outpost tactics later. Concentration of Firepower: Overall, this is the best ractic you can use. Even three small Scouts can overwhelm the best defenses of a Dreadnought if they all concentrate their firepower on the ship, especially if using Pinpoint. By ordering all your ships to target one enemy ship, this will ensure that the missile pinpoint defenses are overwhelmed, allowing many missiles to do internal damage. Give all your ships the «Destroy Enemy Ship X\" command. Pinpoint: This is lethal when used with Concentration of Firepower above. By pinpointing a system with your EBW, you cnsure that all EBW fire is concentrated on a single area of the enemy ship. When this is used with the next tactic, you will make short work of an opponent's vessel. Concentrate Fire On System: By giving this order to all your ships, you guarantee that they will concentrate fire on a particular system. I have found that concentrating fire on weapons first, then targeting drives works Ship-to-Ship Combat Tactics This first discussion focuses strictly on shipPage 128 Computer Gaming World "


"GATEWAY IT SPECTACULAR ANIMATIONS! Experience the chilling reality of 22nd century Earth Wiveunda thousalvear ideo, Bechnologically advanced race called she benne valed that exit When they vanished San Francisco 2112 AD. A fanatic cult of terrorists plans to bring the Heechee's ancient enemy to Earth and purify humanity in a bath of cleansing fire. You must stop them, but you can't do it alone. Battle murderous robots, carnivorous dinosaurs and spearcarrying humanoids The race to stop these madmen catapults you on a journey to new worlds and new adventures and ultimately across the event horize of a black hole where you discover mankind's last remaining hope for survival the Heechee homeworld. Based on Frederik Pohl's Hugo and Nebula award-winning Heechee saga. Rescue a prospector marooned in a robot-controlled Heechee starship BE A PART OF THE ACTION! GATEWAYU Tell me about this Conesien Fiet Ge Tell me about this Gravity Leni Tell me about Dusch W 29 ocagal the sun Al hot n d ind back and watch Available Now In Stores! Escape a frozen planet where crystalline beings metabolize electricity Meet the Heechee face to face. Hold conversations via new intelligent dialogue system, operate alien technology, pilot a starship! PLEGEND WLEGEND ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY P.O. Box 10810 14200 Park Meadow Drive Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744 , Legend Entertainment Company. Gateway II: HOMEWORLD is a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Actual VGA graphics shown. Cross the event horizon and explore the Heechee planets hidden in the core of a massive black hole Circle Reader Service #76 "


"T NS CUENCE INSTRENGUTANO HAYORAL ASSIGNMENTS N I HOROR 892 223 KHM EHICAREEE 20000 TOTAL RPT ALLOWIDT OTO00 UN SIPSIE + + can order other ships in the fleet to finish off the cripples or come to your aid. If not, you may find some enemy ships targeting you and coming in for the kill. It's not called \"Suicide\" for nothing! Always keep track of the condition of ships in your fleet. Ensure that you have requested ASSIGNED TO HAYPOINT TONIIDE U TOTU O TTTDI 01635 UNAL COCATED RPTI 09195 UDISELETID VIEN RADIUSI 2000 DOG DOB U EVRYTION TYPE: STAR ID: 501 RAPINS: 93 355 00 m E TYPE OLAV 19 NICFINGOLOY LLLS LLC L VERT COORDIOD OD 3 COD OCD SA ERITRICITE TH STARSHIP SPECIFICATIONS INACTIVE av T DIPLOYI and turn on shields and jamming. In TACFIR, choose an enemy ship as your target and use TACMAN to set a range between 20-30,000 kilomerers. Click on Position or Shadow to go after the target ship. When you are at the desired range, select Auto EBW and turn off Stealth long enough to fire one shot, then immediately turn it back on again. If lucky, you will get a hit. When EBWs are fully charged, repeat the same tactic, continuing until you start taking hirs. (Stealth is not best. The most powerful Dreadnought is perfect, so there is a chance you will be disnothing without weapons, and is definitely a covered. Certain emissions leak out allowing sitting duck with its drives gone. an enemy ship to discover a Scout.) If you are Disabling: When outnumbered or outgun taking damage and hirs, immediately click on ned, your best tactic is to disable one enemy Evade in TACMAN to escape. Scouts are the ship at a time. Disable the first vessel, leave it. fastest ships in the game! and go after the next. The following pinpoint Suicide: This is a dangerous technique, but EBW methods are effective for this tactic: it may work as a last resort. The problem is 1. Pinpoint Weapons that you may cripple or destroy your own ship in the process, and may even destroy other 2. Pinpoint Drives ships in your fleet. To employ this tactic, your 3. Pinpoint Weapons, then Drives. ships must have mines. When several enemy Hide and Seek: You can only employ this ships are closing on you, under 500,000 kilotactic if you command a Scout ship with meters, go to TACDEF and select Shield Stealth Capability. Since a Scout only has Reinforcement. Set Mines to 500,000 kilo EBWs as weapons, choose your ships caremeters and drop one or two. If you survive, fully (some only have low powered EBWs). you will find you have crippled one or more By using Stealth mode, a Scout can sneak up enemy ships. You may have even destroyed on and cripple a Dreadnought. When first one or two! However, you may find you have deployed, immediately turn on Stealth from effectively crippled your own ship. Hopefully the NAVHLM panel, then go to NAVDEF your communications will be intact and you Table 2 Alien Captain Personality Assessments CVEYTIN TYPE STRA 13:501 FABIUS : 683 BSG DELM IL M AIN SEQUENCE VIEW RADIUSI ROOG CON DOO MOECOBEDI.DOC3 CDO COD VERT COBEDE O COO COD CODE H all ships to send updates every minute, and periodically bring up the DATAFLT panel. If a ship is close to being destroyed, order its evacuation. It is better to lose the ship, than to lose the captain. During any campaign, if a ship or captain is lost, they are lost for the duration of the campaign. Evacuation, however, takes time. If, in your estimation, there is insufficient time to evacuate, order self-destruct. Self-destruction overloads the drives and will destroy or damage ships in the explosion radius. The drawback to this tactic is that you will lose the ship and 18 26 84 62 44 : 8 ? 38&a 88 RO 68 38 34 70 48 60 88 Name Aggresion Bravery* Diplomacy Experience Humility Ingenuity* Leadership' Loyalty Stamina' Temperament\" Anteater Anteater 84 84 20 1 8 26 28 12 08 22 84 Antillies 84 00 52 50 16 16 99 70 50 Basaree 5299 Belowee 9072 Cybers Cybers 9 9 7299 99 Entymions 64 34 20 Feenzrock 386022 FWRP 66 FWSF Marine 44 Gormidians 80 74 H'z Riz 90 80 Intoid 80 60 68 65 Karipthed 92 Martian 82 Mutai Laicr'Mok B 3624 26 Mutai Laicr'Mok G 54 Nomad 50 42 Oreeginard Pervect P8266 80 66 91 Trizan Alpha 91 7593 Trizan Beta 84 60 90 92 95 7 0 UDP Military 28 38 66 84 64 14 Xenos Agnus (Aliens) 80 68 38 7666 86 38 Notes: * = Crucial traits for combat: Average rating = 50; HUMILITY: Affects Surrender Factor. The Lower the number, the higher the chance the Captain will surrender to the enemy. LOYALTY: Affects the likelihood of following orders. The higher the number, the more apt the Captain is to carry out orders. DIPLOMACY: Affects how the Captain interacts with neutral outposts. This determines if the neutral outpost will allow the ship to dock for repair and resupply. 3:33 8 8 8 8 8 888 88 86 1828888888888224 38 82 383 38 8888888888888888888: jas as Gagas 88 as aga383 142 88 35 88 22 22 4 6 88 87 88 88 $ 74 68 64 28 42 : 50 24 22 46 72 94 55 68 55 80 68 62 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"GREED IS GOOD. TM RAGS TO RICHES He who ends up with the most toys wins. It can all be yours--the cars, yachts, planes and other big boy toys that will make you the righteous king of conspicuous consumption. But it does take some savvy moves, a few dirty tricks, and, oh yeah, a little hard work. 20 Welcome to the business simulation game that could easily be dubbed \"Sim Business\". It's a fast-paced program that lets you become the master of your entrepreneurial destiny as you climb the slippery Wall Street ladder to financial success--the higher you get, the higher the stakes. So go ahead, get bullish on greedit feels good! LI GO Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 1993 Interplay I'roductions, Inc. All rights reserved. Rags to Riches is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc. To order RAGS TO RICHEST, call 1-800-969-4263, or see your local retailer. Circle Reader Service #77 "


"Table 3 Catalog of UDP Missiles: General Type captain, and you may damage or destroy friendly vessels in the area. Finally, never forget to pick up escape pods after ordering a ship to evacuate. Otherwise, you will lose the captain for sure. Damage JE Number Name Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 6 Type 6 Type 6 Type 7 Type 8 9 Type 9 OVO AWN Damage 52 N/A N/A 84 N/A 74 74 84 142 1 81 Range 980 1,920 2.530 2,950 1,050 830 1,520 740 565 Description General Damage Anti Personnel Damages Shields General Damage Anti Personnel Weapon System Drive System General Damage General Damage Light Light Medium Medium Medium Medium Heavy Medium Heavy Rabbits In Space! A hidden «Easter egg\" can be found in the FWAF Shipyard screen. Pressing the F10 key at this screen will cause one of two famous science fiction characters to cross the corridor. More famous science fiction characters are hidden in the game. Try this to get a peek at the 12 hidden alien races: Creare two alien races using the Alien Factions creations module. Don't worry about the graphic, it will be replaced with the hidden file. Name one Alien faction \"ROBBY ROBOTS\" and the other \"MARVIN MARTIAN.» After running through the tutorial, go back into the builder and load the Basree Cargo campaign. Replace the Hostile alien with one of the above created alien factions. Go back and Make a game using your new version. I am sure that you will recognize each of these famous characters. Stanley Trevena Ship vs. Outpost Tactics There are three types of outposts in ROE2: FW, Enemy/UDP and Neutral. \"They come in four varieties: Commercial (full shields and limited armaments), Sertlement (limited shields and no armaments), Scientific (limired shields and limited armaments), and Military (full shields and full armaments). All outposts with armaments have unlimited missile supplies. Thus, a single ship, even a Dreadnought, will be hard pressed to destroy a Military Outpost. There are two ways to take an outpost: destroy it or capture it. Unfortunately, the only system that can be pinpointed on an outpost is shields. This is because outposts are located on large asteroids, planetoids, artificial satellites, or on a planet's surface. Their weapon systems are shielded and too numerous to pinpoint. However, outposts can be destroyed after taking a heavy pounding from your EBW and missiles, following the methods below. Capture: The best way to capture an outpost is to order all ships in your command to participate in the capture operation. All ships will concentrate their full firepower on the outpost. You can then issue the order to concentrate all fire on the shields. Then, pinpoint the shields with your EBW. Set it to Auto and fire shield damaging missiles (#1 and #9). Once the shields are down, immediately close to boarding range and board the outpost. Be sure that no enemy ships are near ACCESS Soft A COURSE FOR YC LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS INKS LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS BOUNTIFUL  16. NORTH GOLF COURSE FAKTON CREEK ACCESS TAGGEST ACCESS ACCESS Firestone Akron, Ohio Troon Scottsdale, AZ Bountiful Bountiful, UT Circle Reader Service #33 Dorado Beach Puerto Rico Barton Creek Austin, Texas Bayhill Orlando, FL "


"I TRETING DEPLOY DACTIVE CRISTOPHE DE COUR der 4 POSTILE CAPTAIN EVEYTISN TVPEI STAR T S HIN SEQUENCE HE COORD.0000 003 CODE VERT COORDO COO GOD DOO Hosea's Last Stand Build Your Own ROE Campaigns! At the request of many mission design veterans of the original Rules of Engagement, Tom Carbone has offered a Developers Kit to the CompuServe ROE players. This kit has all the tools needed to produce professional quality campaigns in much the same manner as Omnitrend. The kit includes the \"Athena Document,\" a complete game universe history in an encyclopedia format (over 100-pages of text) all technical information on sound effects allowing the designer to replace the voice of A.N.D.I. with custom voice files: generic ship views in GIF format for inclusion in custom missions: all game graphic files in GIF format along with a GIF to ROE2 file converter; dig itized picture data so the designer can import his/her own image files for captains: 12 \"special alien forms reserved for future use; mission and campaign editing forms to streamline the design process; ANSI debug support for monitoring game Alon a terminal or computer attached to a COM port in real-time during a game; and system graphs of all FW and Enemy ships and their statistics. In addition, modifiable missile stars have recently been added, and rumors say that predefined Breach 2 ships will also be included. Tom Carbone has stated that he will do a second production run of this kit if there is interest from CGW readers. This is only offered directly from Omnitrend. Their phone number is (203) 678-7679. The cost of the kit is $49.95 plus $5.00 shipping. Stanley Trevena when you attempt to board, as you have no control over ship combat during boarding. Otherwise, your ship will continue to take damage either from the outpost or from any enemy ships within range. Once captured, the outpost's guns will cease to fire. You will then be able to resupply and repair your ship, provided the outpost is sophisticated enough and has supplies Destroy: If your objective is to destroy an outpost, you should order all ships to do so. However, your ship should never get closer than 30,000 kilometers to a military outpost or you may find yourself disabled and a sitting duck! Military outposts have plenty of armaments and can heavily damage your ship in a short period of time. When attempting to destroy an outpost, hold nothing back; fire all missiles and use Auto EBW on Normal Beam. Continue pounding in this fashion and you are guaranteed to destroy it (though, you will probably take heavy damage). Note that anti-personnel missiles do not affect outposts. The best way to destroy an outpost is to capture it first. Use the Capture tactic described above. Once you have taken the outpost, take advantage of the resupply and repair facilities. When finished, pinpoint the shields and destroy it at your leisure. The outpost will not fire on you as it is now under your control. These are just a few tactics and maneuvers that I have found to work about 90 percent of the time. You will discover others as you play the game. Good luck, and keep the following close to your heart: 1. No enemy will react the same way twice, even when replaying the same mission. 2. Always be aware of the battlefield state, as situation awareness is critical to winning any battle. Many conflicts have been lost because a commander was not aware of what was happening on the field of battle. ** 3. Know the location of enemy outposts that can take pot-shots at your ships. 4. Always keep track of the condition of your fleet using DATAFLT. 5. Above all, «Know Thine Enemy!\" CGW are brings you UR EVERY MOOD! LINKS Championship COURSES If you feel like playing 18 holes on Hawaii's Mauna Kea course on Monday and Arizona's desert spectacle Troon North that night and Akron, Ohio's Firestone course on Tuesday morning, save your airfare and just pull out your LINKS Championship Courses! ACCESS Software has beautifully digitized versions of some of the world's finest golf courses so you can play them on your computer anytime of the day or night! LINKS PINUTTURST MAUNA KEA Buuff Sprines LINKS Championship Courses are completely compatible with our original LINKS-The Challenge of Golf, the new LINKS 386 Pro, and Microsoft Golf for Windows! ACCESS W Chicco COURSE as a cc Mauna Kea Hawaii many more 22A EN 2 Pinehurst Pinehurst, NC Banff Springs Alberta, Canada SOFTWARE INCORPORATED 4910 W, Amelia Earhart Dr., SLC, UT 84116 (801)359-2900, (800)800-4880, FAX (801)596-9128 "


"REVIEW = A 3.1-Run Homer Miller Associates' Baseball for Windows by Wallace Poulter h Windows. That curious little graphic interface from Microsoft that atI tempts to do what the Mac has been doing successfully for years. Like a lot of Microsoft products (DOS comes to mind), Windows is cumbersome and ugly, yet has sold a bazillion copies. I suppose it proves that Barnum was wrong: You can fool most of the people all of the time, including our intrepid reporter. The potential game market for Windows-based products has been overstated by many, yet a number of brave souls have ventured into the breach. Chief amongst these is APBA Presents: Baseball for Windows from Miller Associates. Step Into The Box First impressions from the box reveal more meat than marketing. While the front panel is an uninspiring crowd shot, the back of the box is one of the more complete and informative pieces of copy in the industry. There are six full-screen images with relevant information. How many times have we seen useless and inaccurate screen shots on the back 1-100 Hava Trust Game DetenscOnse lleparts Options Help STTER Select StartingLeeup for NEW YORK 27 Locup Edit Reports Help KOENIM GELA MEUSE. Bale TARIT DAN COLLINS, Dom. dt. Dlache DUGUN 2 C LS MEUSEL Hay all Pre Post Game Defense OEASE Reports Options Help 23. On 19 PASCHAL gram within the game that answers any quessame inning by Boone racing back to the tions that arise. An extra couple of sheets have screen, getting a glove on a foul ball, but also been added which cover \"Most com dropping it for a ruled error. That's a pretty monly asked questions.\" tough scorekeeper. Carew goes into the seats Installation of the game is smooth and casy. to make a play, Jackson is called out looking Once installed, a Miller Associates icon apat a strike three ball, Barnhart gets picked off pears in the Program Manager window. at first with two outs and runners on second Clicking on this icon will display four addiand third. tional icons. These are Baseball, Advanced An easy-to-use interface makes all this posDraft, League Manager and Stat Master. sible and is one of the game's best selling One of the highlights of Baseball for Winpoints. The decision panel allows five offendows is the main ballpark screens. In both 16 sive and five defensive choices, cach illusand 256 colors, the ballparks are created from trated with its own distinctive icon. The five paintings or photographs and are just gordefensive decisions are Pitch, Walk (intengeous. Forbes Field in Pittsburgh is especially tional), Hold, Pitch from Stretch/Windup nice at night. I was pleasantly surprised to see my all-time favorite team, the Pirates of '27, included as one of the all-time Great Teams. With the 27 Yankees considered the greatest of all time, usually the '27 Pirates are overlooked by companies, or individuals, compiling their alltime lists. I soon had the mighty 27 Pirates OK Cancel Who? taking on the '82 Angels. The 27 Pirates have such all-time greats as Lloyd Waner, Paul Waner and Pie Traynor, with Kiki Cuyler on the bench. Against them the '82 Angels lineup of Jackson, DeCinces, Carew and company doesn't look all that hot. This should be an easy victory for the Pirates, 1 and Infield In/Deep. Good basic choices, but thought, prior to play. Pirates pitcher Lee it would be nice to have some more detailed Meadows carried a no-hitter into the 5th choices such as guarding the lines or bringing when suddenly the roof caved in. Bobby the corners in. This, combined with a lack of Grich homers with Fred Lynn on base and ballpark effects, is the biggest negative to the the Angels don't look back. Grich adds a product. Batting in Oakland with its huge second Homer, and Lynn contributes himself foul territory should be very different from as the '82 Angels win comfortably 6-0 on Tiger stadium, for example. Geoff Zahn's 7-hit shut out. Making managerial decisions is smooth and easy. Clicking on the bullpen will not only You Make The Call show the user who is there, but also the next The Baseball Module allows the user to four batters in your opponent's lineup. The make all the game related decisions that a introduction of righty/lefry effects as in Stratmanager would. Each team 0-Matic would make this even more relevant, in Baseball for Windows has a ADRA Presents. Raseball for Wine primary lineup that is preAPBA Presents: Baseball for Windows programmed, but new lineups can also be saved. The TITLE: APBA Presents: Baseball for Windows $69.95 running commentary is one SYSTEM: IBM with Windows of the best around and does REQUIREMENTS: 386-20MHz or beiter, 3MB RAM a great job capturing the at12MB hard drive space, Windows 3.1 PROTECTION: mosphere of the game. PUBLISHER: Miller Associates DeCinces bobbles a ball for 11 Burtis Avenue, Suite 200 New Canaan, CT 06840 an error, followed later the (203) 972-0777 GRAS PLATER MART SOLA BATLLA CEED INVIAR LAR DAVET ENOWE of a box? Here we get good representations of the ballparks, and screen shots showing league ser ups and reports. Combine these with detailed descriptions of the screens and 24 bullet points of useful information, and you have a box back that should be studied by the industry. Before I opened the product I knew exactly what I was getting. After such a well-designed package, I was rather disappointed to find an 80-page manual with all of two illustrations. This Baseball for Windows Tutorial is well written and pretty comprehensive, but there is no substitute for showing the user what to expect. Fortunately, there is a full-featured help proPRICE: None Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"\" The humor and originality of Zork are always present... its images are the most spectacular in the history of video games\" -JOYSTICK MAGAZINE \"The interface may be revolutionary [and] allows a richness that has been absent heretofore in graphic adventures.\" -Johnny L. Wilson, COMPUTER GAMING WORLD An epic adventure...underground. RETURN TO ZORK A Cast of Hollywood Actors Over 1 hour of Spoken Dialouge Revisit Flood Control Dam #3 Try to Outwit Devious Dwarves 19: JASON HERVEY ROBIN LIVELY AJ.LANGER JASON LIVELY EDAN GROSS SAM JONES PAGRINFOCOM muscuno wa ACTIVISION POLSEKS JOE ASPERIN SORERIMICHELE EM INFOCOM. MONATHAN WANG... TERI MASON WILLIAM VOLK IS A DOUG BARNETT SISIR EDDIE DOMBROWER ECHO PETER SPRAGUE ACTIVISION. Available for IBM and Compatibles. Enhanced version for CD-ROM also available, To order: See your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Circle Reader Service #36 "


"Play Bal Pre-Flest Game Defense Ofense Beperta Oplans Help LOS ANGELES'63 Balleen CITURE TIDULU SANE SITUATION Test HOY PELLOLLE DEDULD 1 26 125 al THELET,L UCKILTELT 17: 00 Windows Of The Year The credits are not particularly specific, but either Rosewell Miller, Colby Duerk or Alan Pratt needs to be congratulated for making a true Windows product. This is not your typical «make a game and slap a Windows shell around it,\" or worse yet a «Windows Compatible\" program which usually means you can only initiate the program from the Windows command line without crashing your system. Instead this is a fully functional Windows Instead this is a fully functie program with all the hot key options, screen minimizing, etc., that one would expect. A realistic representation of baseball with an excellent interface and multiple modules, Baseball for Windows comes through in the clutch. CGW Tome you Draft module contains a Pankin Optimizer, which calculates the most efficient lineup. It would have been nice to get a full description in the manual of who or what Pankin is. Similarly, the Markov calculation deals with average run estimates and the lineup, but details are lacking. The Starmaster module borders on overkill. With over 2000 different statistical categories for players and teams, the scope is amazing. Added to that, a custom option allows the user to create a list of either best or worst performers in these categories. Finally, the but this is a philosophical decision that ABPA League Manager controls all league functions seems content to stay away from. Baseball for for the team and season. Obviously this alWindows uses a \"Dynamic Decision\" concept lows the creation of fantasy leagues and multo spice up play; that is, the user will sometiple series schedules. Within the League times be given options such as sending the Manager is the Advanced Injury Managerunner, cutting off the throw, or trying for an ment system. Player's roles are based upon extra base. Depending on the level of play their actual usage during the course of the selected, the user gets a set amount of time to season being recreated. For pitchers, roles make the decision. I tend to be a little too affect Readiness Ratings, as well as Fatigue aggressive and run my way out of big innings. Status related to Readiness Ratings. For nonA High Draft Pick pitchers, roles affect the computation of Play Rating. This has caused some problems in The Advanced Draft module is a pretty replays. It appears that the routines are based impressive piece of software. The smooth on the number of games the player particiintegration of the programs via the icons pated in and not the number of at bats. allows easy transfer to this and other modules. Therefore a pinch hit appearance is treated Most impressive is the ability to sort all the the same way as an extra inning game in players by either their fielding position, determining whether a player is ready or not. APBA rating or name. Two new terms to me This is something that Miller Associates will were Pankin and Markov: The Advanced need to address in future versions. Secuump Ed US Heports Options Window Help OT). CALIFORNIA\"? Tharap di DOWNING. H al Dave OT-3. PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL Edit 3 JACKSOW, Letpe EGEICH JA O 7 TOLI, 1OONES V ZAIN LAYER 12 10ONE. IN TAN O IT CALIFORNIA 82 Flaster Edel C ZARN mall KISOM, Trece WITT, M. FOLICRE LIVRO, Steve NNNAN  14CTION WILTONG.   TOLI, ITIQUE LYNN DOWNING, CUCU 01 11 SANCHEZ ADAL JATY ALDIIDGE Y ALLIANDER. Pete oraOFESSIONAL BASEBALL TERRIER CALIFORNIN UZ A 3:43pm TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT! GAMER'S GOLD HOME BASE PILOT CONTROL WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES also Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title availibility suggeris til FlightStick Thrustloster Gratis Nasi ABY flight control-type WE ACCEPT VISA, MasterCard Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/$7 2nd Day Air ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick oul over your lop to more accurately reflect the positioning of a real control stick. It also turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily occess the keys without taking your eyes off the \"IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus $4.00(CAN 57.00) for shipping and handling fo: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 DEALERS CALL FOR DISCOUNT (503) 686-1809 *Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 Circle Reader Service #62 Page 136 Circle Reader Service #69 Computer Gaming World "


"Find a well Cast a spell Make a mistake Go to #*%!! CIMON THE CORCERER on his quest. In a wacked-out world filled with Wherever you go, expect the unexpected. Because Simon is no ordinary sorcerer. He's an adolescent with an attitude, who beer-swilling trolls, a schizophrenic two-headed clerk, swamplings, werefrogs and more, he must acquire the knowledge of a sorcerer and defeat the evil wizard Sordid. wizard Sordid. Discover a wondrously animated world. Unravel the mysteries of a puzzling plot. And beware that your biggest mistake accidentally stumbles upon a magical dimension on the very verge of collapse. As fate would have it, only would be Simon can save it from a tyranny of missing all missing all evil. Armed with a sharp wit and a the fun of tongue to match, our reluctant ... Simon The Sorcerer! hero sers INFOCOM forth TM An Activision Company Circle Reader Service #37 To order: see your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Simon The Sorcerer is available for IBM and compatible computers. "


"THE RUMOR BAG A praia nua -miss Nirvana And e Karmic Cabby From Hellcab with apologies to Pepe Moreno GUI 12 cuore InO U LEASE 51T BACK IN CASE OF SHORT STOP TOUR OWN SANTY by Saringhbari Singh I was being beside myself with most excelIt is supposed to be a World War II game gamer has to figure out how to put the circuit lent palpitations. It was my first day as a for dedicated game systems with the depth of back together with a little on-screen tank. New York cab driver, and I was to be Sega Japan's advanced strategy game. The larWe had a near miss as we headed for 57th picking up my first fare at Kennedy Airport. ter, in spite of its tactical excellence, was never Street and he said, \"I wasn't planning to tell It was wonderful! I was playing the horn like released in the U.S. because one gamer essenyou about Winball!, Twin Dolphins' pinball it was a tabla, my regular percussion beat sotially played Hirler. Anyway, the gentleman in much more pleasing to the ear than the dissothe other cab was telling us that it had inspired bumper. I might as well let you know that they tially played Hirler. Anyway, the gentleman in game, but as long as we're driving bumper to nant bleats and honks of my brother hackers. the MicroProse game in terms of interface and have a cute one coming out with six different I cut off two other cabs and squeezed between plavability, and that Arnold Hendricks was pinball games.\" two airport buses in order to change lanes. I designing the product. was feeling like King of the Cabbies, I am When we ended up stalled in traffic due to telling you. I asked my fare to roll up his window be esewer repairs on 57th Street, I told my fare that se That is what I was feeling when I picked up caus cause there are so many strange people in New I was more concerned about getting my hands this very strange man who played computer Tork. York. I also pointed out that there was going on that Smokin' Guns shooting gallery game. games for a living. I asked him if there were to be a full moon that night and hope that It features six different theme settings and I o I asked him if there were to be a full moon that night and hoped that forces games where one could be playing the driver he would be most careful. \"Under A Killing ng was hoping that one of them was New York of a New York cab and book more fares than Moon, eh?\" he responded. Then, he filled me traffic. My fare didn't think it was available, the other cabbies. He said, \"No! You don't in on the most fascinating news that Margot Margot but I told him to tell the developers. even do that in Hellcab.\" He did tell me that Kidder of Superman fame (Oh, to be hoping he had hoped for a game based on Kinemaker; I pick her up in my cab some day!) and Brian Then I carned my stripes as a New York some Avalon Hill boardgame where supposKeith of Disney movie and television fame cabby by making an obscene gesture and calledly grown men gather around a map of Eng. were going to appear in Access' latest Tex ing a tourist the effluent by-product of a goat. land and pretend to be nobles during the War Murphy game. I asked what game that would I told my fare that I wished these cabs came of the Roses. I asked him if I could play it on be and he said that strange phrase about Under equipped with anti-automobile weapons. He my new computer and he said, \"No! The Killing Moon, again. laughed and said that I would be better off European designers of the boardgame sold the I reminded him to be rolling up his window seeking my fortune with a computer game software rights to U.S. Gold. So, Avalon Hill where I could be my own boss and actually and most fortuitously, he did. Although I isn't going to do a U.S. version of Computer overheard him saying something about the Kingmaker until those European software blow away the comperition. «You are speaking fact that everyone is wanting to do Windows We of a Godfather game?\" I suggested. rights expire.\" these days.\" He asked me if I had heard of Actually, he explained that he was speaking My fare seemed most personally disapTwin Dolphin Games. I hadn't. He said that of Project Nomad, a publishing partnership pointed, so I tried to take his mind off it by when their Forgotten Castle 3-D first-person between Papyrus Design Group and Gamerisking our lives more than four times before perspective game came out that everyone tek. The game is sort of a Starflight meets Space we got to the Queensborough Bridge. There, would lenow their name bur he chouch ugh briage. There, would know their name, but he thought they Rogue where would-be interstellar traders the traffic was slower than a mystic can attain might even make more money with their build up funds by tradin oneness with the divine. Some guy in a cab Windows games. lomatic skills by interacting with some fascinext to us motioned for my fare to roll down his window and, since I did not have time to I cut through a blinding maze of side-streers nating aliens, and literally blowing away the warn him, he did. With blessings all around, and he said it reminded him of one of those competition in a simulation with 3-D polythe other passenger told my fare that the stop Windows games he was speaking of. Nanogon-filled graphics. and go traffic across the river reminded him of Tank. This game has a hundred different As I sat there in the traffic, in the stilling MicroProse's upcoming cartridge game, mazes and is supposed to be something like humidity of an East Coast heat wave, I wished Across The Rhine. The Incredible Machineon a circuit board. The I had that option. Cow Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"\"I found this game exhilarating. Many a night the adrenaline was pumping and palms were sweating.» Fred J. Philipp QuestBusters \"The skillful 3 synthesis of full motion video digitized speech, CD audio quality soundtrack, and a pleasing variety of game play make INCA one of the finest multimedia games yet published.» Stephen Poole CD-ROM Today \"a cinematic tour-de-force...' -Video Games & Computer Entertainment INCA TM Multimedia CD COKTEL VISION See your local retailer or call: (800) 757-7707 Part of the Sierra Family IM indicates trademark of or license to Sierra On-Line, Inc. Circle Reader Service #117 "


"REVIEW WAYNE'S Are These Guys Worthy? oo, Our Reviewer Hangs Out With Capstone's Wayne's World by Gordon Goble MINTHIE GILU DIBANDINUDICIPLE NAVIGATION SYSTEM AURORA ILLIUS DENTIN This reviewer has renounced the teachings can be raised within the next 72 hours, head-banging Mirthmobile. A full-screen city of the Esteemed One...er, Wayne...and is C.A.T. is finished, and Wayne's World along map appears when a specific area has been now following a path that travels the with it. To make matters worse (or better, exited, allowing access to new locations. A straight and narrow. The following critical asdepending upon one's viewpoint), there also musical score is present throughout, and it is sessment of Capstone's Wayne's World will seems to be some form of evil influence delightful indeed...NOT! Perhaps a little make no use of Illinois teenage slang, nonsensical threatening to censor or cancel the broadcast digital sampling of Aerosmith or Alice Cooexpressions, nor any colloquialisms based on a of Wayne's World. With cancellation and per would have been more suited, consider\"rock and roll» music doctrine. airwave oblivion looming ominously on the ing the tuneful tastes of these two. In 1992, the cinematic release of Wayne's horizon, Wayne and Garth (SHWINISome specific chores that must be comWorld capitalized on the popularity of a SatING!...ignore that) mull over their appropripleted in order for Wayne and Garth to hold urday Night Live sketch of the same name. ate course of action. their Pizzathon include: securing Cassandra Two somewhat moronic and disheveled teen The misdirected minds of this dynamic duo agers, brains addled by a touch too much eventually hatch a plan to stage an offshoot \"partying\" and numbed with copious, car of a telethon, a Pizzathon, wherein viewers splitting doses of the popular music of their pledge their money to the cause and receive a generation, set out to regain creative control pizza or two for their donations. In typical of their television program from commercial Wayne and Garth fashion, this is a great idea interests. in theory, but stands very little chance of In 1993, the computerized release of practical application. Neither Wayne or Wayne's World attempts to capitalize on the Garth have $50,000 worth of pizza ingredinotoriety of said movie, and no one really ents on hand, nor a tote board, decent enterknows where this sort of reversed domino tainment, volunteers, an advertising budget, effect will stop. That this pair of slothful or the necessary video equipment to stage ne'er-do-wells could ever achieve such godsuch a monumental event. However, if they (Wayne's babe-alicious girlfriend) a release like status signals that something has gone are able to enlist the assistance of a dedicated from her contract with the snotty Eugene of horribly wrong with our society. That said, game player, the race to save Community Eugene's Video Emporium so she may enteron with the review. Access Television and Wayne's World is on. tain the viewers; talking or bribing restauraHaving salvaged their television program \"The Wayne's World interface features the teur Pepe Roni into lending the use of his rypical adventure game side-view of the impizza making equipment; acquiring a large mediate surroundings (usually a single room chunk of TV time, etc. These are not life or although sometimes a right outdoor shor) death situations, Wayne's World is not a battle TO THE and both Wayne and Garth move about as to save mankind, yet the intrinsic humor and SI WARIUS SO they obey their various commands, inspectlight-hearted conversations of the program ing objects, picking objects up, giving objects make it, like, real fun. to others, pulling and pushing things, and Conversation is a valued art in Wayne's verbally interacting with themselves (Party World (though language is given a real beaton, Garth... Party on Wayne!) and others. A ing), and a multitude of problems can be row of icons resides at the bottom of the solved by speaking to the right person at the LACOSTE screen, graphically displaying these comright moment, including dialogue between mands, and across the top of the screen apWayne and Garth themselves. At other times, during the course of the Wayne's World pear visual representations of objects though, Garch may say to Wayne, \"How movie, it is now the very existence of Comcurrently in possession. Pointing and clicking many marshmallows can you stuff up your is the method of choice in munity Access Television (in Aurora, Illinois, nose\", or \"Don't you think Wayne's World and the 1 eventually we should change anyway) that rests upon the shoulders of keyboard rarely enters into clothes?\", or \"I dreamed about Wayne and Garth in the Capstone's Wayne's play. World. Speaking of shoulders, did you notice the TITLE: Wayne's World The \"world» of Wayne's WAYNE'S chestial region on Madonna during her latest $49.95 World is confined to REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGA graphics, 6MB hard drive video? She is truly an epitomization of babeness. Aurora, IL, and transporspace; supports Adlib, Sound Blaster, and Hey! Someone cut that last remark—that is Roland LAPC-1 sound cards tation from one location PROTECTION: None the old me...perhaps my therapy has not to another is accomDESIGNER: Kelcey Simpson, Brent Smith been 100% successful. PUBLISHER: Cappstone plished through Wayne's 7200 Corporate Center Drive, Suite 500 In an effort to reduce spending, the mayor vehicle, henceforth Miami, FL 33126 (305) 591-5900 of Aurora has announced that unless $50,000 known as the infamous SOCIETUVOTACOL DASTE LOOK FT GUITAR PRICE: Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"How AEOUT LEMIESZ US VIDCO LOUITMENT TOR OUR PIZZA-THOM DO YOU HAVE THE LATEST SCLERO CLICK? UHAT DO WC NCCO TO MAKE OUR OUT WIOCO? UC VE TUS THUMBS UP TO THE RETURTE Y MVE 1 NCC STORE. E'LL JUST LOOK OORD. basis? Madonna last night,\" to which Wayne reonly once required the three-finger salute sponds, \"You dream about Madonna every (CTRL-ALT-DEL), and getting both in and night.\" Like the Wayne's World sketch, the out of the program takes a matter of seconds, game never takes itself too seriously, and fans especially since Wayne's World sports no copy will find that the same level of humor perprotection. Saving a game takes all of a millivades. second, although some annoying delays will The game is not overly difficult. Uncharacoccur during conversations. Perhaps too teristic of this genre, issuing the wrong commuch time has been allotted for the Wayne's mand will never result in disaster—one is World game player to real aloud each word on simply not allowed to do it. The smacking the screen. Perhaps Capstone believes that sound of one's head against computer table prospective users will more often than not be will rarely be heard with Wayne's World, as \"perks\" embedded throughout, like Garth's Garth clones. Perhaps Capstone believes nothing will be completely unraveled by a shocking \"tongue trick\" (sorry, no further we're all not worthy! Are they mental? Are we wrong move. Combine this with a limited explanation on this one!) and the appearance mental? Do monbeve flv out w button a nightly amount of destinations and witty bantering, of the one and only \"Gilligan» (that's right, and Wayne's World becomes an obvious the mate who was a mighty sailing man). choice for the neophyte adventure gamer. Game instruction is, to say the least, miniThat's it...I've lost it!!! Wayne's World is the This is not to say however, that it's all. like mal, and one will discover the ins and oure of greatest thing since MADONNA DROPPED a piece of cake. More often than once, an Wayne's World only through extensive experiHER TOP... not!!! yes it is!!! no it isn't!!! apparently insignificant item barely discernmentation. In these days of War and Peaceauuugh!!! SHWIIINGISHWIIING!!! SHWIible on the screen will be important to have. sized game manuals, it is refreshing indeed to IMMING!!! To make matters worse, combinations of see one that isn't. Yet, Capstone may have So much for therapy. nondescript items may be used in harmony taken things a little too far with the Wayne's in particular locations to provide incredibly World manual, a lean offering that won't take Wayne's World is, like, fun, man. It's here for profitable results. Also, the timing of arrival more than five minutes to browse from be a good time, not a long time, so experienced at a given destination may be paramount; ginning to end. Although this really bestows adventuring dudes and babes may want to exploring the local public television station at upon one a pioneering spirit, a pinch more look for something a little more enduring. one moment will provide little but locked detail and guidance would have been a welNewcomers attracted to the game for its subdoors, yet later may result in a guest shot on come addition. ject matter will find good humor, unexpected a game show. In this way, the game has many Movement though Wayne's Aurora-based twists, and an odd setting, separating it from of the typical adventure game frustrations. world is expeditious thanks to the way cool other efforts in this genre in these respects, On the other hand, it has many unexpected interfaces and solid programming. My copy while being rather typical in all others. CGW «Baseball heaven» HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ARE SO UNREAL? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH, TESTING, & DESIGN. Mike Douglas, online game player WE DIDN T . \"Has no rival\" PC Magazine \"Sparkles with unalloyed brilliance ... truly belongs in a league of its own.\" Game Players PC Entertainment SEE Magazine SIMULATIONS CANADA... FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING SUSU FIKK OWS Compete against friends, challenge the computer, or relax in Spectator Mode. WIND \"Breathtaking ... stunning... + a landmark product\"  Sports Game Review \"True baseball fanatics can slide head-first into baseball fantasy\" New York Times Call now to order 1-800-654-5472 Ext. 10 (Open 24 hours) Share the sense of time and place known only to true baseball fans. Playing the computer game Baseball for Windows is like being on the field. Includes four powerful programs that put you in control  Baseball StatMaster  League Manager Advanced Draft NAVAL COMBAT: ***New\"RED SKY AT MORNING, Global Naval Strategic Combat In The Modern Era. ***New\"TYMAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 1815. THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1942. THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations In The Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Corbat. APBA presents BASEBALL FOR WINDOWS Only $69.95 plus shipping. No-Risk 30 day money back quarantee Miller Associates. 11 Burtis Ave. Suite 200, New Canaan, CT 06840 ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #87 Circle Reader Service #118 October 1993 Page 141 "


"VIKINGS: FIELDS OF CONQUEST DUNE 11 COMPUTER Express A 1-6 player, 199 territory lond con quest game Beautifully detailed graphics and superb gameplay unmatched by any other VIKINGS style map game Flotillas, armies, castles, colopults and seven different troop types are available for your command in an attempt to become the sole ruler and King of England and save it from the Viking invasion. Features 256 Color VGA, 5 difficulty levels and handicapping. The best multiplayer medieval strategy game made. PERIOD! Simulation strategy game takes resource manage ment lo epic pro portions. As either the honorable Atreides, the mysterious Ordos ar the Brutal Harkonnans, you must overcome vio lent know and unknown adversaries to build up military prowess. Secure the future of your dynasty on the planet of Dune, Select from three very dit ferent Houses Build tanks, turrets and more as you defend your cities and wage wars Features over IMB of digitized speech, and sounds make combat exciting and realistic, 800-228-7449 5. Publisher: Realism Entertainment S36 Porl #31316 Publisher: Virgin Games Port : 30580 $32 JOHN MADDEN NFL '94 SEGA LINKS 386 PRO NHL HOCKEY '94 FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO RETURN TO ZORK $40 A 16 bit football game BASPORTS offers an entirely new gome design packed with 80 NFL teams and an entice NFL sco son, playoffs and the Super Bowl. Save your stats anytime with bat MADDEN tery backup. Teams include all 28 from 1992, plus 12 from chise All Star teams, 2 All Maddon teams and 38 all time Super Bowl todms. New design offers 72 new offensive plays complete with play flipping and \"bluff mode to hide your plays from your opponent. All new Madden commentary and new 4-Way Play ability are ideal for tournament gaming. NFL license with signature helmuts and fonts, 16 MEG cartridge SNES available too Championship golf at your fingertips Featuring Harbour Town Golf Links with Super VGA 256 color graphics for breathtaking views Over 345 different combina 385 tions of viewing windows Features a club selection, \"saved shor\", and profile view Male or female golfers with 10 different shirt colors to choose from. Statistics recorded for each player and game with optional print out, Supports SoundBlaster and compatible sounds cards You've got nothing to lose, and 50 much golfing to gain! Combines hot arcade action with in depth simulation and stats and a full season mode, NHL and NHLPA licenses allow inclusion of player names and loces as well as team names and logos (including the Stanley Cup! Simulate the actual 1993 84 game NHL season Compile team and playet sluts through out the season Ron Bart's digitized voice sets up every game of the season. Digitized rink announcer voice reports goal summaries and penalties Realiste organ music brings tink to lite. Each rink features individual music, over 50 proces in all Supports Sound Blaster, Ad Lib and Roland MI-32 sound. Play with the best EROXIDUCE SHORTS play with the pros! Now, the pro names and slots oro more compre hensive than ever! Complete with all the bone crunching teolism and strate gic coaching of America's Gridiron battles. Chock full of new hard-hitting animation depicting flips, spins, leaping catches and running back dives, Features real NFL player names and stats and enhanced artificial intelligence Game plays expanded to over 140 plays per game. All Star game option, and so much more! Publisher: Electronic Arts Part 3 32049 $49 Publisher: Access Software Part # 27660 $40 Publisher: Electronic Arts Part # 31741 $45 Publisher: Sierra Part: 31820 $40 098 479 479 419 616 542 JOYSTICKS 109 495 Analog Plus Joystick Command Control Pad Flight Yoke 2000 GForce Flight Yoke......... GomeCard II Automatic ............. GameCard Ill MCA Automatic... MAXX Flight Yoke II. MAXX Rudder Pedals............. Pilot Control Stond...... ThrustMaster Weapon Markt Thrustmastor ACM Gamo Card..... Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Pro Flight Thrustmaster Ruddur Pedals... Virtual Plot MASTER OF ORION $34 ..42 PRODUCTIVITY 532 358 CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS Chinon CDS 435 Int. Drive Chinon CDX-435 EX Drive DigitalEdge CD Mult ki... Discovery Ext. B-bit Kit..... Discovery Int. 16-bit Kit Discovery Int. 8 bit Kit. Edutainment Ext. 16 bit Kit Edutainment Int. 16-bit Kit.. Edutainment Int. 8 bit Kit Fusion CD 16 Internal Fusion CD 16E External... Fusion Double CD Internal kit NEC CD Express External IBM......... Omni CD Upgrade Kit... PAS 16 || Multimedia Kit Sony CDU 31A LL/L Mult Kit.......... Sony CDU.7305 Ext. Mult. Kil...... Texel Ext. Bare Drive Texel Ext w/8 bit AT Adaptor .... Texel Ext w/MCA Adapter Texel Ext w/PAS 16 & Cable Texel Ext. w/Parallel to SCSI... Texel Int. Bare Drive... Texcl Int Bundle w/PAS-16... Texel Int Home Bundle... Texel Int. w/8-bit AT Adpir.. Texel Int, w/MCA Adopler. Texel Int. w/PAS-16 & Cable CD-ROM TITLES 905 536 549 604 696 SANN. 3893 8888 398 CD7th Guest CD AD&D Eye of the Beholder 3 CD Adventures CD Animals MPC VERSION CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD 317 & Silent Service II CD Bare Assets CD Battle Chess MPC & DOS CD Berlitz Japan Alive............ CD Berlitz Think & Talk French........ CD Better Homes Health Cooking CD Blue Force ........ CD Chessmaster 3000 Window.... CD Cinemania Movie Guide CD Compleat Beatles... CD Complete House CD Compton's Encyclopedia Upg CD Compton's Interactive Ency CD Cookbook Heaven... CD Curso o! Enchantio CD Dinosaur Adventure........ CD-Dinosaurs! Multimedia Ency... CD-ROM TITLES EDUCATION 212 SOUND CARDS AudioMan Gravis Ultrasound.. Pro Audio 16 Basic... Pro Audio Studia 16 Pro Audio Studio 16XL Pro AudioSpectrum 16 Sound Blaster 16 Sound Blaster 16 ASP Sound Blaster Deluxe Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe SoundMan 16.......... Windows Sound System CD Multimedia Dinosaurs Paradox for Windows.................. CD Multimedia Mozart Windows.... Print Shop Deluxe CD Multimedia Stravinsky Print Shop Deluxe Windows CD Musical Instruments Procomm Plus for Windows CD Photo CD Access Windows CEMM 386 7.01 CD Prophone 1993 QEMM 386 Upgrade 201... CD Return of Zork....... Quickbook 1.01 CD Return of the Phantom ...... Quickbook/QuickPay Bundle 1.01.... CD Scrabble Deluxe... Quicken for DOS 6.0................ CD Secret Weapons lullwalle Quicken for Windows 2.0 CD Secret of Monkey Island.. Rosemary Wesi's House Fortune...... CD Space Quest IV WordPerfect Comp Upg DOS 60 CD Spirit of Excalibur WordPerfect Comp Upg Windows... CD Sporting News Pro Football WordPerfect For Windows 5.2........ CD Star Trek 25th Enhanced WordPerfect Version Upg DOS ....... CD Street Atlas USA Wordperfect Version Upg Window CD-Strike Commander/Tactical....... Wordperfect for DOS 6.0... ........ CD. Tony LaRussa Baseball ... Your Deck for Windows CD Total Distortion. Your Medical Records Windows.... CDUFO Close Encounters Guide... CDUSA Today: The 90's Vol. 1..... CD Ultima I. VI............................ A Train... CD Ultima Underworld I & II Al World of Discovery..... CD WinCD Professional 1.1 Alge-Blaster 3 for Windows CD-Wines of the World Bailey's Book House CD Wing /Ultima Under Wid Calculus for Windows... CD Wolf Pack.... DinoPark Tycoon.. . Discover Space ........ GMAT w/Cliff Notes After Dark for DOS ........ ... .. GRE w/Clift Notes... After Dark for Windows 2.0..... Kid Cod for Windows ........ AutoMap 3.0 KidDesk AutoMap Upgrade 3.0...... Maps & Facts... AutoMap Windows Upgrade 3.0. Moth Bloster in Search of Spo AutoMap for Windows 3.0 Millie's Math House Betty Crocker Cookbook Windows... My First World Atlas CAClipper Comp. Upgrade 5.2... Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA... Corel Draw for Windows 4.0........... Playroom 20 DesqView 386 2.6................. SAT w/CliH Notes Disney Collection Screen Savel........ Treehouse...... Draft & Print ............ UFO Close Encounters Guide Home Medical Advisor DOS.... Where in Spaces Carmen Home Medical Advisor Windows Word Attack 3. Key CAD Complete...... Key Font Pro for Windows Keyfonts for Windows 3.1.......... A320 Airbus: US Edition KeyMop w/FREE T-Shirt...... . AD&D Dark Sun Shattered lands... lolus 123 Window Rel 4 Upgrade.... AD&D:Eye of Beholder Ill...... Lotus 123 Windows Release 4 AD&D Eye of Beholder Trilogy Lotus Improv for Windows 2.0........ Aces of Pacific 1946 WWI Miss. MS Access Comp. Upgrade 1.1. Acos of the Pacific . VGA... MS Access Ver Upgrade 11 Aces over Europe MS Access for Windows 1.1....... Air Warrior SVGA....... MS FoxPro Comp Upg Windows 2.5......190 Alone in the Dark........ MS FoxPro Ver Upg for Win. 2.5............ 96 Arborea 2 MS FoxPro for Windows 2.5 316 Archon Ultra ....... MS Office For Windows 30 Ashes of Empire. MS Publisher Windows 2.0......... .89 8-17 Flying Fortress VGA MS Windows NT 3.1..... 315 Battles of Destiny MS Windows NT Upgrade 3.1 278 Betroyal at Kronder MS Windows UPG w/Adobe Fonts...... BloodStone.... MS Windows w/Adobe Fonts 3.1...... Blue & the Gray MS DOS Upgrade 6.0.... . Blue Force: The Next of kin. Micro Kitchen Companion Window...... Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space Modern Bride Planner Windows Caesar My Advanced Backup Windows Corsors Palace Windows My Advanced label Designer....... Carrier Strike... My BockUp for Windows Carriers at War 11... Notton Unilities 7.0....... Castle of Dr. Brain VGA NORTON UTILITIES 7.0 $117 164 218 ..82 127 105 CD Dune... 186 129 22 SPEAKERS AR Partner 22 Speaker Sys AR Partner 42 Speaker Sys........... AR Partner 570 Speaker System AR Partner 622 Speaker System Altec ACS100 Speakers Altec ACS300 Speakers... Koss HD6 MPC Speakers Labtec CS-150 Speakers labloc CS 550 Speakers......... tablec CS 800 Speakers Labtec SS 700 Speakers PRODUCTIVITY 309 100 CD-ROM TITLES CD-European Racers CDF 15 Strike Eogle lll. CD Fractal Ecstasy CD Global Explorer... CD Goblin CD Goblilins 2.............. CD Great Navul Battles Pack.... CD Guinness Disk Records MPC CD Gunship 2000 w/Seenatio CD INCA... CD Indiana fote of Atlantis. CD Iron Helix CD-Journeyman Project CDJust Grandma & Me..................... CD lutland CD Key Home Designer Windows CD-King's Quest VI CD Laura Bow II...... CD-legend of Kryandia CD lightning CD lord of the Rings... . CD Lost Treasures Infocom... CD Lost in Time CD-MPC Music Mozart CD MPC Wizard Diagnostic CD Macmillan Kids Dictionary... CD Mantis Experimental... CD Mayo Clinic Family Health... CD Microsoft Golf Windows MPC 480 CD-TH GUEST $48 RECREATION HARDWARE Carlo SFR 20 Organizer 256X. Game Modem w/Sierra Network.... IPS 360 GPS Navigation System Jumbo 250MB Tape BackUp..... Practical PM14400FXMT EXTF/M........ Pro Movie Studio .......... Sony PIX 100 CD ROM XA Player Sportster 144 EXT Fox/Modem Sportster 14.4 INT Fax/Modem............ Tope250 Insider Int 250MB.... Trakker 250MB Tape Backup VGA TV Elite.... SVONS VIRTUAL PILOT YOKE $62 "


"SIMCITY CLASSIC RAILROAD TYCOON DELUXE EMPIRE DELUXE WINDOWS GATEWAY II: HOMEWORLD TYCOON The original city simu lator is a must have for any software col lection, and has intro duced over 600,000 people to the joys of designing and build ing the city of their dreams. Challenges you to manage the basic principles of a successful city. Deal with disostors, crime, pollution and public opinion as you build your way to a thriving metropolis. Now includes the SimCity Terrain Editor and supports popular sound cards. Join the world at a new low price! One of our most popular titles of all time. The \"Sim\" that started it all Upgrade to the caward winning bestselling Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon. Players are entrepreneurs in the early 1800's, and must compete ogonstrail barons as they try to build their railroad rl Six spector ACORD PROBE ular new areas to develop, including North America, Eastern U.S., Western U.S. South America, Africa and Europe Each with its own unique resources and terrain, Enhanced hi res graphics support VGA. Includes 11 new trains with a new total of 32 trains. Guaranteed to be an addictively good time. REQUIRES IBM 386 OR BETTER & MSDOS 5.0. An addictive strate Sy war game feo tures: Network and modem compatibile ty. Super VGA graphics, Advanced scenario editor, Digitized sound effects, and Various difficulty settings. You stort the game in posses sion of one city, with your goal being to copture other cities und be the last player on the map. Through strategic planning and production, you must conquer the world Designed to be played against the computer, or chollenge up to six opponents at the same time FREE Hint Book enclosed Experience the chill ing reality of 22nd Century Earth Battle murderous robots, carnivorous dinosaurs and spear carrying humanoids. Rescue o prospector marooned in a robot controlled Heche starship. Can you stop a fanatic cult of totorists? Journey to new worlds and new adventures and ultimately across the event horizon of a black hole. Features 256 color graphics with spectacular animations FLIGHT SIMULATOR SCENERY $28 Publisher: Maxis Part 31410 (DOS) Part 31455 (Windows) Part 31456 (Mac) $24 Publisher: Microprose Part 31428 $40 Publisher New World Computing Part 132032 S Publisher: Legend Part 31514 $36 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES SOFT KARAOKE FOR WINDOWS THE HUMANS CD BEAT THE HOUSE High quality, full color keyboard over lays for flight simula fors will turn any AT101 keyboard into a 3D looking con trol panel. Includes all key commands in a logical layout, and legend boxes for cockpit displays Available for MSFS 5.0, FALCON 3.0, MG 29, STRIKE COMMANDER, ATP, XWING, COMANCHE, F 15. ACES OF PACIFIC. JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS, B-17, GUNSHIP, ACES OVER EUROPE, TORNADO and morel Ask about Fokon 3.0's Keyboard & Ushbundies! Quantity Pricing 2 $2150; 3 $3000, any 4 or more only $9.25 each! Publishers Keyboard Commander Corp. $13 Turn your PC into home karaoke ISOFT machine. Lyrics light up to the right beut KARAOKE right on your moi for. Countless hours of fun for music lovers and profes Sonnls. Includes five legally licensed top Billboard hits Hundreds of other licensed hits avail oble s arutely. Guaranteed to run on Windows 3.1 with your sound board. Compatible with a professional MIDI devices Plays all standard MIDI files. Access over 128 instruments Send in your registration card and receive 10 FREE extra songs plus a chance to win FREE microphonel Macintosh version available REQUIRES A SOUND BOARD Humans must learn to cooperate throughout all 160 levels. They can do this by using and sharing tools that are discovered along the way Also, they must learn how to be stocked upon each other's shoulders to get up to heights they cannot reach. Cooperation is the key in this world of dinosaurs and enemy tribes. Features cight original soundtracks, colorful animations and three levels of difficulty. A totally addictive experience, not to be missed! Catch The Humans now available on CDROM Prepare yourself for casino gaming experience The ulti mate gaming tutor and simulator. Includes the 160 poge study guide \"Bect the House Companion Featuring slot machines, black jack roulette, video poker and Crup. Beginners will learn the rules, rituals and terminology of casino play Seasoned gomblers are schooled in strategie counting techniques as well as profitable bening strategies. One to fout people can play against each other, or computer players will till the empty seats. Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to Beat The House!\" FUGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 $42 Publisher: TUNE 1000 Part # 31412 $29 Publisher: Gametek Part # 31790 $25 Publisher: Spirit of Discovery Part # 30343 528 O 39 Y O EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 325 FAX:508 443 5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 * ***.90*-*-** ! * FAX:0011-508-443-5645 X .CompuServeID:70007, 15347 U 1 ] Ant Fan  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS Circle Reader Service #48 RECREATION RECREATION 12 18 Summoning... ......... Syndicate Terminator 2029 Tetris Trio........ .. Tony LaRusso Baseball 11. Tony LoRusso Baseball : 1992 Tony LaRussa : AL&NL Stadiums...... Tony LuRussa Il Fantasy Draft....... Castlos II.Siego & Conquest... Challenge of the 5 Realms..... Chessmaster 3000 for Windows..... Civilization Civilization Hint Book............ Civilization Master Player Ed... Clash of Steel: WWII 1939-45. Classic 5 Windows.. Cobra Mission........... Cognito for Windows.... Cohortil...... Comanche: Mission Disk I... Comanche: Mission Disk II...... Comanche. Maximum Overkill Command HQ Classic Companiors of Xanh Conquered Kingdom. . Conquered Kingdoms Scenario... Crosswords Deluxe... 20 D&D Fantasy Empires.... D&D: Stronghold..... Day of the Tentacle Hint Book Day of the Tentacle: Manioc il... Dragon Knight Eco Quest: Rainforest 28 Eight Boll Deluxe.... ...... Elfish. Empire Deluxe DOS Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide, Eternam. F.15 Strike Eagle Il Classic F 15 Strike Eagle Ill..... F. 19 Stealth Fighter Classic Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3.0 Operation Fight.... Falcon Mig 29/Deodly Adversary 32 Fields of Glory Waterloo FlashBack Flight Sim: New York Scenery.. Flight Sim: Paris Scenery 5 0 Flight Sim: San Francisco 5.0. Flight Sim: Washington DC 28 Flight Simulator 30 Forgotten Castle Freddy Pharkas..... .. Freddy Pharkos Hint Book......... Front Page Sports: Football ...... Gabriel Knight.. Gary Grigsby'. Wer in Russia ... Goekwad Games of the Galaxy .............20 Global Dominations ....... Goblilins........ .... Goblins II: The Prince Buffoon........ Great Novel Batlles Pack..... Great Naval Bottles: N.Atlantic Great Naval Battles. America. Great Naval Battles: Scenario Great Naval Battles: SuperShips.... Great War..... HardBall ... HardBall Big League Parks... HardBall Player Disk.... High Command Hoyles Book of Game Classic..... Human's Like You've Never Seen.... Humon's: Insult to injury INCA INCA Hint Book... Incredible Machine Indiana Jones Fole of Atlantis Innocent Until Caught.... Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf. Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour ! Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Jeopardy with Alex.......... Jet Fighter Jump Jet Kasparov's Gambit .... King's Quest V. VGA King's Quest VI. VGA King's Quest VI Hint Book Kingdoms of Germany... Kings Table Lands of lore... Lovro Bow II VGA...... leather Goddesses of Phobos II Legacy Realm of Terror ................. legend of Kyrandia..... ... Legend of Kyrandia Hint Book legends of Valour ........... legends of Valour Hint Book....... Leisure Suit Lorry 1 VGA leisure Suit Larry V VGA Leisure Suit lorry V Hint Book Lemmings.... Lemmings Il... Links 386 Pro: Banff Springs Links 386 Pro: Bellroy Course links 386 Pro Innsbrook Course Links 386 Pro: Mauna Kea Course.... Links 386 Pro: Pinghurst... Lost Treasures of Infocom Lost Treasures of Infocom II. Lost Vikings Lost in Time lure of the Temptress... MS Arcade for Windows... Master of Orion Metal & lace Michcel Jordan Flight... Microleague Baseball Football Microsoft Space Simulator.... . Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen............. Might & Magic: DarkSide of Xeen........ More Incredible Machines More Vegos Games for Windows........17 Pacific War...... Patriot Perfect General Perfect General Great Battles .... Perfect General WWII Scenario Pinball Dreams PitotesGold Police Quest IV....... Pool Shark Populeurs II Powermonger. Prince of Persia il....... Privateer Privateer Speech Pack.... Prophecy Quarter Pole Quest for Glory ... Quest for Glory !!! Railroad Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Master Hint.... Realms of Arkania . Realms of Arkania Hint Book Red Baron VGA Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal Red Storm Rising Classic Return of the Phantom..... Return to Zork.... .... Rome: Pothway to Power Rules of Engagement il ...... Scenery Collection USA East Scenery Collection USA West Seal Team... . Secret of Monkey Island ..... Seven Cities of Gold Comm Shadow Coster Sid Meie's Trilogy Silent Service ll Classic SimAnt for Windows SimEarth Windows PRO AUDIO SPECTRUM 16 $165 30 36 RECREATION RECREATION Simlife for Windows Solitaire for Windows .... Solitaite's Journey Windows Space Hulk Space Quest V Spear of Destiny Hint Book Spear of Destiny Wolfenstein Spectre PC Speed Racer Challenge Racer X Star Trek: 25th Anniv. Hint Bk.... Star Trek 25th Anniversary..... Street Fighter II Strike Commander VGA Strike Commander Players Guide .... Strike Commander Speech Pack Strike Commander Tactical #1........ Strip Poker Professional.... Ultima Underworld...... Ultima Underworld ll Hint Book Ultimo Underworld Il Labyrinth Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle Ultima VII Purt 2: Silver Seed Ultimo Vit Forge Virtue Add On Ultima Vil The Black Gate Ultrabots Unnecessary Roughness V for Victory Market Garden V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Velikiye luki Vegas Games for Windows Veil of Darkness..... Warlords Warriors of legend When Two Worlds War... Wing Commander Academy Wing Commander ll w/Speech Wing Commander ll. Operation ! Wizardry: Crusader Dark Savant..... World Circuit Grand Prix.... X Wing. X-Wing Official Guide X Wing: B Wing Tour of Duty X-Wing: Imperiol Pursuit.......... Yserbios RECREATION RECREATION 988 Orders accepted on our tol trec number Mon-Sat 8:30 to 6:30 EST Same day shipping on in. stock items. Continental US shipments: UPS Ground Handling Charge 53. Airbome overight $7 International shipments: UPS Express cost based on weight Canadian, APO, FPO ship ments: US Mail cost based on weight. No Sales Tax except for MA add 5 Personal checks accepted, allow 5 business days for processing No CODs. Products covered by manufacturer's warranty. Defectives replaced immediately. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. All specials and promotions limited while supplies last Educational government, and corporate purchase orders welcome 15. restocking fee for all non-defective returns. Part represents 3.5'floppy. except where noted COMPTON'S MULTIMEDIA ENCYC. $220 CASIO SFR 20 ORGANIZER S200 SONY PIX100 PLAYER $857 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW Probe On The Run Jeremia Obrian J EGN (DOOID. Iron Helix Makes A Mad Dash For The CD State-Of-The-Art by Maxwell Eden Ithough Spectrum HoloByte's first The Scenario ship's computer has deployed a well-armed CD-ROM release, Iron Helix, is the Defender Robot sentry to eradicate the crew, I Late in the 24th Century, a cold-war exists now product of creative presentation more ES now perceived as a threat to the computerthan originality, it is not another case of subbetween Earth and an alieni race called the controlled mission stance sacrificed for style. Drew Productions Thanatosians. So, what else is new? has pulled off a fine CD (coup d'érat) by The game is lean and mean with no meanDistress Beacon making the most of the CD-ROM's limita dering subplots to get in the way of a 90-minWho should receive the Captain's emertions and putting dramatic shortcomings toute dash to avert an intergalactic war. Because gency video log, but you—the player-a sciwork for them, proving once again that good there is no \"click-and-wait,\" load times or 80 cntist aboard an unarmed spaceship doing other on-screen interrupts, the CD playback design still mcans less is more. medium is all but transparent, creating the Scientific Observer Probe a weaponless biological research. On board is the Darwin 5 Inside Intricate illusion of gameplay in real time. logical craft used to study alien life forms, Sure, the science fiction story is secondary to Evoking anticipation and anxiety, Iron Felix including their DNA structure. the arcade action of the game, but it's worth a immediately propels players into a nervebrief look behind the scenes at how the talwracking drama. The addictive pacc begins ented design team approached this project with the runaway, renegade SS Jeremiah First, start by borrowing from some wellObrian, an enormous starship destroyer carryworn movie scripts. Rework these successful ing a secret doomsday weapon—code name: formulas and contrive a tension-driven game Iron Helix. The weapon is a virus that mutates the DNA of an organism and attacks the where the absence of characters becomes part of the story. Since the crew is dead, there's no immune system, killing its host in the process. During a wargame simulation, the Obrian's computer goes berserk and takes control of the dreadnought. The ship's computer isn't fooling around; it has targeted a peaceful Earthlike Thanatosian planet where it will drop its horrible payload, annihilating the inhabitants COUTERAVE CAUSE and igniting a galactic war. Fortunately, for the purposes of entertain As both fate and the game's developers would have it, the player just might have a way ment, Murphy's Law still haunts the universe of bearing the odds. Interestingly, the Decenturies from now. Not only has the comfender Robot and the Darwin Probe are maputer failed to recognize the difference bechines that are opposites in purpose, yet tween a simulation and a real attack, but the day ne cleverly and unequally matched: One built to WS dreadful virus has somehow escaped. The crew he crew deere destroy, the other to discover new life forms. the QUEDAVE PAUSE has become infected and their DNA has begun Pave svegun Players must get into the cat n' mouse mind mutating need for annoying load times and delays assoset of the game and outwit rather than outfight Since the virus alters the Defender Robot. the unique DNA signagames. To offset the lack of characterization, ture of an individual, Iron Helix video logs of crew members provide a semthe computer refused to blance of personal interaction. TITLE: Iron Helix acknowledge the crew's PRICE: $99.95 Next, develop motion-picture quality altered DNA-based recMacintosh with CD-ROM graphics and animations to create a superb REQUIREMENTS: Macintosh Color Classic or better, 4MB RAM (5MB recommended), CD-ROM drive cinematic gameplay environment, reminisognition system. As a (150 Kb/sec transfer rate or better), color monitor cent of such films as Star Wars and Alien where result, all hands, includwith 256-color (8-bit) graphics capability, 7MB hard drive space, System 6:07 (with 32-bit hardware and spaceships showed signs of \"re-ing the Captain, wer Quickdraw or System 7); incompatible with alistic\" wear and tear. Then, lay out an unpreunable to access the NEC CDR-25 CD-ROM drive PROTECTION: None tentious, yet believable, control interface that computer and override LIRON HELIX DEVELOPER: Drew Pictures, Inc. responds incredibly fast considering the existthe attack plan. PUBLISHER: Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. ing limitations of CD-ROM technology. 2490 Mariner Square Loop If death doesn't come Alameda, CA 94501 And that's all there is to it. from the virus first, the (510) 522-1164 COO0002 SYSTEM: Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"TWO FLIGHT REASONS WHY SIMULATORS WILL NEVER BE THE SAME... Circle Reader Service #138 "


"THE FIRST SUPER-VGA FLIGHT SIMULATOR SUPER-VGA HARRIER ADVANCED Sim Se visual world, where objects are sharper, cleaner and can be seen for miles. Trom the flight fanatics at Domark T comes the first-ever strategic flight simulator designed for full-screen SVGA graphics technology. This is not a typical flight sim. SUPER-VGA HARRIER blows the competition out of the sky with super-fast, silky-smooth screen update at twice the resolution! Now you can experience a much larger for graphics which are the best I've ever seen BETTER THAN FALCON. The explosions and ground detail are really great.\" PC SOURCES MAGAZINE \"After playing Harrier in SVGA, all other flight-sims look like they are being played through a telescope... Not so long ago, a few glimpses at multimillion dollar serious flight simulators produced memories of images not far from those present in Harrier; very simply, it's that good.\" STRATEGY PLUS MAGAZINE 52 DISTRIBUTED BY Screens shown: 640 x 480 256-color SVGA resolution. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available October 1993 Spectrum HoloByte DOMARK Visa/MC orders: call 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) Super-VGA Harrier 1993 Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin Sound by Martin Walker. Produced by Jim Tripp. Falcon is a trademark of Spectrum HoloByte. 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite, 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #139 "


"FIRST-EVER COMPREHENSIVE FLIGHT MODELING SOFTWARE FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT pogo ADVANCED Si mSETies CREATE YOUR OWN PLANES, OBJECTS & BATTLEFIELDS — IN SUPER-VGA! Domark set the standard the first 3-D flight modeling with SUPER-VGA HARRIER, the software ever produced for your first-ever SVGA strategic flight PC, is Domark's second offersimulator. Now, we're pushing ing in its ADVANCED SIM-SERIES that standard to new heights! state-of-the-art flight simulaFLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT, tor product line. FST is revolutionary. It's powerful, sophisticated, and easy to use. Technophiles will appreciate the attention to detail-cockpits include modern instrumentation, such as OBI, DME, and Glidescope as well as the ability to build every detail of their sim world. In a hurry? Not interested in building every last plane, tree, truck, valley or skyscraper? No problem. Just check out the extensive library of clip-art imagery: aircraft, ground targets, landscapes and objects. You'll be streaking through the heavens in no time! FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT. YOUR AIRCRAFT. YOUR LANDSCAPES. YOUR MISSIONS YOUR WORLD. DISTRIBUTED BY Visa/MC orders: Screens shown: IBM 256-color SVGA displays. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available November 1993 Requires Windows 3.1 Flight Simulator Toolkit 1993 Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin. DO MARK Spectrum HoloByte 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) call 24 hrs a day, 1-800-695-GAME 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite, 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #140 "


"L. PARERES CODOOD: SOLLTE SECTION OUTEAVEMUSE Probe Able Cause and the Probe, are all non-human, the scenario upon which the game is played becomes Once one accepts the mission, a feisty female the star. Admiral explains, via video transmission, what Iron Helix uses first-rate, realistic details to action must be taken to stop the biological holocaust. The player must then complete develop its neo-gothic, surrealistic world. The player sees Hollywood-standard cinematic sefour separate phases of gameplay: collect quences when the Defender Robot is defeated; DNA, locate video clues, eliminate the Dethe Probe uses a search light in darkened areas fender Robot and destroy the Obrian. of the ship; the Probe's on-board computer Via remote control, the player pilots the randomly malfunctions, requiring a reboot to unmanned Darwin Probe through the vast get the system on-line again; the Thanatosians destroyer's eerie corridors, chambers and ladcome to life through the sounds of the opening der chutes. One must steer the Probe in a deck     sequence; and fine actors portray the crew by deck search for DNA samples that provide rarily disorient the Defender. Though it does members in the video logs. access to the video logs left behind by the dead use a lot of precious energy, it's the only option crew. The video messages contain the clues when the Probe gets backed into a dead-end. needed to stop the Defender Robot and destroy the Obrian. The clock is running and the Defender Searching for the proper clues necessary to never stops hunting. The Probe can take elevators, fly up and down ladder chutes, and advance to the next stage of the game is just move through corridors of the six-story the beginning. The player's Probe must conObrian. One can check out the Science Lab stantly elude the ship's deadly Defender Roand a lavatory for sights easily overlooked, and bot sentry who relentlessly stalks the Darwin. access the crew roster from one of the termiIf a Probe is destroyed, players have two more nals. (Hint: There's a safety zone in EngineerProbes, and thus two more chances, to win ing where the Defender can't find the Probe.) within the allotted time. Student Driver Briefing After a movie-like animation sequence of ne of Don t skip the well-written, mercifully Don't skip the well-written, mercifully slim Since the game relies heavily on believable the Probe entering the Obrian's shuttle bay, manual that provides hard copy of the stohard copy of the stosound effects and its metallic, techno-beat the screen presents the player with Darwin's ryline, background information and nuances score to boost the mood of the savvy space well-worn Control User Interface, a panel that make the game more enjoyable. The opera, you shouldn't play the game without that's uncluttered, easy-to-learn, and funcdocumentation also includes tips with a warnexternal stereo speakers. tional in its simplicity. ing to players that further reading will reduce the challenge of figuring out the game on their On Probe-Ation own. Purists can struggle with this doubleedged offering for themselves. There's one notable hiccup that the designWith five skill levels of increasing difficulty, ers should be razzed for: When the player's the game offers excellent replay value. The time runs out, an animation sequence shows scenarios don't just get harder; each skill level the Obrian deploying the deadly Iron Heis another game, where all clues, videos and lix...and the Thanatosian planet exploding. solutions are different with no discernible patThat's one hell of a virus! tern. In the higher levels, the Defender is This is a minor lapse in logic in an otherwise smarter and clues are harder to find. Players tightly-constructed sa Players tightly-constructed script. The designers have should use skill level one to familiarize themrectified and enhanced this shortcoming for selves with the Iron Helix environment before the upcoming PC release. moving on to serious tactics and gameplay. out Care PIE N OTE Video Log Summary Clicking on the navigation arrows or using Pumping Iron Helix How well a computer-generated game the keyboard, the player moves the Probe in Trou Helin hac much in common with the the draws the player into irs artificially-induced the desired direction, including up and down. film Blade Runner. In both productions, futurreality is the final lirmus rest for a game of this A few mouse clicks are necessary now and then istic set design and atmosphere dominate in type. Iron Helix racks up the kills here. The To access various controls and functions, as stead of characterization. Since the games full-color, photo-realistic world and the scamwell as to activate the Probe's Robotic Arm for principle players, the Destroyer, the Defender interfacing with the ship's computer termiless CD technology provide top-notch suspension of disbelief and an intensely satisfying nals. FESTAS TICK experience. Any player carrying even a recesContributing to the claustrophobic feel of sive gene for susceptibility to puzzles and fastthe game, the control panel features three paced action will enjoy this cinematically small screens: two video feedback monitors superb game. and a Map Display Screen, which offers variNote: Players should make sure they have the ous schematic views of the ship, including a most recent release of their CD drivers. Also, 3D orthographic mode that locates the Deplayers with color video display interface cards fender's position in relation to the Probe's. and a monitor capable of changing the display's Staying alive means tracking the Defender's resolution, such as an NEC Multisync FG monimovements at all times. A Jam Signal Button tor, should change the screen to 640 X 480 (53 is available for the most dire of situation; at DPI) mode for a larger viewing area of the close range, pressing this button will tempoProbe's control panel. Cow CARAME FOTBANKPUN BOND Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine Cobra \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Mission Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy. overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOME!! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and BOND WAS HOT STUFF. SO WAS ARNIE. NOW IT'S YOUR TURN. To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258-MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 JO System requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended) Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 800-258 MEGA RATED R (This program is voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences onlyllt Nosales to miner under 18 and where prohibited by law MEGATECH Circle Reader Service #78 "


"VIKING ))) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing Past Present Future Hint Books Hardware October Specials 13 12 15 . .. IBM Mac AD&D Dragonlance Kit 43 . AD&D Starter Kit AD&D Stronghold 38. AD&D Unlimited Adven. 38 38 Bards Tale 3 Betrayal at Krondor Challenge of 5 Realms 38 Darklands MPE Darkside of Xeen Dark Sun Grey Isles Camp. Sep Daughter of Serpents 19 . Enc the Unready 37. Eye of Beholder 1 19. Eye of Beholder 2 Eye of Beholder 3 Gryphon Master Havlar Nov. Inca Kings Quest 4 39 Kings Quest 5 Kings Quest 6 47 Kings Ransom IBM Mac Alone in the Dark Amazon 38 Batman Returns 42Blue Force:Next of Kin 42Carmen San Diego Series Where in Past 37 Where in Europe 34. Where in Space Where in Time Where in USA Where in World Where in World Dlx. Champions Dagger of Amon Ra Day of the Tentacle 37. Deja Vu 1 & 2 31 25 Elvira 2 43. Freddy Pharkas Indy Jones/Fate Atlants 39 37 Leisure Suit Larry 5 42 42 Lost File Shrick Himes 26 . Lost Treasures Infcom 33 42 2653 ... 29 IBM Ami B-17 Flying Fortress 19. Command HQ Crisis in the Kremlin 19 . Eye of the Beholder 1 19 Eye of the Beholder 2 Global Effect Leisure Suit Larry 5 M-1 Tank Platoon Meglomania No Greater Glory Paladin 2 Siege & Dogs of War Silent Service 2 Space Quest 4 Summoning Western Front Masters of Orion This sci-fi strategy program surpasses any other in its class in both size and scope. If you liked Reach for the Stars, you'll love this! Features ten different alien races and up to five computer opponents 42 42 QE IBM Mac IBM Mac Battletech Powerhits 20. Avatar Adventures CH-Flightstick Bloodnet Civilization/Rome 640k CH-Flightstick Pro 54 CH-Virtual Pilot 66 . TRIEU CRM Red Crystal Gravis Eliminator Card 29. Seek out the seven secrets Gravis Joystick Pro 39 of life! Can you forge Gravis Ultrasound 130 Pilot Control Stand 26 . through the evil that lurks in Pro Audio Spectrum 16 199. the depths of the eerie dun Pro Audio Spctrm Plus 145. geons, ominous castle tow Soundblaster ASP 16 235. ers and the savage coun Soundblaster Pro Delx 130. tryside? Play alone or with ThrustMaster Series a partner. Supports Flight Stick 66 Flight Stick Pro 107 IBM $38 modem play Game Card Rudder Pedals 109 TSR'S 12ea. Cyberspace Clouds of Xeen Weapons Control 69 Dominion Dagger of Amon Ra Weapons Control 2 95 . Dune Darklands MASTER Dune 2 Darkside of Xeen Flashback Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 11 Gateway Lucasfilm Air Combat Gateway 2:Homeworld 38 Might & Magic Off, Guide 12 Masters of Orion 38 Might & Magic 3 or 4 13 ea Mechwarrior 2 Nov. Quest for Clues Series Out of this World 37 37 Book of Orbs 11 Privateer Dec Manual of Swords 11 Protostar:War Frontier 42 Books 3 or 4 19ea Rex Nebular MPE Railroad Tycoon Ringworld:Revenge Patr37. Ringworld Space Hulk Run 5 Magazines 5ea Star Control 2 Secret Monkey Island 182 10ea Star Trek 25th Anniv SIMEarth: Strategy Guide 12 Star Trek:Next Gen. SIMLife: Strategy Guide 12 Strike Commander Star Control 2 Speech Pack Star Trek 25th Anniversary 10 Syndicate 38 Strike Commander Terminator/Rampage 43 Ultima: Official Book Betrayal at KrondorA Ultrabots Ultima 7 Clash of Steel Wing Commander 2 49. Ultima 7 Part 2 Day of the Tentacle A Spec Ops 1 & 2 19 ea. 11 Ultima 7/Underworld 1 Speech Pack Ultima Underworld 1 or 2 11ea Pax Imperia Wing Commdr Acdmy 33 . V for Victory: Battle Book 12 Pirates! Gold X-Wing Wing Commander 1 & 2 Bk 12 Space Hulk Imperial Pursuit 19 . Wizardry 6 (Bane) 19. Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) 13 CD-ROM TITLES AD&D Gold Box Series Pools Radiance, Curse of Azure Bonds, Secret of Silver Blades, Gateway to Savage Frontier, Treasures Savage Frontier, Champions Krynn, Death Knights Krynn, Dark Queen Krynn are all specially priced! 12 IBM $384 868 IBM Viking Ratings anaari Lost Treasures Infcom 2 20 37 Maniac Mansion 2 37. Police Quest 3 Return of the Phantom 38 Sam & Max Hit Road Savage Empire Seal Team Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness 888888 Star Control 2 Stronghold Syndicate V for Victory Series A War in Russia Warlords 2 B-Wing IBMMac Stonghold by SSI IBMMac IBMMac 37 37 35 56. Legacy Legend of Kyrandia 37 Legends of Drakka Sep Legends of Valor Lost Vikings Magic Candle 3 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 Pirates! Gold Quest for Glory 3 Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork Secret Monkey Island 1 37 Secret Monkey Island 2 39 Shadowcaster Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Summoning, The Ultima 4 Ultima 5 Ultima 6 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7 Part 2 The Silver Seed Ultima Trilogy 1 Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld 1 Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters 43 43 Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) 39 39 42 42 47 47 57 42 Oct. 7th Guest 12 Rds to Gettusburg Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Bloodnet Buzz Aldrin Race/Space Challenge 5 Realms Chessmaster 3000 Chopper Pack Conquest of Longbow Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun Oct Day of the Tentacle Dune F-15 III Great Naval Battles Iron Helix It's a Wonderful Life Jet Pack Kings Quest 5 Kings Quest 6 Kings Ransom Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Tresurs Infocom 1 Lost Tresurs Infocom 2 Mad Dog McCree Prince of Persia Sherlock Holmes Series Consulting Det. #1 Consulting Det. #2 Consulting Det #3 Star Trek 25th Annivers Tony Larussa 2 Underworld 1/Wing Co 2 Ultima 1-6 Bundle Ultima Underworld 182 Wing Commander 2 Dlx IBM $38 Stronghold Build your own D&D Kingdom with over 100 structures including cas ties, forges, mines, market places, towers, temples, cottages, schools of magic. Micro-Manage every detail or assign chore to the com puter. . . . . . . . Dec 47 47 53 22 . 27. "


"Shipping Rates/Hours For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax Fax 1 (404) 840-7925 UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day air. $6.00 2-day air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD add: 5.00 Overseas: Call Mail Rates: AK & Hl: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Call Prices subject to change, so call first! Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-8pm(EST) 7am-5pm(Pacific) 2980 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 3, Norcross GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5. Strategy/Simulations/Sports Pre-WWII World War II Modern Sci-Fi General Sports IBM Mac IBM Mac A-10 Warthog A Line in the Sand IBM Mac Armored Fists 38 . Battle Chess 4K (VGA) 32. 19 . 31. . .. IBM Mac Air Duel 37 . Ambush at Sorinor Ancient Art War Skies 37 Archon Ultra Bloodstone 26 Blue & the Gray Caesar Cohort 2 Castles Northern Camp Castles 2 Centurion Civilization Civilization Master Edit 45 45 Civilization Windows 42. Cohort 2 Command H.Q. Classic Conquered Kingdoms Add on Disk #1 Conquest of Japan D&D Fantasy Empires D&D Stronghold 38 38 8.8.8 Aces of the Pacific WWII:1946 25 Aces Over Europe Campaign Dsk #1 Oct. Air Warrior SVGA B-17 Flying Fortress 38 Battle of South Pacific Oct Battletank Barbarossa 39 Carriers at War Construction Kit Carrier Strike Expansion Dsk #1 Clash of Steel Fleet Commander Fleet Med Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles 42. Super Ships/Atlantic 19 . Scenario Builder 25. America/Atlantic 19. Grigsby's War in Russia 47. High Command 44 Pax Imperia The ultimate multi-player strategy adventure cast you as the leader of the an expanding empire. Through diplomacy, you must lead your people into the vast frontiers of space. Go where no Mac has gone before! 888888964298888 IBM Mac A-Train 42 42 Const. Set 24 24 Air Bucks 37 . Battles of Destiny 37. Battlechess 22 32 Battlechess (Windows) 32. Battlechess 4000 VGA 32. Battlechess 4000 SVGA 37. Buzz Aldrin Race Space 42. Civilization Civilization Windows 42 42 Civilization MPE 45 45 Command HQ Classic 22 Design Your Own R.R. El-Fish Empire Deluxe Flight Sim 5.0 Global Conquest Gobliiins Grand Slam Bridge 2 34. Grandest Admiral Dec. Hong Kong Majong Pro 32. IBM Mac 4-D Boxing 16 31 ATP Tennis All Amer Coll Ftbil 92 37. Andretti's Race Chall 16 . Bill Elliot Nascar 32 32 Car and Driver Front Page Sports Series Baseball Basketball Football Grand Prix Hardball 3 MLBPA Players Disk 15 Stadium Disk 18 Hockey League Sim2 29 John Madden Football 2 31 Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro Banff Springs Belfry Mauna Kea Pinehurst .. MAC $43 868go ........ 38 WWII:Battles of the South Pacificiop) Wage war for total control of the south Pacific with historically accurate forces that challenges players to rewrite history. Command Naval, Land, and Air Forces. Supports modem play 9987 *  Battle Chess 4K (SVGA)37 Battle Cruiser 2400 A.DTBA Bld. Manknd Fut Space Dec. Cyber Empires Global Effect Global Conquest Lunar Command Maelstrom Mantis Speech Pack Masters of Orion Mechamander Mechwarrior 2 Mechwarrior 3 Meglomania Mercenaries Mercenaries2 Pax Imperia Privateer Speech Pack Reach for the Stars 26 28 Rules of Engagement 2 38. Spaceward HI(WIN) 37. Spaceward HO!(DOS) 37. Spectre 37 . Star Control 2 ........... Harpoon 2 Command convoy escorts missle boat patrols, or carrier task forces! Control both land-based and carrier based aviation assets. Supports modem play. Interface allows you to cofigure your own game screens. 25 IBM $38 CE IBM $49 .. Buzz Aldrns Race/Sace 42 Commnche:Max Ourkil 43 Expansion Dsk. #1 25 Expansion Dsk. #2 25 Conflict Korea Conflict Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin Empire Deluxe Scenario Disk Empire Deluxe (WIN) F-117A Nighthawk F-14 Fleet Defender F-152 Classic F-153 Voice Commander 18 Falcon 3.0 Op. Fighting Tiger Falcon MC . 42 Flight Sim 5.0 Dec. Grandest Admiral Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk #1 Halls of Montezuma 27 29 Harpoon Battleset 2 or 3 19 Battleset 4 23 26 Harpoon Dsgnr Sries 16 32 Harpoon Dsgnr Sries 2 26 26 Harpoon Signature Edit 49 49 Harpoon 2 Harrier Assault Jet Fighter 2 Jump Jet M1 Tank Platoon MacArthur's War Patriot Perfect General WWII Scenario Great Battls 20th Cen25 Red Sky at Morning 39 Red Storm Rsng Classic 22 Seal Team 32 &&&0888 8. . Incredible Machine 32 Incredible Machine 2 32 . Lemmings 2 37 37 Lost Admiral 38 Sep Lost Admiral Enhanced Dec. Pacific War Panzer Battles 26 29 Red Sky at Morning Rommel North Africa Secret Wepons Luftwaf DO-335 HE-162 20. P-38 P-80 30 . Silent Service 2 Classic 22. Task Force 1942 V for Victory Series Gold, Juno, Sword 43 43 Kasserine Pass DecDec Market Garden 43 43 Stalingrad DecDec Utah Beach 43 37 Velikiye Luki 43 43 Victory at Sea 43 43 Victory Pack Western Front 22. WWII:Battles of Pacific . Microleague Baseball 4 33 NCAA Road to Fnal 4 38 NFL Challenge NFL Coaches Football 33 NFL Video Pro Football 47 Pool Shark Pro League Baseball Stratomatic Baseball Tony Larussa Basball 2 37 92 Stats Disk AL/NL Stadium's Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky 3 37 Hockey Lega Sim Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit Battles of Civil War Series Vol.1 26 Vol.2 Vol.3 Discovery of Columbus Dominion Gold of Americas Great War, The Inindo Jagged Alliance L'Emperuer Liberty or Death Man of War Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga Ambition 1 Nobunaga Ambition 2 Paladin 2 Pirates! Gold Populous 1 World Editor Populous 2 Powermonger Prelude to Jutland Railroad Tycoon Classic 22 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe 42 Rampart Red Baron Mission Builder Seven Cities of Gold Sid Meir Civil War Siege & Dogs of War Spoils of War Uncharted Waters Vikings Fields Conquest 37 Warlords 2 8..... Flight Sim 5.0 The best flight simulator of all times just got better Utilizes digitized graphics. Now supports true longitude and latitude system with the precision of 170 thousandths of an inch. A must for all flight Sim buffs  UIBM $45 Keyboard Overlays 38 . . 8 99998.&NSO908596 8908 Star Legions 2 Strike Commander Speech Pack Tactical Disk #1 Strike Squad When Two World's War 38. Wing Commander 1 19 . Secr.Mssn 1 & 2 19. Wing Commander 1 Dlx 49. Wing Commander 2 49. Spec Ops.Disk 1 & 219eaSpeech Pack 13 Wing Commander Acad 33. X-Wing Add on Disk B-Wing Warlords 2 Play the sequel to the high ly addictive, hugely suc cessful, award-winning Warlords! Now, Warlords 2 gives you more of every thing, all displayed in fbu lous HI-RES graphics and backed by a bold sound track! Perfect General WWII Disk Great Batt.20th Cen 25 Perfect General EnhancDec. Populous 2 R.R. Tycoon Classic 22 R.R. Tycoon Deluxe SIMCity Supreme SIMCity Supreme 2 SIMCity 2000 SIMEarth SIMEarth (Windows) SIMFarm Dec 42 SIMLife 42 42 SIMLite (Windows) 47 Solitaires Journey 38 . .. AA.. A-10 Tank Killer Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress Chuck Yeager Flight Commanche:Max Ovikl F-15 Strike Eagle 3 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.01 Flight Simulator 4.0 Gunship 2000 Secret Weapons Luftwaf 10 X-Wing 000000000 . IBM $42 .. Circle Reader Service #124 "


"REVIEW The Russian Revolution Spectrum HoloByte's Mig-29 Rips Through The Iron Curtain by Tom \"KC\" Basham limbing into the cockpit of a MiG-29 HoloByte, with very little information availcular monocle overlays the target in the lower and locking onto a US fighter might able to them, have attempted to model both 3D window. Symbology is displayed within feel strange the first time. The red stars the strengths and shortcomings of the MiGthe monocle indicating the targeting and no longer represent your mortal enemy, but 29. weapons status. The monocle can be used to your wingmen. The familiar F-16 is now your To begin with, the MiG-29 lags far behind acquire an off-boresight lock-on, meaning dreaded nemesis, and the technologically adthe F-16 in terms of avionics. The cockpi the F-16 in terms of avionics. The cockpit is the target aircraft is not directly in front of the vanced US arsenal now focuses on destroying, littered with analog dials and small indicator attacking aircraft, but on-board weapons are rather than protecting, you. Yes, comrades, lights. Though it bears little in common with still tracking it. This allows the pilot to emmodern air combat is a whole 'nother can of photos of the actual cockpit, the overall \"feel\" ploy missiles against the target more reliably borscht in Spectrum Holo Byte's MiG-29, an of the analog cockpit is maintained. A combat without switching out of padlock mode. add-on program for Falcon 3.0. pilot from World War II would probably feel The HMS does have a few glitches. Almuch more at home sitting in a MiG-29 than though generally reliable, switching from Behind The Iron Curtain an F-16. The HUD displays basic flight inpadlock to forward view or vice versa usually In MiG-29, the player lives the life of a formation, but is less informative than the results in the lock being momentarily broken. Russian pilot in the Frontovaya Aviatsiya F-16's HUD, especially when displaying inThis can be annoying, especially when (Frontal Aviation), the tactical combat formation about locked targets. Since little switching into padlock mode. Also, although branch of the Voyenno Vozdushnyye Sily, public information on MiG avionics is availmissiles can be aimed by this off-boresight  H ,      vve u out LE. able, MiG-29's Radar Display is loosely patmode, they still suffer from poor hit rates terncd after the radar electro-optical display unless fired from very low aspect angles. (REO) used in Falcon, but like the HUD, D. The IRST makes the MiG-29 a silent, but displays less information than its Falcon deadly foc. The IRST works by tracking heat counterpart. emissions from target aircraft instead of by Od All is not archaic in the MiG-29 cockpit. radar. Since the IRST only monitors heat Two features set the Russian aircraft far ahead .9 . from the target and never emits any signals of of many of its opponents: the helmet its own, it is completely undetectable by radar mounted sight (HMS) and the Infra-Red Search and MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon Track (IRST) system. The the Soviet air force. The Soviet Union of old helmet mounted sight is exTITLE: MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0 is gone, but somebody still has to keep those actly what the name sugMiG-29 PRICE PRICE: $59.95 pesky Americans from nosing around in eve gests-a monocle mounted SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 286-12, 1MB RAM, VGA graphics, rybody's business. on the pilot's helmet that proFalcon 3.0 The MiG-29 is a completely different ma vides valuable targeting inforPROTECTION: None PUBLISHER: Spectrum HoloByte chine from the F-16. In some ways, the MiG mation when looking away Alameda, CA is clearly superior to the F-16, but falls short from the HUD. Visible only (800) 695-GAME of the mark in other categories. Spectrum in the padlock mode, the cirOS Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"TO F O RCESTE PRETTIOSOOFT warning receivers. A MiG-29 could have an IRST lock on an F-16, and the F-16's TWI will be dead silent. Only after a missile is fired and the launch warning sounds will the targer know he has been stalked. Both radar-guided and heat-seeking missiles can be targeted using the IRST. The IRST, which is limited to only a 10nm range, places the MiG's radar (code-named \"Slot Back\" by NATO) into standby mode. If the locked target moves out of IRST range or passes behind a cloud (which blocks the target's heat signature), the IRST will automatically activate the radar to maintain the lock. Although this can betray the MiG to its prey, it protects the attacker from losing a lock at some critical moment just before a weapon is launched. The IRST does have a minor glitch, but it doesn't really affect play. As a result of the internal mechanism used to determine if a target is locked or not, sometimes targets ar greater than 10nm ranges will briefly be locked on to by the IRST when switching from standard radar scanning mode to IRST mode. These phantom locks last less than 1 second and provide no significant advantage to the MiG-29 player. This has led to some concerns that the IRST was supposed to work at longer ranges, but is broken. This is not the case. counter the reduced lift. At high speeds, the nose is trimmed down to counter the increased lift. The F-16's flight computer handles this automatically, but the MiG-29 requires manual trimming. Trim settings are valid only for a single airspeed and fight profile. If the aircraft accelerates or decelerates, the trim must be reset to provide stable flight. MiG-29 allows for both pitch and yaw trimming. Trimming the Realistic flight model has turned out to be one of the biggest complaints with the MiG-29 flight model. Although the acrual impact of trimming may be reasonably modeled in MiG-29, sufficient trim controls are not. The trim controls are very sensitive, and the aircraft's trim requirements are a little over-done. The simpler flight models do auto-trim the aircraft to ease the flight difficulty, but the Difficult and Realistic flight models require constant trim adjustments. The trim keys make extremely fine corrections and are usually too slow to counter \"nose bouncing.\" The MiG is far from unflyable, though. It does require a steady hand and lot of thinkdone ing, but with a good joystick it is quite possible to adequately control the MiG. The ser ble to adequately control the MiG. The secret is in two additional trim controls which are documented only in the MGREADME.TXT the amount of G available for maneuvering. If you have an airspeed of over 400krs, but are unable to pull more than five or six Gs, you probably need to release and reset the trim P controls. \"G\" Whiz Another effect of the manual flight linkages is that there's no computer preventing you from over stressing the airframe. The amount of G that can be instantaneously generated by an aircraft is based on how much lift the wings can generate at a certain speed. But, with lift comes drag, and drag reduces speed. Reduced speed reduces lift. Therefore, pulling maximum G will cause airspeed to drop and reduce the amount of G the aircraft can sustain. At operational speeds, many aircraft, including the MiG-29, can instantaneously generate more G than the airframe can withstand. In the case of the MiG-29, at 500 600kts, a quick yank on the stick can generate 13 to 14G before the pilot can even blink. The aircraft modeled in MiG-29 can withstand a respectable 13G. Pulling more than 13G, even for a few milliseconds, will damage the aircraft! At speeds of 700 to 800kts, a quick pull of the stick can generate as much as 18G and instantly disintegrate your aircraft. As with countering the manual trim effects, the \"unlimited\" G capability requires a very steady hand on the control stick. MiG-29 does a reasonable job of modeling the complex flight dynamics of the real MiG29. For example, the Spectrum HoloByte MiG-29 retains good control at speeds as slow as 100kts (a definite plus in a dogfight), and also handles high-alpha flight. Spectrum's MiG is capable of spins, tail slides, and even a reasonable approximation of Pugachev's INDEBER SELL YOUR USED GAMES Yeah, But Will It Fly? The MiG-29 is an old-fashioned, stick-andrudder, thinkin' man's aircraft. Unlike the fly-by-wire F-16, in which a computer monitors the pilot's stick movements and thereby adjusts the control surfaces to steer the aircraft, the MiG-29 uses plain old hydraulics to link the control stick and rudders to the control surfaces. The F-16's flight computer is designed to monitor the pilot's commands and \"keep him out of trouble\" by ignoring or limiting \"unreasonable\" commands. The F16 is limited to 9 Gs in this manner, and the controls automatically trim the aircraft to provide a smooth ride. Not so in the MiG-29. As airspeed increases, so does the lift produced by the wing, causing the aircraft to naturally climb. As the aircraft climbs, the speed decays, lift reduces, and the nose drops. When the nose drops, airspeed and lift again increase, perpetuating the cycle. Trimming is used to make very small adjustments to the flight control surfaces to prevent this effect. At low speeds, the nose is trimmed up, to filc, not in the manual. The \"*\" key on the keypad immediately releases trim settings to neutral positions and the \"5\"key immediately locks the trim settings to the current joystick position. This allows users to set the trim instantly no matter where the stick is. Spectrum HoloByte recommends only using the keypad \"5\" to set the trim, but I found it works better to first release the trim with the keypad \",\" move the stick to the desired flight position, and finally lock the trim at that position using the keypad «5.\" This method has a few hazards one needs to be aware of. Be sure not to press the keypad \"5\" unless the nose of the aircraft is exactly where you want it. If you are diving, but want to fly straight and level, you must first pull the nose up. If you lock the trim as soon as the nose hits level, the aircraft will actually still be climbing and the trim will be set to continue that climb. It is necessary to allow the aircraft to stabilize in level flight before locking the trim. Also, if the trim is locked in extreme positions to counter very high or very low speeds, this effectively limits the available travel of the control stick and possibly limits Top Prices Paid . Convert titles you've beaten or grown tired of to CASH or trade credit (20% more)!  IBM AMIGA C64  Call or send list Bare Bones Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Circle Reader Service #42 November 1993 Page 153 "


"Take Advantage of Our $5.00 Off Coupon As Well As Our Super Sales Specials! Order via GENIE! Type MC-SOFTWARE On-Line To Visit Our Store! Raise to the Occassion! Voice Recognition Software for SoundBlaster Compatible Cards PA Strip Poker Professional combines the strategic play action of 5 card draw with some very different table stakes. Laura. Kami and Greta are 3 lovely opponents who are willing and able to bet it all for the chance to 'beat the pants off of you'. You can play against 1, 2 or 3 opponents simultaneously and of course, the more you win, the more they take off. Play 3 opponents at once, SVGA graphics and digitized speech. By Artworx............... $35. VOICE LASTEK *.37 TOUCH SOGATION 10 TEARO .40 IBM DISKS COVOX VOICE Operate your computer at the speed of sound! The world's most powerful PC based VOICE RECOGNITION program. Adds voice commands to popular educational business and entertainment programs! Prophecy ........................ Putt Putt Joins the Parade ... Putt Putt's Fun Pack Quarterpole. Quest Glory 4 ... Quest for Glory III. Ragnarock ...... Rags to Riches ... Railroad Tycoon Classic ... Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Rampart .............. Reader Rabbit 2 Reading & Me ..... Realms of Arkania ... Red Baron Red Crystal... Return of the Phantom. Return to Zork RingWorld ........... .... Rules of Engagement 2...... Sales Letter Works .............47 San Francisco Scenery Disk ....29 Scenery Collection Set A ........37 Scenery Collection: Set B.......37 Scenery Enhancement Editor ..27 Scenery Grand Canyon ...........22 Scenery Upgrade: Tokyo Japan 22 Scooter's Magic Castle .... Seawoll ........ Secret of Monkey Island Il Seven Cities of Gold Commemorative Edition.... Shadow of Yserbius... Shadow President Shadowcaster ......... Sharif on Bridge Shuttle Space Flight .. Siege Walls of Rome. Silent Service 2 Classic Sim Ant .... Sim Ant Windows Sim City 2000 Sim City Classic DOS. Sim City Windows 42 32 43 ..32 4D Boxing A Train A-Train Construction Set ........25 A.L.P.: Flight Commander ....37 A320 Airbus.......... Aces of the Pacific ..... Aces of the Pacific:WW2 1946 Disk 1 ...... 22 Aces Over Europe ............ 47 AD&D Fantasy Empire....... Adventures of Willie Bemish 2.43 Air Dual Flight Simulator .... Air Warrior By Covox ......... $79. 40 48 .32 DEGUSTIHL ONS TWO Megalomania ............... Metal and Lace .... Mickey's 123 2.0.... Mickey's ABC's 2.0 .... Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 47 MM 4: Clouds of Xeen ........ More Incredible Machine.........32 Naval Battles:America Atlantic 22 Naval Battles:Scenario Builder 29 New York Scenery Disk.......... NFL Coaches Club Football.....43 32 ..19 C662-666-008  TOULNOO NOISSIN Auto Map ........... 157 Automap Road Atlas...............57 Automap Road Atlas Upgrade. 27 Automap Road Atlas Windows.57 Automap Road AtlasUpgrade...27 AutoWorks ..... .47 AV8B Harrier Assault. B-17 Flying Fortress ...... Bart Simpson's Arcade Game.32 Bart Simp. House Weirdness Beat the House Betrayal at Krondor 43 Blood Net .... Bloodstone ....... .... Blue Force ... Body Illustrated Dual Bridge 7.0. Bridge Master Windows Caesar ....... Carrier Strike ....... Carriers at War ................ Carriers at War 2....................43 Carriers War: Construction Kit 37 Castle of Dr. Brain ........ Castles 2 Siege & Conquest..32 Celtic Legends ..................... 32 Center Court Tennis ........... Challenge of the 5 Realms .....42 Champions ........... Chess Manjac 5 PC Civilization Master Edition .. Clash of Steel .... ....... 43 Coaster ..................... ..... Cobra Mission .................. Cohort. Il .......................... ....22 Comanche Maximum Overkill .47 Comanche Mission Disk 1......28 Comanche Mission Disk 2 ......28 Command Adventures Starship 43 Companions of Xanth .............35 Conquer Windows. Conquered Kingdoms ....... Conquered King Data Disk 1...27 Conquest of Longbow.... Daemonsgate .......................40 Dark Side of Xeen .... .45 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands ....50 Daughter of Serpents ............21 Deja Vul & l:Casebook of Ace Harding... . ..33 Delta V.................. Design Your Own Railroad .......37 Discovery:Steps of Columbus 37 Doom.... Dragon Knight 3 43 A Dune 2: Building of a Dynasty 37 Dyno Quest.... Earth Invasion Windows EarthQuest Easy Street Eco-Quest 2... Eco Saurus Eight Ball Deluxe Empire Deluxe Empire Deluxe Scenario Builder22 Empire Deluxe Windows Eric the Unready ..................37 Eternam ...... Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle..47 Falcon 3.0 ............................50 Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 Mission ....37 Falcon 3.0 Fighting Tiger .......27 Family Fun Pack ............. Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise 33 Femme Fatale Femme Fatale Data 1 thu 6 Fields of Glory Flashback Flight 701 Flight Sim Toolkit.. Flixmix ............... Freddy Pharkas ....... Front Page Sports Football .....43 Front Page Sports Football Pro 47 Gabriel Knight................43 Gary Grigsby's Pacific War ......47 Gary Grigsby's War in Russia ..47 Gateway 2.. Gearworks Global Domination.... Grammar Gremlins Grand Slam Bridge 2 Graue Wolf Aces of the Deep .42 Great Naval Battles ........... Great Naval Admiral's Pack.....54 Hardball 3 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk Hardball III Players Disk Harpoon 2 ............ Harpoon Challenger SIG .........52 Harpoon Designer Series 2 .....27 Head Coach Football Windows 27 Headline Harry VGA ..37 High Command .............. Hired Guns ..........................37 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro .........33 Hoyle's Book of Games 3 .....32 Hoyle's Book of Games 4. Hoyles Classic Card Games ...32 It ...... Incredible Machine Indiana Jones IV Atlantis IndyCar Racing Innocent Until Caught International Golf Island of Dr. Brain Isle of the Dead Italy Scenery Disk .... Jagged Alliance.... Jet Fighter 2 Bundle Jordan In Flight Jump Jet .... Jurrassic Art ....... Kasparov's Gambit Kid Pix Kid Works ...... Kid Works 2... King's Quest 6. King's Ransom Koshan Conspiracy ... Kronolog The Nazi Paradox.. Lands of Lore ...... .... Leasure Suit Larry 6....... Legacy Realm of Terror .. Legal Letter Works .... Leisure Suit Larry 5 ..... .... Letter Works ... Life & Death II: The Brain .......32 Links 386 Pro ....................42 Links Course Banff Springs ....22 Links Course Disk Belfry. Links Course Disk Bountiful ...22 Links Course Disk Innisbrook ..22 Links Course Mauna Kea .......22 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 30 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 .32 Lost Vikings ......... .32 Lucky's Casino.. Lunar Command. Madden Football 23.5 Maelstrom ................ MM 2 Day of Tentacle.... Mantls: Experimental Fighter ..43 Mario Teaches Typing Masters of Orion Math & Me... Math Blaster Mystery Math Blaster Plus Math Magic.............. Math Rabbit Enhanced..........32 MegaFortress:Flight of the Old Dog 28 Not a Clone! Genuine Soundblaster chipset means 100% SoundBlaster compatability. Includes High Performance Speakers, An Ergonomically Designed Joystick & Gameport. Software Includes Voxkit Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot. FM Intelligent Organ, Jukebox for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein. By Bondwell ............$99. 42 ..43 DL II: Curse of Mordread brings the classical animation style of Don Bluth to your computer featuring fullscreen animation, digitized sound and new animations not in the original arcade game. ON SALE........529. Aircraft & Scenery Designer ....37 Airport & Facilities Directory ...20 AJ's World of Discovery ..........32 Algeblaster Plus .............32 Alied Forces Bundle........ Alone in the Dark Amazon ........ Ambush at Sorinor. Animation Studio Windows Arborea Archon 93... Armored Fist Armour Geddon.. Ashes of Empire ..37 43 NHL Hockey '94. Number Munchers Operation Light Storm ... Operation Neptune .. Out of This World P.T.O........ Pacific Strike...... Paris Scenery Disk Perfect General .. Sim Earth .............. Sim Earth Windows Sim Farm... Sim Life ........... ... Slater and Charlie Go Camping 32 Solitaire's Journey Space Quest 5 Spaceward Ho! Speed Reader for Windows ... Spell It Plus ..... .47 MARK II WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 Simply The Best! Flight Control -The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight Simulator packages as a 2 button joystick $69. Flight Control Pro $115. Rudder Pedals $115. ACM Game Card $35. . ...22 Weapons Control Mark II Hands on throttle with 7 controls including radar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures Fully Programmable $99. International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, Mc, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School. State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) UPS Blue ismini mum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: 37 Peter Pan A Story Painting Adventure ............ ... Pilot's Edge Version 1.0 Pilot's Edge Version 2.0 Pilot's Edge Version 3.0 Pilots Power Tools Pirates Gold Police Quest 3 Police Quest 4... Populous 2 ......... Positronic Bridge. Prince of Persia 2. Print Shop Deluxe PrintShop Deluxe Windows Privateer ... Spellcasting 301 Spring Break 37 SPROUT! .......................... .37 Star Trek 25th Anniversary .....37 Star Trek Judgement Rights ....37 Star Trek Next Generation.. Stonekeep ....................... Street Fighter II ..... Strike Commander Speech .....22 Strike Squad Strip Poker 3...... Strip Poker Data Disk 1 thru 6.18 Strip Poker Professional...... Stronghold. Super Jeopardy Super Ships of the Atlantic .....22 Super Tetris Windows............32 MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW1193, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! "


"Order Now 800-999-7995 Now Available in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico & Canada! International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 37 Syndicate Take a Break Pinball Windows 32 Terminator 2029 Terminator 2029 Op.Scour .....22 Terminator Rampage Tetris Classic ......... Tetris Classic Windows. The Blue and The Gray The Dig.. The Elder Scrolls The Arena....43 The Great War 1914-18. .....43 The Labyrinth... The Lost Tribe Theatre of War 33 Tom Landry Football Deluxe ....32 Tony Larussa Baseball 2 .40 Tony Larussa lI AL/NL Tony Larussa Il Fantasy Draft .16 $5 SAVE! $5 .....19 For the Best in ADULT CD ROM. Call, Write or Fax Mission Control for a List of the Hottest Titles and Most Competitive prices. You Must be 21+ to Order. SUPERS $5.00 off your order (over $50) Simply send in coupon with your order! lol to Pr I srd For Sale Items! collet mpires 11/1/93 Hom Tony Larussa Il Player Disk ....16 Tornado ...... Tristan Pinball U.S. Atlas for Windows .........54 Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue... Ultima 7:The Black Gate ..... Ultima Underworld II Ultima Pt 1:Stygian Abyss ......50 Ultima VII Silver Seed......... .22 Ultrabots Uninvited Windows ..... Unlimited Adventures USA East Scenery Disk ... ......43 V for Victory 1: Utah Beach ....47 V for Victory 2: Velikiye Luki ...47 V for Victory 3: Market Garden 47 V Victory 4: Gold Juno Sword ..43 Victory at Sea ...... Victory Pak.. Walker War in the Gulf Warlords 2..... WC 2 Special Ops 1 & 2 Pak...27 WC || Special Operations 1 ....25 WC II Special Operations 2 ....27 When Two Worlds War ...... ...37 Where Space Carmen Deluxe 50 Where in USA Carmen DelxEd 47 Where in the World Deluxe .....48 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.39 WC 2 with Speech Pak...........27 Wing Commander Academy ....35 Wing Commander Deluxe Ed ..50 Wing Commander II. 52 Wolfpack CD Rom .... Word Attack Plus ............... Word Munchers World Circuit Grand Prix ...... Ww Il Battles of South Pacific 37 X-Wing ... X-Wing Mission Disk 1 CD ROM HEADQUARTERS Fores Cits Galore Girls in Viid 1 or 2 Cirls of I. Stephen Hicks 1 or 2 Clobal Explorer Great Naval Battles Croliers Enclopedia Banship 2000..... Hacker Hawai Girls Hell Cab Hidden Obsessions (N) High Volume Hudes Het Hanks Hot Piu 2.3 or 4. House of Dreams (N) House of Games AEES      ...........22 STRASSE ACCESSORIES ACS 100 Speakers. ACS 150 Speakers........... ACS 300 Speakers......... CyberMan ..................... .69 Media Box Black 100 5.25 ....34 Mitsumi CD Rom Drive...... Mouse Mat Single .. . Notebook Gameport ...............43 Supra V32 Internal Fax Mod..169 101 Sexual Positions 1 or 2. 7th Guest 7th Guest 2 The 11th Hour Adult Movie Almanac (0) Adalt Palate Vol 1 or Vol 2. Adult Reference Library Adult Sampler --Adventures of Seymore Butts (1) ... After Dark Trilogy A Beauties ..... . ...... America's Premier Shareware... American Business Phonebook .29 American Heritage Dictionary Animals ........ Animation Fantasies 1 or 2... Arthur's Teacher Trouble..... Asian Ladies Astrology Source B17 & Silent Service Combo Bangkok Bare Assets Barney Bear goes to School Barney Bear Goes to Space Basics Electronic Cookbook Battle Chess Enhanced Best of Vivid (1) Betrayal........ Bible Library Blue Force Britannica's Family Choice Business Master Busting Out Busty Babes 3. Cafe Flesh (M) Cat and Mouse () Chess Maniac ChessMaster 3000 Classic Book Collection Clip Art Galore Clip Art Heaven Creepy Crawlies.... Cute & Caddies Dare Bluff or Die Debbie Does Dallas Deep Throat (M) Delure Scrabble Digital Dancing (0) Digital Dreams Dirtylak (0) Dream Machine (1) 24 299  38 Reference Library Return of the Phantom Rimfire Pacific (M) Sci-fi Fantasy Secret Weapons of the Lottwalfe Secrets (0) Shareware 1993. Shareware Explorer Shareware Extravagana Shareware Overload Shareware Studio Sherlock Holmes Detective 12 or 347 Shuttle Right Simulator Sleeping Beauty So Much Stareware Software Vault 2.. Software Vault Cold Southern Beauties Space Quest 4 Sports Illustrated Almanac Star Trek 25th Janiversary Storm 1, 2 or 3 Super Smubare Surts Up Surioware 1993 ___ Talking Classic Tales Tabing Schoolbouses Terrorist Group Profiles The Journeyman Project Things Change My Lst Time (W) 69 Tanetable Business Polities & Media 65 Timetable of Arts Entertainment....65 Timetable of History Timetable of Science & Insations...69 Too Many Typelaces. .. Tobal Baseball '93 Ed.. . Total Fantasies... Traci I Love You (N) Tropical Gris Trouble Mind Twee Roads to GettysburgU.S. Presidents Ultima Under/Wing Commander 2.54 UIS Alas / Automap US History USA Wars Korea or Vietnam USA Wars: Civil War Video tube Visual Fantasies (NO) Volcano Where in World is Carmen Deluxe Wicked Wild Places Wilie Beamish Windoware Windowmaster Windows 1993 Wing Commander & Ultima Wing Commander 2 Delute Wing Commander Deluxe Women af Venus ...... World Trader Wrath of the Demon CONTROLLERS While Supplies Last! A Line In the Sand 14 LightSpeed A.T.A.C. 29 Links troon North 5.25 Action Station 19 Lost Treasure Mac Ad Lib Gold 1000 99 Mach 1 Air Force Commander 19 Mac Diction Children CD 29 Alrbucks 19 Magnetic Scrolls Alrcraft Adventure Fact 22 Marlo Is Missing Analog Joystick 32 Martian Memorandum 19 Ancient Art War In Skles 29 Math Blaster Plus Wind 29 Arachnophobla Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0 19 AutoMap Windows 39 McGee Bundle 22 Avlator Yoke 29 Mercenarles Bandit Kings China 29 Mickey's Memory Chall. 14 Battle Isle Scenario 9 MicroLeague Baseball 4 22 BattleChess 4000 SVGA 29 Microsoft Flight Sim V4 29 BattleChess 4000 VGA 24 Mini Vacuum Cleaners Beauty and Beast CD 29 Monopoly Deluxe Win 29 Bug Bunny's Adventure 5 Mouse Wheel 29 Business Card Maker Deluxe Mouse Yoke 5.25 29 Grammy Awards CD Rom 32 Buzz Aldrin's Race Into NY Times Crossword Mac 19 Space 34 NFL Pro League Football 19 Callfornla Games 2 27 Office Design Campaign Omega Joystick Cash Biz 14 Oregon Trall Deluxe CD Rom Caddle Oregon Trall IBM Coaches Challenge 5.25 9 Oregon Trall Mac Combat Classics 24 Origin FX Screen Saver Computer Cleaning Kit 19 Pacloll 2000 V.2 Computer Vaccuum Kit 14 Panzer Battles Macintosh 14 Conan the Cimmerlan CD PC Command Control 19 Rom Personnel Readyworks 49 Crime Does Not Pay PowerGame Bundle 44 Crusaders of the Dark Savant Reading Adventures In Oz 29 5.25 29 Remote Control 5.25 9 Darkseed 29 Rex Nebular Dinosaur Designer Road Track Grand Prix 19 Disk Drive Head Cleaners 5 Romance 3 Kingdoms II 37 Dragon's Lair 3 29 Salling Simulator III VGA 29 Dream House Pro 29 Sargon V Dune 24 Scenery Upgrade Bundle Eagle's Rlder 9 Tropics & Rocks Elite Plus 14 Scrabble Deluxe Wind Expert Palnt Mac 17 Secret Island Dr. Quand Expert Pet Care Shanghal Il Macintosh Eye of the Beholder 3 37 Sharlf Bridge Windows F15 Strike Eagle III 34 Software Jukebox CD FallSafe Guardian 19 Solltalre for Windows Fisher Price: Maln Street 12 Sound Commander Gold 59 Flight Stick Sound, Graphics Alr Filntstones Game 5.25 9 Special Forces Future Wars CD Rom 29 Special Ops 2 5.25 Gameport 2 MCA 22 Spolls of War Golf Guide: (CA & HI) CD 19 Star Legions Greens: Ultimate Golf 29 Strike Commander Gunship 2000 VGA 5.25 34 Super Munchers Halls Montezuma Mac 9 Swap Hare Raising Havoc/Sound Terminator 5.25 Source Theatre of War 5.25 Head Cleaning Kit 5.255 Time Treks Heimdahl 19 TimeQuest Hockey League Sim 2 . 22 Tom Landry Football Icontroller 39 Trolls Icontroller for Laptops 49 Trump Castle 3 Inspector Gadget 5.25 19 Ultima 7: Serpent Isle Intruder Joystick 19 Ultima Underworld II 49 Jeopardy 25th An. UltraSound 119 Jetsons Game 5.25 Vell of Darkness King's Bounty Virtual Pllot L'Empereur 5.25 29 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 32 Land, Sea, Alr Trilogy 2 24 What's My Angle Leather God Phobos 2 Wheel of Fortune Vanna Legend of Excallber 19 WindEase Legend of Kyrandia 32 Zoo Keeper Lemmings 2 29 47 Indiana Jones 4 Fate of AHantis Insatiable (M) Iron Hefit Island Girls..... lack in the Beanstalk Just Games Jutland Kama Sutra ... KGB/CIA World Factbook. King's Quest 6 Upgrade King's Ransom King Quest 6 Legends of Permit() Library European & American Art.. Library of the Future Local Girls 1 or 2 Lord of the Rings .... Lost Treasures of Infocom 1 or 2 Lotus 123 for Windows V2.1... Lovely Ladies 1 or 2. Mad Dog McCree Manuals National Geographic Mantis: Experimental Fichter Mayo Clinic .... Mixed up Mother Goose MM 2 Day of Tentade Monster Disk (2 disk) Moving Fantasies (M). Multimedia Music:Vivaldi... My Private Collection 1 or 2 Mystic of Orient New Wave Hookers 1 or 2 (0) Nidit Trips (M) Night Watch () North American Indians Officer's Bookcase P.C. SIG Games Paradise Cluh (0) PC P1 Vol 1, 2 or 3 PC Six Version 2 Phoeni: 3.0 PhoneDisc Residential USA Prysical Therapy Pork Ware Private Pictures Vol. 1 Putt Putt's Fun Pack Q69 Rebel Assault ACM Game Card .. Analog Plus Analog Pro Joystick .. Eliminator Game Card. Flight Control Pro Flight Control System ....... Flight Control Yoke Flight Pedals ....... Flight Stick SUPER SPECIALI..39 Flight Stick Pro FX 2000 G Force Yoke .................59 Gameport Automatic MCA ... Gameport III Automatic Parallel Game Port.. Rudder Pedals Virtual Pilot... Weapons Control .................89 Weapons Controller Mark 2.....99 24 29 8 29 Dracuda Ecstasy   Education Master Encyclopedia of Clip Art Eric the Veready Erotic Encounters 1 or 2 SOUNDCARDS/CD Erobcate. The Humans European Racer Exotic Girls Extremo Delight Eye of the Beholder 1,2,3 Bunde FUTA Stealty F15 Strike Ende 2... F15 Striko Eade 3...... Farily Doctor Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise 40 Discovery CD 16 bit External 599 Discovery CD 16 bit Internal..499 Edutainment 16 External.......645 Edutainment 16 Internal .... ..595 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.... .189 Sound Blaster 16 ASP ...249 Sound Blaster Pro MCA... 258 Soundman 16............. 169 Sound Blaster Pro Basic ..... .159 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe .....149 Sound Machine Sound Kit.......99 UltraSound SUPER SPECIAL 119 Voice Blaster ... Wave Blaster ....................249 382 40 .72 30 19 59 Flight Simulator 5.0 $47. New York Scenery $29. Paris Scenery $29. $5. off when you buy all three! 29 14.4 Internal Fax Modem. V.32,V.42 & MNP5. Free bitcom and Bitfax Software Included! $169.95 CONTROL 32 Circle Reader Service #91 "


" The Tools Of The Falconer Keyboard Commander Corps' Falcon/Mig Utilities Cobra. Under some circumstances (which were not readily quantifiable), the MiG-29 will enter a flat spin. Normally this rare event would happen only after being hit by a missile, but at least once I managed to enter a flar spin simply by wildly moving the joystick during high-alpha flight. Reach Out And Splash Someone In addition to the new MiG-29 stuff, the package also updates Falcon 3.0 to version 3.02. In this new version, the communications programming has been completely rewritten to give players even more opportunities to blast their simulated friends 2. Current-squadron NoneSuhagin SQUAD TATUS available. out of the simulated sky. Connections generally take less time to establish with improved stability during play. Warping (where the target aircraft seems to rapidly shift positions) still occurs at slower speeds (2400 baud), but this is a limitation of slower data transfer speeds and not a reflection on the program. At 9600 baud, warping is barely noticeable. Due to the rewrite, comms mode is not backwards compatible with older versions of Falcon. Falcon 3.02 can only connect to Falcon 3.02 or MiG-29 1.00 players. Players can mix and match comms play. In simple head-to-head mode, players can match F-16 against F-16, F-16 against MiG29, and MiG-29 against MiG-29. Users should be aware that during F-16 versus MiG-29 matches, the F-16 player must be on the calling system and the MiG-29 player must be on the answering system. In allied play, players can fly as wingmen on either side of each theater. Network play is the champion of them all, though. Network players can engage in a multi-bandit, head-to-head furball with multiple MiG-29s and F-165 screaming across the pixels. Better yet, networked allied play allows two teams to play a concurrent campaign against each other! Local Falcongroups have reported three F-16 versus three MiG-29 campaigns. There is one downside to the new comms mode: modem play is only supported up to 9600 baud. Higher through-put standards V.32bis, V.42 and V.42bis are not supported. This was not an oversight, but a design decision by Spectrum HoloByte. Spectrum developers stated during a recent CompuServe conference that these protocols were not included because the design team was reluctant to introduce them until a more robust comT T Tith a program as big and as comtomization of Falcon options. Want to plex as Falcon 3.0 sitting on the disable the view shifting when the ILS is hard drives of hackers around the activated? Want to remove unused data world, it was inevitable that it be dissected from the HUD? F3maps takes the user's bit-by-bit. It started with enthusiastic playchoices and permanently stores them. Y ers taking stabs at fixing bugs, passed Third, F3maps allows customization of through a massive shareware stage, and fiRed Flag armaments and automatic gennally hit the commercial arena. Keyboard eration of random Red Flag missions. Commander Corps (KCC), the makers of Want to equip a C-130 with Sidewinders keyboard overlays for many flight simulaand watch it take down a few unwitting tors, has begun marketing a set of Falcon MiGs? F3maps allows this in Red Flag utilities designed to enhance gameplay and mode (but not in actual campaigns). offer solutions to campaign-blocking prob Want to fly a surprise mission? F3maps lems. will generate some doozies based on input A large number of freeware and sharecriteria such as how many aircraft on each ware tools have been written to fix, hack, side, how many ground forces, etc. Lastly, edit and decode Falcon. Most of the utiliit has a \"remove all patches\" option which ties provided from KCC trace their roots will remove all changes and restore the back to freeware or shareware origins, but FALCON3.EXE and MIG29.EXE files it should be stated that all products listed to their original, default configuration. in this review are now fully commercial programs. The KCC products are not FZREQ available from BBS systems, and it is illeFreg is a squadron and campaign mangal to copy and distribute them without agement tool. Similar in design to the licensing from KCC. This review only \" sh shareware program Falcnr, this new utiladdresses the comity adds a few new mercial KCC prodtwists for those who ucts, not the many feel editing their other shareware and squadrons is cheatfreeware programs ing F3reg has two baSince every version sic functions. As a of Falcon has resquadron editor, it quired a rewrite of allows users to nearly every userchange every attribmade tool, KCC ofute associated with a fers two separate pilor: name, rank, packages: Falcon callsign, flying skills Commander Utilities An alternate view of the Red Flag map and even the numfor use with Operavia F3MAPS. ber of sorties flown! tion: Fighting Tiger Awards and promo(Falcon 3.01 and 3.01.1), and MiG Comtions can be given to pilots who distinmander Utilities for use with MiG-29: guish themselves but are overlooked by 17 Deadly Adversary (Falcon 3.02 and MiGFalcon, and rank can be busted from pi291.00). lots who Falcon unjustly awards. Fatigue Both Falcon Commander Utilities levels for every pilot in the selected squad(FCU) and MiG Commander Utilities ron can be set to 100% with one keypress, (MCU) include the same five utilities, the which is great when the user wants to start only difference being version compatibil a new campaign using an existing squadity. All five tools use a simple, mouse ron. Dead pilots can be revived and missdriven interface, and each have ing pilots found. Best yet, users can print documentation files. Most of the individa list of their pilots showing their callsigns dual authors, as well as the \"Commanding and abilities, saving time when trying to Officer\" of KCC can be reached via Comdetermine which pilots to send on a parpuServe for support. ticular mission. As a campaign editor, F3reg allows users to edit resupply dates, F3MAPS edit pilot replenishment dates, and edit the F3maps does many different things. the stockpiles of all weapons available in nyp First, as the name suggests, it lets the user the campaign. Need a few more AMchange the default map used for Instant RAAMs: A quick trip to F3reg will do the Action and Red Flag modes. Want to sightsee in Japan? Just switch the Red Flag Freg allows users two modes of operaW map from Nellis to Kurile Islands and tions, cheat and simulation. In cheat WX roam around freely. Second, it allows cusmode, users may freely edit rosters and job. Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"\"I hope there will be a sequel... Will yiuuiy buy luer luis one! — Computer Game Review ...the graphics in PROTOSTAR are incredible!\" . Computer Gaming World TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah--mee) PROTOSTAR n. A powerful vision and a fresh approach WAR ON THE FRONTIER to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLD PROTOSTAR PER NACK ADVANCED LEVEL FUNSTERSI SDB 13 11 PUGLITT2T LASTE place Actual VGA screens MANKIND IS IRRESISTIBLE PREY.. The Skeetch Empire has viewed Human prosperity as an invitation for conquest. Now they have sealed the borders of Human space. YOU are enlisted to serve as the PROTOSTAR Agent for an operation of grave importance. Your objective is to disrupt Skeetch supply lines along the Galactic Frontier. You must assemble your team and win the support of the critical alien factions. Your War on the Frontier may prove that mankind is more predator than prey! Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. OTsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"munications package could be provided. Hopefully, high-speed transmission will be included in Spectrum's next generation products. As with previous versions, direct connections still support baud rates up to 57,600. wer MAN FEUEM HAAR Switzer So What's The Downside? ATC (G I MVA HIVICA 15 FED FIAT Stos TYS HIINALAISIMETALLURE ? Not everything is fixed or fully operational in version 3.02 of Falcon. Although MiG-29 itself is very stable and relatively bug free, very few of the previous Falcon bugs have been fixed. Users should not be expecting a total re-write of Falcon (excepr for the comms code) in MiG-29. Wingmen may still fly into the ground, bandits still are created at random positions, and the padlock view still distorts the view angle through the HUD. MiG-29 doesn't introduce new bugs, but it doesn't solve all of Falcon's problems, either. The most annoying aspect of MiG-29 is the new redout/blackout model. Coming in four varieties (No Effect, Moderate, Difficult and Realistic), the new scheme, which is retrofitted to Falcon as well, tries to model several effects: rate of G onset, blackout and recovcry. Unfortunately, the more realistic\" settings present the least realistic effects. At the hardest setting, the program makes no distinction between blacking out and GLOC (actually losing consciousness after losing all vision). Once GLOC has set in, it lasts for a minimum of 30 seconds according to Spectrum programmers. During this period, all flight controls are disabled. After that, depending on various flight conditions, the GLOC may continue or the pilot may enter a 30 second recovery period. During this recovery, any subsequent G loading, even as little as 1.5G, can cause total vision loss or more GLOC. Needless to say, once a pilot has entered GLOC under the Realistic setting, he's more likely to take a missile up the railpipe than to recover. This effect contradicts what numerous combat pilots have told me, as well as my personal experiences with G forces. Tolerance to Gs builds with exposure to Gs and anyone flying high-performance combat aircraft as a profession would have better recov. ery than this. Fortunately, Spectrum Holo Byte has not imposed this scheme on players by giving three additional blackout models to choose from. Based on my personal flight experiences, I found the Moderate setting to be the most suitable.  campaigns to their o w n car.com in the campaign f heart's desire. In theater, listing how simulation mode, many and what types however, things of units are stationed aren't so easy. Withthere, and which side out FZreq, users are currently controls it. at the mercy of the Do we need a flight whims of high-level of SEAD aircraft to officers inside Falcon tackle SAMs before who run the war and the strike package ardistribute supplies. With F3REQ you can edit rives? Check how With Freg in simucampaign supplies. many SAMs are at lation mode, the that sight according user is still at the mercy of those whims, to Falecalc. Falccalc also lists victory nodes S# but has a few contacts in the chain of for each side, so users know exactly which command that owe a few favors. MIA nodes must be taken and which nodes pilots cannot be auromatically restored to must be protected. fight status in simulation mode, but a A special SAR mission can be launched to SHOWF3 search for the pilot. The odds are good, but Show allows users to conveniently not perfect, that the missing pilot will be view Falcon screen captures. Undocufound. Need a few more AMRAAMs? Fill mented keystrokes of ALT+ (when in out a requisition and go visit your old pal, menus), +ALT+ (when in flight), and Z the Stores Officer. How big is the request? (from the ACMI mode in version 3.01 or Only a couple of missiles. Sure, no problater) will capture the screen and dump it to 1 lem. What's that? You want 500 missiles? the hard drive in a non-standard format, Don't let the door hit you on the way out. requiring a proprietary tool from Spectrum Maybe the Stores Officer remembers the Holobyte to view. Show will not only 300 missiles he diverted your way last week display these files for you, but will also and decides enough is enough. In simulaconvert them to standard GIF or PCX tion mode, the user has to be careful and files. Catch those Kodak moments of flamnot waste the limited number of favors ing MiGs and perfectly pickled bombs! available. Luckily, users can switch back to cheat mode at anytime. KCC FALCCALC KCC is a front-end interface for the DOS-haters out there. Using an openFalccale is a friend in the INTEL office. ended architecture, KCC allows users to During campaigns, this friend knows alnot only select utilities from the most everything about allied operations FCUIMU packages, but to also add their concurrent with your flights. Also, this own menu items. Like a good front-end friend has access to enemy intel and can program should, KCC completely unloads provide a lot of information about enemy itself from memory before executing called operations. With MCU, users get two tasks, leaving maximum resources for separate executable files, Falccalc for use memory hungry programs like Falcon. with Falcon, and Migcalc for use with In addition to the five utilities listed MiG-29. We'll use Falccalcto refer to both above, MCU and FCU come packaged A programs. with over 20 Red Flag missions designed Falccalc, like most tools in these packby Howard \"Whiplash\" Bornstein, author ages, has two purposes. First, it gives de of Falcon 3.0: The Official Combat Strategy tailed analysis of waypoint timing and fuel Book. FCU contains 28 missions, MCU usage, helping users to choose between a has 30 different missions, both of which centerlinc fuel tank or an ECM pod, and are accompanied by a file describing trainadjusting waypoint speeds to ensure all sure all ing obje ing objectives and tactics. flights arrive on time. Second, it is an . In summary, these tools are all quite amazing source of strategic and tactical useful. Keep in mind, they are not Specbi information. trum Holobyte products and do not have In tactical terms, Falccalc lists every the glamour and glitz of Falcon itself. They flight, both allied and enemy, occurring are all created by avid Falcon players using 40 during the upcom| a straightforward deing mission. Even sign to provide usethe dreaded randomful features and inappear-out-of-now formation. The here flights that FCU and MCU replague Winchester tail for $19.95 each pilots on the way and can only be purback to base can't eschased directly from cape Falocale's attenKeyboard Comtion. In strategic mander Corps al terms, Falccalc gives 800-262-6066. details on every node Check your fuel status with FALCCALC. CGW TERE N IR ELLER es TI MITTARIX FIREW There are 7 Irrari a L these are or Interuet, Pight 1 CURRIRts of zerretti Airer g r ee Petur 116 Te Rru TLINE The Wrap Up MiG-29 is not a bug-fix patch. It doesn't increase the resolution of the graphics or speed gameplay on slower machines. What it does is provide a new set of challenges designed to broaden Falcon's appeal. Flying the MiG takes a lot more skill and intervention than flying the F-16, but once mastered it really is a deadly adversary.\" Cow I STITI ANTIRE Y Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) BLUE w n. A powerful vision and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: ... RINGWORLO 23 CREATED BY: BEST SELLING ..GAME DESIGNER FUNSTERS! JIM WALLS Actual VGA screens YOU'RE JAKE RYAN, rookie motorcycle officer. Ten years have passed since the unsolved murders of your parents, but a twisted trail of evidence still exists. While patrolling your beat, pieces from the past begin to link with the present. You're treading where you're not wanted and someone wants you to know it! BLUE FORCE... Realize your destiny. Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. Circle Reader Service #134 Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. OTsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW All Aboard The Role-Playing Terrain! WETU AWO ZWC and map VFor Window s Terrain Options Window Help World Creation Made Easy With DIGITAL Alchemy's Adventure Writer For Windows by Chuck Miller T Thether traditional \"paper and Easy Writer from these terrain types, making it a timepeople\" role-players dream in devouring process, especially with the hexes and squares or not, creatMap creation with AWW is relatively large larger packs. ing game worlds can often be a real nighteasy. One selects the desired terrain (from mare, especially as their complexity the built-in or add-on terrain types) and The program could also use additional increases. With this in mind, DIGITAL color (from a palette of 16 pre-defined fonts and improved graphic repreAlchemy designed Adventure Writer For colors), then pastes it down in the target sentations for terrain types (the existing Windows (AWW), a map creation utility hex or square. One click of the mouse images are, for the most part, a bit crude). for non-computerized role-playing Easier color selection is also needed. At drops the terrain in place; another click games. Thankfully, as a result, the Game removes it-plain and simple. Text suppresent, one must scroll through colors one at a time or select a color from the Master's life has been greatly simplified. port is also provided and allows descriptions of up to 20 characters to be placed menu by description. A greater selection A World Of Features in a hex or square, with text size automatof colors and user-defined palettes in the ically adjusted to fit the available space. works), and a wider selection of zoom AWWallows players to create maps and Larger blocks of text can be saved as doculevels would improve AWW, too. Finally, documentation for adventures using both ments through the built-in document adding the ability to save and output hex and square maps, providing 32 tercditor, though it will not be dynamically maps to a postscript file, and the ability rain types. The terrain is nicely varied and linked to any particular location on the to create one's own terrain types (schedincludes elements (water, air, earth and uled for Version 1.1) and to edit existing fire), indoor terrain (wall, door, stair, pit map. However, by selecting the Show Number option, the number of each hex terrain would increase the usefulness of and trapdoor), outdoor terrain (castle, and square can be displayed. This can tower, village, archway, mountain, hill, AWW. then be associated with the written inforforest and swamp), outer space (planet, mation in the document file. Mapping Out The Future star, asteroid and space station), dressing Owners of IBM compatible computers In its current form, AWW offers roleshould have no problem using AWW as players a speedy way to produce their TERMINAol? long as they meet the minimum require adventure and campaign maps. In spite of Noel ments (a 286 or better with Windows 3.0 is weaknesses, AWW's many tools make or greater, IMB RAM minimum, it an eminently useful program. With it, VGA/EGA graphics, and a mouse). With adventure and campaign design is easy, Version 1.0 available for almost a year even for a novice. now, no major problems arose during my In all, users of Adventure Writer For testing of the program. However, I did detect several weaknesses which are deWindows will find their time used more scribed below. Fortunately, most are beefficiently and the quality of their finished LA ing addressed in Version 1.1, due to arrive maps much higher. This, in turn, will just after the first of the year. Version 2.0, allow one to devote more time to the (pentagram, body, debris and treasure) scheduled for release at Gen Con 1994, creative process itself. and specials (color, text, compass, and will offer even more significant improve For more information on Adventure encounter). In addition to these built-in ments. Writer For Windows (or the DOS verterrain types, several add-on terrain packs are available: Natural Caverns, Medieval sion), contact the publisher at: Dirty Windows Arms Armor, Possessions & Accessories, Digital Alchemy Great Outdoorsand Ground Forces. Sched As capable as AWW is, it still needs a 11469 Olive Blvd., Suite 223 uled for September is a sixth pack, Catalittle smoothing of rough edges and a few St. Louis, MO 63141 combs. cosmetic touch-ups. Of course, as a Win(314) 625-3657 CGW dows-based program, it suffers from the Other features include a built-in docusame plight as any other graphic-intensive ment editor, text captions for hexes and products—it creeps. Optimal use reLOMBA077 squares, and B&W and color printing. quires a 386/33 or better system and an * The printing options support 15mm and accelerated graphics card; otherwise re25mm scales, and allow one to print the painting the screen when accessing the entire 50 x 50 map on a single page. Print add-on terrain packs, zooming in or out quality is good, especially from laser and on a map, and scrolling the terrain wininkjet printers. AWW is also a Windows dow can be tediously slow. MDI (Multiple Document Interface) compliant program, allowing multiple Access of add-on terrain packs also maps and documents to be open and needs improvement. Presently, a second edited simultancously. window must be opened in order to select HRTLE de la O cm 180 BOTTLE AW For W Search for The Ld h app wwwbuldum Options Window Help uc Dart Diye Comp Encounter Elementa Utreci Que Outer Space Dark Green Light Firew Dar em Natural Cuvee Volume Natural Caverns Volume Natural Cover Volume Up Red Bed Dark Red Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"TURBO TOUCH 360,\" THE STATE OF THE ART PC GAME CONTROLLER! TURBUCH I Need To Pushi 360\" 11111111!! !!!! TURBO ON Un1111111 Mmmm TRIAX 111 mu111111 For use with IBM PCs and compatibles 11111). 1111111 111111 TUTTI W 1111111111111 1111111111 1111111 Gives you better diagonal control Gives you easy circular control Faster movement for higher scores No more blisters or \"numb thumb\" Extensively consumer-tested with game \"thumb fatigue.\" Just pass your thumb or players, software developers and computer index finger over the control sensor-you don't game reviewers, the Triax Turbo Touch 360 have to push down. And, thanks to better controller brings a new dimension of control diagonal and circular (360°) control, the newest and comfort to computer game playing. and most challenging games are easier to It's a breakthrough product, control and more fun to play. offering the benefit of higher The Turbo Touch 360 is the scores and longer play without TECHNOLOGIES right product at the right time. For the name of your nearest Turbo Touch 360 retailer or to place an order, call 1-800-858-7429 *Patent Pending. IBM PC is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. Turbo Touch 360 and Triax are trademarks of Triax Technologles. , Triax Technologies Circle Reader Service #128 "


"REVIEW GET YOUR BLASTERS BLASTERS DEGREE At Origin's Esteemed Wing Commander Academy by Paul C. Schuytema VEC lwn-O ZUC W ORM SELECTION POT SHE ECOEU DOGFIGHTER BUDEDICE SADE first, the bottom line on Origin's to taking on four Ralatha destroyers after \"holo room\" in which the configuration Wing Commander Academy: if you weaving through a mine field. controls make up the dashboard of the I enjoy space combat simulations, Academy is a stand-alone game. Possessimulator. Clicking on the controls brings you must have this game. Period. sion of the other Wing Commander (WC) up a full-screen of the mission configuraWhile the game chalks up the standard games is not mandatory, but herein lies on computer. From here the player may fare of deficiencies and kudos, it has in one of the faults of the game. While it is load and save missions, create them from stantly become a mandatory element in a stand-alone product, it relies heavily scratch, run the \"gauntlet, or modify any serious space combar library. upon the fiction of the previous two existing missions. Wine Commander Academy is the third games to set the tone and atmosphere. Each mission may have up to four \"nav \"primary\" product in the Wing ComJust playing Academy without previous points, or theaters of action. Players of mander universe created by Origin. In the WC experience reduces the game to a the other WC games will immediately timeline of their fictional world, in which dogfighting simulator (albeit an excellent recognize the nav points as the way the the humans are continually battling the one). missions were broken up in those games, remarkably tenacious Kilrathi, it occurs with players flying from point to point, to after the conclusion of the Wing ComIN HIGHELOREAN search, escort and battle the ubiquitous CALLSIGN mander II story line. The game is a simuCALLSIGIL Kilrathi. CRELS:15N lation of a simulator, a combat simulator, CALLS IGRE that is. Colonel Jack A. Lombard is now al CSIGN consion employed as a flight instructor in the Wing Commander Academy after being nearly killed when his wingman, Maniac, TRATTERNSHIL didn't follow orders. He lost an eye in the battle and, reminiscent of «Jelly in HeCREATE MISSION WWW inlein's Starship Troopers, he has turned On the other hand, since it is a standFREE SPALLECA his attention to honing and improving alone product, it allows players to hone ELE. A E L EXECUTE the caliber of the Academy's recruits. OCE O FEMDE their combat skills before purchasing His first observation after coming to the either WC game, and, most importantly, Creating a mission is as simple as selectAcademy was that the combat simulator it allows players to enjoy dogfighting ing a clear nav point and then clicking on was good, but not nearly good enough. It without the time commitment of a one of the buttons representing an object, needed to be improved. Putting the Acadsweeping adventure game. A saved misfrom friendly ships and Kilrathi capital emy's programmers to work, he created sion can be ready for play in the time it ships to data pods and asteroid Fields. A an entirely new combat simulator which takes to boot up a computer, and I've small window on the left of the simulator used holographic projection technology found myself taking down a few Kilrathi presents the player with a rotating image to recreate, vividly and completely, the with my morning coffee before heading of the object, and clicking on the nav experience of flying a Terran star fighter. off to my nine-to-five. It gives me that point screen will place it in the mission. He also made the simulator customizable killer edge that truly frightens my coPlayers may select their choice of ship, so that new cadets could create missions workers. to test their classroom learning or work Before going into more Wing Commander Academy out problems and tactics. The Colonel likes and dislikes, lets disstresses that while the simulator isnt ascuss the nuts and bolts of real as actual combat (you can't hit the TITLE: the game. First off, the Wing Commander Academy $49.95 pause key in real life), it's as close as it gets. game is incredibly simple SYSTEM: IBM Wing Commander Academy (Academy) to play. The manual is opREQUIREMENTS: 386SX, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics supports Roland, Ad-lib, Sound isn't a simulation of the entire training tional since setting up and Blaster; supports DOS 6.0's academy, but rather a concise simulation designing missions is very DoubleSpace PROTECTION: None of Colonel Lombard's combat simulator, intuitive. When the game PUBLISHER: Origin short and sweet. Working with the simubegins, the player is preP.O. Box 161750 Austin, TX 78716 lator, players can generate countless missented with a view of the (512) 328-0282 sions, from the retrieval of an ejected pilot PRICE: Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"TUISSION NAME PLOT SHIP DHIEFORGIATE SFORS K NINGSTAR   SALE HE BE and whether or not to have a wingman (as in Academy to \"safely\" work out a well as the caliber and character of the successful strategy SELECT SHIP P IER wingman). Clicking on the \"execute\" CRUITLESSIO I also like the fact that the misGROSSEN    burron brings the player back to the holo URRITE SunGMAOS sion files can be copied and room; the walls dissolve away, and sudTOLEDO IR DANGEL traded, uploaded and downdenly the player is in the cockpit of a PRILE 26 loaded. This feature will help to fully-juiced interstellar fighter in the midbring the WC community closer dle of a dogfight. w CLEAR together and will allow a player to Combat is quick and breathtaking, 3 EXP CANCEL assemble a library of truly great with the welcome addition of a speed missions. adjustment that allows the player change DIEFICULTURE 2 30 BEMOVE Perhaps the best aspect of Acadthe pace of the simulator. With each sucemy is that it can be a truly social cessive Wine Commander game, Origin The simulator also offers the gauntlet game. Missions can be short and sweet, has refined the graphics of their birmode, essentially a training game which allowing friends to get together and play map/polygon three-dimensional space presents the player with 15 levels, three for a while without the cumbersome system, and Academy presents the best waves cach, of attacking Kilrathi. A learning curve of a full-blown adventure graphics yet, by far. Ships are sleeker and player's ship regenerates shields after each game to get in the way of immediate more defined with colored markings and wave and is fully repaired and reloaded playing satisfaction. subtle shading. Even the blaster discharge after cach level. Like a good Nintendo I did have some quibbles with the game, shifts color when the fuel mixture is game, he who chalks up the highest score mostly things which I feel Origin should changed during an after-burner kick. wins, and his name is presented to all who have included but didn't. Some of these enter the holo room for combat traming. enter the holo room for combat training. Teansider necessary other make up more I consider necessary, other make up more I found a lot to like in this game. In of a wish-list. today's market of ultra-complex games it first, only the gauntlet mission keeps is a true breath of fresh air to find a game track of the player's score. Each mission this simple and easy to play (or rather to should have its own scoring, allowing for set up to play-running the gauntlet or more than a binary success/fail result. Idetaking down four Ralaris is next to imposally, since this is a training simulator for sible), and one that comes on only three cadets, the score should be a detailed disks. report of mission results: time taken, eneOn the most important criteria for any mies shot down, kill percentage, fuel game, fun, Academy comes up holding used, etc. Having this type of scoring The combat cockpits will be familiar to five aces. This game is an absolute ball to system would allow more competition WC aficionados, with one display for play and presents the player with almost between friends and more relevance to communications and targeting informazero frustration (except from the chaluploaded and downloaded missions. tion, another for damage assessment and lenge of attempting to complete a diffiSecond, since this is a training simulaweapons loadout, and a radar screen for cult mission). The simplicity of the tor, it should have some type of mission tracking bogies. The technology in the interface means that 90 percent of the recording function, or at least an instant WC universe has been steadily improving, time will be spent in white-knuckled dog. replay function. This would allow the and the player can control side and rear fighting, and the only potential hazard cadets to replay their failures and sucturret guns, as well as enjoy the benefits this game raises is trigger-finger calluses. cesses and learn from their mistakes. of ITTS (Improved Targeting and TrackOh sure, some will argue that this game Finally, I would like the mission builder ing System) tracking. When a target lock merely turns a several thousand dollar to be a touch more sophisticated, allowis activated with the new tracking system, computer into a Super Nintendo system, ing the player to create such things as the player's shipboard computer calcubut those will be the ones who haven't escort missions, delayed enemy encounJates the enemy's trajectory and presents played the game and who tend to shun ters, and navigational flying. the player with a leading rericle, allowing too much fun as bad for their health. greater accuracy in leading blaster shots In all. Academy is a tremendously excitinto a Kilrathi's hull. This is a great help Taking this game at its fictional face ing game, one which provides many, since in space, where there is no absolute value, as a training simulator to prepare many hours of play and replay. One of my speed, only relative speed, it is often hard you to better fight the Kilrathi, it makes favorite missions, and one which I'm sure to tell how fast or slow the enemy is a wonderful companion product to the goes against the Academy's code of ethics, moving with visual cues alonc. previous WC games, and it is even possiis to set up a mission with only a wingman A player may choose to fly the full range ble (but not all that realistic) to head out and no enemies (flying a Ferret is bestof WC ships, from the Volkswagen Bugon a WC mission, gather intelligence, they only have a single weapon, a mass like Ferret to the advanced Morningstar, then closely recreate the mission's hazards driver). I start the mission and choosing between fighter and bomber then turn on my wingman, going mano-a-mano until one of us types. Two additions are noteworthy. PILOT SHIP blows. The combat is fierce, and During the time since Wing Commander the obscene shouts of \"traitor!\" II, both the Terrans and Kilrathi have hit GREU PODER the drawing board to up the technology 001 really get the blood pumping. ante, and each have a new fighter in preWell, enough banter. Time to production testing: the Wraith and the head for the holo room and Jrathck. Academy allows you to fly either punch up mission number 23 to IN WA one of these experimental fighters, and see if, this time, I can get through PRES ENTER flying a Kilrathi fighter against Terran those three Drakhri and take out EBOB bogies is more fun than a barrel of kitties. a Dorkathi transport with my N/ AI B BETTER lowly Ferret. Wish me luck! Cow MISSION NAME CAUTELLET WIBGMAGE GAVE CLEAR ELKE DIFFICULTO EXECUTE November 1993 Page 163 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD «I Came, I Played, I Conquered» How Goes The Battle? by Alan Emrich Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics GOMITER WARGAMING WORLD In this issue... Empire Deluxe Scenario Design by Alan Emrich and Mark Carroll ..... 166 SimCan's Man of War by M. Evan Brooks.... 172 Building Scenarios For Man of War by Johnny Wilson .... 174 Empire Deluxe Scenarios by Mark Carroll and Alan Emrich..... 178 The Designer Speaks On Aide de Camp by Scott Hamilton .... 180 Aces Over Europe Preview by Bryan Walker ..... 182 SSG's Warlords II by H.E. Dille ....... 186 Strategy For Warlords Il by Bob Hayes, Jr..... 190 Strategy for High Command by Bob Hayes, Jr. .... 192 SimCan's Red Sky at Morning by Terry Lee Coleman.. 199 Clash of Steel Strategy by Alan Emrich...... 202 Carriers at War Tips by Roger \"-Tzu\" White .. ur New World Computing Empire working together any longer on the V for Victory Deluxe tournament has moved into series. The collaboration we had was terrific for the semi-finals after some tweaking of both companies, and we're really going to miss the official CGW Tournament Scenario. For those guys and their talent. The split was basithose who want to modify their Empire Decally over the strategic direction of our compaluxe game to keep it current with our tournanies. I'm very proud of what we accomplished ment quarter-finals through finals, here are with Atomic.\" (Three-Sixty will continue to the changes to make: support the V for Victory games through GoldJuno-Sword, including the new 4.0 upgrade 1. Move the Green Capital 2 squares south to 51.28. for the entire series.) 2. Decrease Troy @ 27,29 from 146% to 100%. It appears that in the separation between 3. Increase Tobruk @ 4,31 from 100% to 147%. 4. Increase Turk @ 51,31 from 63% to 72%. Atomic and Threc-Sixty, the former got the V 5. Increase Essen @ 7,42 from 128% to 147%. for Victory game engine while the latter got the 6. Increase Bonapart @ 5,42 from 99% to 139%. V for Victory name and marketing rights. This 7. Increase Greasy Grass @ 36,6 from 102% to 129%. means that the Atomic/Avalon Hill Gazala 8. Increase Limbaugh @ 30,10 from 100% to 129% game is likely to have a very familiar feel to These changes seemed to have eliminated the veteran V for Victory gamers. Tom Frisina conpro-blue bias that tournament testing has found tinued: in the scenario. \"Games more along the lines of Harpoon II ving into the semifinals are Henry Gale and Victory at Sea will be Three-Sixty's future. (of Westwood, MA), who defeated Bob Pryslak Less of the hex grid and more of the open, (of Scarborough, Ontario, Canada) in a humiliunrestricted presentations will be featured. However, we will be continuing to publish ating display of superior luck. Mark Conder (of Littleton, CO) won a seesaw contest against products from Colorado Computing, who did High Command.\" Melvin Ellis III (of Tupelo, MS), who deserves a special award for being among the most comTom also said that wargamers should look for plimented players by his opponents. Ray Maran Atlantic/Med version of Victory at Sea, plus thews (of Assonet, MA) upset Bruce Marchesani lots of Harpoon 11 BattleSets for next year. (of Lindhurst, NJ). In this particular contest, the computer player (commanding the red forces) Over The Horizon came out strong and, when the smoke cleared, Bruce was in far worse shape than Ray. Finally, On other fronts, Scott (Aide de Camp) HamMichael A. Kohn (of Walnut Creek, CA) did ilton is busy on his sequel to Point of Attack. It one of his famous \"MAK\" attacks and defeated is an as yet untitled tactical WWII Eastern Front Walter Haberer (of Tucson, AZ). game using a \"much improved\" Point of Attack game engine, with several graphics, sound and Wargames And Rumors Of interface enhancements. Scott is doing this even while Gary Grigsby (War in Russia, Pacific War) Wargames: Atomic Reaction is busy working on a new game covering this Following their recent announcement that same topic and scale, tactical WWII Eastern they had signed a deal with Atomic Games Front. I guess I'd better get out my old Panzer(designers of the V for Victory series) to create a Blitz boardgame and work out the rust. Squad Leader game for the computer, The Not to neglect the Western Front of WWII, Avalon Hill Game Company continues to push Clash of Steel designer Martin Scholz will apply ahead with an ambitious schedule of releases for its engine to a new game covering the campaign late 1993 and throughout 1994. Added to the in France, 1944. While the scale will telesc list is a computerized version of their Blackbeard down a bit (from Clash of Steel's grand strategic game, designed by Hall of Fame designer Richto a more strategic/operational level), the play ard Berg. will feel the same. He is also completing a Rumor also has it that Avalon Hill will be Version 1.1 patch for Clash of Steel (see Part 2 publishing a second game from Atomic, due out of my COS strategy article in this issue for in the first or second quarter of next year. Not details). surprisingly, it's an operational level WWII Sid Meier's Civil War (yes, they negotiated game covering the battles around Gazala in with Avalon Hill to use that title, too!) is still on North Africa. Are there shades of what would hold while he puts the finishing touches on CPU be the next V for Victory game in an Avalon Hill Bach for the new 3DO system. However, Imwrapper? I think so. What happened between pressions' Civil War game from Ed (Air Bucks) Atomic Games and V for Victory publisher Grabowski will be entitled (not to be outdone Three-Sixty Pacific? by Sid Meier in the name recognition departAccording to Three-Sixty's President Tomm ent) Ed Grabowski's The Blue & The Gray. Frisina, \"Atomic and Three-Sixty will not be See you in the trenches! Cow .. 208 Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"ALL WRAPPED UP AND READY TO GO FOR THE HOLIDAYS NG FIGHS A 12 Exciting Issues For onl For only $28 . No Wrapping No FIGHTING Crowds At The Malls. SMPUAN COMPUTER WIE NORD COMPUTER COMPUTER COMPUTER NG WORLD COMPUTER OMPUTER OMPUTER T ARY MING WORLD T EMIN WORLD OMPUTER MING WORLD Modele AMPUTERI JOULES.WORLD of Xunth WEMA Order by December 10 and we'll send a Gift Card before Christmas! A gift subscription to CGW makes a wonderful holiday gift. No endless treks through massive malls seeking that elusive something. If someone you know plays computer games, they will cherish a subscription to the #1 computer game magazine, Computer Gaming World. A year's worth of enjoyment is less than the cost of a single game. Please call today to ensure your Gift Card will reach that special person before the holidays.  To order call toll free 1-800-827-4450 -92GXG "


"Empire Builder Excerpts From Empire Deluxe: The Official Strategy Guide by Alan Emrich with Mark Carroll In addition to being CGW's On-line Editor, Alan Emrich has also become a prolific author of game strategy books. In his latest book, Empire Deluxe: The Official Strategy Guide from Prima Publishing, he and his co-author Mark Carroll include a chapter on designing scenarios for Empire Deluxe. While the wisdom imparted is particularly germane to the game in question, the discussion of game design philosophy cum be applied to the general pursuit of scenario creation. achieve and keep them clearly in mind as you place every unit and lay out every bit of terrain. The philosophy of your scenario design is the glue that holds it together as you construct it. It also gives you a yardstick by which you can measure your design's success or failure once it is completed. To focus in on a clear design philosophy from the outset, here are some questions you should be asking yourself. The answers will clearly define the scenario's purpose and give you a goal to achieve when designing it. You may also wish to impose a turnlimit on the game. For example, the German player must win the Sea Lion scenario by turn 200 or he loses. SimiTarly, the CGW Tournament scenario ends on turn 200 or immediately after one player controls all three starting cities. Will this be a historical scenario? If so, you will want to do some research. An atlas will help with the terrain, of course. A listing of the military units that fought (called the order of battle\") can be harder to find, but if the subject you've picked is also the subject of a board wargame, its picces should be easily translatable into Empire Deluxe units. Designing historical scenarios can be challenging, but it is equally rewarding when you have finished them. Tust as there is a difference between teaching young people about sex education (read: human plumbing\") and sexual relationships (read: \"love and emotions\"), so there is in learning about creating scenarios for Empire Deluxe. While the game manual was long on \"plumbing,\" it was completely lacking in the \"love and emotion\" aspects of scenario designing. Therefore, this article will focus in on the heart, the soul, the passion that makes for enjoyable scenario designs in Empire Deluxe. Once your right brain is stimulated into creativity, you will also find a few things that your left brain will enjoy. Primarily, these are ways to complete your design so that your map contains many interesting and challenging features. Also, a few special nuts and bolts features are included in this article to supplement the game's documentation. As examples, we will refer to the scenarios we designed for Empire Deluxe, as included in the released version of the game. Scenario Design Philosophy 101 Every scenario should set out to accomplish something before the creation process begins. You, the designer, must determine what design goals you want to Who will play this scenario? How many players is it intended for, and how many of them must be human? For example, the Sea Lion scenario is designed strictly for two human players. de This is because of the weaknesses in the Al in dealing with large land masses, economic build up, and the need for some extraordinary cunning in maneuvers and combat tactics — all key elements in the game's design philosophy. When this scenario was conceived, the decision was made to make it a grand test of Empire Deluxe skills for two serious human players. Each faces his own dilemma, and the situation covers one of history's greatest \"what ifs.\" Or will I need to be really \"creative?» Whenever you're creating the map and unit set up (if any) from your imagination, this should inspire more questions. Without a historical situation to recreate, you must really focus in on what you're trying to achieve. Beyond your answers to the previous design philosophy questions, consider some of these: . Will this be a \"borrowed\" or original map design? What size map shall it be? . Will there be many or few land masses and what will their sizes be? What special terrain features, if any, will influence play? How will I paint the \"economic landscape?\" Where are players going to start? How strong will their initial forces How long should this scenario be? The answer will affect the size of the map and can influence the special rules included with your scenario design. The size of the map has a major affect on game length. If the goal remains, simply, world conquest, your experience will have shown you that larger maps increase the amount of time needed to conquer them. Not all scenarios require the largest map size available to be challenging. be? Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"Brush Terrain 29 Forces How will this scenario be won? What other special rules, if any, should I impose? This is where you can really define your scenario beyond the standards imposed by Empire Deluxe's inherent design of \"discover and conquer the world from scratch.» Between the possible variations on the sighting rules (nothing visible, all visible, or map only visible at all times) and defining what unit types are available, the designer is given lots of flexibility. You can also artificially impose the game level played (i.e., require using the Advanced Game rules for your scenario) and what difficulty level the computer players must be (usually experts). Furthermore, you can even specify which players should have whar degree of handicaps as part of your scenario's grand design scheme. ED1 HE 2 Map Design: Setting the Dimensions The map will greatly affect the scenario being played. With so many variables to consider, ranging from its size to what you draw on it, it is crucial to have wellthought out plans. As many have discovered, one's enjoyment of a particular game of Empire Deluxe directly relates to how interesting the map is. Therefore. when creating original maps (i.c., ones not translated from an atlas), remember the types of terrain formations that you found interesting in previous games and try to include similar ones in your design. Players can also import maps saved from the old Empire game. Once loaded into the Empire De# luxe game editor and saved, they become playable Empire Deluxe maps. Unfortunately, because of a E bug discovered in the IBM 2.xx versions of the old Empire game, some maps might not load for owners of the IBM 3.0 version of Playar Empire Deluxe. A \"fix\" program called «FIXEMA.EXE\" is available on both GEnie and CompuServe, and directly from New World Computing Translating a Map From an Atlas Finally, another way to make Using an atlas, one user was able to design this incredible map of Scandinavia. sure that you're not simply drawing onto a blank canvas is to use an the more time a player will spend shufatlas and simply try to paint the map you fling his forces around. see. Of course, you should work out in your mind some sort of scale when you Map Design: Not Starting begin («Let's see, I want France to be From Scratch about 12 squares across...») and then try There is no rule that says every map you to work things out proportionally. create has to be entirely original. In fact, Begin by drawing the outline of a chomany first time scenario designers get sen spot. Next, fill it in with clear terrain \"artist's block\" when they stare at the and then place the important rivers on it. blank map of the scenario editing screen. After that, dot it with appropriate cities It is very common that you simply will and then, finally, place the forests and not know where to begin. Fortunately, mountains. Don't be surprised if your Empire Deluxe's scenario editor has made map doesn't look right after it is initially this problem fairly casy to overcome. drawn from an atlas. It will probably take a bit of fudging before it really works. In Randomly Generated Maps the heat of battle, however, Empire DeFirst, from the Map menu of the sceluxe players will easily overlook minor nario editor's Menu Bar, you can always ve quibbles they may have about your map gum select Build World. This will fill your translation. So, do your best when interpre-selected map size with a typical, ranpreting maps for the game, but don't domly generated Empire Deluxe world. If frustrate yourself trying to get it perfect. you don't like the look of it, replace it by generating another one until you find one Using Grid Coordinates that has the core map elements you're There is one undocumented map maklooking for. This will give you a good ing tool that you will find particularly starting point for your map design that useful when trying to translate a map you can then modify to suit your exact from an atlas. It is the grid coordinate needs. system located on the Information Bar along the top of the screen. If you have Previously Saved Maps and Scenarios no brushes selected (i.e., you are not ready Another way of instantly putting a map to paint\" any new terrain feature) then to paint any.\" on the canvas is to start with a map that you are in information mode.\" In this you previously plaved and enjoyed. For mode, clicking either mouse button will example, let's say that you want to design show you both the terrain type and the a scenario featuring the entire planet featuring the entire planer grid coordmate grid coordinate for that square. Earth. Well, since we already provided Each grid coordinate consists of two you with a map of the planer in the WWII numbers separated by a comma. The first scenarios, all you have to do is load one number is the location's horizontal posiup and select Save. Just be sure to save the tion on the map that increases as the map, and not the game. After you give the cursor moves to the right. The second map a name, exit out of the scenario, number is the vertical position that inre-enter the Game Editor and either select creases as the cursor moves toward the that map to start with or, from the File bottom. Map coordinates always begin in menu, select Load and then Map. Any the top-left corner at 0,0. This square is time you're playing a scenario on a paralways an unplayable \"border» square. If ticularly interesting map, save it sepa you are looking for square 0,0 on a map rately. It might inspire you to design a that wraps, you may have to click along brilliant scenario for it. the top edge a few times to find the map's Map Size Generally, nothing defines the \"natural\" length of a game more than the map size, since a \"natural\" game requires a single player to spread out across the entire map and conquer it. Usually the map size also corresponds to the amount of time it will take to design a scenario. You initially define the map dimensions as you begin to create a scenario. The height can range anywhere from 20 150 squares, while width may vary from 20 200 squares. I his can create maps as small as 400 total squares or as large as 30,000. Besides affecting game length, map size can also affect game play. The larger a player's borders become, the more units must be detached for securing them. This means more air and sea patrols. The size of the ocean and the distances between land masses and air bases also have a direct affect upon the viability of using aircraft carriers in a direct combat support role. Remember, units move slowly on the Empire Deluxe map; the larger the map, November 1993 Page 167 "


"View actual \"wrapping point\" (horizontal zero coordinate), but it will coincide with the moment the lower scroll bar button jumps from one side to the other. Using grid coordinate numbers when you design a map will help you place strategic terrain far enough apart to affect air operations. For example, you might place two cities across an ocean so that they cannot simply fly across and rebase there. Instead, players must build carriers or air bases to operate airplanes between them. You can also place cities so that they are 13 squares apart, keeping bombers from striking them and returning home. Map Design: The Geographic Landscape With the issues of map size and starting points decided, it is time to start filling all of those empty squares staring at you from the game editor screen. What are you going to put in them? If you didn't start your new map from scratch or used an atlas, you already know and it's just a matter of getting it adjusted the way you like it. When you're staring at a blank slate, though, what do you do? Land Masses While it is enjoyable to dot a map with many small islands, larger continents make the most interesting terrain features. Since they take longer to explore and capture, and they usually posses several cities, larger continents tend to behe come highly embattled focal points of a good game. Although games will take longer when larger continents dominate the map, they do add spice to old fashioned \"island hopping» scenarios. A good variety of land mass sizes and locations are often the best way to go. However, if you have a theme for your world in mind, use it instead. Perhaps you want a world with only one-square islands or one that is solid land—if so, then build it! Only when you've created such worlds and tried them out will you know if they are fun to play or not. Since there are no roads City Eagle's Naut Err: 724) in Empire Deluxe, it is interesting to cut through patches of difficult terrain with a path of clear terrain squares for armor units to move through. This is particularly useful through mountain ranges that are otherwise impassable to tanks. Although it does tend to channel the De 135 tank's movement, at least they can get through. If B . you want armor to get through a mountain range but not as quickly, run a river pass through it instead, as Figure 14-3 illusThough there are no roads in Empire Deluxe, you can simulate them by running trates. Rivers aren't strips of clear terrain or rivers through mountains and forests. friendly places for armor to attack, but the tanks this problem was to sever North and can at least bog through them if the can at least bog through them if they South America. want. Therefore, when designing a scenario Strategic Interaction Points map where you plan to have computer players competing, be careful not to conConfluence points on the map where nect all the land masses or the AOs will land masses and oceans connect are imbuild few ships, if any. Also, remember build few shins if any Also remen portant strategic terrain features. Diagoortant strategic terrain features. Diagothat even when com that even when computer opponents do nal connections where land and sea units need ships, they will never build enough can both pass through or the more retransports to conduct coordinated, largestricted \"canals» each have their place on scale invasions. Don't plan a map around an interesting and enjoyable map design. this theme if computer players are going Also important is the placement of ports, to be the primary participants. Large scale particularly canal ports, as strategic ininvasions and plenty of trans teraction points. Remember, joining something that the AOs simply will not larger land masses and oceans at a nexus deliver. makes controlling it more crucial durin makes controlling it more crucial during Finally, computer players are used to play. \"knowing that there will be a port on Computer AI Considerations When every land mass (as is always the case when Mapmaking the computer randomly generates a map). If you have examined the Earth map If you create land masses without ports, it closely, you may have noticed that the will hinder the AO's ability to play a Panama canal is just an ocean square and decent game. The net effect will be to that North and South America are not further reduce a computer player's naval joined via the Panama isthmus. The deproduction and slow his ability to transsigners did this in response port tanks and armies off that land mass. to a feature of the comPlayer WG hao now been selected puter players -or \"Artificial Opponents\" (AOs). They will primarily con# centrate their production on securing an entire land mass before gearing up to BPM move off it. Thus, when VIZUE 2 these two continents were connected, an Allied computer player would always Playar spend many turns conquering South America and building up a huge, lumbering land force to do ER so (and no navy). Because of this, a computer player would be playing the The two units on this map sit at important strategic interaction Americans quite ahistoripoints. You can bet that these two areas will see a lot of action cally. Their solution to over the course of a game. Hrush Terrain Forgos Smooth Versus Difficult Landscapes When deciding what type of terrain will be placed where on a land mass, ask yourself if you want it to be easy or difficult for armor to traverse. While difficult terrain (particularly mountain ranges) will create some interesting strategic problems, it also reduces player enjoyment if it dominates the landscape. If difficult terrain is your world's theme, such as a jungle planet or a desert planet, and you have planned other interesting things for players to experience around the dominant terrain type, then it could still be enjoyable to play on. = X2 = KELL = Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"WHICH ON-LINE SERVICE HAS REAL PEOPLE PLAYING ALL THE TIME? BGERS Franke MS ROS: MODEM REQUIRED Shawnee GoldenMaia Jessie Eriond OM 12.MAGINATION 02 GOPReptile Trotter JohnPH Katkisser SOM Options VIRTUAL COMMUNITY & CYBERSPACE THEME PARK Uhisper? Options Golden GoldenMaia Up Options HEY FOLKS! EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO GETONHINE BIN THIS BOX WE EVEN PAY FOR YOUR FIRST $20 OF FUN! The Sierra Network TERRATERET 1841 25465 magic! UTION Sipu casts Poison Cloud! Cantanterous Human Wizard casts Death Darts on the partu affecting White Haul. Al Engaging Cawbatu Kender. Sifu, Sinbad and causing 35 damage! Cantankerous Hunan Wizard casts Backfire on Sinbad! THE IMAGINATION NETWORK! Call 1-800-743-7721 for details on Imagination, or see one of the retailers listed below and we'll see you on-line. Chatting with your friends and staying up all night playing games is fun. But have you ever done it on-line, and in real-time? Well, now you can with ImagiNation available at your favorite software retailer. Inside this box you will find your passport to all the adventure and new friends that are waiting for you on-line. All you need to get on-line is at least a 386 computer, VGA monitor, 2400 baud modem, and Imagination which is now available from your software retailer. It already comes with a $20 usage credit that gives you plenty of time to explore your new world for FREE. ImagiNation THE IMAGINATION NETWORK ImagiNation Is Available At These Fine Stores. Computer Babbage's EGGHEAD SOFTWARE electronics boutique SOFTWARE Incredible Universe City TM indicates a trademark of The Imagination Network Code Number 447.  The Imagination Network All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #129 "


"Map Design: The and Sea Lion scenarios both start with speed? When will players make \"first Economic Landscape players' forces already dominating the contact\" with each other? map. In fact, some players begin with so When we say the \"economic landscape\" Should any players have forced many units (such as the Japanese in the of a world, we're talking about cities. Not WWII scenarios) that they are actually a handicaps? Perhaps the production only how many will be placed on the map efficiencies of their nearby cities drag on their global economy. The CGW (up to a maximum of 200), but also where should be adjusted? Tournament scenario, on the other hand, and with what production efficiencies features expansion out from a single city, Are the computer players getting off and specialties. Consider the following: bur includes a few starting forces for each to good starts? player to get things moving along quickly. . If two (or more) humans are supCity Density Therefore, you must decide what the posed to play this scenario by moCities can be more widely dispersed or initial military situation is going to look dem, is it short enough to keep their clustered together in tight knots than they like. How strong will each player's forces phone bills down? are on the randomly generated maps most be? Where will they be located? Is this players are used to. Multiple cities right going to overlap with the economic landPlaytesting Tips next to each other can make for some scape (i.e., will players begin with more interesting starting \"capitals.» When citThe beginning game is crucial for comthan one city)? Players' starting forces are ies are more widely separated, air bases puter players. If they get off to a bad start, a key element in creating balanced, excitand carriers will become a more influening situations they will probably never recover before tial factor in the game. they have to lock horns with a human Production Efficiencies and Specialties player. Therefore, the best playtesting Computer AI Considerations: Starting you can do is to simply run the game with Forces When pondering the producrion effiall computer players and just observe their If the first turn of the game is a crucial ciencies and specialties of the cities you play, paying particular attention to their place on the map, remember that you are one, you will want to help computer play early moves. If you find something that trying to influence future production ers out. Here is the reason: Computer needs to be changed, enter the game ediplayers will move units in the order that throughout the scenario (as opposed to tor, make the change, and playtest the you placed them when designing the sceany starting set up of units). Beginning scenario again. Repeat this again until you nario on the first turn of the game. Therewith many cities at terrible production are finally satisfied with the result. efficiencies (such as in the Sea Lion scefore, if you know that it would obviously be better if a computer player sailed out If computer players move their starting nario) makes a player's starting units exof a port with armies on board the transforces in the wrong order, that means that tremely important. It can also mean a port you have there, place the transport you placed them in the wrong order. If long game if world domination is the in the city first. If you don't, the armies they don't expand properly, bait them goal! may walk out of the city on the first turn with easier access or closer cities in the direction you want them to go first. You Limits on Improving the Global Econbefore the transport takes its turn to move. Also, you will want the computer omy During Game Play must get computer players off on the right player to move its fighters first over an foot in your scenario design. Another weakness of the computer's AI initially contested area, instead of its Of course, if your scenario is not deis that computer players do not play \"the bombers. signed for any computer players, then it long game when building up a low effiWhen we designed the CGW Tourna will be harder to playtest. While observciency city. In other words, they will only ing the AO play such scenarios might help keep a city off-line until its efficiency is ment scenario, cach player's starting city somewhere between 20% and 50%. Selhad its \"main island\" land units placed you to adjust it, only when you play all the positions yourself or get the required there first, then their transport, then their dom will they try to improve it beyond the 50% level (at that point, further raistransport's cargo infantry units last. In number of human volunteers to test out ing of the city's production efficiency that way, the computer players will, on your new design can you really call it playtesting. Make a few phone calls and level drops from a high to a low priority). the first turn, move some of their land Similarly, most human players won't try to arrange a game. Be sure to get units across the mainland while sending all of the others out to sea on the transreactions from the other players and conbother trying to raise a city's production port. Thus, we have forced them efficiency much past 104% because of the sider all of their suggestions for improving into making a \"balanced» move on the first the scenario. If you agree with any of their diminishing return in efficiency for the turn of the game. Observe three comtime invested to raise it. comments and they work within your puter players playing it and you'll see design philosophy, carry out those Therefore, high production efficiency what we mean. changes. cities must be placed by you, the designer, while creating the map. If not, the game As you have learned, there is a lot more Playtesting Your Scenarios will have no \"super cities.\" Now, if a poor to making good scenarios than just knowworld is your plan, then that is fine. In After you have designed your new sceing what the keystrokes are for laying out practical, Empire Deluxe terms, however, nario, you are only halfway finished. Now the terrain and units. The art of game a rich world can be played into a poor one, begins the process of playtesting and baldesign is one of philosophy. Yes, there but a poor world's cconomy will only rise, ancing your scenario. The purpose of will be a lot of time sweating over the at best, to mediocre. playtesting is to find if the game is true to keyboard, placing this terrain here and your design goals or not—and fun to re-naming that city there. Playtesting will The Philosophy of add even more time and effort to your play. Ask questions such as these: scenario design burden. However, underStarting Forces  If you created a historical scenario, lying the entire process will be your sceA traditional game of Empire Deluxe does it bear enough resemblance to nario's design philosophy. Keep sight of begins with no starting forces. Scenarios, history and have enough of the right it and you will have scenarios that are far however, can be anything their designers feel to it to satisfy you? more interesting and enjoyable to share want them to be. For example, the WWII . Does the game move at the right with your friends. CGW Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"rabowski S THIQUE THLTRAY * THE CETTYSBJRG ADDRESS Where will you fire the first shot? late the W . . Craw B . Authentic historic interludes faithfully recreate the atmosphere of the period! ecreate the power and excitement of the Civil War! As the leader of either side in this challenging simulation, you recruit, train and direct your armies around the American countryside. When two armies clash, fight out a Micro Miniatures battle in fast, high-resolution animation! Historically authentic, The Blue and the Gray features up to 200 animated figures per battle, naval units and blockades, river and rail transport, breathtaking graphics atmospheric sound and music. GORGES DEEP Includes a FREE copy of a specially commissioned book on the Civil War! Watch your armies battle in fast, high-resolution animation 01993 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #136 "


"REVIEW Man Of War Grand Tactical Combat Under Sail, 1765-1815 Matti Kaarala/Corel by M. Evan Brooks MINI Light Norst The Age of Fighting Sail...and NelThe game is composed of two secsection, and this presents a problem. son! SimCan's Man Of War tions—the setup phase and the battle itWhile one can order a unit to move to a (MOW) is the first computer game self. The former is easily accomplished, specific location, determining the proper in almost five years to recreate this period but requires careful consideration. One coordinates can be difficult; therefore, of warfare which, bitter though it was, has must determine general guidance for his one will usually order a course change been romanticized in the eyes of 20th forces, e.g. when to engage, when to based on bearing (direction) only. century gamers. While military historians maintain range, when to open fire. A wise debate the best general of history, opinion admiral will delineare different orders for Given the nature of the simulation, this is is virtually unanimous in naming Horatio the ships under his command; in a large not important. However, for the user Nelson as the best naval leader. fleer action, frigates should not engage in who demands intensive graphics and MOW is a simulation of fleer level acgeneral melee against the massive shipsP$ sound, MOWis not for them. un tions from the viewpoint of the comof-the-line. Similarly, smaller vessels such mander. The subtitle accurately describes as sloops, brigs and transports should be Manning The Rigging the product's scope-grand tactical. kept out of harm's way. One cannot directly move ships in the fleet. Only after the commander determines Orders are limited to \"Follow Me\" (the credo proper groupings of vessels and their genof the American Infantry?), \"Conform to eral guidance should he commit to open Flag,\" \"Make/Reduce Sail,\" \"Follow, battle. However, once contact is \"Rally/Pursue\" or \"Set Course.\" Thus, once achieved, it is difficult for the fleer admithe setup phase is complete, battle impleral to direct the actions of individual mentation is somewhat preordained. ships. Orders can be given from the flagship, but with the lack of radio, commuAs ships change course, they wear and nications are limited to signal flags (which tack. An intelligent commander ensures The simulation covers the era in which may or may not be obeyed, depending on that crews of lesser quality avoid the latter Great Britain succeeded in establishing a the tactical situation and the ability of maneuver, as it can result in losing headway and can lead to collisions. Pax Britannica through the use of sea one's forces). power against the French Royalist and, It is obvious that the graphic reprelater, Napoleonic Navies. Admiral Alfred Oh, To See The Sea... sentation of MOW has caused some conThayer Mahan's The Influence of Sea Along with SimCan's Red Sky At Mornfusion at SimCan. The documentation Power Upon History (1890) remains the ing (review on page 199). MOW is the notes that a single sheet of die cut countclassic text for the period. Also strongly first SimCan game to have graphics. Theyers...will be included in the initial rerecommended is Cross Sections: Man-of are not state-of-the art, nor do they have lease.\" These were to assist the user in War by Stephen Biesty, a 32-page book to be. At the end of each four-minute determining positional references, but of how a ship-of-the-line operated, at all turn, one may view the action from two would be omitted in later releases. Since levels. Aficionados of Forester, Kent and perspectives: a bird's-eye view with cach the map cannot be accessed until all ships O'Brien will still learn something from ship represented by a \"sticks\" and letters, have moved, the ability to physically see this work. For example, most people have or a view from the flagship, often obthe opposing Fleets in mid-turn would heard that biscuits at sca were often inscured by smoke or other vessels. have been helpful. Also, it would have fosred with maggots. Cross Sections has the \"The latter view is quite similar to Ralph assisted one in determining proper orders historical recipe to get rid of them (1. for follow-through. Bosson's High Seas (1987). Place dead fish onto biscuit sack; 2. When While somewhat interest. Man Of War of MOW is crew quality. A The most critical element maggots cover the fish, throw it away and ing, it is not very useful and replace it; 3. Repeat 1. and 2. until magquickly pales. The bird'sgots no longer appear). eye view is the viewpoint TITLE: Man Of War that the player cannot live MAN OF WAR PRICE: $60.00 The Admiral Has His Orders SYSTEM: IBM without. One will issue orREQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz recommended, The documentation, in keeping with ders depending on the genVGNEGA graphics, IMB hard drive space SimCan traditions, is a sparse 13 pages. eral situation depicted # OF PLAYERS: 0-2 PROTECTION: therein. However, the disThree pages consist of scenarios and play is static; one cannot DESIGNER: notes, and three pages consist of tables S.M. Newburg PUBLISHER: Simulations Canada and a map. Actual play mechanics are zoom in for a more detailed PO Box 452 Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, B4V 2X6 covered in less than seven pages. rendition of a particular None Page 172 Computer Gaming World "


"mittedly a rare occurrence, as aptly noted by MOW designer Steven Newburg). MOW is a serious simulation. As the designer notes, popular perceptions have been \"strongly influenced by novels, motion picrures, and often surprisingly inaccurate secondary and tertiary popular history.\" The simulation attempts to give the player only those options available to the commander of the fleet, and not the ability to jump command levels and portray everything from sailing master to fleet admiral. professional crew is more than capable of overcoming even poor leadership. Generally, a professional crew can prevail at 3:1 odds. Historically, the British Navy was superior in seamanship to the French, and the user should react accordingly. More evenly matched battles can be fought between American and British forces. The simulation comes with 24 scenarios ranging from moderately small (Cabrita Point (1801) or Lissa (1811]) to tremendous in scope (Trafalgar (1805), the most studied naval engagement in history and The Glorious First [1794]). Plus, a versatile scenario editor allows one to create his own scenarios. Pull out the old boardgame copies of Frigate and Wooden Ships o Iron Men and have at it. (See the following article \"Clearing For Custom Actions\" for more details. -Ed.) The Sun Sets On The Engagement MOW is for the serious student of Fighting Sail. The flexible scenario editor allows one to create additional scenarios, and the provided scenarios include the major fleet engagements of the period. However, the use of Fighting Instructions or the Nelson Touch is not really portrayed. British naval strategy had been Ossified into a series of fixed orders which every British officer was expected to obey. The fact that such instructions rarely resulted in a decisive action was considered by the British Admiralty to be the fault of the officers on the spot (as a result of one such failure, they executed Admiral Byng \"to encourage the others\"). Nelson's genius was to recognize the failings of the doctrincand to encourage initiative based on the superiority of British seamanship. MOW does not really show the evolution of naval leadership in these tactics. In conclusion, MOW is a simulation of limited appeal. While aficionados of the topic may want to have it to add to their collection, they should know that its short-term interest may not lend itself to long-term enjoyment. CGW Victory conditions are determined by losses or exiting a map section. Although battles occur at sea, the battle arena is limited and the edge of the world» syndrome applies. The edge can be either land or shoals (injurious to one's health), or simply exit areas whereby ships cannot re-engage in the battle. Why a moving ocean replenishment map was not employed is unknown, and often somewhat at artificial maneuvers are required to avoid \"falling off the edge.\" While this presents an ostensibly accurate simulation, it does not present an entertaining game. A gamer with visions of Gregory Peck and Virginia Mayo (\"Horatio Hornblower\") or Alexander Kent's Richard Bolitho (\"Fire on the uproll, Lieutenant Herrick!\") will be sorely coral disappointed. I do admit to a sense of such disappointment; while Editor Johnny Wilson loved the flavor of MOW, I missed the individuality of Broadsides (1983) whereby one could literally load the cannons (chainshot, grape or ball) SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS Talk to her Talk to a GIRLFRIEND in Your Computer $ 5,00 Blue Angels The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! $19.50 $19.50 $10.00 Watch her Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. Add $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. IBM, AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM BARGAINS 810 & UNDER IBM/NS-DOS. BARGAINS. UNDER $20 SPECIAL PURCHASE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2 $ 5.00 500 Sub Battle Simulator $10.00 DON'T GO ALONE, Accolade $10.00 Star Trek 5: Final Frontier $20.00 EROM. MICROPROSE Microleague Football $14.50 OUTRUN, Sega $5.00 Your Choice $25 each: Microleague Baseball $14.50 SPACE HARRIER, Soga $5.00 F-29 Retaliator $10.00 GUNSHIP 2000 GUNSHIP. Microprose $10.00 Solo Flight $14.50 F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER CROSSBOW, Absolute $5.00 Tomahawk $14.50 MIND DANCE, Mindscape Star Glider 11 5.25\" 1.0. daks only. VCA required! $2.50 $14.50 Xiphos $14.50 NIGHT HUNTER, UBI-SOFT $ 10.00 MEGAFORTRESS SIERRA GAME BUNDLE FOR 18M $10.00 MAGIC JOHNSON BASKETBALL $ 5.00 Carrier Command Includes: $14.50 CALIFORNIA GAMES, EPYX $5.00 Sky Chase $14.50 A-10 TANK KILLER. HEART THIRD COURIER, ACCOLADE $5.00 David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 OF CHINA & STELLAR 7 WORLD GAMES, EPYX $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 Only $30 SILENT SERVICE $5.00 Air Strike U.S.A. 514.50 B.A.T., UBI-SOFT $10.00 BATTLECHESS 2 Dark Hoart of Ukra $16.50 SIERRA SPECIALS SIERRA for IBM $20 EACH Buck Rogors 1, SSI QUEST FOR GLORY 2. CODENAME Horvos Lanco, SSI Buck Rogers 2, SSI YOUR CHOICE $15 each $19.50 ICEMAN, HEART OF CHINA, KING'S POLICE QUEST 2 Dragons of Flame, SSI $10.00 QUEST 1 -or-4, OIL'S WELL. Questron II, SSI $10.00 CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT COLONEL'S BEQUEST, LEISURE Hisar, SSI $10.00 MEDIEVAL LORDS, SSI SUIT LARRY 1 -or3, ZELIARD. FIREHAWK $10.00 ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE $20.00 RISE OF THE DRAGON. THEXDER. POOL OF RADIANCE, SSI $10.00 MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE, DAS BOOT $14.50 STAR COLLECTION for IBM SPACE QUEST 1 -or2-or-3. MANHUNTER NEW YORK 10 GAME BUNDLE CALL FOR OTHER TITLESI X-MEN 2 $19.50 PUNISHER $19.50 from Electronic Zoo DR DOOMS REVENGE 514.50 LAND, SEA & AIR TRILOGY AMAZING SPIDERMAN $14.50 SUPER SALE $19.50 SUPER CONTRA $14.50 by Microproso. 3 GAMES $20 TWILIGHT 2000 $14.50 Includes: Paris-Dakar, Skidoo, Includes: AIRBORNE RANGER, LIGHTSPEED $14.50 20,000 Leagues under the Sea PIRATESI & GUNSHIP. FOR IBM COVERT ACTION $14.50 Legend of Djel, Mouldy Old Dough, Balloon Lagoon, Mechanic ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE Panic, Plasma Pilot, Space Scape. Hoyle's Book of Games Vol. 2 FROM MICROPROSE $20 & best selling TREASURE TRAPII INGLVPEI: SOLITAIRE, by Sierra. $15 M-1 TANK PLATOON & GUNSHIP Includes:28 Solitaire games with TROIKA 3-pack ADULT FUN FOR IBM FROM FREE SPIRIT mouse support. Tons of fun!! SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE from Paragon Software for IBM For IBM on 3.5\" disks only. SEX OLYMPICS (VGA only) $16.50 .......SALE.......$14.50...... SOLD ONLY TO ADULTS 21 & OVER. Indeter REBEL PLANETS, IVAN & METAL 16 VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE more come for a HEARTS. Al ce Windows 3 compatible with HEARTS. Al are Window copatolewa different computers... Apple, VGA, Mouse & sound card support!!! Fast paced 1-800-676-66 16 Atarl, Amiga, C6-4122, MAC, milevel arcade action with 100's of levels of Credit Card Orders Only 11 ( 525 minimum & lots more IBMMS-DOS II uditing play. Strategy & Quickf requed COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of 55 for USA, $8 for Canada, $16 all others, Californians must include 7.25% sales P.O. BOX 5160 tax. To receive our catalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types, SAN LUIS OBISPO send $2 incashor U.S. postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOGII CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. Girlfriend Lisa $69.95 AldeaLabs, Box 450971 Garland, TX 75045 (214) 495-6047. Specify 31/2\" or 5 1/4\" HD disk.  Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles  Artificial Intelligence, Interactive Conversation  3000+ word vocabulary, synonyms, idioms  She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen She learns from every conversation!  VGA video of a REAL Woman. no cartoons!  Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.)  Requires 640K RAM and 8Mb hard disk  No nudity, possible mature situations  Ask about Girlfriend Teri and other Personality Kits constantly being released! Circle Reader Service #39 Circle Reader Service #49 November 1993 Page 173 "


"STRATEGY za Clearing For Custom Actions Simple Scenarios For SimCan's Man Of War by Johnny L. Wilson include the: Hero (74), Monmouth (64), Romney (50 gun frigate), Jupiter (50) and Isis (50). The French ships include: Heros (74 gun frigate), Hannibal (64), Artisan (64), Sphinx (64) and Venguer (64). The scenario should be fairly well-balanced. Though the British flotilla took some serious damage, they managed to fight well enough to drive off the French and recapture a ship or two, but no ships are reported as having been sunk. The British expedition aborted their mission and returned home, while Suffren moved on to a successful campaign in the Indian Ocean. ess. After Action Report Ithough Man Of War's lack of a squadron. In this case, since this is an campaign game means that earlier engagement than those included in player-admirals and commothe MOW database, one may substitute dores do not get the thrill of the long. any French 36-gun frigate for the Materm chase, the «Build Your Own licieuse and any French 32-gunner for the Scenario» feature makes it possible to Opale, as well as any 24-gun frigate for the plan and fight battles at will. This article Flamborough and any 20-gunner for the Junger for the will use two very simple actions to walk Bideford on the British side. Fortunately. the gamer through the construction proc the editor lets one name the ships for each scenario. The French squadron should be set for Average crew quality and the BritBay of Bengal (April 4, 1760) ish squadron for Excellent quality. In this relatively obscure action from Then, one sets the initial position and Then, one sets the initial position and the Seven Years War, a British escort enheading (put the French squadron countered a French squadron that was slightly north of the British one, near or trying to disrupt a convoy from Lisbon far away according to personal taste, and which the British were protecting. The headed for certain interception). Then, British managed to fight off the French, it's time to set the doctrines as in the but the escort ships were heavily damaged actual game and clear for action. in the process. The British were heavily outgunned in this action, but as in most Battle of Porto Praya MWscenarios, they should win because (April 16, 1781) of the higher ratings for crew quality. This battle from the Napoleonic cra is relatively simple to set up. The scenario takes place in the Cape Verde Islands off the coast of West Africa where the British, anchored in Porto Praya, were caught off-guard by Suffren's French squadron. Though the British were taken aback by Suffren (he wasn't supposed to be in the area), they were still able to make it out of harbor and meet him in the open sea. The British and the French square off in the One can set up the scenario to reflect the Bay of Bengal scenario. proximity to the islands by setting the First, the player-designer establishes northern screen-edge as Land. This is opthat there are two squadrons using the tional and represents the harbor of Porto MOWmenu system. Then, the player sets Praya, but is not necessary. The crew quality should be only slightly in the Britthe wind as Brisk and the direction as ish favor with the French at Poor and the NW. Storm conditions are not in effect. British at Average. The wind is, once This would normally be followed by deagain, blowing from the NW and Brisk lineating the status (Land, Shoal or with no storm conditions. Water) of the map edges. Since this is an open water engagement, one need notSet the French on the west edge of the bother with this step. map and the British squadron to the east. This provides for plenty of sea room in Next, one enters the forces for each setting up the engagement. British ships The scenario builder for Man Of Waris fast and efficient. The lack of a real map builder means that it is impossible to set up satisfying cutting-out expeditions or fireship missions, but the game is definitely suited for establishing simple or complex missions in the open sea. The ability to designate map edges as Land or Shoal is useful, but does not give the gamer the tactical satisfaction of deliberately forcing an opponent through the gauntler of shoals, or to take the wind gauge while an opponent is leeward of the coast. Nevertheless, the scenario builder is useful for most actions and will add hours of play value to would-be admirals and commodores. Cow Kr v atorietrantos San 6 A T 10:10 N Their selectie ter all players to b e hirm Over of Battle Readying the British fleet for the Battle of Porto Praya. Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL BLASTER that's \"as good as But like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16\" And that's a Sound Blaster 16.  Sama Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster\"16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster samo Sound CREATIVE BLASTER CREATIVE LABS, INC. 1 PC2 U.S. Inquiries: Creative Labs Inc., Tel: 1-800 998 5227 or 1-405-428 660). International Inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore. Tel: 65-773-0233, Fax: 65:773-0353. Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd. All rights tectved V IR Circle Reader Service #52 "


NA


"ALL OF THE PACIFIC THEATER. ALL OF THE CONFLICT. ALL IN YOUR HANDS. Victory At Sea picks up exactly where the Japanese left off December 7, 1941. However, one thing is different. You're suddenly in control of the entire Pacific Theater. From the ice-encrusted Aleutian Island battlegrounds to the site of what many call the greatest naval battle ever, Leyte Gulf. Direct the entire campaign from the task force level, or engage in specific battles. Command the Allied Forces, or the Imperial Japanese Navy. Either way, Super VGA graphics and actual documentary footage bring your decisions to life. Decide which resources to stockpile. Who to promote. Who to demote. Get intelligence reports on the political and logistical situation around you. Then plan your next attack. Because it's designed by world-renowned military expert James F. Dunnigan, the historical accuracy of Victory At Sea is without equal. It's also the first game ever to give you GameBook technology. Featuring real WW II action photos and over 100,000 words of historical analysis not available with any other game -all just a mouse-click away. JAMES E DUNNIGA December 7, 1941, may live in infamy. But what happens after that is all up to you. Visit your retailer or call 800-653-1360 to order in the U.S., or 800-697-2360 in Canada. VICTORY AT SEA IS AVAILABLE FOR THE IBM PC AND 100% COMPATIBLES AND THE MACINTOSH. VICTORY AT SEA IS A TRADEMARK OF THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC, INC. (C) 1993 THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. IBM IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES. MACINTOSH IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF APPLE COMPUTER. Circle Reader Service #31 "


"REVIEW An Expanding Empire New World's New Worlds for Empire Deluxe NUK EW by Mark \"Skulker\" Carroll with Alan Emrich 119.99 99999 ewu u ZUS Following on the heels of their EmEmpire as Chess? pire Deluxe and Empire Deluxe for 1 Windows. New World and White The most visually striking of the scenarWolf Productions have produced an add ios is Mark Baldwin's \"Chess\" which on disk boasting over 10 new scenarios to comes in two and four-player versions. It challenge the Empire buff. Designers is playe is played on a checkerboard map of alterMark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky contribnating land and sea squares with only one uted their own scenario designs and encity to a side. Each side starts with two listed contributions from various game lines of units along an edge of the board. designers, play testers, and other industry This particular game is a fascinating exernotables. With a cast of \"celebrity\" decise in unit conservation as there is little signers behind it, this disk offers more hope of reinforcements during the game. hope of reinforc than just new worlds to conquer; it can The most bizarre scenario included is Jerry Pournelle's island scenario sets the also be seen as a set of lessons to teach \"Vortex\" by CGW editor, Johnny Wilstage for a major naval conflict. scenario design principles. son. The map is composed of one long, ers start out with both large initial forces Contributing to Empire Deluxe: Scenarthin spiral of land with cities dotting the land mass. As the players move toward the ios are such gaming dignitaries as noted and a large city count. The huge map has several main islands and huge expanses of board wargame designer Jim Dunnigan, center of the spiral, the game becomes a sea. A few neutral cities are included to science fiction author Jerry Pournelle, logistical nightmare requiring some creagive the edge to a clever player. Trevor Sorenson of Interstel's Star Fleet tive strategies. series, Will Wright of Sim City fame, Extra Extras Gordon Walton and Don Gilman of Harpoon, and CGW's own Johnny WilThe scenario disk also comes with two son, among others. utility programs, EMPSTATS and EMPSTATW. These are the DOS and History in the Playing Windows (respectively) versions of the same program. When given the name of There are 37 scenarios included on the a scenario or map file, they will print out statistics on the percentages of terrain disk, several of which have multiple vertypes, and for scenarios includes the numsions for increasing numbers of players. Shop The scenarios range from fairly normal, ber and types of each sides' starting units. to historical, to outright bizarre. The hisThe look is quite spartan, but these proJohnny Wilson's spiraling design clearly grams are useful when designing scenartorical scenarios, contributed primarily reflects the author's state of mind. by Steve Barker and Mark Clouser, feaios, giving a quick overview of the design. ture gorgeous real world settings for the One of Jim Dunnigan's contributions, Another included utility is RANDMAP American Civil War, the Bolshevik Revo«Red World,» is a game for a single human and RANDMAPW (again, the DOS and lution, WWII's Pacific Theatre, Ancient player against five computer opponents Windows version). Its purpose is to pick Rome, and several global conflicts. Em within a science fiction motif. The map is within a science fiction motif. The map is a random map file for a game, much like phasis in the scenarios runs from extreme solitary worlds (cities) in a space (ocean). the original Empiredid. With all the maps naval to extreme land actions, and from Once the human player reaches a certain to the scenarios thoughtfully included on single play to humans-only multi-player level of cities captured or battleships sunk, the disk, players will certainly have plenty games. A number of special rules have the computer player levels are enhanced to to choose from. been suggested for some of the games to keep the game from ending too soon. Finally, Empire Deluxe Scenarios ingive them character and add a good deal Bob Rakosky's \"Win or Draw\" scenario cludes the latest, greatest version of proof gaming spice. is ideal for modem play. On a map of gram, Version 3.11, which fixes minor three continents, each player starts with bugs. All told, Empire Deluxe fans, espeonly two transports and cannot build more. The game ends in a draw if all the cially those into scenario design, will find a lot of value in this single, \"star-studded\" tranports are sunk and each player has one disk. CGW continent to himself. It becomes a touchy game of cat Empire Deluxe Scenarios and mouse with each player trying to protect his transTITLE: Empire Deluxe Scenarios PRICE: $29.95 ports and expand, while SYSTEM: IBM committing resources to Scenarios REQUIREMENTS: Original Empire Deluxe game PROTECTION: None sink the enemy's transports. DESIGNER: White Wolf Productions Jerry Pournelle has proP.O Box 4302 Jim Dunnigan's scenario is a single-player game duced a real slugfest in his with a science fiction motif. \"Naval Duel.» The two play(818) 999-0606 PUBLISHER: New World Computing Hollywo, CA 9008 Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Robert Brus, Burbank Robert Strauss, Burbank OP Oxyd magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, IT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now shipping! Mac: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5MB RAM, EGA or VGA monitor, Soundbla, or Adl. optional. ex OXD My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent prodUCH. R. S, Germantown Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C. Moore, Columbia This is without question, the most impressive game / have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tonty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming / keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Oxyd Credits: Game of the Year Computer & Pudagopk 06/93 The variety of play is literally, incredible. Score this game a solid 10 Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. Angelord 06/93 Game of the Month. MorWelt 02/93 Top of the Charts Brainleset Cougary, FC Cartes German edition This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes New objects ond game elements to explore. The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. Il look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, ( I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnum! is an entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego OK so we got hooked! I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks Get a free appetizer for Mac, PC, Amig, or ST: Send $ 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxyd to Dongleware Publishing, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139-2909 Circle Reader Service #57 "


"DESIGN NOTES Even The Aide Could Use A Hand The Designer Speaks On Aide de Camp by Scott Hamilton, President of HPS Simulations Scott Hamilton's Aide de Camp has been planning should be aimed at keeping called the \"Holy Grail of Computer Wargamthings as simple as possible. ing\" by its most enthusiastic users. It is not a game, but rather a tool for making games. With Check The Map it, board wargamers can computerize their Look over the entire map before placing favorite board games or design original games, and play them via e-mail with wargaming terrain. Make sure it's the right size and friends. In this short article, Scott offers some the mapsheets line up properly. If not, tips for the wargame designer. delete the map and start over. There is a truism among board and Save Often computer wargame design: \"The Save map and game sets often to miniplayer can always do better.\" Even mize potential data loss. A good idea is to before the shrink wrap has hit the floor, use a different name each time a ser is most hard core gamers will find clements saved. That way, if a mistake is made, a of a design that they could have done file saved previous to the error can be better if given the chance. Aide de Campresurrected without losing a lot of work. gives gamers just this chance the chance If disk space is at a premium, clear out the to put their design talents where their unwanted back-up files ar the end of each mouse is. session. Note that the auto-save feature Practically everything about a final Aide creates a backup file by overwriting the de Camp (ADC) game is determined by existing auto-save file. the user: how it looks, how it plays, and how detailed it is. In effect, the user deSet Zoom Levels Appropriately cides where to go, and ADC provides the Redefining zoom levels for a game can power and flexibility to get there. be a real time waster. A little forethought Because the user is responsible for so can save many headaches. Normally, many elements of the design, careful Zoom 1 should show the entire map, planning is essential. Sometimes knowing Zoom 2 should show enough hexes so even a few tricks\" can be a real time saver. that any unit can move its full movement From the experience of users so far, I've allowance without scrolling, and Zoom 3 been able to compile a list of often-heard should show combat in detail. suggestions. Delay Unnecessary Map Entry Start Small If portions of the map are not going to be used at the beginning of the game, Everybody tells me this! Begin with a leave them blank to save time. Maps and small game, or even a small portion of a symbols can be changed at any time, so map to get the hang of ADC before inwhen the map portions are needed for vesting time in a larger game. In particulater game play, they can be added. lar, experiment with different zoom level settings and secondary terrain symbols. Keep Contrasts Between Units And Terrain Plan Ahead Try to keep a color contrast between Il of units and terrain so that the units show bols up at a glance. For example, lise darker beforehand. Decide what color they will colors for unirs and lighter colors for terolors for units and lighter colors for terbe and what they will look like. Decide rain. If this is not possible, try to make a which unit and class values will be stored border of an opposite color around the and what modifications they may need. If unit symbol. For example, place a unit symbol. For example, place a dark the values don't fit or don't display well, border around a light colored unit, and consider making \"chits\" or \"markers\" to vice-versa. go in the hex with the units. Above all, The success that ADC is achieving is very much due to customer feedback and support. Every improvement I've made since the introduction of version 1.0 has been the result of player suggestions. The single biggest change I've made was the addition of an optional hex grid overlay. This change didn't affect any of the game mechanics, but allowed ADC maps to look like the familiar hexes instead of squares. For the monster gamers\" who use ADC to play games such as GRD's Europa and SPI's War In Europe, I made several changes. The number of unit symbols was increased from 200 to 250, and up to 12 units per hex are displayed at the bottom of the screen. I also introduced an autosave feature to protect against data loss in case of power or system failure. From the suggestions of tactical gamers-like those playing Avalon Hill's Advanced Squad Leader and The Gamers' Civil War Brigade Series—I added built-in unit facing capabilities and the option to change the number of unit symbols displayed per hex. The current version of ADC (1.14) includes all of these additions and more. Since I believe in supporting my customers the way they have supported me, I am offering this upgrade free to registered ADC users. All I ask is that they send me a blank, formatted, high density disk and a self-addressed stamped return envelope. Version 2.0 is planned for next year. This upgrade will include a number of significant changes over version 1.14. My standard upgrade policy will hold for that version, which will be made available to registered users for $10-$15. I've also begun an ADC Opponent's Wanted database. Each gamer registering with this service receives a list of others looking to play the same or similar games. \"The list will be updated and printed every four months. Each customer will receive an initial copy of the list for free. Annina Scott Hamilton may be reached by phone at (408) 554-8381 or by e-mail on GEnie (S.Hamilton), Prodigy (KFHB08B) or NVN (SHAMILTON). He is a strong believer in product support. CGW Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"Introducing FLIGHTSTICK PRO Flying The Best... Just Got Better. Look for CH Products' VIRTUAL PILOT, FLIGHTSTICK, GAMECARD 3 AUTOMATIC, and our MACH series where you buy FLIGHTSTICK PRO. Fly The Best! FLIGHTSTICK PRO is the ultimate combat stick for total command of the skies. Made to endure the toughest missions, FLIGHTSTICK PRO gives you the winning edge to take on even the worst enemy. With top gun precision, you can view your surroundings, activate radar, blast missiles, thrust into mach speed ... all at your fingertips. FLIGHTSTICK PRO includes a four-way switch to control weapons, radar, and viewing for more advanced games plus all the best features of FLIGHTSTICK. Great with flight simulation, auto racing, and any game that uses a joystick. For all IBM compatible computers. FLIGHTSTICK PRO. The most intense joystick you'll ever fly. PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619 598-2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Airfield of Dreams Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. A Preview of Aces Over Europe from Dynamix by Bryan A. Walker M Sonido OIL Like many new simulators, Aces Over sharper and more detailed than those of Red An avid computer game and flight sim fan, the Europe has had rumors swirling around its Baron or AOTP. In addition, the Tall mode author is also an AH-64 Apache pilot and Arma development like vapor trails off of wingtips. helps the player discern what maneuvers the ment Officer for the U.S. Army. A combat veteran The truth is there will not be modem support enemy aircraft are performing from a greater of Desert Storm, he's currently stationed at Fort or a «Padlock» view resembling the one in distance—a big plus in a dogfight. Switching Campbell, Kentucky. Falcon 3.0. During discussions with Tucker between both resolutions provides a very clear Hatfield, Quality Engineer at Dynamix, I example of how much better the Tall graphics i litary, civilian, or arm-chair pilot, learned that these features one common thread runs through were considered, but You are being shot of! -all aviation buffs: A passion for judged too unwieldy for \"Warbirds.\" There's something about the the current game system. coughing rumble of a huge Pratt and WhitWhile I was disappointed, ney radial, or the cultured growl of a Rollsthe game's other improveRoyce Merlin that fires their imagination. ments make up for these They all dream of bravely striding out into missing options. Rather the foggy English dawn to mount their trusty than simply put a new coat Thunderbolt, Lightning, or Mustang and of paint over AOTP, DySTALL roar off into the sky. Wherever a magnificent namix has polished and reold Warbird flies, misty-eyed aviation enthufined their award-winning siasts of all ages and backgrounds dream of simulation system. Even going back in time and being Aces Over with my early beta-test Europe. copy, it's easy to see that AUSL. 00 BPX120475 fans of both Red Baron and COND AOTP will find many familare in comparison to normal VGA. And, to iar features, while being pleasantly challenged the relief of technophobes who cringe when by noteworthy improvements. With a few a new gimmick promises to crash a game mouse clicks, new missions, planes, weapons, every 30 seconds, the Tall resolution code graphics, flight models and other features will seems quite stable, even in my beta-test verstart showing the game's new muscle. sion. areers REDRIF LESSRES-256 Shiny New Toys As impressive as the Tall resolution would be by irself, Aces Over Europe also introduces CANCEL START Of course, a major attraction of any flight gradient shading to the aircraft models. ComOf the computer game companies that have simulator is the number of new toys for the bine these two features, and players are going fostered these fantasies, few have been as sucplayer to enjoy. Aces Over Europe's wine list to be treated to possibly the best-looking cessful as Dynamix. Fans of their Red Baron has plenty of vintage, sporting 20 different Warbird models ever seen in a PC Right sim. aircraft, 14 ground vehicles and 13 ships. The The extra power has made it possible to and Aces of the Pacific (AOTP) can look forP-51. -47, and -38, two models of Spitfires, clearly render multi-color camouflage, invaward to climbing into the cockpit of Aces Over Mosauitoes an s Over Mosquitoes and Me-109s, three different Europe, the newest title in the \"Great War Landing gear raises. Focke Wulf 190s, and the Me-262 jet are all Planes\" series. Building on the friendly interwaiting for the player to climb in. The B-17, face, versatility and attention to detail that is -25,-26, Arado 234B \"Blitz\" jet bomber, and their trademark, Dynamix has set its sights on Ju-88 are also represented and make appearthe European theatre during the latter part of ances as either targets or friendlies to defend. World War II. With surprisingly few good P erhaps the most impressive new feature in games addressing this influential period of air Aces Over Europe is what Dynamix calls the combat, the arrival of Aces Over Europe is a Tall Resolution Mode. With twice the vertiwelcome addition that is sure to make a threecal pixels of normal 320x200 VGA, the point landing in its genre. \"Tall» mode looks great! The planes are now YOUR INTERRUS M enente Page 182 Computer Gaming World "


"6616-Bit Sound Explosion!\" Booth A928, South Annex COMDEX! See us at you greater software and CD-ROM drive compatibility than cither Creative Labs or Media Vision! Aztech Labs opens your window to the multimedia revolution like no one else can! Everything is Crystal Clear! Earth shaking, bone rattling, crystal cracking 16-bit, 44.1 KHz stereo audio. From sonic booms as you devour Mach I, to the hottest guitar licks that rock the house, Aztech Labs delivers and delivers BIG! The Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 audio card leads the multimedia revolution with the widest sound standard compatibility in the market today. Bundled with the finest multimedia and business audio software, headphones, and a microphone, buy Sound Galaxy, and get the most flexible, compatible, and affordable sound performance available for your PC, Your Multimedia Leader! With over 700,000 boards shipped, a strong commitment to R & D, and a host of exciting products scheduled for release, Aztech Labs leads the Multimedia industry into the future. Sound Galaxy's Wave-Power Digital WaveTable Synthesizer and new Double Speed CD-ROM Multimedia Upgrade Kit are a glimpse of the future available now Get the Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 from Aztech Labs, the difference is crystal clear! Visit your local computer dealer & insist on Sound Galaxy! For information call 800-886-8859 today. The Compatibility Advantage! Aztech's Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 audio card owns the compatibility advantage. Only Sound Galaxy is compatible with Microsoft Windows Sound System, Sound Blaster PRO, Adlib, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And only THE ONLY 16 BIT STEREO SOUND CARD TILAT SUPPORTS 5 SOUND STANDARDS Sound Galaxy gives you the SOUNT widest choice of CD-ROM interfaces, and a SCSI and Wave-Table Synthesis upgrade Aztech products give SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16 SOUND MEDIA VISION BLASTERPRO AUDIO 16 ASP SPECTRUM 16 SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16 OUTPERFORMS THE COMPETITION: EASILY! COMPATIBLE WITH: SOUND BLASTER SOUND BLASTER PRO MICROSOFT WINDOWS SOUND SYSTEM COVOX SPEECH THING DISNEY SOUND SOURCE ADUS YES NO YES NO NO NO NO MULTIPLE CD-ROM INTERFACES (AT-BUS) PANASONIC M|SJ| SONY* tadapter required) Look for the Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 candio card at your local dealer today! NO NO CD-ROM INTERFACE ISCSN OPTION TO UPGRADE! NO YES OPTION FOR UPGRADE TO 16-BIT WAVE-TABLE SYNTHESIS YES YES NO! SON HALAXY WinD05  PRODUKT MICROSOFT TOP PRODUCT AWARD BY WINDOWS WINDOS MAGAZINE (GERMANY) \"Pioneering the Multimedia Explosion!\" COMPATIBLE MultimediaPC A product of Aztech Labs, Inc. 46707 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 OGRODOTTI 1993 Aztech Labs, Inc. Aztech, the Aztech logo, and Sound Galaxy are trademarks or registered trademarks of Aztech Labs, Inc. All other names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. Specifications, terms, and services subject to changes without notice. Circle Reader Service #41 "


"You are being shoi an! sion stripes, and even individual squadron \"Interdiction\" and \"Crossbow\" missions selves \"out of airspeed, altitude and ideas» will markings on the aircraft. The sharp detail on challenge the player to destroy key facilities be thankful for the ability to now bail our at the bombers is particularly impressive, and such as bridges, rail heads, V-1 launch rails any time. The animated sequences are parprovides great suspension of disbelief as the and radar sites. The new \"Close Support\" ticularly well done, resembling old WWII player slashes through their formations. missions may find the player atracking a colfilm footage. Personally, my favorite new bit Without question, the aircraft models of Acesumn of panzers while trying to avoid Me of chrome was the small explosions that now Over Europe are a new standard in excellence. 262s and intense ground fire. The \"old\" appear when a plane takes a hit. missions from AOTPare also present, includThe Good Fight ing new Aces to tangle with. A major fix in Not Necessarily the News Remembering the criticism AOTP initially Aces Over Europe has made the \"Scramble\" One of the few disappointments Aces Over received for its slow frame rate, Dynamix sorties much more exciting. Instead of trying Europe may have in store is the relatively tried to keep the speed of Aces Over Europe as to intercept high-altitude bombers, the player boring terrain. The flat. lifeless terrain model high as possible while including the new feais now greeted by enemy fighters buzzing of the game is physically much larger than tures gamers wanted to see. Bench-testing right down the runway! Even worse, the AOTP's, but virtually identical. Compared to between AOTP and the bera-version of Aces player's own plane may be loaded with bombs the terrain models of Strike Commander and Over Europe certainly bode well for the cager and external tanks in anticipation of a long Comanche: Maximum Overkill, Aces Over flight-sim public. Despite the fact that my range strike. Europe's terra firma is a definite step backbeta-test copy still had some «rough\" code Aces Over Europe also showcases new weapwards. It seems almost criminal that the and integral hardware/software-based copy ons and attack options. From the tactic of game's gorgeous aircraft must zoom around protection, the game plays just as smoothly as \"Skip Bombing to the tricky German GM21 over scenery that's only marginally more inAOTP with the 1946 upgrade. The actual rockers and new cannon pods, there's plentyteresting than a putting green. Of course, release version may well run a tad faster. of new spice in Aces Over Europe's gunnery there is always the graphic flash vs. frame rate stew. In addition, Aces Over Europe gives the trade-off, and it seems Dynamix has opted for You are being soon player the ability to send his comrades after the frame rate and its resulting playability—a targets that didn't appear on the mission decision that will do right by most gamers. brief, which was impossible in AOTP. Still, the wingmen are tentative in the ground-attack missions, leaving the player to do nearly all of the work. While doing that ground-attack work, veterans of AOTPare going to find Aces Over Europe's heavier and more accurate ground fire aggressively \"stitching up\" their planes. The familiar exploding flak is now much more destructive and definitely adds to The huge formations of the \"white knuckle\" factor! heavy American bombers Attacking bombers in Aces Over Europe can also be a harrowing experience. The impresspew out a hailstorm of sive formations of heavy American bombers Along with a terrain model mired in yesterdefensive fire, occasionally spew out a hailstorm of defensive fire, occa day's technology, the sound effects have also vaporizing attacking sionally vaporizing attacking fighters in a sinfailed to challenge the state of the art. In fact, gle pass! The cartoon image of a singed, like the terrain, they seemed to have been fighters in a single pass! wide-eyed pilot hurtling through the air in a simply ported over from AOTP with little scated position and gripping a twisted control noticeable improvement. With the heartstick came to mind often. Mr. Harris made it stopping digitized effects of games like SVGA Another criticism leveled at AOTP was the clear that. mercifully, the accuracy of the Air Warrior on the market, the sounds of Aces \"one size fits all\" flight models that took away bombers' defensive guns would be reduced in Over Europe seem timid by comparison. from each plane's own character. The flight the release version of the game. This is very envelopes and aerodynamics of Aces Over good news for would-be bomber intercepOff We Go... Europe have received some tweaking and are tors. now noticeably more realistic than those of The Campaigns and Historic Missions of Aces Over Europe is not a revolutionary AOTT. The realism of external stores, flaps Aces Over Europe will again feel familiar to game. Taking a proven concept and engine, and landing gear have also been improved veterans of Red Baron and AOTP. The HisDynamix has skillfully woven small improvedramatically. A significant new feature is the toric missions are well-researched, providing ments into the system while leaving the best addition of buffering and spins, which were a 28 different aerial adventures of varying diffeatures of their previous games intact. The deadly hazard to the pilots of real Warbirds. ras. ficulty. The campaigns offer a wide variety of successful formulas of Red Baron and AOTP The flight model improvements are certainly challenges while staying faithful to the actual challeng are very evident in the overall feel of Aces Over more realistic, but still lack some of the nascicr progression of the war. Flying as a Luftwaffe Europe. This evolutionary method of develtraits characteristic of the high-strung fighter pilot can be a humbling experience as the opment may disappoint those expecting a era..he takeoff and climb player's character comes to grips with the quantum leap in technology. Regardless, Aces characteristics are still overly generous, with futility of fighting huge numbers of Allied air Over Europe certainly promises to be accomeven fully-loaded P-47s becoming airborne forces. modating, playable, entertaining, and even after rolling perhaps 200 fect! While AcesM Aces Many other sharp refinements will come to anyarhershare refinemente will come to educational to the majority of flight-sim fans. Over Europe's flight models don't approach Without question, Aces Over Europe has the light as players explore Aces Over Europe: an SVGA Air Warrior's level of realism, they improved briefing/inflight man, new flight potential to be the best Dynamix Warbird stand well above those of AOTP. recorder functions, and controller options game to date. New-and-improved missions successfully that include CH Flightstick Pro and note The author can be reached for further comconvey the flavor of the European air war. book adapter support. Pilots who find themment on America Online at WALKER34. CGW Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 11-93 Since 1982 LlomputAbility Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm FAX: (414) 357-7814 P.O. Box 17882 Milwaukee, WI 53217 TIBM SOUND CARDS CREATIVE Wayne Greizke 3 34.95 Warriors of Legend .... 19.95 When Two Worlds War ......... 34.95 Where... Carmen SanDiego. Each 29.95 Where... Carmen Pas! ............ 29.95 Where... Carmen Space ........... 44.95 Where... Carmen USA Deluxe .... 44.95 Where... Carmen World Delure .44.95 Wilson Pro Stall Goll ............. 24.95 Wing Commander Il ......... ....... 47.95 Wing Commander Deluxe ......... 47.95 Wizardry. Crusaders Dark Savant 39.95 World Circuit Champ Edition .....39.95 World Circuit Grand Prix ..........34.95 World War II Battles of South Pac 34.95 Worlds of Legends ......... 29.95 XWing Mission .............. 39.95/19.95 Yserbius ............................2495 Software available only on 3.5\" disk or premium packs. No individual 5.25\" disks are available CREATIVE LABS. INC. SOUND $215 BLASTER.16 ASP  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible VIDEO BOARDS Presents... The Award-Winning ORCHID Line of Video Boards Fahrenheit 1280 Plus, 1MB VLB version... ProDesigner Il/s, 1MB ................. Celcius VLB 1MB (expandable to 2MB) $165 $179 $135 $235 MEMTA VW   VISION  PRO AUDIO PCI Multimxia F Fahrenheit $205 VLB Version $225 Mahrenheit. VAI CALL! AA DIAMOND 165155 NEW NEW NEW Pro Audio Studio 16 $199 MODEMS . 44.95 Batu * ****..... $199 Speedstar Pro 1Mg. 24bit, 1280x1024 ........... .....S115 Stealth 24 ISA/VLB S155/$155 Stealth 1MG, 32,000 col, 1024x768 Stealth Pro SVGA ISA, 1280x1024, 16 color 1 MB / 2MB ............... S235/5329 Stealth Pro VLB 1MB/2MB... S245/$329 Number Nine 9GXE, 1230 x 1024 NI, SVGA: LVL 10, 1MB $239 LVL 11.2MB LVL 12.3 MB... ... 34.95 ZOOM FREE FREE Prodigy Starter Kit with purchase of any Zoom Modeml S349 Legacy, The 39.95 Legacy Realm of Terror ......... 34.95 Legends of Valour. 37.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5............. 39.95 Lemmings ........................... 29.95 Oh No More Lemmings (add-on)21.95 Lemmnings Il......... . 34.95 Liberty or Death ...... .. ..34.95 Links 386 Pro.... .. 39.95 Lord of the Rings II: Two Towers 34.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom .... 39.95 Lesl Vikings .. . 24.95 Lunar Command ..... 34.95 Magic Candle lll ............. 37.95 Maniac Mansion 2 (Day Tentacle) 34.95 Mantis/Speech Pack...... 39.95/19.95 Megatraveler II or Ill....... 34.95/39.95 Mig 29, Falcon 3.0 Add on ........ 29.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win ......... 34.95 Mystery at the Museum ........... 34.95 National Lampoon's ChessManiac39.95 Nick Price's Trouble Shooting Golf29.95 NFL Pro League Football 44.95 No Greater Glory ................... 39.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge/Win29.95/29.95 Out of this World ................... 34.95 Pacific Theater of Operations .... 39.95 Paladin 2 ..... ... ... 34.95 Patriot 42.95 Pathway to Power ... 29.95 Papper's Adventure in Time ... 29.95 Perfect General. 34.95 Pinball for Windows 29.95 Pirates of Gold ... 39.95 Populous il ........ 37.95 Prince of Persia ll ... 39.95 Privateer 47.95 Proto Star: War on the Frontier ..39.95 Quarky Turbo Science ....... .. 29.95 Quest for Glory 3 .... 39.95 Red Crystal 34.95 Raos to Riches.. 34.95 Railroad Tycoon 39,95 Realms of Arkania 34.95 Return of the Phantom 34.95 Return to Zark... 44.95 Ring World: Patriarch's Revenge 34.95 RoboSport for Windows .......... 24.95 Rock and Bach Studio ..............34.95 Home ........ *** ... 29.95 Rules of Engagement Il ........... 39.95 S.C.OUT....... 34.95 Sam & Max Hit the Road ...... 34.95 Seal Team ...... 37.95 Secret Weapons/Lulltwalle ...... 39.95 E xpansion Disk 1,2,3 or 4.... 19.95 Serpent Isle (U7 part 2) ........... 47.95 Seven Cities of Gold ............... 31.95 Shadowgale for Windows ......... 31.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Show and Tell for Kids .. 29.95 Seige Dogs of War Bundle ..... 20.95 Sid Meier's Bundle ... 29.95 Sim Anl DOS/Windows .... 34.95/34.95 Sim Cily DOS/Windows .... 29.95/34.95 Graphics Sel 1 or 2 .... .... 13.95 Sim Earth / Windows ....... 29.95/29.95 Sim Farm... 34.95 Sim Life.. 39.95 Simon the Sorcerer ................ 29.95 Solitaire's Journey5/Win .. 34.95/34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircrall .. 24.95 Space Hulk 37.95 Space Quest 5 39.95 Special Forces ... 29.95 Spectre DOS premium 34.95 Spell Crall 34.95 Spellcasting 301 ........ 34.95 Spelljammer: Pirates Realmpace 37.95 Star Lagions .... 23.95 Star Control ll ..... 34.95 Strike Commander 47.95 Strike Squad 37.95 Strip Poker 3/data disks 2-629.95/15.95 Studio for Windows 119.95 Sub Version 1.0.. 34.95 Suminoning ... . 37.95 Syndicate .... 36.95 TA Break Pinball ...... 29.95 TA Break Paol........ 29.95 Tales of Magle: Proph. Shadow. 37.95 Task Force 1942 39.95 Task Force Admirals Pack ........ 44.95 Terminator 2029 39.95 The Prophecy..... 24.95 The Legacy: Realm of Terror ..... 39.95 The Fighter .... 39.95 Tom Landry Football ....... 29.95 Tony Lalussa Baseballll 30.95 Tornado ... 47.95 Tornada Limited Edition 56.95 Tristan 29.95 Trouble Shooting Golt.. 29.95 Ultima Vll... 49,95 Ultima Underworld Il.... 47.95 Ultrabols ........... 37.95 Uninvited for Windows.. .. 31.95 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword ... 42.95 V for Victory: Market Garden ..... 42.95 V for Victory. Ulah Beach .......... 42.95 V for Victory Il: Velikiye Luki ..... 42.95 $429 Aces of the Pacific ... .......... 44.95 WWII 1946 add on disk ......... 19.95 Aces Over Europe .................. 39.95 AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 47.95 AD & D Stronghold .. 37.95 AD&D Unlimited Adventures ..... 37.95 ADIBOI/ADIJUNIOR VOL 1 ......... 34.95 Adventures of Pinocchio ..... ...45.95 Air Bucks ....... .. 34.95 Air Traffic Controller .. ... 34.95 Air Warrior .................... ............ 39.95 Aircraft & Adventure Factory ..... 24.95 Airforce Flight Assignment ...... 39.95 AJ World of Discovery ...... covery 29.95 Aladdin and His Wonderful Lamp 35.95 Alone in the Dark ......... 34.95 Amazon....... .. 39.95 Ambush at Sorina.. 37.95 Archon Ultra..... 37.95 Ashes of Empire ........... 44.95 Aspects of Valor . .. 59.95 AT Air Command ... 34.95 B-17 Flying Fortress ........ 39.95 Barron's Book Notes ......... 44.95 Battles of Destiny 34.95 BattleChess 4000/Supe VGA29.95/34.95 Battlefield 2000 37.95 Betrayal at Krondor ......... .39.95 Blades of Destiny .... 39.95 Bloodstone 25.95 Blue Force .... ..39.95 Body Illustratud..................44.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space.... 39.95 Campaign ... ... 34.95 Car & Driver 37.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific ......39.95 Carriers of War ... 34.95 Carriers of War Construction Kit 34.95 Castles I or II .... 34.05 Challenge of the Five Realms .... 34.95 Champions ..................... 34.95 Children's Writing / Publishing 1.539.95 Civilization ...... Classic Adventures ......... ... 34.95 Cohort Il... tl .. . ............... 19.95 Comanche: Maximum Overkill ... 42.95 Mission Disk #1 or 2 ... ... 25.95 Conquered Kingdoms.............. 34.95 Scenario Disk.. 24.95 Conquest of Japan ....... Creepers ... .29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant ... 41.95 Cyber Empires ........ .31.95 Daemonsgate VGA 34.95 Dagger ol Amonra... 39.95 Darklands MPE 44.95 Dark Hall... 34.95 Dark Side of Xeen ..... 39.95 Dark Sun. 47.95 Daughter of Serpentis . 31.95 Day of the Tentacle ................ 34.95 Deja Vul or II, Windows .......... 37.95 Discover Space ................ .34.95 Dragon's Lair 3 .. . Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys .24.95 Dune Il 34.95 Ealgle Eye Mysteries ..... 31.95 Ecoquest ll 29.95 Eight Ball Deluxe ................... 39.95 El-Fish/Electronic Aquarium ..... 34.95 Empire Deluxe ......................34.95 Eric the Unready ......... .... 34.95 Eye of the Beholder III ............. 42.95 F-15 Strike Eagle lll........ 34.95/49.95 Falcon 3.0 ... 44.95 Disk 1. Operation Fighting Tiger24.95 Flashback .... Wack.......................... 31.95 Flight 701 ........................... 17.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force ..... 39.95 Flight Simulator 4.0.. 39,95 Football Pro... 39,95 Freddy Pharkas ...... . ... Front Page Football 39.95 37.95 Gary Grisby's Pacific War..... 44.95 Gateway Il Homeworld....... .. 34.95 Gettysburg 29.95 Gobblins Il 24.95 Government Giveaway .............33.95 Grand Slam Bridge 11 .............. 31.95 Great Naval Battles ............... 42.95 Seen Builder/Expan ea .. 25.95/20.95 America in the Altantie ..... tant . 20.95 Hard Ball Il or III............. 29.95/34.95 Harpoon Signature Edition ........ 47.95 Harrier Assult ....................... 34.95 Heaven & Earth ..................... 29.95 Heroes of the 357th ................ 17.95 High Command ..................... 41.95 Hockey League Simulator II...... 29.95 Humans. 24.95 INCA ... 34.95 Incredible Machine ........ 29.95 Indy Jones 4: Fale of Allanlis ..... 34.95 Jack and the Beanstalk... 35.95 James Pond 2.......... 37.95 Jump Jet ....................... 39.95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced 39.95 King's Quest 6. 47.95 Lands of Lore 34.95 La Russa Baseball ll .... 37.95 ATI Technologies GRAPHICS ULTRA V.32 bis Send/Receive 14.400 for Windows Internal / External .......... S125/S155 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 for DOS Internal / External ......... S125/S155 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal Fax Software, DOS/Windows ... $135 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone$225 Fax Software, DOS/Win ........... $235 SIS JOYSTICKS Graphics Ultra Plus No compromise Graphics for Windows & Multimedia Video! 1 MB / 2MB......$209 / $229 Graphics Ultra Pro 2MB Professional Graphics & Multimedia Video for the Uncompromising User! VLB/EISA.. ...... $349 / $375 800-554-9925 .......... Gambil .......... ............$39 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick Eliminator Game Card .... PC MouseStick $75 CH Products: Virtual Pilot / Virtual Pilot Pro$69/$89 Flight Stick. Hi Speed Adaptor $19 Gamecard 3-Aut/Gamecard 3-PS/ 849 MACH 3 Joystick $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke... MAXX Pedal..... Kraft: Kraft KC3 Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler .... $55 Kraft Thunderstick Thrustmaster: Flight Control ..... ... $75 Weapons Control Mark II............... $99 Rudder Pedals ..... Thrustmater Pro ......................... $119 One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses.  All Products Sold  Corporate Government & Carry Manufacturers School POS Welcome. Full Warranties & Documentation VISA  APO, FPO HI, AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards. orders welcome: 6%.  Most Orders Shipped Min. S. International within 48 Hours Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: $5 per order, not per title. 15%-Min. S15. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. SS. exceeds calculated amount, .C.O.D orders welcome you'll be billed additional with only a $6,00 Charge. Call for Free Catalog . We Ship Latest Version Items Not Listed Personal or company checks allow 14 wiking days to clear 'ncc fluctuate heyond our control & may change for better or wone Defective retumsmithe Relum Authorizati umr. Call curl 09 to ohtain a Return Authorization or your retum will not be accepted. Slupping & handling are m-refundable. All wesan tinal Allnetums are suht to restocking Ice. .... $27 Circle Reader Service #50 "


"REVIEW Art Thou A Worthy Opponent? SSG's Warlords I/ Will Cripple The Weak And III-Prepared by Ed Dille \"In the survival of favored individuals and races. crops, and slaughter the innocent...all vicaricomputer opponents are patsies. Instead, the during the constantly-recurring Struggle for Existously, of course. chief difference between them is the degree of ence, we see a powerful and ever acting form of 'The fictional background for Warlords II is aggressiveness displayed toward expansionSelection.\" brief but sufficient. After a long and bloody ism. Knights are the most conservative, preCharles Darwin war, the land of Illuria entered a blessed reign ferring to consolidate their holdings with \"Though fraud in all other actions be odious, yet of peace. While this condition was popular strong defenses before venturing further. in mitters of wr it is landable and glorious, and he who overcomes his enemies by stratagem is as much to amongst the masses, the assembled Warlords Lords are a little more opportunistic, willing be praised as be who overcomes them by force.\" who had created the peace grew bored and to take a risk now and then to capitalize on -Niccolo Machiavelli restless. As the saying goes, idle hands are the an opponent's weakness. Warlords are natuDevil's playthings. Realizing that trouble rally the fiercest opponents, attempting to Tere these two great minds alive to would soon erupt unless the warriors could drive you before them with well balanced day, it is likely that they would apbe provided an outlet, the Sages of the land be provided an outlet, the Sages of the la stacks of units while jealously guarding those Vpreciate how well Warlords 'Il gathered to cast a mighty spell. Once assets already won with the blood of their illustrates their points. In this latest offering wrought, all the heroes and other unem brothers. from Australia's SSG, none but the fittest ployed military units were plucked from the Internal examination of the program remay survive, and inferior positions are only l land and dumped, en masse, in the new world veals that the Al routines for each skill level winnable with great strategic acumen. of Etheria. Etheria is ripe for conquest, with are identical, but Knights and Lords are three set piece campaigns and a handicapped by special logic constraints. SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 000000 random world builder, such that They are forced into more passive play by the most voracious appetites for restrictions on the offensive options open to Arkratel conquest should be sated. them and the number and types of units they Current Warlords II is an eight player may build. By opting for this approach, in game of conquest. As in Empire lieu of designing three separate Al routines, and other games of this ilk, diploSSG was able to devote more energy to makVOICE Tiguan. macy is only a tool to allow one to ing the Warlord opponents as cunning and simo Codu choose the time and place of the ruthless as possible. Strength Strength ensuing war. There is no victory Full campaigns begin with 80 cities on the pos: 12 short of total victory but, as Hitler map, 72 of which are neutral and must be and many other would-be world brought under control. Neutral cities never 2 E conquerors learned, it is best not undertake offensive operations, so the player ALIUM to support too many fronts at need not be concerned with strong defenses 6. EL once. Less than of new cities during the initial phase of 1923 top a cap 20OX eight players the game. Succumb to the land rush may be used, Warlords II Warlords // returns us to the moral state of though it deTITLE: Warlords ir PRICE: fracts from the complexity $69.95 the Dark Ages, where kingdoms were built on SYSTEM: IBM the backs of the peasantry and survived only to do so, and any combiREQUIREMENTS: 386SX, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, 5MB hard drive space, mouses supports Adlib, Sound through expansionism. Players who wish to nation of the total may be Blaster. PAS, MT-32 and Sound Canvas cards # OF PLAYERS: human controlled. survive in this environment must shed all 1-8 PROTECTION None civilized inhibitions and take to heart Dille's Computer players have DESIGNERS: Steve Fawkner, Roger Keating, lan Trout first axiom of combat: the greatest happiness three selectable skill setNick Stathopoulous, Gregor Whiley PUBLISHER: Strategic Studies Group (US Office) is to scatter thine enemies and drive them tings: Knight, Lord and Pensacola, FL 1904) 469-8880 before you, to raze their cities, poison their Warlord. None of the Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 260000 types which may be prostaff which accompanies the unit changes to duced by each city until reflect the number of units in the stack. The there are at least three. banner on the staff becomes larger and longer With the potential to as units are added (eight is the max per stack) build three or more unit and a second smaller banner appears below types, city walls will prothe first when the number of units exceeds vide a defensive bonus of four. What is important to understand from two instead of one. Playthis is that looks can be deceiving. A fierce ers of the original War: Demon unit with a double banner may be lords will remember that, accompanied by other powerful units, such as over time, it was possible Griffins, Giant Spiders and Minotaurs, or it to build city fortifications may be the only strong unit in the stack, to a level of nine, which carried along by several units of Scouts with made them virtually iman Orcish Mob or two. The only way to tell penetrable. Warlords II the difference is to use the Military Advisor EXE BEN does not allow this. Two BAD GAURO function. 12k @ladlo z avtop stamp is the maximum defenThe same logic applies when approaching sive bonus of city walls, cities. Each city is divided into four quadbut several new and rants, which makes it capable of holding up mentality and grab as much territory as posunique unit types more to 32 units. It doesn't matter which wall is sible before coming in contact with the other than make up for this difference. attacked, all the units in the city must be dealt Warlords. Remain ar peace with them for as When an opponent is encountered early in with to capture it. The presence of certain long as possible while consolidaring one's the game, the player has two options. First units in the city. some of which may not position after the initial expansion (more on garrison the border with at least three units in appear visually, can negate bonuses in the that later). Alternarely, players may opt for a cach city and expand in a different direction. attacking stack and vice versa. The next secquick start, which divides the neutral ciries Or second, focus on bim in lieu of the neu tion will discuss these new effects but, for evenly amongst the sides prior to the start of trals to attempt to eliminate him from the now, the important thing to remember is to the game. In practice, one generally receives game before he can become very powerful. If use the Military Advisor profusely when planless cities starting with this option, but they one chooses the latter option, the outbreak of ning attacks. are more defensible once other Warlords be hostilities may take one of two forms. The gin to eye your territory greedily. Finally, for diplomatically correct way is to move units The types of comments one obtains from those who don't have the days necessary to do into position, then declare war on the diplohim range from this battle should be as easy a full campaign, shorter scenarios with 40, or macy screen just prior to ending the turn. as butchering sleeping cattle\" to \"an attack even 20 cities are possible. This gives the opponent a small warning of here would be utter suicide.\" Between these what is coming, but it preserves one's status two extremes are several other recommendaAmbassadors From Abroad as a fair player with the other opponents. The tions that reflect an even match and slight alternative is to strike without warning, conadvantages by either side. Players must use Diplomacy is an essential component of the ducting surprise attacks accompanied by their judgment as to how hard the attack new system. A single display provides the treachery messages for the world to see. This should be pressed. current state of affairs between all the king. may yield an immediate tactical advantage. When a city is conquered, the player may doms. By referring to it frequently, the player but it may also prompt other leaders to be either occupy, pillage, sack or raze it. Occucan keep track of which nations are occupied come more hostile based upon that act alone. pation treats it like all other player cities and elsewhere in conflict, as well as those who are retains whichever units were already being presumably building up in a period of peace. The Military Advisor built therein. Pillaging eliminates the ability As mentioned earlier, it is best to minimize When one is positioned next to an enemy, to build the most powerful unit in that city the number of enemies one has at any given time. By keeping one's ambition in check, for a sword icon appears to prompt the attack. By in return for an immediate cash benefit. Sackholding down the shift key, this icon changes ing destroys all production except the least the time being at least, it is possible to mass decisive force on one or two of the opposing to a question mark. Clicking on the mouse powerful unit type, but yields the most cash to continue the campaign. As such, it is usuWarlords at a time. In military terms, this is then brings up the Military Advisor screen. The SSG Game Order Report Hero Vlow History Turn Jurn 2 HUDUD known as defeat in detail. advisor is important for Dame Three states of diplomacy exist: peace, limseveral reasons. First, his ited war and total war. All sides initially begin advice is usually accurate Diplomatie Action at peace with one another, with one excepunless one has the \"intion. If the player begins the game with the \"I C laudya Flame tense combat\" option enam the Greatest\" option, then all the opposing computer players will come after him abled. Intense combat Diplomatic State with a vengeance. Limited war is an agreecan even out the disparity berween inferior and sument to allow armies to fight each other in Sher Pupuedo the field, but cities are considered sacrosanct. perior forces, allowing Total war is inevitable if one wishes to win the former to win on ocYour offers and the game, but again, one should not rush casion. Also, the advisor is headlong into this state of diplomacy (or lack important because of the thereof). manner in which unit FERI The initial period of peace allows one to stacks are presented. Report build a military and economic base for the The most powerful unit Caloy pa hl?gu. ensuing conflict. Defeat and occupy as many in a stack is always disneutral cities as possible. Invest in the unit played as the map icon. A Dysonnalic . Stalow U E DE KNE Done) NEED 3mm November 1993 Page 187 "


"SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Do 90 Jurn 30 PUDUD units. They are cheap to establish vey a +2 bonus. Special units are the most (30 gold), which makes them a powerful in the game, so it is necessary to perfect choice to increase cities divert one's Heroes away from the battle to Oictory from two to three unit producaccomplish these explorations. tion, and they are built in one Temples are inhabited by non-secular turn. Their base move value of 16 is the same as that of Scouts, but 10 priests who may either bless the Hero and his P they suffer no terrain disadvanstack (another combat bonus), offer information about the location of certain items or tages to movement. Build several Decupy Pillage Sack Bats early in the game and use allies, or offer a quest. Quests might entail the allies, or offer a quest. Quests might entai them to uncover the map (which recovery of a specific item, destruction of a is hidden at higher levels) in ad particular city or even a crusade, where one must sack a certain amount of gold from the vance of the conquering armies. SuomXEMER ORD. ER The most powerful units that opponents. The successful completion of a 3200X may be built directly, instead of quest results in the temple bestowing several acquired through special actions powerful supernatural units to your cause, (sce the next section), are Pegasi, typically Archons but not exclusively so. ally not a good choice if one is planning on Griffins, Unicorns and Elephants. Pegasi may keeping the city unless it is necessitated by a move 20 spaces without terrain restrictions, In The Heat Of Battle quest (see below) or the player is very cash have a combat value of 5 and provide a +1 poor. combat bonus to all units in their stack. Grif All battles in the game are decisive, continuRazing is the adoption of General William fins have the same movement value, a combating until only one group remains. The entire T. Sherman's scorched earth policy. In esraring of 6, but have a +2 individual bonus campaign may also continue as such, but if sence, the city is burnt to the ground and when attacking cities. This makes Griffins an one becomes too powerful, the other sides cannot be rebuilt. The player derives no excellent choice to conduct interdiction op may sue for peace. The player may opt to money from razing a city, but there is a way erations deep in enemy territory. Unicorns do accept or continue on. Either way, by the to do it that is not explained in the manual. not move as fast as Pegasi and are subject to time a full-scale campaign is completed, as If one's intention is to raze the city anyway, terrain restrictions as well, but their unmodimuch as 15-20 hours will have passed. Herein don't do so when it is first captured. Instead, fied combat value is 7 and they have the same lies the single complaint I have about the sack it for all it is worth and then move on. +1 bonus for stacked units. Elephants are a Prior to ending the turn, however, return to particularly nice addition, and not only begame. Once victorious, one receives a brief fanfare and a single graphic image depicting that city with the pointer and then raze it. cause I happen to be a big fan of Hannibal's This is an effective tactic when one is raiding the arrival of peace. Sorry gang, it was great campaigns. They have a base combat value of and cannot defend the 8. but more importantly, the presence of an getting there but the payoff could be a little cities from being recaptured the next turn. In elephant in an attacking stack reduces the more rewarding. If there is a Warlords III essence, it fills one's coffers and denies recombat value of every enemy unit in the one hopes so), some of the expanded graph sources to the enemy. battle by one point. ics and sound capability might be used to jazz. Rank And File What Is Thy Quest? Grumbling aside, every other aspect of As was mentioned, there are several other Warlords II is worthy of respect and admiraThe expanded bestiary of Warlords II enunits which may only be gained through tion. The digitized sound routines are hanhances the tactical model very nicely. Cities special action. Everyone begins with one dled very nicely and the AI engine is surely are initially capable of building 1-4 unit types, Hero, but may receive offers from others if one of the finest on the market. Even if one but the player may invest in new unit types as the coffers of the kingdom are full. Heroes is a highly skilled strategist and tactician, the funds become available. Players must pay 10have variable combat and move values which same is going to win now and then. As in the 1500 gold pieces to give a city the capacity to may increase as they gain experience. Heroes real world, anything can happen to disrupt build a certain unit. Each unit type has a base add leadership and combat modifiers to the combat and movement value, a set producthe best laid plans. If one's heartbeat keeps stacks they command. Further, they can distion time which ranges from 1-4 turns, and time with the rhythm of war drums, and a day cover and carry items which increase their may have other movement or combar boin battle is more palatable than a day in the bonus levels even farther. Heroes obtain these nuses. Successful players will learn this system park, step into the Warlords II arena and be items, as well as numerous other beneficial pa inside and out, such that they construct of humbled. CGW rewards, by visiting the ruins and fensive and defensive stacks of mutually supSSG Game Order Report Hero Vlow History Turn Jur temples scattered around the porting units. Given that, let's examine some units and illustrate advantageous methods of employment. Powerful monsters inhabit the Golden Tomb ruins one discovers. By defeating i l Spiders are extremely effective units for de Jyle Run fending cities. They cost 1000 gold to estab them in single combat, the player Puma may obtain a cash bounty or one lish, but they have a two turn build time, a Blad Bam Soufield base combat value of 5 and a +2 combat of the aforementioned special bonus if defending a city hex. Given that, a items or combat units. The types Die Jamily and conva aj dhe spider supported by 2 or 3 expendable light of special units include: Wizards, Gelton Test 1224 lec unirs in a city with +2 defensive walls can Giant Wyrms, Undead, Demons, withstand all but concerted enemy attacks. As Elementals. Devils. Archons and Donc such, it is best that the third city captured be Dragons. The presence of any of SELDI put to work producing spiders to vector to all these units in a stack adds a +1 CENE new conquests for quick defense. combat value to all units with the et loga 250 3 @ Giant Bats are the best reconnaissance exception of Dragons, which conit up a bit. Page 788 Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE -ON PC ZOOL NINJA OF THE \"Nth\" DIMENSION V ZOOL DZ GREMALITIA N2 Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085 Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"STRATEGY Prepare Thyself For Warlords II by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. his two-part strategy guide to SSG's columns will be familiar to anyone who has tion, a two-point difference in movement I Warlords Il begins with an overview of played the game; they cover the same basic points, or a one-turn difference in production I the production of military units and the unit data provided in the rulebook. Number time. It is possible, then, for a city to construct uses for each unit. Next month, we'll cover of units produced per turn is self-explanatory; heavy infantry with four combat strength combat, grand strategy, and useful tips and this value provides a basis upon which to points, ten movement points, and a one-turn tricks. compare the strength added per unit of time. construction time. For the most part, howStrength per turn indicates how many ever, units will follow the rulebook values. The Best Creature For The Job o strength points the production of a given unit Usually, a country will be able to afford as The individual units in Warlords Il can all will add to your army in a given period of time. many military units as it can build. This would be used for the same purposes: attack, defense Of course, not all strength points are created seem to make the unit cost somewhat irreleor exploration. However, most units have speequal: Eight one-point Scouts are not the vant, but this is not the case; a few gold pieces cial powers or characteristics that make them equivalent of one eight-point Archon. Howper unit times 100 units can make a remarkfar more useful for certain tasks than others. ever, these numbers can be compared to a able difference in your overall gold availability. The successful Warlord will be the one who certain extent. Special strength per turn reSince your treasury determines whether you makes sure his or her armies are performing flects the special terrain or supernatural modican afford to hire another hero or purchase the jobs for which they are best suited fiers that certain units receive or produce. spiders at an important ciry, watch your unit Each city has a selection of unit types availSome of these modifiers are very common costs! (Dragons, for example, always get their twoable for production. Additional unit types can point bonus unless fighting a Devil), others Putting Units To Good Use be added to existing cities by spending gold; fairly common (cavalry gets a point or two when to buy new unit types and when to Scouts are good at exploring unwhile fighting in open ground), and some are simply concentrate on producing what you known territory, moving through quite rare (archers get their one-point bonus can is one of the decisions that separates world hills and forests as though they were conquerors from dogmeat. In general, puronly in forests). Cost per strength point and clear terrain. They are the best units for naval chase units when you can, but don't bankrupt... cost per special strength point reflect how purposes, as they are the cheapest and the much gold is required to build each unit relafastest to build. Since all navies have a strength yourself in doing so. Heroes that approach you of four, scouts can be used to take out huge during the game should always be bought, but tive to how strong the unit is. generally each hero will want 1000 gold or Unit values not easily tabulated are those quantities of enemy strength at minimal cost more; try and maintain between 1000 and powers which affect an enemy's stacks rather to yoursell. But they are thoroughly pathetic 1500 gold in your treasury at all times. Addithan your own; catapults reduce a cirv's defighters on land and contribute very little to tional funds should be used to purchase new fenders by one or by two depending on the any stack they are in, aside from their ability unit types at cities that are appropriately lostrength of the city, while Devils and Archons to guide stacks through bad terrain. cated. eliminate the bonuses the enemy stack receives Bats make the perfect explorers; as Table 1 provides several categories of useful due to the presence of special units. Elephants, aerial units they see an extra square in information on the various units. The first few handy creatures that they are, reduce the enall directions in hidden-map games. e emy's strength by one regardless of the terrain 350 Bore Order Report Hero View Hilary tum o m Wino chyssuh o n They are very expensive relative to their or presence of special units. strength (although not very expensive in an Caves of Urg Depending on the given circumstances of a absolute sense) and make poor combat troops. y Ruin game, some bonuses are not worth as much as Quickly produced at the beginning of the they are ordinarily; if your opponent's army is game (and only rarely thereafter), bars can CUT BY simply swarming with devils then few of the survey vast amounts of territory very quickly. bonuses will be worth anything at all, since bear Light Infantry are the grunts of most your enemy's devils will negate the bonuses DARCH when you fight them. nations. Slightly stronger than scouts A or bats, they are very inexpensive and Note that the table uses the normal values can be built Note that the table uses the normal values can be built up quickly. They make good for units. Occasionally, a city will make units navies due to their inexpensive nature, and in 3 a la that are non-standard. These changes can be a city with a defense of 2, they can make an one-point combat difference in either direclet Fys ULU Page 190 Computer Gaming World "


"enemy attack an expensive proposition. They and get a combat bonus in woods. However, are not generally useful on the offense, but on they are expensive relative to heavy infantry occasion a powerful enemy stack will move which is just as strong anywhere else. Reasonwithin range of a vast number of superfluous ably fleet of foot, they can be used en masse in light infantry, whereupon the enemy's highwoods as a strike force, raiding enemy stacks powered troops will receive terrible casualties that are ponderously trudging through the before stomping your infantry (a fair tradeoff, bush. wouldn't you say?). Dwarves have the same performance Orc Mobs are cannon-fodder; their characteristics as archers, but are cfonly advantage over light infantry is fecrive in hills rather than forests. that they can move through hills and They are also among the slowest units in the forests like scours. They are slow, take twice as game. Heavy infantry is better for city defense long to produce, and cost more than light and wolfriders are better for hill combat; there infantry; on balance, they are not the best unit really is no reason to build dwarves if anything to buy. If you need a guide, build scouts better is available. they are slow to produce. However, they add instead. an additional +l to any stack they join, in Pikemen are good city defenders. addition to any other bonuses. This makes Light Cavalry are another unit of They are strong, very inexpensive, them very useful as part of attacking or delittle worth. They are weak (though and in a pinch can be used to sortiefending stacks. Flight capability adds to their not so bad in open ground) and don't outside of a city, as they get a combat bonus veneral rility and bonus general utility and makes them good hero produce very quickly. They are exceptionally for fighting in the open. The only problem companions. fast, however, and make decent explorers with pikemen is that they are very slow to through large quantities of open terrain or on produce. Defend your rear cities with pike Griffins are the city-busters of Warroads. They are fairly good companions for a men; once the city is adequately covered, starr lords. Fast and extremely strong hero questing after artifacts as well, as they sending pikemen forward to hold cities on when attacking or defending cities, provide sufficient protection against the occayour frontier. They move slowly, but as with their only problem is their slow production sional enemy army and don't slow down the heavy infantry, defenders don't need to move. time. Their ability to fly makes them good for hero. Don't build them if you have anything overseas operations. better available, but their replacement by Heavy Cavalry are the premier openheavy cavalry can be delayed if no funds are ground combat troops. Surprisingly Unicorns fall into the same category available. cost-effective, they are reasonably fast as pegasi, but are strong enough in movers. Don't waste heavy cavalry on city I their own right to make them a powdcfensc; send your heavy cavalry to the front erful main combat unit. and let the dogfaces hold the masonry. There are better troops for city assaults, but heavy Elephants are extremely powerful cavalry are strong enough to do it in a pinch, and fast units whose special power is or if strongly led. to reduce an enemy stack's effective strength by one point per unit. A slow producWolfriders make good general-purtion time is their only flaw. pose troops. They are reasonably strong, reasonably inexpensive and Wizards are the fastest unit in Warquite fast. Their combat bonus is usable only lords 2, more than twice as fast as in hills, a rather uncommon combat site in dragons. While not overwhelmingly most games. strong, their incredible movement rate means they can move a third of the way across the Giants are the ideal general-purpose map in a single turn. At the beginning of the troops. They are strong, reasonably game, this means a wizard may conquer several A Catapults are occasionally useful. priced and fast on the ground. They neutral cities simultaneously; later, this high Their ability to eliminate the dehave no special bonuses. Quickly produced, movement rate means they can flexibly defend fender's city bonus is helpful, espethey are excellent troops for the beginning of or attack in conjunction with other, slower cially when the defenders are tough city troops the game when taking neutral cities is the main stacks almost anywhere within your territory. like spiders or griffins. They are extremely activity. The first of the supernatural units, wizards are slow to produce and very vulnerable; on balMinotaurs have the same performLike all the supernatural unit types, wizards well worth producing in any circumstances. ance, I'd rather have a griffin or spider as part C a nce characteristics as giants, but are cannot be constructed: only a cirv already of an attacking stack. In any circumstance kan2 slower. Additionally, they have a capable of making them can do so. other than attacking a city, their expense, weak small combat bonus while in cities, which strength and extremely slow production time makes them good attack and defense troops. make them a poor investment. Worms are strong, cost-effective, and slow. They are wonderful defensive Heavy Infantry are excellent defenSpiders are the ideal city attack and defense troops. They are strong they will retard the progress of most attacking units, but their slow speed means that sive troops. They are inexpensive, PAN (VERY strong with their bonuses), stacks. reasonably strong and reasonably extremely cost-effective when used in their quick to produce. They move very slowly, but proper role and quick enough to move fr once entrenched in a city their movement rate city to city with reasonable speed. If you can wly, but proper role, and quick enough to move from Undead are identical to worms in becomes irrelevant. every way, but are quicker. They are build spiders, do so. good general-purpose units, and Archers are another special-use unit. their supernatural bonus means that mundane Pegasi are not much good in and of They are wonderful to have in forests, themselves; while strong and speedy, as they move through forest normally (Continued on page 210) 16 November 1993 Page 191 "


"STRATEGY At What Cost Victory? An Analysis of Economics And Production In Three-Sixty's High Command by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. 9 360 900 180 0 3601 360 360 360 270 1941 0 0 8 °° °°S 98919888 120 60 T Tigh Command, Three-Sixty Pacific's infinite economic points, your production of with. Thus, to achieve optimal production grand strategic simulation of WWII's tanks will be limited to the available factory increases it is not sufficient to simply increase European Theatre, is a highly complex resources. Conversely, all the production in your supply of raw materials, factories or ecogame system with a wealth of detail that, the world will do you no good if there are no nomic points; you must maintain a balance unfortunately, can overwhelm the would-be raw materials or economic points to produce between these three components or your efGerman Chancellor or English Prime Minister. To make matters worse, the game's manTable 1 High Command Production Table (1939 Data) ual is, to be as polire as possible, inadequate. Nation: USA/Britain/Germany This article is intended to clarify issues that are not well understood by many High Command Unit Type Qty Built Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Oil players, as well as to discuss grand strategic Min EP Sea Ground Factors issues involved in the game. Infantry 72 360 360 1800 360 720 2880 One look at the game's structure reveals that Armor 360 360 180 900 180 90 1170 economics and production are the central Mech Inf 720 720 360 360 1440 points of any well-designed strategy. Though Airborne 600 600 360 600 0 600 600 the economic and production systems are conMarine 360 1800 360 2160 troversial, in that many gamers feel there are Fighter 360 180 270 900 270 too many decisions to be made, it is possible 1440 F/B 360 360 180 900 270 to greatly simplify these tasks. 900 2070 Bomber 360 180 270 270 810 Play Transport 180 180 180 0 Merchant 18 180 180 180 180 0 0 DD 120 120 180 180 180 540 CA 9 90 90 90 135 450 135 720 ANOG BB 460 60 200 60 200 460 ROBEEDO 40 40 100 100 120 120 0 0 600 600 DGOEDE EZZEMOS SE DU E QUE Table 2 High Command Production Table (1939 Data) LUE QUI Nation: Russia Unit Type Qty Built Total Total Total Total Total Total Total There are only three general types of reOil Min | EP G round Air Sea Factors source-producing sites in the game. Oil and Infantry 360 360 360 1800 360 720 2880 mineral production sites produce the raw maArmor 360 360 180 900 180 90 1170 terials needed for your war machine. Factories Mech Inf 720 720 360 900 180 1440 and shipyards convert these raw materials into Airborne 600 600 360 600 0 600 the actual ground, air and sea units. National 360 Marine 1800 360 0 capitals provide the economic points that tie 2160 Fighter 360 360 270 630 the entire system together. Economic points 270 1170 are an abstract measure of the manpower, F/B 360 360 630 270 1530 630 efficiency, and civilian production of a given Bomber 360 360 270 270 810 country. It is important to note that High Transport 180 180 0 Command's economic system follows a limitMerchant 180 180 ol 0 ing-factor model; it generally takes all three DD 120 180 180 540 components (raw materials, production faciliCA 135 315 135 585 ries, economic points) to produce any given 60 60 140 60 140 340 unit, but your unit production is limited to 40 40 40 100 100 100 100 210 the smallest of the three contributing factors. 12 120 1201200 0 420 420 So, if you have infinite raw materials and 40 100 300 CV SS 12 120 NOS 360 360 360 270 0 180 888888888888 SES °°33930 33 00389 0 °°388999999 9899933 120 180 90 NAKON BB CV . 8 100 SS Page 192 Computer Gaming World "


"Notebook computers are great — except when Whether you fly combat, race a car,   it comes to playing simulation and action maneuver a tank or wing along at 100 GENOLORI games. That's because they don't come knots, the PGP's software features will equipped with a game port. Introducing the enhance your play action. Use it to Parallel Game Porr from Genovation. The PGP program the joystick's keys and customize turns your notebook into a gamebook by them for specific games. This enables you converting the computer's printer port into a to take control of the game. What's more, \"Virtual game port\". With PGP, you also get a PGP eliminates the computer speed depengender changer adapter, which lets you dencies of some game ports. And it's easy to connect a joystick, yoke, pedals or even a install, so you can be up and running in minweapon sytems controller to your notebook or utes. Look for the Parallel Game Port in desktop DOS PC. the software section of The PGP is an indisyour nearest computer pensable accessory for STICK IT TO YOUR NOTEBOOK. dealer. Or call us at today's serious gamer. (800) 822-4333. UCH Now compatible with more than 50 games. ELDEDEUTLLLLL STOICE LIIIIIII TITILILL IIIIIIII GENOVATION Genovation, Inc., 17741 Mitchell North, Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 833-3355 FAX (714) 833-0322 Sales: (800) 822-4333 Copyright 1993 Genovation, Inc. All product names are trademarks of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #66 "


"Oil 360 360 720 90 990 600 1800 900 NASCONON 360 270 180 120 120 180 180 S 135 8 CV 40 80 80 O 1080 360 720 0 Table 3 High Command Production Table (1939 Data) the anti-air columns) for reasons which will be Nation: France made clear later. Unit Type Qty Built Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total The tables make two things very clear. One Min EP Ground Air Sea Factors is that some classes of units are much more Infantry 360 1440 360 720 2520 expensive in terms of raw materials and ecoArmor 360 360 180 180 nomic points than others. Mechanized infanMech Inf 720 720 360 720 try, for example, is staggeringly expensive in 360 180 1260 terms of oil and minerals, while capital naval Airborne 600 360 480 vessels are very cheap. Note, however, that Marine 360 360 360 1440 360 0 depending on the amount of raw materials Fighter 360 360 180 270 900 270 1260 you have, the expense level of what you build F/B 360 360 180 720 270 1710 may be an irrelevant consideration; all that is Bomber 360 180 270 270 810 important is how many combat factors you Transport 180 0 0 o can field from a given turn's production. Sec180 Merchant ondly, some classes of units are overwhelm180 180 0 ingly powerful in terms of how much combat DD 120 180 540 power you can get out of them in a given CA 90 360 360 135 amount of time, notably infantry. BB 160 60 160 160 380 380 The question of what to build, of course, TL 40 80 240 240 depends in large measure on what you are derends in Large SS 120 120 120 0 480 480 planning to do. The vagaries of war and the vast number of military options available to both sides make generalizations almost useTable 4 High Command Production Table (1939 Data) less. It would seem, for instance, that France Nation: Italy should build nothing but infantry to forestall Unit Type Qty Built Total Total Total Total Total Total Total the inevitable blitzkrieg (or at least try and Oil Min EP Ground Air Sea Factors slow it down a little bit), but even that truism Infantry 360 360 360 360 720 2160 may not hold, depending on Germany's inArmor 360 180 630 180 90 900 tentions. However, analysis of the combat facMech Inf 720 360 540 360 180 1080 tors involved can show which unit classes are best suited for various missions. Airborne 600 600 360 360 0 0 360 Marine 360 360 360 1080 360 1440 Naval Matters Fighter 360 360 180 270 630 270 1170 360 360 180 630 270 1530 The naval situation is fairly clear. The table Bomber 360 180 270 270 810 provides a bit of misleading data here; in lookTransport 180 180 180 ing at the total combat factors (ground, air and sea) it would seem that there is a fairly wide Merchant 180 180 0 selection of units, depending on mission role. 120 180 180 180 540 This is not true. In a competently managed CA 135 135 585 game, your navy will never conduct a shore 4 60 60 140 60 340 bombardment (sea-to-ground) and will never CV 40 40 40 40 40 70 70 210 engage an enemy air force (sea-to-air). This SS 120 120 0 420 420 leaves only the sea-to-sea factors to consider, and in that category it is clear that submarines forts will be wasted. Generally speaking, proand the USSR cach have their own national are the undisputed kings of the sea, with a duction is the bottleneck except at the very attributes. The tables presume a total available year's run of submarines for any power probeginning of the war or when enemy action production Gheamount of industrial produes ducing at least twice the sea-to-sea combat of factors of any other naval category. However, 60, a number that works well for purposes of due to the special sub-killing properties of natural resources. destroyer units, submarines should not be Further complicating this tightrope acr is calculating the total number of units that can your only naval asset. I recommend a producthe fact that different nations have different be built. Obviously, a country with more or tion ratio of two submarines to one destroyer production priorities. Units cost the same less production available will obtain different ht versus the computer. If you are playing a huamount of resources for all the nations in the results; these numbers are provided as an inman they s for all the nations in the results; these numbers are provided as an inman, the exact ratio of subs to destroyers will game, but different countries' units have difternational comparison. The tables are built depend on what that player produces. If he is ferent combat abilities: German infantry is with the 1939 start values in mind; the exact producing an all-sub force, then by all means substantially superior to Italian infantry, while numbers will change as technological adproduce an all-destroyer one. (And if he procosting the same amount of resources. Thus, vances increase individual unit types performduces an all-destroyer force, then you still while what you can build is the same from ance numbers. The number of units shown is must do the same; however, for the major country to country, what you should build is a the number of units that will be built in one powers an all-battleship force is marginally question of strategic priorities and the varying year of production if the necessary resources better against an all-destroyer force than is unit abilities. (the next few columns) are present. The colanother all-destroyer force). Tables 1 through 4 detail the various proumns listing combat factors display the total The reason that you will never conduct duction capabilities of the major national combat factors that will be obtained in each of shore bombardment or engage an enemy air groups in the game. The United States, Britain the three combat areas (land, sea, and air) from force with your naval groups has to do with and Germany produce units with identical the listed units. Note that some of the combat the way the High Command combat system (and superior) attributes, while Italy, France numbers are somewhat misleading (mainly works. You cannot amphibiously invade or F/B 09 360 270 O 180 0 DD NASONS 120 120 360 BB 60 140 12 120 Page 194 Computer Gaming World "


"The Book Store CGW Presents... CHUCK YEAUCRE THE AIR COMBAT CIVILIZATION O PRODUK GAMES BIBLE Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by CGW On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Prima $24.95 Special features: floppy disk with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. The Official Guide To Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE BOOKS $12.95 U.S. The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game; learn to defeat each of the tycoons; manipulate the stock market to your advantage; and learn optimal building and survey techniques. Luv Doze Lemmings, Lemmings 2 Hint Disk by Stanislaw Lemming $6.00 CGW's first Hints-On-Disk offers solutions to all 120 Lemmings 2 levels. Please specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disks. The PC Games Bible by Paul Rigby and Robin Matthews Sigma $20.00 CGW's British correspondents describe over 2,000 computer games in short \"Taking A Peek\"-size tidbits. Sid Meier's Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. -Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements; 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as 17 ways to cheat and more than 20 ways to win. Falcon 3.0 Air Combat Pete Bonanni and Bernard Yee Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Bonanni provides the insights of a trained Falcon pilot; Yee provides the perspective of an experienced game reviewer; and CGW's own Mike Weksler tells gamers how to maximize their computer systems in this useful book of tactics and campaign management for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0. Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler Prima $18.95 U.S. Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MiG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Exclusive interview with Chuck Yeager. The Official Lucasfilm Games Air Combat Strategies by Rusel DeMaria and George Fontaine Prima Publishing $18.95 History, tactics and programming insights are blended together into this compendium of strategies for Larry Holland's best-selling WWII air combat series. The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 I salute Johnny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. James Lovelock Wing Commander I & II: The Ultimate Strategy Guide by Mike Harrison Prima Publishing $18.95 Filtered through the viewpoint of Lt. Col. Carl T. LaFong, a fictional pilot, Harrison's book assists gamers in mastering the game in a logical, lincar fashion. The SimEarth Biblc is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Each time we read this book we learned something, because it explains the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three bints. START Magazine The Harpoon Battlebook by James DeGoey Prima Publishing $18.95 In addition to providing a solid guide to Harpoon tactics, The Harpoon Battlebook offers new scenarios, additional information on weapons platforms and handy reference tables. THE OTIGUAL CUIDE TO THE SIMEARTH BIBLE TYCOON Use order form bound into this magazine to order books. "


"Mittorie Messages ZALI Warningt None Japani 1 Second 3 seconds Icesario tenint IRRI Progress Random 1 Second 5 Seconds Seconds ID Seconds Limited Complete Lorson BeginnerTimid Cautious 1941 Russo Advanced Dating Tale Spala Tutorial Combat sult Detailed Beginner Start 1 Summary Neutre! Turte Poor Average Timid Cautious Normal Dering Reckless huerage Advenced wert Duit Good Bio Player NILA HIGH COMMAND): EUROPE 1930-15 premacy over the enemy. The sole exception One major error in the documentation asto this should be Britain; oftentimes strategic serts that failure to invest any economic points bombing of Germany is all England can do to in your economy will result in a one-half help Russia against German aggression, and percent decline in the economy size; this is a producing a small but steady stream of bombmisprint. Failure to invest at all in your econers can draw off valuable German fighter cover omy will result in a 50 percent decline in your from the eastern front. economy. Under-investment in an economy There are three primary offensive ground will shrink it by an amount equal to one half units. Armor is inexpensive relative to the of the deficit; that is, if you need 100 EPs of other two) but you cannot build very much of investment to maintain the status quo, then it. Mechanized infantry is just as fast, just as investing only 80 EPs will result in your econgood on ground attack (since you can build omy shrinking by 10 points. Never under-inmore of it), and has the added bonuses of vest, except in one situation: If you expect your bombard any important site, only uninhabbeing highly resistant to enemy air attack and opponent to capture your country in a turn or ited coastline. The simultaneous movement of getting the defensive bonuses granted to intwo, stop all production and start transferring the ground combat system makes garrisoning fantry; its only drawback is the obscenc exall your raw materials and economic points to the coastline a waste of forces; leaving powerpense in oil and minerals. If you have those your allies, every turn. (France might consider ful counter-strike forces one or two hexes inresources, though, then mechanized infantry doing this from the start against a strong Gerland of an endangered beach is a much better is the king of the battlefield. Paratroopers are man opponent). This means that your enemy idea. This leaves nothing for the attacking probably too expensive for general use, though will capture, not a rich country bursting with naval force to bombard. (The computer player they are wonderful for cracking open critical economic points to be plundered, but a pauses the counterforce-in-reserve defense as parts of an enemy line or reducing a fortress thetic shell incapable of paying for anything. well). not accessible by ordinary means. June 1921 Your ships will never fight enemy planes Local Or Global Investment? because ships at sea on missions are immune to enemy air attacks; only in their home ports One issue that confuses many High Com(or, if left on an enemy beach for mysterious mand players is that of local vs. global investreasons) are they vulnerable. In both situment. Some purchases (military units and SEOS DE OB ations, your own air units should be providing investment in factory production) are local; OPBL22 CAP protection for the fleet. (You can almost that is, they are built at a factory and appear at BIERUM always simply have a naval unit's home port a factory, there being no vectored production DOOGONZA L2REDE be far out of reach of enemy air.) Only an in the game. Other purchases (research and KT DOO isolated invasion site is going to be (or should economic investment) are universal, meaning SKOON be) out of reach of your own air units, so unless that they can be built at any factory. If you your enemy has toral air superiority (in which spend one economic point on economic incase, shut the game down because it's all over) vestment or research at each of five factories, Note that when you are using captured proyour navy is airplane-proof. your roral investment is exactly the same as if duction facilities, they produce units with the Ground and air units pose a more complex you had spent five points at one factory. national characteristics of the factory they are problem. Cursory reading of the tables would A question which often arises is how much made at. For example, German control of indicate that an all-infantry army is the way to to spend on investing for future production. Brest will not cause Brest to produce German go, but in realiry this is not true. Infantry is the Fortunately, modest investment in future prosubmarines; subs produced there will have backbone of defensive army. bur almost duction and/or economic growth is quite inGerman markings and coloration but will useless to an invader due to its slow speed. expensive, and I highly recommend it for any have French characteristics. If you are one of Paratroopers look like a terrible investment, power expecting to remain in the war for more the naval great powers, produce as much of but their special power of dropping from a than a year or so. (France, obviously, may your navy as possible at your home shipyards. distance makes them far more effective than decline to invest in production, since GerIf you are a minor naval power, try and prothe raw numbers would indicate. I have exmany will be the power that gains the advanduce at captured, superior yards. Also note perimented with an all-paratroop army for tage of French industriousness.) A one-point that technological advances only assist new Germany to use against England and France, investment per turn in a factory's production units constructed; your old units derive no with reasonable success. Paratroopers in the and in economic growth yields impressive benefit from technology advances. Mediterranean are priceless, and the Italian dividends over the course of the war. Table 5 Table) On 90 percent of your turns in High Comeconomy can be put to far worse uses than shows the net effects of such investments. mand, you can allow the computer to allocate churning out paratroopers full-time. As a gengenTable 5 Long-term Results of a One T resource transportation and political investcral rule, build infantry and fighters if you are Point Investment Per Turn ment. Minor changes to the computer's asplanning to defend. signments (which are done reasonably well) Year Factory Economic are simple and will take far less time than If you are on the attack, then your air arm Investment Investment doing the entire weary business yourself. Proshould consist of fighters and fighter-bombers 1940 20.0 200.0 duction should never be left to the computer, in a proportion of about one to two. This ratio 1941 22.5 212.3 as (not being telepathic) the AI does not know should vary depending on the fighter strength 1942 25.3 225.4 what your production priorities are and will of your opponent. Unescorted fighter-bomb1943 28.6 239.3 produce the wrong things. The best order in ers are doomed if they encounter significant 1944 254.0 enemy CAP; a strong fighter shield is a critical 32.2 which to perform economic activities is: part of any offensive unless your enemy has 1945 36.3 269.7 1. Delegare political allocations to the High been swept from the skies. Strategic bombers 1946 40.9 286.4 Command. Do this first, while you have a lot are expensive relative to the benefits proffered; Denerits prorrerea; Note: 1940 value is the initial size of the factory of EPs to spend. This gives you good diploonly buy them if your other service branches or the economy: subsequent yearly values show matic coverage and gathers your tribute from are lying idle due to their vast numerical suthe production after 12 turns of 1-point investment. your vassal states. nas Page 196 Computer Gaming World "


"FutureVision Expanding Educational Frontiers Through Technology NOW APPEARING! We futur Vision, in order to form a mort perfect union with our corporate. institutional, reseller and end-user customers do hereby dedicate ourselves to ensuring your right to: 1. Sassle-free service II. Adedicated educational software specialist III. The largest selection of Mac, Windows. DOG. and CD-ROM bitsed education software iv. The best price. v. Complete satisfaction with your product and service. VI. Receive your order when you crpect it. vn. Be free from automated telephone attendants YOU VE SEEN'EM IN COMPUTER SHOPPER... YOU'VE SEEN EM IN PC SOURCESI. HERE FOR AN EXTENDED ENGAGEMENT IN COMPUTER GAMING WORLU FutureVision STARRING THE EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANTS WITH A CAST OF THOUSANDS OF BLOCKBUSTER SOFTWARE TITLES! TAJUKF0Z ADVENTURE AD&D Unlimited Adventure....34.00 Alone in the Dark.... ..35.50 Betrayal at Krondor..............41.50 Cobra Mission ....... ..48.00 Dark Side of Xeen... Dark Side of Xeen................41.50 Darklands................. ......38.50 Day of the Tentacle... ....34.50 Eric the Unready.... .36.50 Eye of the Beholder III ........41.50 Flashback.......... ...32.50 Kings Quest VI.. ....44.50 Lost Tribe... ...27.50 Pirates Gold. .41.50 Police Quest IV. ...............45.50 Prince of Persia 2.. ....44.50 ..41.50 Quest for Glory IV.. 38.50 Ringworld ...... .35.50 Space Quest V. ..38.50 Star Control 2. ...34.50 Ultima Underworld Il............46.50 Ultima VII Part I or ............46.50 SIMULATORS Aces Over Europe ................41.50 ATAC.. .....33.50 B-17 Flying Fortress. ...........38.50 Car & Driver... ...37.50 Commanche: Maxim. Overkill ..43.50 F-15 Strike Eagle 3...........41.50 Iron Helix.... ...49.00 Road & Track ......36.50 Strike Commander ...... .........47.00 Syndicate. ...47.00 Tomado .... ...49.00 Ultrabots. ...37.00 ...39.00 WAR GAMES A-Train ...... ..33.50 Caeser ................. ...35.50 Civilization MPE..............47.00 Conquered Kingdoms............36.00 Empire Deluxe............. .....36.00 High Command........... ..41.00 Populus II...... .38.00 Powermonger...... ...32.00 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe.........47.00 Rome..... .......31.00 Seven Cities of Gold II...... .....36.00 Sim Life ........ ........ ..39.51 Star Trek 25th .. -36.00 Stronghold.... ................ ..39.50 EDUCATION Alge-Blaster 3.....................31.00 Dinosaur Adventure ..............31.00 Eagle Eye Mystery..........31.00 Fatty Bear's B-day Surprise ...31.00 Foreign Language ...............CALL Kid Pix....................... .35.00 Kid Works 2........ ..35.00 Metrognome Music..............31.00 Stickybear Preschool ........31.00 Supersolvers Midnight Rescue 31.00 Talking Spell-it Plus.............31.00 Think Quick. ..31.00 Treehouse... ....39.00 Writer Rabbit ..31.00 CD-ROM Jutland ..... ................... ...52.00 King's Quest VI.....................49.00 Legend of Kyrandia.......... .49.00 Loom... .34.00 Mantis Experimental Fighter....45.00 Mario is Missing ........... ..24.00 Mixed up Mother Goose........24.00 Monkey Island ..................27.00 Peter and the Wolf......... .22.00 Putt Putt Joins the Parade ......39.00 Right College.... ......... ....27.00 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe ...24.00 Seventh Guest...... ..55.00 Shakespear.... ..16.00 Sherlock Holmes. 44.00 Space Adventure... .29.00 Space Quest IV....... ..19.00 Stellar 7....... .20.00 Ultima Bundle (1-6)......... -59.00 Where in the World CSD........29.00 Willie Beamish................ .-27.00 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.21.00 20 TMW o X-Wing ...... ........ Protostar... SPORTS Frontpage Football... ...39.00 Hardball 3 ...34.00 Links 386.......... ..36.00 Michael Jordon in Flight.... ...38.00 NFL Challenge .......... ...59.00 Tony La Rusa I. .36.00 World Circuit....... ..32.00 ARCADE Beat the House Gaming Tutor..32.00 Goblins II. ........ ..25.00 Hoyle's Classic.... ..31.00 Lemmings II................ ...34.00 Take a Break Pinball.... ..........30.00 Take a Break Pool.................30.00 Animals... ...24.00 Arthur's Teacher Trouble........36.00 Battle Chess... ..24.00 Buzz Aldrin's Race-Space ....58.00 Dinosaur Adventure ... ...........29.00 Interactive Storytimel............29.00 ALL PRODUCTS SOLD CARRY MANUFACTURER'S FULL WARRANTIES AND DOCUMENTATION ORDERING SHIPPING PAYMENT  Phone orders accepted M-F from 8.00am 5:00pm PST  Orders received before 2.00PM will be  No surcharge for Visa or MasterCard orders  Fax orders accepted 24 hours a day 7 days a week shipped same day for product in stock  C.O.D. orders welcome with a $5.00 charge  Ask for a catalog of our complete software selections  S5,00 shipping charge per order.  School, government and corporate purchase orders accepted. CALL YOUR PERSONAL EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANT FAX 1-800-995-4669 1.800.995.4661 INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMERS: Voice-408-370.4650 Fax-408-370.9466 Many other titles available. . Prices subject to change without notice, FutureVision 644 N Santa Cruz Ave Suite 12. Los Gatos CA 95030 Circle Reader Service #61 "


"DON'T WASTE YOUR SOUND CARD ON INFERIOR SPEAKERS. The Powered Partner 622 Powered Partners are the perfect complement to your multimedia computer system. They are the only speakers to be named a 1992 Windows Winner by Windows magazine. They were also nominated for a Readers' Choice award by Multimedia Magazine. But the best reason to use Powered Partners is the sound. Listen to the experts: \"They (Powered Partner 622) set the standard for all the other speakers\" (David Ranada-\"Windows\" recommended) and \"If you want the best, look no further... the (Powered Partner) 570s are the laws Rolls Royce of sound\" SE (Rich Heimlich). With such high praise, why buy anything else. 2. Delegate resource transportation to the air reserve; don't feel that you have to use every High Command. unit every time. If you have enough units to 3. Conduct production activities. Do not spare, use only your \"green coded\" (high orforget to allocate research and economic inganization) units in a given turn, giving the vestment points. more tired units a chance to regroup. The question of which grand strategy to On the ground, always coordinate major pursue can be a most difficult one to resolve, attacks by using the delay an impulse\" order. particularly for the Axis player. The Allics in five eight-lactor armor groups arriving at the many ways have it easier, in that their main target simultaneously will do far more damage objective (stay alive) does not change for most than five cight-factor groups arriving one per of the game, but even the Allies have to make impulse. Unless an objective is at the end of many decisions about the relative priority to your movement path, stop there. Don't conassign to each front and what offensives can be tinue onwards, as the computer player and made from the limited stock of military force your human opponent) is tricky and will often at their disposal. The Axis at the beginning of schedule a small infantry unit to arrive in a the 1939 scenario is faced with all of Europe co O contested hex at the end of the movement to conquer; too much conquest can bring phase, after your conquering forces have capabout early Allied intervention with the prob tured the hex and then moved on. Cutting lems that this causes, but to be too cautious is is units out of supply is difficult on the western also dangerous. front but very easy for both sides on the castern front; do it whenever possible, as then your The Axis player has one enormous advansmaller infantry units can very easily mop up tage over Hitler: The USSR is far less likely to the unsupplied remnants of your opponents become an Allied power than in the actual, army. war. Careful German maneuvering on the eastern front and proper diplomatic allocaOrganization is returned to your units at the tions can keep the Russians off of Germany's eng end of each turn as long as they are in supply; back for a long time, if not indefinitely, makthe their actions during the turn do not have any ing the conquest of England and France very affect on how much organization they have simple, as only a small garrison force is necesrestored. Each unit's new organization value sary to provide a delaying action in the unat at the end of the turn is calculared by the likely event of a Russian activation. The great form formula: weakness Russia has is that, unlike in the real war, she does not acquire any new forces New Organization = Old Organization + (100 Old (other than the Siberian units) until she actiOrganization) * (100 + Old Organization) / 200 vates; this means that Germany can build up Table 6 shows sample organization values. a truly monstrous army and crush Russia in a If the new organization is at 90 or above, there very brief campaign. is a chance that the unit will return to 100 organization; the higher the rating is above 90, The Grand Strategy the better this chance. There are so many different ways to conduct Many of the strategies and tips presented the grand strategic war that it would require here are made with the computer opponent in several articles longer than this to convey a mind. As serious players of the game have basic discussion of each one. However, there realized, human opponents are far more chalare many techniques and operational maneulenging and make the game much more worth vers that are worth making public. the time it takes. Most of the ideas presented When fighting an enemy (computer) air here are either valid when applied to a human force, mass your CAP over your most imporplayer or can be easily modified. tant formations rather than attempting to cover the entire line. The computer player Table 6 Sample Organization Changes tends to \"piccemeal\" irs air assaults, and you can destroy large portions of his air wings a bit Old Organization New Organization at a time as they fall into the maw of over10 whelming numbers of air unirs. (Even the 20 British and French air forces can nearly elimi30 75 nare the Luftwaffe in this fashion.) If you have 40 reasonable air superiority and a forward de50 ployment of your air forces (dangerous, but often worth the risk) you can strike his air 60 92 wings on the ground\" before they have a 70 chance to merge by ordering one-hex CAP 98 over the enemy airfield. When his air force 90 rises to begin its own missions, it encounters your CAP and is destroyed. This works very well on the Russian front for both sides. When I would be very interesting in seeing comfighting a human opponent, who is presum-mentary on this article or suggestions on adably wise to your tricks after the first time you ditional tactics and techniques. I can be use them, try and maintain a reasonably strong reached via CompuServe at 70314,2302. CGW Powered Partner 622 Features  Sophisticated 3-piece system with separate powered sub-woofer  Fully shielded, even the sub-woofer  Perfect for all computer and video applications  Electronic crossover and 3 power amplifiers 58 68 87 For a dealer near you, call 1-800-969-AR4U. In Canada, call Precor at 1-800-268-1172. 95 RO Superior Sound Simplified  1993 Acoustic Research, a division of IJI Circle Reader Service #35 Page 198 Computer Gaming World "


"REVIEW The Fog of War Can Sometimes Make You Choke SimCan's Game of Naval War, Red Sky at Morning SELECT TARGET BLUE SEAT KA TTOTYY HILFE TEME CVN TISEROVER TARGET RUSSIA Contrat med forto INANCE M ITERE TO PRETALE STRIKE 50 NIE OCCH P O 10 DCU Chervon Ukraina BC DXTA QENET MUSSIA BIBIE AIRE UXIU INEET RUSSIA viadivostok A UNA INTRUDER RUSSIA VISAR Arbas MESSIR RITS CHIRAT BORDS RUSSIA Valvestak Pe TIME ON TARGET CERCETTE ELEIRL POBLE by Terry Lee Coleman ack in the Dark Ages of Wargaming, porary naval simulations gets off to a shaky shoot at the enemy after he is found out; it is R Steve Newberg and Bill Nichols were start, as it is a plot in search of a villain. amusing to see the old P-3s shooting Harmakers of board wargames. They had poon missiles at an opposing battle fleet (ala reputation for interesting, if esoteric, games «What's the special today?\" though not so amusing for the P-3 crews which they published under the Simulations \"It's right there on the menu, see...\" when the Mig-29s scramble to intercept Canada label, otherwise known affectionately One of Red Sky's strongest points is that it them). In any \"fog of war\" simulation, the as SimCan. Entering the Computer Age of Gaming, Steve and Bill designed games first side with the best information generally has a is fairly easy to learn. The biggest setback for most users is that SimCan refuses to live in huge advantage, Red Sky being no exception. on Amigas, then IBM platforms for a larger the Windows-type world. There are no pullBattlegroups (the basic unit in the game) are audience. In keeping with their company's down windows or \"hot keys,\" all information allowed to have radars and sonars active or idiosyncratic nature, the games contained no graphics, even though this ignored the impassive. With large groups, such as US aircraft having to be accessed through DOS menus which would have been familiar to users 10 mense graphic potential of the Amiga in paryears ago. There is, of course, no mouse supticular. SimCan carved itself a niche by releasing port either. realistic naval games, heavy on statistics and The determined player will find a wealth of \"fog of war,\" praised by chaos types and information at his command, despite the shunned by control freaks. Red Sky At Mornawkward interface. Felix Hack did the orders ing started as merely another boardgame conof battle, and has done a fine job of making version, but changed in some strange ways. In Red Sky more than a rehash of Jane's Fighting a maior concession to the fact that people like Ships. When the player gives orders to his ENTER> to select Eses te Cousine to see what they are doing, Red Sky offers the ships, he has a wide varicty of armaments first graphics to ever appear in a SimCan from which to choose. The old F-4 Phantom, carriers, the player learns quickly that the big computer game, and suggests a VGA monistill in use around the world, is quite useful ships cannot be hidden well, and as a result, tor! in the game due to its versatility, but can't should sail with everything active, hopefully quite handle the newest Soviet (Russian?) to find the enemy first. Subs work fine with interceptors. To simulate advances in rechpassive sonars, as should be likewise anticinology, the player is allowed to increase lepared. All well and good, but nothing gamers thality of weapons for one or both sides. Even haven't seen before in games such as Harpoon, as impressive as the database is, there are still or even Red Storm Rising for that matter. some troubling questions. US ships seem to sink much more often in minefields than do Although it is difficult to find the enemy at their Russian counterparts. Russian weapons times, once found, there are no more mysterare also more effective than US, both in terms ies. The player always knows how much damof how often they hit and in amount of of age the enemy has suffered, with a \"body damage caused. Given the performance of count of planes, ships, etc, ready to sprin For the astute readers who have avoided a US/Allied technological weaponry in the the touch of a key. It's not difficult to imagine heart attack thus far, what Red Sky concerns Gulf War, one can't help but be skeptical. Gulf War, one can't help but be skeprical that the enemy captain's home phone numis worldwide naval warfare in the aftermath of the Cold War. It is possible to simulate a \"What's out there?\" Red Sky At Morning US-Japanese conflict, for those who have any doubt how such a campaign would turn out. \"Can't quite tell. My glasses are all fogged up.\" TITLE: The Falklands conflict can be recreated as can Reci Sky At Morning RED SKY PRICE: any actions of the past decade or so. The Big MORNING SYSTEM: Bad Meanies, though, are still the Russians Reports are available from REQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz recommended, VGA all graphics, IMB hard drive space (Soviets), or whatever one wishes to call them. over the globe, from P-3 Orions # OF PLAYERS: 0-2 Thus does the design show its age. SimCan and stealthy subs, even from spies PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: W. Nichols and S.M. Newberg cannot be blamed for the fall of the Berlin (actually, that's \"highly classified\" PUBLISHER: Simulations Canada Wall, or the Warsaw Pact demise. Still, a sources). What's interesting is P.O. Box 452 Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, B4V 2X6 game touted as the most realistic of contemthat the \"eyes and cars\" often $60.00 IBM None November 1993 Page 199 "


"Lowest delivered prices with great customer service. Il DISCOVER Card MasterCard VISA 800-448-6658 READER DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 37\" liial 39% 34 29 19\" 843 39\" 39 Protostar 29 BES 40% 474 37\" F.15 294 3595 73° NO SURCHARGE SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM-8 PM SAT 10 AM-3 PM EST ITEM PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 CHOICE HARDWARE INCLUDEDIII CD ROM Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 SOFTWARE Comanche 42% Great Britian 37 Lord of Rings 2 37 Putt Pult Fun Pack 26 Stronghold Aesops Fables 33 Loom 39 A Train Mission Disk 25% Hawaii 19 Lost File Sherlock 27% Quarter Pole 29% Studyware for ACT Lost Treasure 49 Aircraft Encyclopda 45 Construction Set 22 Instant Fact Loc. 19 Comic Bk Creator 17 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Quest for Glory 1 22 GMAT,GRE,SAT 30 28 MacMillian Child Dict49 & Compan of Xanth 3595 Japan Scenery 19 Lost Treasures 2 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 29 Quest for Glory 3 Across the Rhine 47 39 Studyware Biology. 49 Manhole Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Aces Over Europe 44 Computer Works 46\" New York 294 Lost Tribe Rags to Riches 35% Calc.,Chem.,Econ.. Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Ma Maniac Mansion 39% Aces of the Pacific42 Cohort 2 199 Paris Lunar Command 35% Reach for Skies 19% Physics, Statistic 25 Mantis Autodesk Explorer 119 Mission Disk 19 Conquest of Japan 35 Pilots Pwer Tools 24\" Lost Vikings Reader Rabbit 35\" Studyware LSAT 37 Mario is Missing AD&D Collect 2 Contraption Zak 2505 42% Rescue Air 911 17 Barney Bear Goes Maelstom Reader Rabbit 2 35° Mavis Beacon Syndicate 37\" Crusader Drk Savnt39% San Fransisco 29% AD&D Starter Kit 42% Magic Candle 3 37 Ready for Letter 35 to School Take a break X-Word2 26 Mayo Clinic AD&D Unlimited Cuckoo Zoo 379 31% Scenery St A or B 37 Maniac Mansion 1135% Ready Set Read 29\" into Space Pinball 29 Mixed Up Moth Gs 37 Cyber Space Adlbou&Junior #1 346 Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mantis 39 Reading Adv in Oz 36 Task Force 1942 37 Battlechess 34 Monarch Notes 75 Daemonsgate 34% 359 Air Bucks Sound & Graphic Speech Disk 25 17 Reading Comp 32 Beauty & Beast 49 Admiral Edit 43\" Monkey Island 39 Darklands 19 Air Bus A320 Tahiti 45% Mario is Missing 35% Ready Set Read 29\" Beethoven Ninth Terminator 2029 3995 59 MM Music: Mozart 33 Darkseed Air Duel Washington DC 29 Mano Teach Type 25 Realms of Arcadia 35\" healms 01 Arcadia35\" Tesserae Berlitz Think & Talk 17 MM Music: Vivaldi 33 Darkside of Xeen 39% West USA Scnry 39 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Master of Orion 37 Red Baron . French 39 Trmntr 2 Cybrchess 35 105 Our Solar System 29 47 Dark Sun West Europe AJ World Discvry 29 19 Math Blaster Plus 29% Mission Disk 17 Spanish Tetris Classic 105 Pool Shark Daughter of Serpnt31 Alge Blaster Plus Freddy Pharkas 30 39\" Mystery Return Of Phantm 33\" Bloodnet 41\" Time Riders Amer. 35 Prcision Map Deja Vu 1&2 37\" Alone in The Dark 35 Front Page Pro 45% Search of Spot 35% Rex Nebular Blue Force 37 Tony LaRussa Base 17 Design your Railrd. 35 Alphabet Blocks 296 Fun School:Fred Frog. Math Blaster Wind 36 Ring World 34 Bookshelf Tony LaRussa II 37 Publish it! Math Rabbit Diet Pro DOS/Win2536 Amazon Sam Spy Teddy Br 17 38% Britanica Family Cho49 Reference Library 59 Robosports Wind 25\" Expansion Disk 19 Dino Park 35 19\" 349 G-Force Amazon Trail Mathology Buzz Aldrin Race Rock & Bach Studo35\" Top Class Series ea 16 59 Return of Phantom 37\" Dino Quest 31 Gates Gateway II 35% Ambush Mavis Beacon 29% Rodney Fun Screen31 Tornado Carmen World Dixe 65 RotorAirball/Time 25 45° Dinosaur Adventure 34 Gearworks Ancient Art War Sky 35 Mega Lo Mania 29% Rome 29% Treasure Cove Cautious Condor 35 45 San Diego Zoo 49 Discovering Amer 35\" Ancient Empires Geekwad Games 22.95 30 Mental Math Games 37 Rule Engagment 239\" CD Game Pack Treasur Math Storm 35 55 Secret Weapons 59 Distant Sun Animal Adventure 47 39% Gobblins 1 or 2 22 Michl Jordon Fight 37% Science Adventure 42 Treasure Mountain 35 CD Speedway 57 Seventh Guest 375 Dog Fight Animation Studio Grand Slam Bridg II 32 75 Micro Cookbook 4. 31 Chess Maniac Scooter Magic Cast32 Treehouse 34\" Sherlock Holmes 39 Dr Floyd Desktop 1995 Microsoft Golf Great Naval Admrl 48% Arcade for Wind 29% Scrable Delx 32 Christmas Carol Tristan Pinball 33 Sherlock Holmes 2 42 Dr Jam Window 59% Super Ships 20% 37\" Midnight Rescue 35 37\" Seal Team Armored Fist CIA World Fact Turbo Science 39 Sherlock Holmes 3 49 Dr. Quandry 30\" 31 Great Works Ashes of Empire 40 Might & Magic 4 35% Clipart Goliath Sort Weapn Luftwt 29 30 Turtle Tools Sleeping Beauty 37 Dragon Sphere 29% 35 Gunship 2000 Might & Magc 5 39\" A.T.A.C. Tour of Duty ea. Conan Cimerion 20 Ultima 7 36 Sound Works 35 Dragon Lair 3 399 Scenario Disk Auto Insight 24 Millies Math House 31 Seven Cities Gold 38 Forge of Virtue Creative Kids 17 36\" Space Quest 4 37 Dreadnoughts Hardball 3 35 Mind Castle 35% Automap Shadow President 39 Silver Seed Curse of Enchantia25 Space Series Apollo49 19 36 Dune 2 Automap Wind 59 Dala Disk (ea.) 17\" Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 Shadowcaster 47\" Ultima 7 Part 2 Deathstar Arcade 47° 30 Space Shutle 29\" Harrier Assault 74 Dungeon Master 29 34 Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Shadowlands 29\" Ultima Trilogy Dictionaries & Lang 30 37 Automap Europe Spirit of Excalibur 37 Autoworks 395 39\" Dynamix Bundle 42 Headline Harry 37 Money/Clocks Wrk 19 Sierra Action Five Dune 25 Ultima Trilogy 2 479 Stellar 7 37 Health & Diet Pro Eagle Eye Mystery 31° Health & Dieter 26 Monkey Island 1/2 23 Sierra Award Winner47 Ultima Underworld 47\" Education Master 32 Strange Deadfellow 39 B-17 Flying Fortress 19 High Command 42\" Bailey's Bookhouse29% Eco-Quest 1 or 2 29\" Monopoly Deluxe 34 Sierra Family Fun 32 Part 2 Electronic Cookbk 75 Star Trek Enhanced49 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Fouse Eight Ball Delx 35 Hong Kong Mahjong32 More Vegas Game1995 Sierra Starter Bndl 39% Ultrabots Elect. Home Library 49 Street Atlas Street Atlas 99 El Fish 35 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Mutanoid Challenge31 Silent Service 2 19% Uninvited Window 370 Elcten Traveler:Calf 33 Batman Returns 39 Talking Classic Tale75 35 Humans 25 Mystery at Museum35 Sim Ant 34 Unnecessry Rough35 Encarta Encyclpd249\" Talkng Jungle Safari75 Battlechoss 4000 SVGA36 Empire Deluxe 350 Battle of Destiny 35 Scenario Disk 19 Inca NFL Challenge 59 Sim Ant French European Monarchs49 Time Table Science59 35 U.S. Atlas DOS Beat the House W e 29% o Entrmt Pak Win (ea.)28 Incredible Machine 29\" NFL Coaches Club 33 Sim City Classic 25\" 39 Utopia Ultimate Shareware 59 Betrayal of Krondor39\" Eric the Unready 35 Indiana Jones 4 37 Nigel's World 31 Windows 25° V for Victory (ea) 42 F-117A 43\" US Atlas 42 Eternam No Greater Glory 209 Inspector Gadgel 35 Sim Earth 39° 6 Betty Crocker Cook Call Family Doctor Vista Pro 39 US Atlas w/Automap49 31 20 Eye of Beholder Island of Dr. Brain 29% Omar Shariff Bridge 37 Black Crypt Sim Life Dos/Wind 39% Vocabulary Devl Fatty Bear 32 US History 37 Eye Beholder 2 38 Jetfighter 2 3 9 Open Dialog 44% Bloodnet Sing a Long Wind 31% Wacky Funsters 19% Font Master 39 US Presidents 49 35 Blue & Gray Eye of Beholder 3 42 Ady Mission Disk 19 Operation Neptune 35 Snap Dragon 32 War in Gulf 19\" USA Wars:Civil War49 G Force 29\" 39 EZ Cosmos 42 John Madden 2 31° Bluelorca Orbits 2995 Snoopy Game Club 29 War in Russia Gateway 11 45 USA Wars:Korea 49 471 Ez Language Series Body Illustrated Johnny Quest 29\" Oregon Trail Delx 34 Solitaire Window Gettysburg:MM Hist43 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 29\" Warrior of Legend 19\" 42 Fr. Gr.lt, Sp.Jp. As 319 Bodyworks 38 Jump Jet Origin FX Solitaires Journey 35 Wayne Gretzky 3 35 Goter Winkles Adv 33 USA Wars: WWII 49 F14 Fleet Defend 44% MPE Version 48% Out of This World 36 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Space Ace 2:Borl 36 Waynes World Golden Immortal 29\" 28 Voyage Planet ea 69 F 15 III 44 30% Kye Deluxe Outnumbered 30 Buzz Aldrin Space Adventure 42 What's My Angle Great Cities Vol 1 30 49 Who Killd Sam Rup 25 Master Edition 49% kid Cad Pacific Wars 47 Space Hulk 37 When2Worlds War35 Gunship 2000 Caesar 37\" Willy Beamish 37 F117a Stealth 27 299 Kid Cuts Paladin 2 Car and Driver Space Quest 5 Guy Spy 39% Where Crmn San Diego Falcon 3. 0 4 5 39 Kid Desk 25 Patriot Spear of Destiny America Past Humans 34 25\" Carrier Strike Wing Comm & Miss 45 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Kid Pictures 19\" PC Study Bible 42 Special Forces Europe 30 Inca Expansion Disk 19 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Mig 29 Data Disk 34\" Carriers at War 2 42% Kid Pix Peppers Adventure 299 Spectre Space Inspector Ga. Aet 37\" Wing Comm 2 44\" 57 Kid Pix Companion 25 Family Tree Maker 42 31\" Perfect General 36 Spellbound Time Cash for Kids Interactive Old Test 52 WC 2/Ulti. Undrwld 57 Fantasy Empire 4295 Castle 2 Kid Works 2 Pinball Dreams Spellcasting 301 29 Interactive Storytime45 USA World Atlas 42 Farm Creativity Kit Castle of Dr. Brain 18 30 Kids Zoo 33 Pirtate's Gold 30 Spell-it Plus Intro Games FrSp 79 World War II Pak 37\" USA Deluxe 44\" Fatty Bear Birthday 319 Kings Ransom Playroom 2.0 Center Court Ten. 12 SpellJammer 37% World Deluxe Its a Wonderful Life 48 Adults Onlv-Must be21 44\" Fields of Glory 33% King's Quest 6 45 Police Quest 3 Chalinge 5 Realm 33 39% Sports Adventure Jazz:Multimedia Hist69 Animation Fantasy 65 33 Wild Science Arcad35 Flashback 32% Land Of Lore Pool Shark 19% Siar Control 2 35% Ween:Prophecy Champions Jels & Props 34 55 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 38 Flight Simul ATP 28% Prince of Persia 2 39% Legacy Chemistry Works Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Wing Comandr2 47\" Jones in Fast Lane 37 Porkware 65 29% Flight Simulator 5 43 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Legacy Necromncr19 Star Trek AudioClip 34% Wing Com Acadm 31% Chessmster Just Grandma & Me36 Private Collection 65 Air Tric Cntrir 3495 Legion's of Krella Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 37 Next Generation 38 Children Writ & Publ 39 World Circuit 34% Jutland 440 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Arctt/Scen Dsgn Lemmings 28 29\" Print Shop, New 35 City Streets Star Trek Screen Sav37 MPE Edition Kings Quest 5 44% 42 Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 Civilization Aircraft Adv Factry 25 22 37 Lemmings 2 Graphics (ea) King Quest 6 Up 26\" Stickybr Math Tutor 30 World Tour Tennis32 is Storm 1 or 2 65 #685 17 Civilization Deluxe 45% Lethal Weapon 35% Print Shp Compion 31 Stickybr Pre-School 30 World War II Land Of Lore 35% 34 Visual Fantasy 65 Civilization Win #701 17 41 Links 25 Privateer Languages of World99 Caddies 7.95éa. 3/$ 19 Clash of Steel Stickybr Read Tutor 30 X Wing 39\" Airport Facty Loc Links 386 Pro 17 39 Prophecy Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Mission Disk 39 19 Learn to Speak Spn59 California Course Disk ea 16 Protostar Storybook Weaver299 Coaster Yobi Spelling Trick29 Leisure Suit Larry 42 Cobra Mission29 East USA Scen 39\" 386 Courses ea 19 Putt Putt Parade 32 Strike Commander 45\" Zodiac Signs 39% Speech Disk 17 Zoo Keeper 36 Sound Cards SB CDROM Intrl 369 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Joysticks Multimedia Strip Poker 3 SB Portblaster All Stereo Fx 32 Zug's Spelling Adv 22 149 19 Ballade Windows 79 Toshiba CH Flightstick 37\" Aitech Data Disk (ea) 17 Adv of Eco Island 22 StereoF/X CD 147 SB Video Blaster 349 Band in a Box 69 3041 Internal 489 CH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show 369 Covox Voice Bist Bus SB Video Spigot 419° Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. Cadenza 3041 External 5940 125 CH Mach 3 Pro 256 28\" Gravis Ultra Sound 129 SB Waveblasler 234\" Cakewalk Texcel America CH Virtual Pilot 65 Pro Color Plus 529 CO-ROM Kit 298 Roland RAP-10 4599 Cakewalk Win 129% 375 TERMS AND CONDITIONS 3021 Internal 349 ProVGA TV Eliminator Card 459 SCC-1 GS 26 Media Vision 3024 Dbl Spd 390 Cakewalk Pro SC-7 169 315 Gravis Analog Pro 39 139 Pro PC/TV Plus 249% Atax . Master Card, Visa, Anerican Express 3024 Business 679 Cakewalk Win Pro 240 Pro VGATY + Gravis Joystick 659 959 32 Discover Accepted. No SC-55 Surcharge on 3024 Education 604 Encore VideoSurge Credit Cards. By tail: P.O. 659 CDPCXL Gravis PC GamePad21 Box 1159 105 3, MA-12C ea Jammer Pro Pro Audio 16179% SPEAKERS 125 3024 Home 569 Kidz Mouse Video Surg SVHS 729 30% Carteret, N.J. 02008. All Sales Aro Pro Audio Studio 224 3024 Multimeda844 Laser Music Proces 79 Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Wave Watcher 419 CS 150 Shielded Kraft KC3 Joystick 28 28 Pro 16 Multimedia 5024 Dbl Spd 495 Master Tracks Pro 249 CS-550 Shielded 35 Maxx Flight Yoke 69 merchandise with the same item only. No TV/GRX TV 269 Upgrade Kit 2 MCS Stereo exceptions. All Products are new from 5024 Business 769 Maxx Pedal 935 55 W/3 band Equilizer 45 Pro Movie Audio 339 Skins & Pads CS-1000 Midiscan 5024 Education 729 manufacturer. All claims and guarantees 269\" 8 4\" Quickshot Game Cd14 Logitech Audiopon 134 Altec Lansing 200 219 Midisoft Studio are from the manufacturer. Call for 5024 Multimed 969 159 Quickshot Warrior 18 Dust Covers 15 Soundman 132 Music Bytes Vol 1 65 Suncom Command19 A5 ACS 300 Modem & Fax Grounded Wrist Stro 91 current price and availability. GOVERMENT Sound Blaster 2 99 85 For your 79 '15 Keyboard Skins AND SCHOOL. P.O.'WELCOMED. Music Mentor 59 MIDI Interface SB Midi Kit Thrustmaster US Robotic Sportster protection, we will only ship to the Music Printer Plus 419 Sttic Pads 69 2400 Int. Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Midiator 101 Serial 95 99% Music Time address the credit card company has on 169 Large-System FCS Pro 162 15 109 Sound Blaster Deix 132 PC Midi Card 14.4 v.42bs 79 Piano Works file, therefore shipping to Ak.. Hi., 99 Wrist Pads SB Pro 16 29\" Game Card PR., w/ S/R Fax 183 P.O. Boxes, 1848 APO/FPO 2 Port SE extra. SB Pro16 ASP 149 Quick Score Deluxe99 209 Stax (Dust Repellent)5 H Weapons 2 95% 14.4 v.42bis Ext 183 International orders call for shipping & Hello Music 2776 89\" Songwright 5 SB Discovery 161 459 Statx Complete Rudder Pedal 109 charges. N.J. Resident acid 6 sales tax. W/S/R Fax 213 The Miracle 325 Trax for Windows 60 UPROM Chip 29° SB Edulanmn 16 5494 Cleaning System 15 20% restocking fee for all refused toms. 43% 35\" 25 3975 35 35\" Pa 32 2495 399 35 35 35 38% 30% 34» 34 35 59 47\" 25 39 CDPC 549\" ns15 Padres Circle Reader Service #54 "


"VICTORY STATUS u ber is in there somewhere, if only I can reCertainly, the rest of Red Sky is bereft of member which menu to look under. Where color. Except for the opening screen, there are are the inflated reports of enemy kills, as in no color backgrounds for the gameplay reCarriers At War? Technology is certainly adsults. So what the player sees for combat vanced enough to provide accurate reports, resolution is line after endless line of text on but pilot fatigue, over-enthusiasm, and plain a blank screen. SimCan could take a cuc from old mistakes could have been factored in for publishers of sport stat games, such as Lance even more \"fog,\" and more player enjoyment. Haffner, who use multiple colored backShould the player move to the newfangled oled grounds and a \"split screen\" look to spice up (for SimCan) graphic interface, he is liable to their games visually. Despite the wealth of be more disappointed. The idea is greatinformation in Red Sky, the player is someoccur. In 12 games I never reached it, even provide situation maps for each region of the times left with the uneasy feeling of manipuwith free and easy use of nuclear missiles and world. Thus, players can see how forces are lating a database, rather than playing a game. bombs by both sides. If the game were truly arrayed in the Indian Ocean or the Western trying to be realistic, there would be some \"Strange-looking clouds.\" Atlantic. Enemy ships may also be seen if they effect from electromagnetic pulse (EMP). have been discovered. The problem is that the \"Yeah, rain looks kinda funny, too.\" EMP would affect both reports from the area maps are low resolution, with the ships ap Red Sky assumes that tactical nuclear weapand all kinds of sensory devices around the pearing as blobs of primary colors. If SimCan ons are a necessity in the modern naval world. world. Perhaps this would be too much \"fog\" used 256 VGA for these displays, then 253 of Players choose what level of nukes can be used even for SimCan. the colors are in shades of green. This might by each individual nation. While the player What Red Sky could offer is a simpler alterhave been acceptable five or six years ago, but has the option to prohibit their use, the game native to the Harpoon series, easy to get into not anymore. SimCan would have done just assumes that each side will use them freand quick to play. That all the research work as well without the graphics. quently on major targets, such as airbases. herein goes to waste is only part of the sad With only minor victory point penalties instory. As released, Red Sky lacks many player curred, there is every reason for the player amenities which would make it more accessiwho is behind to \"go nuclear» in more ways ble for the person who might never buy a than one. Such a casual attitude belies the wargame again. The save game function simrealism and detail which exists in the rest of ply does not work, and regardless of how the design, especially since atomic weapons quickly a patch is available, what does this say have not been used in combat in 48 years. about SimCan playtesting and quality conAfter nukes are used, there is a hidden trol? Red Sky wants so badly to be Harpoonceiling where global thermonuclear war will perhaps when it grows up. cow PRESS ANY VIY TO CONTINUE Tupe M i niert Air Bureases Ligi CV interesence Coat Parts fiiits Tripell US Gessantay For UK H. Hlutie Pasta CCM Urginia CON Trustus CC Banker HII C Ticenderage CC Belkeep Polo 2 Pac KAY BOARI) COMMANDI PREMIUM TEMPLATES\" EW! FALCON & MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES CHECK IT OUT! FALCON COMMANDER OR MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES + F3 TEMPLATE EACH! Exciting new utilities for *Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger and the new *MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0\"!! For one low price you get all six: ONLY + FALCCALC 3.0: Superb campaign intelligence gathering tool Viewable Printable theater map with detailed into on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint timing. Strategie/Tactical reports is tactical reports $19.2 and \"Kneeboard sheet\". FaleCalc even tells you the conditions for victory or cleleat!! ORE + 13 REQUISITION 1.0: Puts you in command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons ONLY $24.95!! Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill rating and status Replenish supplies including F-16's Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! FCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger only. *MCU + F3 MAPPER 5.0: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD is compatible with Falcon 3.02 and MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0TM. customizing utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action Customize and Keyboard Commander Corps keyboard templates end \"Keyboard Confusion\" and let you concentrate \"cleclutter\" HUD. Set default view scale. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. on winning. Our high-quality, full color templates turn any AT101 keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve! New graphical map shows entire Rexi Flag theater, flight paths, chemy positions and more! SHOWI3 2.0: Allows viewing of screen-shots from F3's own secret screen capture program!! New interface makes viewing a snap. New conversion feature silves screen N a ... . shots to popular GIF or PCX formats. Inclucles instructions for F3's hicken capture commands! + KCCMENU 1.0: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use default menu Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion and increase one's gaming pleasure. CGW 's preferences. Sub-menus can be created and linked to add other sim CITITETTAVR and games. Completely unloads itseli from memory while running a menu selection! Falcon 3.0/3.01/MIG-29 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut-wrenching action-packed Red Flag Strike Commander B-17 Flying Fortress Tornado MS Flight Simulator 4.0 missions. Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Striko Eagle 111 Say \"Mission Accomplisheel to these thrillers! X-Wing Jetfighter I & II Gunship 20001 &1 Mon-Sat Comanche: Max. Overkill 8:30-6:30 EST DISCOVER F117A Stealth To Order Call: VISA Aces of the Pacific Megafortress CHECK SIX!! OBIEBEE 1. $12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! fusion AT.P Dos CY Air Combat 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 All other inquiries to: Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 143 Ave., 8462, Davie, FL 33330 300-262-61466 * High-Quality. 3-D Graphics * Color Coded Layout * Laminated Stock * Take the corner of keyinder * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * Circle Reader Service #74 November 1993 Page 201 "


"STRATEGY More Steel Tips For Conqueror's Boots Photo courtesy of RBM Studios. Reich & Roll Techniques for SSI's Clash of Steel, Part 2 by Alan Emrich ast issue I presented the keys to victory in SSI's Clash of Steel and second Fleet 2, the third is the Transports, the fourth through seventh even offered a \"perfect plan» for the Axis conquest of Europe. are the Raiders, while the last row is reserved for land based air units. Included were important tables to explain many of the \"die rolls\" 5. An undocumented feature is that damaged ships have one added in the game. In this installment, detailed tactical tips are presented for to their combat die rolls. Thus, a damaged ship only hits if its attack air and naval combat, while the economics and diplomatic game are die roll is less than (but not equal to) its combat strength. both put under the microscope. 6. Remember the nautical choke points located in Istanbul, Hamburg and Gibraltar. Control these cities for free access through their Tactical Tips: The War at Sea restricted passageways and to cut off enemy ship movements through Let's begin with the war at sea which, ironically, plays much like the them. board game War at Sea from Avalon Hill. Things to remember for the 7. Computer players get twice the sea lift capacity out of their naval game: transports as human players do. 1. The proper way to conduct an amphibious invasion is to move 8. To better protect transports on invasion turns, sail them out of one's transport(s) to the \"Transporter\" box in the sea zone where units port with other ships from that same port. Putting all of your ships are to be loaded from. Load all units onto these transports before into one fleer sent from one port helps protect transports during any unloading any during the invasion impulse. Once any unit is unloaded ensuing naval battles. by sea, no more units may be loaded onto ships for the rest of that 9. The Germans need to keep the North Sea in sea supply (i.e., have turn. a surface ship there) to take advantage of their special Norway rule. 2. Each fleet's formation (or \"box placement\" within a sea zone) is 10. When playing the Axis, the Allied navy reacts to any Axis fleets the most important part of the naval war. This is where using some in the here using some in the North Sea by sending most of their navy there to engage it. If strategy and playing the percentages\" really pays off. you want to engage in a big naval battle there, the computer Allied The table on page 33 of the manual says it all. To avoid naval combat, player will always oblige. send ships out as individual raiders. To preserve a task force, make it 11. Shore bombardment is like getting a free, no risk air strike (see a transporter group. To hunt down the enemy, make fleets. By forming. ming the note on the Air Strike/Shore Bombardment cable from Part 1). two distinct fleets in a sea zone, the chances are doubled of finding the Don't pass up an opportunity to use Shore Bombardment. enemy (although they might only be initially engaged in battle with those ships that were in the single, sighting fleet). 12. To keep naval losses down, don't sail surface ships out to conduct shore bombardment until impulse 3 or 4 of a turn. They will be able The down side to raiders is that, when they are discovered, they fight to shore bombard on the impulse they sail and won't be subject to their first combat round individually. At least ships that cower as naval combat on that turn (which as naval combat on that turn (which only occurs at the end of impulses transports will fight their battles together as a team. Keep this in mind Land 2). when deploying ships. 13. Ignore everything page 28 of the manual says abour having a 3. Note that only the best unit in each individual box (Fleet 1, Fleet chance of being sunk in the convoy phase. That was written based on 2, Transporter and each of the four Raider boxes) actually combat at an old routine that is no longer in the program. enemy convoys each turn. If one player has naval combat units in either of the Fleet 1 or Fleet 2 boxes, and his opponent does not, that 14. One dirty Axis ploy to upset a western Allied computer player's pponent's convoy PPs from that sea yone will be completely elimi plans is to leave Palermo open. This invites an Allied invasion to which nated. In this way, the Fleet 1 & 2 boxes can \"blockade\" enemy they will probably overcommit forces (say, 3-5 land unirs). One good army or headquarters unit on the toe of Italy, particularly one placed convoys. upon a fortification, can easily bottle up the Allies. Suddenly, Sicily is 4. When naval units deploy for a battle continuation decision, each the largest, self-contained POW camp in Europe! of the eight rows where they might appear has significance. They serve to remind the player, when deciding whether to stay, retreat from, or The Odds of Invasion reinforce a naval battle, what box in the sea zone those naval units are currently positioned in. The first row contains the ships in Fleet 1, the When land units attempt to hit the beaches during an invasion, there Page 202 Computer Gaming World "


"Un September 1, 1939, this man unleashed a war machine so horriffic, when it was finally defeated, 40 million people lay dead... COULD YOU HAVE STOPPED HIM? INTRODUCING... Avalon Hill's PC Adaptation of its world famous Board Game TWO CICH ' 22 Challenging Scenarios including the Campaign Game 1939-19416 Sca na a Germany THIRD REICH 2 Player and Solitaire mode If you want to be in the real high command, and are tired of the same old clash of steel, pick up THIRD REICH for the IBM PC at your local software store or direct from Avalon Hill. Advanced Artificial Intelligence featuring Neural Net Technology (FHD Intelligent Intuitive Interface 285 a 1-800-999-3222 Carte Wre Gry Strategy Stunning Hi-Resolution VGA graphics Full play capabilities on both the Operational and Strategic Map @ The Operational Map Icatures German Armored Breaththin and Exploitation Assault towards Paris Position man in the lower right allow quick navigation Beautiful full color strategic map allows you to overview the entire Furopean Theatre East West and Southern Frants are represented EXT-CGWII LAU The Avalon Hill Game Company 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 TECH SUPPORT 410-254-9200 Cane Campani AVAILABLE FOR: IBM PC & 100% Compatibles 80286 or ligher (386 Recommended) 3.5 HD Floppy, MS-DOS 5.0 or higher, 6-10K Ram (2MB Recommended). Hard Disk. VGA Color Graphics. Support for Sound Blaster & Internal Speaker #45954. $59.95 Circle Reader Service #141 "


"5 is a chance that they will be intercepted by nearby enemy naval combat 2. Note that the computer players never use their air units to defend units as explained in Table 1. against strategic bombing attacks. Human players can take advantage of this when waging a strategic air war. Table 1 Amphibious Interception 3. Note that an air unit on strategic air defense is also available for Die Where Enemy Naval Units Can Intercept From naval air operations if located on a coastal hex. Thus, they can perform double duty. They will not, however, intercept enemy air strikes 1 Nowhere. There will be no interception of this invasion. against nearby friendly land units. 2 Fleet boxes 1 & 2 in the invasion target sea zone only. 4. Air units placed out of the reserve can be placed on any friendly All naval boxes in the invasion target sea zone only. controlled, supplied hex. They don't have to appear within a supply All naval boxes and harbors in the target sea zone, plus all Fleet block or adjacent to a friendly city. This gives them amazing flexibility boxes in neighboring sea zones. when combined with re-basing (if they start in a clear weather zone) The above, plus all naval boxes in neighboring sea zones. and operational movement. The above, plus all naval boxes and harbors in neighboring sea 5. Remember, depleted air units cost 2 PPs per strength point to zones. replace cach turn, where all other units cost only 1 PP. Pushing too hard with airplanes is expensive! After surviving enemy naval interception, invading land units have 6. The manual states that the combat strength is halved for air units a base 70% of successfully landing on the enemy beach hex (not 80%, based in the mud or snow. (on page 32). This is incorrect. They are as indicated on page 35 in the manual). This 70% chance is halved for reduced to one-third of their strength (as stated on page 41 of the cach of the following conditions: manual). This reduction won't appear on the unit's face value, but it a) If the hex being invaded has a fort. will be factored in to any air strikes they make. b) If the hex being invaded is occupied by an enemy unit. 7. There is a (undocumented) 50% chance that an air unit will not c) If the weather on the hex is either mud or snow. (Note that intercept an enemy strike mission when it has the opportunity. invading units must embark from clear weather ports, but they can Conquest Quirks land in adverse weather — with this penalty, of course). If all three of these apply, that would mean a mere 8% chance for a When does France offer a Vichy Government for surrender? At the successful landing! If a unit fails to make a successful landing (which en which end of the impulse in which a French city falls to the Axis for the first places it on the invaded hex with 1 AP remaining), then it attemprsa tim time, there is a 40% chance of a Vichy offer when Paris falls, while second invasion die roll (at the same percentage chance as the pre-cach of the three other cities in France add 20% to the Vichy offer viously failed one). If it passes this final do or die roll,\" the unit still total. Prill total. Therefore, even the unluckiest player will get a Vichy offer when lands, but takes 50% damage and has its APs reduced to zero. If it fails the last French city falls. this second roll, the unit is dissolved. Note that the computer player will always accept a Vichy surrender Important Invasion Note: Always make high risk invasions (those and will never declare war on Vichy. Players who reject a Vichy offer allow all French units on the board to remain in the Allied force pool made directly against enemy occupied hexes, forts or in bad weather) with \"cheap\" units. A little corps unit has exactly the same chance to units available for play) for the rest of the game. French units not succeed as a big, beefy HQ unit. Therefore, where the odds of currently in pray.cach have an 80% chance of being removed from the succeeding in an amphibious landing are low, reduce your risk by game (and the Allies can build the rest). invading with a relatively crummy land unit in the \"first wave\" and, Spain and Turkey, unlike other minors, do not surrender when their after the beaches are made friendly, follow up the next turn with larger, last city falls. Instead, they surrender when they lose their capital more expensive land units. Note that \"Mulberry\" unirs always have (Madrid and Ankara, respectively) plus one other city. the maximum (70%) chance to succeed against any targer hex (even a fortificd, enemy occupied hex in bad weather -can you say «Malta?\"). The Politics of it All Many players have wondered what their actually chances of success Victory Through Air Power or failure are when they attempt to \"press» a neutral country diploSome techniques for the proper use of air units include: matically. Here is super-secret formula used for determining diplo1. Remember their range: seven spaces for conducting ground\" matic success in Clash of Steel: strikes, four spaces to defend against enemy ground strikes, on or First, a d(100) roll must be less than the pressing player's current adiacent to a friendly city (ironically, any friendly city) to defend political points. Players always want to have as many political points against strategic bombing attacks, or on any coastal square to operate as possible before starting a diplomatic full court press. in the adjacent sea zone. If that check is passed... Photo courtesy of RBM Studios Page 204 Computer Gaming World "


"DMCID LOOF STEEL SUF TEL The Ultimate in Classical Fantasy Role-Playing.. 13.5599 EX YOLADI YORK ENCOUNTERED Help save a richly detailed land  Animated and detailed VGA graphics from self-destruction. Unite the  3D \"first person\" view of dark dungeons and musty towers people of this ancient land and  Turn based overhead tactical combat together you can defeat the evil. Original musical compositions and sound horde that is gathering... effects to get your heart pounding! Open ended non-linear game play growing... Walting... Elght disciples to control and develop Over a hundred quests to complete .Conquer towns and cities, tax the people and raise vast armies. Available for IBM PC and compatibles (VGA, 80386 or better, 2 MB of Ram or more, sound support for Sound Blaster and compatibles.) KINS PICKARD M MEGASOFT V ENTERTAINMENT 137 West Bay Area Webster, TX 77598 1-713-554-7137 Circle Reader Service #130 Tee IMMENSE 1884KTVEUR TION 1IZVKINS Oxu VALOR NIMBLE: PICKARD "


"Then, a second d(100) roll must be greater than pressured country's Rome's supply partition). Conversely, Rumania and Hungary are both break value (including the Balkan Pact value, where applicable). Note leaning 50+ points in the Axis direction in 1939. Because they are in that the computer rolls a d(150) here, thus cheating and getting a the same supply partition as Berlin, their combined 4 PPs are added better shot at diplomatic success. to the German total each turn. If either of these two die rolls fail, then the attempt fails and the There are also key economic cities. Saratov, for instance, controls the pressing player loses some political points. If both succeed, then the Russian's Ural convoy of 8 PPs per turn (as well as its own PP). An pressing player loses no political points and the pressed country leans undocumented feature increases the German's Swedish convoy from further to his side in the war. two to three points if the Axis control Oslo (as they do at the beginning For example, in the Fall of 1940, the Germans, flush from their of all but the 1939 scenarios). conquest of France and the low countries, have 80 political points. If The most important thing to remember about production is that they press Spain, with a break value of 75, there will be a 20% chance one «keeps the change\" after units on the board are rebuilt to full of success (80 x 25%). strength at the end of each turn. During summer turns, in particular, There are two levels of diplomatic success that can be achieved. If a after the long impulses of battle, many units will find themselves country can be brought to lean between 50 and 99 points in one side's depleted of a strength point or two. Every supplied unit becomes fully direction, they will lend the production value of their cities and recharged before the next turn begins, but those strength points are resources to that side (assuming that they are within a supply partition paid for out of one's PPs. Air strength points, remember, cost double that connects up to the receiving player's capital). When a country (i.e., 2 PPs per strength point). Fortunately, unspent PPs from preequals or exceeds 100 points, it declares war and joins that side as a vious turns are saved and available for spending at the next opportufull ally, placing its own army on the board and allowing both sides to nity, so players can save up for the more expensive unit types. maneuver through its territory. Finally, page 22 of the manual is incorrect. The cost to rebuild a dissolved unit (one lost while still able to trace a supply route or while Political Notes conducting an invasion is only 33% of its current price, not 40%. 1. Interestingly, political points are only awarded when a country is However, the price of units is always subject to increase due to enemy conquered, not when it joins a player's alliance through diplomatic bombing activity. pressure. Thus, coercing Spain to join one's alliance does not raise Weather, Goest Thou! one's political stature. 2. When Paris is captured by the Axis, Spain will move 20 points in The Combined Weather Table included in this article is fairly the Axis direction if a d(100) roll is less than the Axis current Political ical self-explanatory. Each campaign game turn of two months sees the Point total. Note that the Axis political point level will be significantly compi computer rolling a die on that table to determine the weather in the 1.2 various Weather Zones. Note that the weather in the Mediterranean higher if the Axis accept a Vichy Government which might occur with the fall of Paris. (The computer does not cheat in favor of itself on this Weather Zone is always clear, as is every Weather Zone during the die roll when playing the Axis.) May/June and July/August turns. 3. Italy begins the war by leaning 80 points in the Axis direction, but is still neutral. The Axis can raise Italy's status by +25 points and, thus, Table 2. Combined Weather Table Table 2 Combined Weather Table usually secure their entry into the war) if either: Die Jan/Feb Mar/Apr May/Jun Jul/Aug Sep/Oct Nov/Dec a) Paris is captured by the Axis, b) At least two hexes of the Maginot Line are captured by the Axis, 1 CCMS CCCC CCCC CCCC CCCC MCSS c) Or at least six Russian cities are captured by the Axis. 2 MCSS CCMM CCCC CCCC CCCM MCSS 4. The Axis never have to declare war on the Benelux countries in | 3 SCSS MCMM CCCC CCCC CCMM SCSS order to get them to surrender. When France surrenders, so will the 4 SCSS MCMS CCCC CCCC MCMM SCSS neutral Benelux countries! | 5 SCSS MCSS CCCC CCCC MCMM SCSS 5. If the Germans favor the Russians over the Rumanians in the 6 SCSS SCSS CCCC CCCC MCMS SCSS \"diplomatic wars\" and maintain their eastern front garrison level each vear, Russia's chances of entering the war are extremely small if Turkey C = Clear; M = Mud; and S = Snow Notes: The first letter represents the weather in the Temperate zone, the is never invaded. second is the Mediterranean, then the Arctic with the Arctic Circle zone 6. To help insure diplomatic success, use an old computer gaming listed last. cheating technique. Specifically, before making the first diplomatic Turn continuation is based on the weather in the Temperate zone, while press, save the game. If it fails, restart the game and try again until it the Russian Winter rule is based on the Arctic zone. succeeds. If it succeeds, save the game (and that successful attempt) and keep plugging away until things are arranged to suit. Stacking the Chips of Production That's it from the bunker, folks. Now that I've given you the keys to Clash of Steel, I hope that you will enjoy it even more. Above all else, The economic system in Clash of Steelis, on the surface, fairly simple. I strongly urge that you schedule a game with a wargaming buddy in Each city produces a single Production Point (PP) per turn, while each the near future. It is no idle boast when I say that it's the most fun, resource produces two. However, there are some important variables multi-human-player-at-the-same-computer-screen game that I've to consider when checking the math on one's economy. First, only major cities produce a production point every turn. played since M.U.L.E. Fortunately, there are only three minor cities (all of which are Italian Finally, producer James Young at SSI has been working with the at the start of the war): Palermo, Tripoli and Tobruk. designer on a patch file for Clash of Steel. Besides some bug fixes, there Second, production points are only added if that city or resource is will be at least a few changes made to the game. The strength of the within the same supply partition (see p. 38 of the manual) as a player's Gibraltar garrison unit is likely to rise from 1 to 3 (which, when added capital. This means, for example, that even though the Axis starts the to the fort bonus of +3 strength points plus an additional 70% for war with Helsinki as a friendly city, because it is not in the same supply computer players' units in forts, will make Gibraltar a tough nut to partition as Berlin, no PPs are received for it until after Leningrad falls crack) and it appears that one will be allowed to rebuild lost naval (similarly, Italy cannot collect for Tirana until it is connected to transports. CGW V.E. Day Page 206 Computer Gaming World "


"Combat Supplies The WARGAMER'S Computer Company supplies you with the tools you need. weapons, etc. POA includes a choice of specific or random Middle East scenarios/maps. An optional Map Builder program ($15) allows players to create unique maps. \"...for the grognard or serious student of the modern battlefield, POA becomes virtually mandatory.\" — CGW ($44.95 + $4.00 S/H) POA runs on IBM and compatibles only, with EGA graphics, and 512K minimum RAM. PS Simulations is devoted to wargamers and their needs: the need to be an integral part of the action; the need to control battlefield conditions, the need for accura cy; the need for detail. HPS products satisfy these needs. Point of Attack The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation available. POA is a platoon/section tactical simulation, with over 100 modern weapon systems from eleven countries. The artificial intelligence is incredibly accurate. Wargamers can control air superiority, supplies, communications, SIMULATIONS weather, morale, Mail checks/money orders to: HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 publishers are creating ADC add-on disks for their games, allowing players to jump right into operations, bypassing the symbol set and map input steps. \"ADC is a must have Available product that will only by mail. change the way Please add $4.00 you play warshipping and handling. games.\" CA residents add state -CGW sales tax. Please ($79.95 + specify disk spec $4.00 S/H) when ordering. ADC requires at VISA/MC: CALL least 600K RAM, (408)554-8381 VGA, for IBM and compatibles only. Mouse optional. HPS Simulationsthe source for all your Combat Supplies. (HPS Aide De Camp Now you can use your computer as a playing aid for all your wargames. Up to 30,000 hexes per game map, unlimited units, multiple user-defined zoom levels, game-turn replay ability, and easy play-by-mail or modem makes ADC the most exciting new product for board wargamers. ADC does not include rules for any specific games the board game must be purchased separately. Several board game Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Circle Reader Service #70 "


"STRATEGY A Pearl Of A Plan A Winning Stratagem for SSG's Carriers at War arriers are, in more than one sense, the \"name of the game in SSG's Carriers at War. You score most of your points by damaging ships and destroying planes. When you sink a carrier, you double your pleasure by scoring points for both the ship and planes it carries. Carriers are easy for airplanes to sink, so the formula for success is easy to derive: Your Planes + The Enemy's Carriers = Victory by Roger White 3. Position your carriers and your covering CAP, and even if the carriers don't go force. down on the first attack, those gaping holes By noon the day before the Sunday Punch, you leave in their accks w prevent any you want your carrier group about 400 miles retaliation. From then on the scenario befrom the enemy's main carrier group if you're comes a turkey shoot. American, 300 miles if you're Japanese. If you arrive early at the party, keep your distance. 8. Load and fuel your planes. Don't put up This will keep you out of attack range. CAP. If dawn is coming and you're absolutely 4. Unleash the cover force on enemy carrier sure you're close, but the enemy carriers are task group. not in sight, then load and fuel your planes At about 16:00 the day before the Sunday anyway and pull down your CAP so they can Punch, put your cover task groups on flank join the assault. This is risky, riskv. risky speed and rush the enemy. The goal of these because armed and fueled planes on deck are groups is to worry the enemy carrier group an invitation to uncontrollable fire if there's during dawn of the Sunday Punch. Ideally, one group will be in contact with the carrier planes off the moment the sighting is made. group an hour before dawn so that you can 550 Ft Pill iy isntrei launch an at-dawn attack. Even if contact is made after dawn, the cover forces will be distracting targets for enemy air strikes. The «Sunday Punch\" Tactic The Japanese attempted this at Pearl Harbor, so I call this the Sunday Punch tactic. The Sunday Punch is a dawn attack against the enemy's main carrier force, and it should be your first carrier-based air attack of the scenario. 1. Cluster your carriers. Step one is to concentrate your carriers. Order your faster carrier task groups to join der your faster carrier task groups to join the slowest carrier task group. If the slowpokes travel about five knots faster than the lead group, they will travel as a tight bunch, If any of your groups are short on fuel, with less than 20 days left, spend some time in port or rendezvous with the oilers. When the time comes to strike, you'll be doing a lot of sailing at flank speeds, and full tanks will bring you peace of mind. 5. Have your carriers follow an hour or two later. At 17:00 send your carrier task group after the enemy carrier group. It will be late enough in the day so that, even if the enemy knows your location, it will be too late to send an air attack before dark. minFi_min_one Start passing time in five minute increments and watch for the first sighting to be reported. However, don't launch on the first sighting. It's likely to be wildly inaccurate in both ship description and position. If your carriers haven't been spotted, wait for a second and third sighting before launching the Sunday Punch. 21 TERSER 6. The clouds are your friends. Storms are a closing carrier's best friend. The enemy search planes have a hard time spotting through the clouds and attacking planes miss a lot. Maneuver so your carriers spend daylight under heavy clouds when you are within striking range of enemy carriers. When you rush the enemy carriers, actually rush for the cloud bank nearest them. PALETA PAT BER After the Sunday Punch 7. Position your carriers close to his about an hour before dawn. If you're American, close means within 170 miles the extended fighter range. The ideal is 90 to 120 miles. If you're Japanese, all your Once the enemy's main carriers are out of action, your carriers won't be subject to massive airborne retaliation and you can cherry pick targets to run up your score. Carriers are say 100 miles, your planes will arrive much 2. Spend the first day on patrol. Ler your scarch planes tell you where the enemy is located. Top priority is finding his main carrier force. In most scenarios this is two carriers cruising together; in Midway, it's four. Don't get distracted by the light carrier task forces (only one carrier in the group) or the seaplane tenders (a task group with one carrier hanging around reefs and shoals). You want the full-size carriers. if your cover group has served well and the enemy carriers are within sight, launch your planes at night so they arrive at the first moment of dawn. There will be little opposcapital ships and destroyers. Try to avoid capitals and destroyers because they will cause too much damage to your planes. Keep your carriers away from enemy cover task groups, and chase enemy transports and carriers with your own cover task groups. Do these things and decisive victories will be yours. Cow Page 208 Computer Gaming World "


"Give Your Joystick a Thrill. in the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You and your opponent — wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. MELATWACE THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money — action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. BOLO B ORA System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum Adlib Gold and Speed Master MATOCRONO DECOR This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 18. Ed a free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7739. (8N1) MEGA TECH All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. Circle Reader Service #79 "


"tively. (Continued from page 191) Dragons are the single most fearsome cost. You generally do not have enough heroes units stacked with them will fight more effecunit Warlords 2 can boast. Second in to use them defensively; try and keep your speed only to wizards, only the heroes on the attack or our exploring ruins and strongest heroes can meer (but cannot exceed) temples. Whenever the opportunity to purDemons are identical to undead in their basic combat value. Giving all units chase a hero arises, take it. most respects, but are more expensive stacked with them a +2, dragons can be the and even faster. This makes them key component to any killer stack. Don't We Shall Meet Again W ood excellent attack units. waste your dragons defensively; lise them offensively in conjunction with lighter troops to Next time, we will take a look at how the Elementals, like worms, are slower lay waste to your enemy's armies. Their wings combat system works, (or, why your hero than most of the high-powered units make them excellent overseas troops. keeps getting killed by the enemy's light infanthey would ordinarily stack with. try), how the stack strength calculation procThis makes them very strong defensive units ess works (or, how to wipe out an enemy but of limited value on the offensive. army. Attacking stacks should be led country with a dragon, a unicorn, a pegasus, by a hero whenever possible, and enand five scouts), and other ways to reduce your Devils are possibly the most useful emy heroes should be eliminated at almost any enemies to han single unit in the game. Powerful and fast, they have devastating effects on enemy stacks: all non-hero, non-city bonuses are removed from a stack facing a devil. This can halve the effective strength of an enemy stack. Devils are ideal for all combat activity, offensive and defensive. The Tady of Flame city of Inis Archons vie with devils for utility. a to gpy a po op 60 gp 100 p Strong and quick, archons negate all A hero bonuses. A stack with a devil and an archon is a formidable opponent, and excellent for killing enemy heroes. Their flight capability makes them flexible over any ter2.300BP ) 300, p. 1000 gp 1000 pp rain. G 1600 OPS 1500 op ou 1500 op C Build Production y 700 op. 400 op 6000P ) 400 gp_ ) 30010p, 99 500 gp 400 mp 500 Table 1 Unit Attributes Army Unit Strength Special Strength Time Cost Unit/Turn Strength/Turn Special Strength/Turn Cost/Strength Cost/Special Strength 2.00 1.00 15 5.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 1.00 2.00 5.00 1.50 2.00 1.50 2.00 2.00 1.00 0.50 1.00 2.00 1.00 1.50 0.50 1.50 2.00 2.00 3.00 8.00 8.00 1.67 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.33 O CovvoAwar 2.33 2.33 1.67 1.75 1.75 1.00 1.33 1.60 1.67 1.25 1.33 Scout Bat Light Infantry Orc Mob Light Cavalry Catapult Heavy Infantry Archers Dwarves Pikemen Heavy Cavalry Wolfriders Giants Minotaurs Spiders Pegasi Griffins Unicorns Elephants Wizard Worms Undead Demon Elemental Devil Archon Dragon 2.00 2.00 2.00 Ecco DOO O OOOOOAAWNWNN2.00 1.67 1.71 cocco CVOOOOOOAAAwww1.00 1.00 1.00 0.50 0.50 0.25 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.33 0.33 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 AAAAAAAAAAWW NN NNW WNNN ANN2.00 2.00 2.50 2.50 3.00 3.50 2.00 2.67 2.00 2.00 1.75 2.00 2.00 2.50 2.50 2.50 1.67 2.00 1.75 2.00 1.50 1.75 1.75 1.75 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.25 15 15 15 2.00 2.40 2.40 2.50 2.14 1.88 2.00 1.71 1.71 2.14 1.88 1.88 2.50 2.22 2.22 1.88 1.88 1.88 1.71 1.50 2.00 1.50 1.88 15 15 2.00 2.25 2.25 2.25 2.75 1.67 1.67 2.22 1.82 114 20 Page 210 Computer Gaming World "


"100 TONS OVERKILL CUE GOL ANONPAN Introducing a new breed of software. A new extreme. A quantum leap in combat simulators. It doesn't push the envelope. It shreds it. A Mechwarrior II: The Clans creates a new reality. A world of sights, sounds and action that can bring you to the brink of sensory overload. Feel what it's like to control K 100 tons of pure hostility, with enough firepower to vanori vaporize a squadron of F-158. A Atop a 31st-century BattleMech four stories high, you're thrust into the most eye-popping missions imaginable. Each mission a frenzied light for victory, honor and the glory of The Clan. A Mechwarrior Il is a guaranteed adrenaline rush. Go one-on-one in real-time via modem. Pick from 16 phenomenal 'Mechs and 40 MECHWAPO Thailand futuristic weapon systems. Use multiple POVS. Select from hundreds of missions in 1991 every conceivable environment. Choose ON og pabb instant action or a complete career. A Mechwarrior II: The Clans, so me heavy it crushes the competition. ACTIVISION Mechwarrior II: The Clans is available for IBM and compatible computers. SNES version also available. To order see your local retailer or call (800) 477-3650. BattleTech, Battle Mech, 'Mech and Mechwarrior are Registered Trademarks of Fasa Corporation Circle Reader Service #38 "


"Taking A PEEK METEK Rrent roa. Este SWING SO Renal (steal top sera Crep Innisbrook Links Championship Course Access Software, Inc. 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. Salt Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 800-4880 INNISBROOK LINKS CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE: The next stop on the Links championship tour takes the desktop golfer to Tarpon Springs, Florida and the Copperhead course at Innisbrook. Ranked as one of \"America's Greatest» courses (Golf Digest) and Florida's #1 course for six consecutive years (Golfweek), Copperhead, host for the JC Penney Classic, offers world class challenge in the comfort of one's own home. Whether one is preparing to play the original «green» or simply teeing off at home, this latest Links course provides the golfer \"hazard free\" play. The fifth Super VGA championship course, Innisbrook requires Links, Links 386 Pro or Microsoft Golf. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Bourbaki, Inc. P.O. Box 2867 Boise, ID 83701 (208) 342-5823 FRACTUNES: If you were in with the In Crowd during the 60s, you may have run across the Light Organ, a device that emitted colored light in response to music (usually while the audience ingested felonious botanicals). The 90s response to this 60s invention is a cup of coffee and FracTunes, a program that alters the colors of fractal images to the beat of any AdLib, SoundBlaster or Midi sound file. If you own a Midi instrument, you can even take control of the show and create your own sight-sound psychedelica. The package includes 250 sound files, 150 fractal images, and tools with which you can create interesting slide shows. While the execution of the «Light Organ\" falls a bit short of expectations (it's just not as neat as the concept), it may still be an interesting tool for the creative fractal hobbyist. IBM with CD-ROM. ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Eight-Ball Deluxe Dictional rile foto Colors LAVINX Lool Slide Sho Fractunes Brderbund Software, Inc. 500 Redwood Blvd. PO Box 6121 Novato, CA 94948-6121 (415) 382-4400 DISCOVER SPACE: The final frontier is hot these days, with \"billions and billions\" of software titles heading for the stars. This new program is another solid-fueled educational booster from Broderbund. It offers a galaxy of information and stellar views, with graphical planet cutaways, animated orbital paths, comparisons of planets in size and mass, constellation charts—you name it. Pick a year, month and hour, and view the night sky in any direction you choose. Click on a star to see its name and position in degrees. Animate the whole swirling maelstrom like you've always wanted to, and see exactly how eternity spins above our humble roofs. Learn about the space program, comparing rockers and shuttles of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. And, our favorite, designate the size and speed of an asteroid and see what effect it would have when slammed into a U.S. state; quite literally, it would rock our world. A 70-page companion book and glossary are also provided. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4. SPACE EXPLORA FON Amtex Software P.O. Box 572 Belleville, Ontario K8N 5B2 (613) 967-7900 EIGHT-BALL DELUXE: Pinball Wizards and all other denizen of pool halls, beer halls, bowling alleys and backroom arcades will find a lot of high-scoring action in Amtex's second pinball game. One look at the game's features, documentation, and packaging extras reveals the designer's true love, perhaps even fanatacism, for the topic. In the box one finds a real flipper and steel pinball, a manual with a detailed history of the pastime, a section on general pinball strategy, and a break-down of the specific machine's scoring possibilities. In the midst of all these googahs one can almost forget the game, which is a fine rendition of an actual Bally's machine. The screen only shows one-third of the playfield at one time, but scrolls smoothly with the ball's action; the only flaw might be that one has to guess at some skill-shots because of the limited view. From the main screen--a cafe patronized by a digitized cowgirl in clinging denim--the player can glance at a Top Ten chalkboard, preview the next two Amtex games, and even get behind the machine to tinker with its settings, changing the playfield's slant and bumper power to personal taste. As a whole, this is a lovingly created package that is sure to send pinball fans into bonus overtime. IBM, Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #2. IALINCII VIRILIS Discover Space FILES TERRESTREYST. DES LAYERDICES Capstone Software Airport Corporate Center 7200 Corporate Center Dr., Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 GRANDMASTER CHESS DELUXE EDITION: Billed as \"The World's Most Powerful Chess Program!\", Capstone's Grandmaster Chess Deluxe Edition offers the chess aficionado a multitude of options to customize the game in-depth. Super VGA graphics provide an attractive array of chess boards and pieces to choose from (seven unique chess sets on eight different boards) in Grandmaster Chess Deluxe Edition Page 212 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S ASK FOR PRICE LIST AND TAKE A LOOK AT OUR SALE ITEM (800) 788-2193 Take Break:Pinball 29.95 Yobi Magic Spell Tricks 29.95 call HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635.00 Discovry 8 CDRom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CDRom Kit 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Kit 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro Dlx 119.95 Video Blaster 299.00 Video Spigot 399.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 PAS 16 Snd Cd 165.95 Pro Aud Studio 16 189.00 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 899.00 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 495.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO: Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 129.00 TelevEyes VGA-TV 199.00 WIN TV 399.95 SPORTS Car & Driver Front Page Sports Ftbl Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro NFL Pro Football 1992 NFL Video Pro Football Sports Adventure Tony LaRussa Bsblll Trouble Shooting Golf Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit Grnd Prix World Tour Tennis call 41.95 41.95 36.95 39.95 35.95 35.95 47.95 37.95 29.95 35.95 24.95 35.95 31.95 44.95 31.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto III Game Card 27.00 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach II 22.00 Mach III+ 27.00 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HISpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control Mark II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS Mark! 27.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 COLORADO SPECTRUM Mouse Wheel call Sample Listing of Products B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Discovery: Columbus 35.95 Wing Commander 11 47.95 Campaign 35.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Wizardary VII:Crsaders 41.95 Comanche:Maximm Ovrkl 43.95 Dune 11 35.95 X-Wing 41.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 El Fish 35.95 X-Wing Misson Dsk 19.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 CD ROM Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Flashback 31.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 7th Guest 52.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Global Effect 19.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 41.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Falcon 3.0/Mig 29 Clip Art Haven-jewel 21.95 16.95 Heimdall Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Humans 25.95 Compton Interact. Encyc.249.95 Fit Sim Scen USA East 41.95 Inca 34.95 Curse of Enchantia 24.95 Flight Sim 5.0 call Indy Jones 4 35.95 Daggar of Amon Ra 41.95 High Command 41.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Day of Tenacle 41.95 Jetfighter II bundle Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Legacy:Realm of Terror 36.95 Dune 56.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Legends Valour 37.95 Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis. Suit Larry 5 41.95 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Pacific War 47.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III 47.95 Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas Infocom 11 29.95 Fontmaster 2 18.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Lost Treas. of Rain Forest 29.95 Games 1993-Jewel 21.95 Perfect General 35.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Global Explrer-DeLormo 89.95 Rebel Assault tba Maniac Mansion 14.95 Indy Jones:Fate Atlantis 41.95 Secret Weapons Luftwife 29.95 Mantis 31.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Special Forces 29.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Iron Helix call Strike Commander 47.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 King's Quest VI 44.95 Task Force 1942 38.95 Might & Magic V 41.95 Jutland 52.95 Theater of War 19.95 Monkey Island 2 25.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 Tornado 44.95 Out of This World 36.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 V Victory 1, 2 or 3 ea 43.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Legend of Kyrandia 41.95 Piratesl Gold 41.95 Map Expert by Delorme 299.95 ENTERTAINMENT Police Quest 3 39.95 Mayo Clinic (jewel box) 29.95 Prophecy by Sierra 24.95 Midi Music Shop-jewl box 22.95 A-Train 41.95 Populous II 37.95 MS Cinemania MPC 54.95 ADD:Unltd Adventure 34.95 Prince of Persia II 41.95 Monarch Notes 61.95 Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 Quest for Glory III 41.95 Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 Adventre Starter-Sierra 19.95 Return of the Phanton PC Karoake 77.95 41.95 Air Bucks 35.95 Ringworld 35.95 Playing with Language 29.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms Prophone 1993 Ed 39.95 129.95 38.95 Amazons Rome:Pathway to Pwr 29.95 Pub.Paradise-Clip Art 22.95 Arcade Hits Putt Putt Fun Pack Rules of Engagement II 41.95 26.95 39.95 Armourgeddon SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 Rodney's Fun Screen 39.95 Ashes of Empire Shadow President 41.95 RoMaterial:Vis/Snd Effect 19.95 Back to Future II Shadowlands 29.95 Shareware Studio V.C 18.95 29.95 Bart Simpson-Wierdnes Sherlock Hims:Lst Files 42.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 4 3.95 Batman Returns 41.95 Siege Space Adventure 2.0 22.95 61.95 39.95 Betrayal at Krondor Sim Ant 35.95 Space Quest IV 41.95 Blue Force 39.95 Sim City Ultima Underworld 1811 58.95 29.95 Caesar 35.95 Sim Earth 42.95 Who Killed Sam Rupert 24.95 Carmen SD-Space Dluxe 47.95 Sim Castles 11 Life Willy Beamish 41.95 41.95 35.95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 Wing Commander II Dix 52.95 Challenge of 5 Realms 39.95 Space Hulk Civilization:Master Playr 49.95 WCmdr 1I/Olt Undiwrld 34.95 52.95 Space Quest v Classic Adventure-Lucas 35.95 World Fact Book '92 41.95 59.95 Spear of Ostiny:Wifnstn 35.95 Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Star Control II 35.95 Creepers WINDOWS Star Trek 25th Anniv. Dagger Amon Ra 41.95 35.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Stunt Island Dark Half 33.95 34.95 Audio: Star Trek V. 34.95 Syndicate 41.95 Dark Seed Conquered for Windows 44.95 Darklands Terminator 2029 41.95 41.95 MS Golf 42.95 Ultima Underworld Il 32.95 47.95 Daughter of Serpents Origin FX Screen Sur 24.95 Day of Tenacle 34.95 Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Star Trek Screen Svr 44.95 Ultrabots 36.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Amazon Trail 34.95 Auto Works 44.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Discover Space 37.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Cad 3-D 29.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24:95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35.95 Peter Pan Print Kit Playroom ver 2.0 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Scooters Magic Castle 31.95 Time Treks 29.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Geom 29.95 31.95 34.95 95 MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra. Zoltrix, Zoom and others AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A... TO Z....!  29.95 FLT SIM/WAR A Line in Sand 26.95 Aces over Europe 44.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Ambush at Sorinor 35.95 Armored Fist 42.95 ATAC 34.95 36.95 MANY SALE ITEMS IN OUR FULL PRICE LIST , ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 3315 E RUSSELL RD, #H-177 LAS VEGAS, NV 89120 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Any return subject to 20% restocking fee. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #126 "


"either 3-D or 2-D perspectives (with 180 degree board roration). An easy mouse-andmenu driven interface makes play a simple matter. Multiple skill levels are supplied (from beginner to grandmaster), as are several time control options. As expected, an opening moves library is available with hundreds of choices to draw upon. Multiple chess sets, instant replays of individual moves or entire games, help and analysis features, and modem and network play fill out the package. Of the chess sers from which one can draw are traditional, fantasy, abstract and space pieces. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Fractal Ecstasy HOLLYWARE Entertainment 13464 Washington Blvd. Marina del Rey, CA 90291 (310) 822-9200 GEAR WORKS: Here's a puzzle game that runs like clock-work. By placing gears on pegs in the correct sequence, the player can build time pieces from different parts of the world. As if the spatial puzzles weren't hard enough, the player must also race the clock and avoid two villainous birds (actually \"puffins\"). One puffin tries to knock the pegs off the board while the other will rust the gears if given a chance. As defense against these fowl deeds you can shoot the puffins off the board, or oil the gears they have rusted, but there's no way to replace missing pegs. You can also use bombs to clear up your own missteps. Success earns points, and if you get bonus gears you have a chance to yank the limb of a \"onearmed bandit\" and try for more points or bonus items. While an interesting brainbanger, the documentation doesn't quite agree with the actual game play. Amiga and IBM ($49.95), Commodore 64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #8. 100 TS MAMS Le Flame EXPERIENCE BASCPTS MELONES. CA VAL CHAR PTS OTSADVANTASC 30 SIR tuingrab a) CD Enraged 30 CON D2 Absorption DOOY Pulsoner such Lim 13 INI 1405 uchery Blast Ucher last untea URRA Secret ID u Flash Ulcin Bonus uerold 30665 Lowase:899994 29999999unggung Fucht DCV CC Donne Rest Fan berens IR Vision Low Enoch Lang Esperan Frage Benefit Contact Britis 4 LENS/Fire 391POHORS.COM 5 R-PD SR-ED CHA COSTISOS DISADS TOTAL FASC PTS 100 CXP SPONTO TOTAL PIS 2 600 TOTAL COST 5% Heromaker Deep River Publishing P.O. Box 9715-975 Portland, ME (207) 871-1684 FRACTAL ECSTASY: This is definitely the flashiest fractal program on the market today. Running under Windows 3.1, the program uses Microsoft's Video for Windows to display an hour of animated fractal «movies.\" The movies dive in and explore the \"infinite resolution\" of fractal images, weaving around the image space to uncover beautiful configurations. What's more, at any time during a movie, the user can stop and pull the current image into a free-form exploration mode where he or she can do their own delvings. While perhaps not as sophisticated or as fast as other fracral programs, it is certainly the most beautiful and accessible product of its type. Definitely recommended for the fractal novice. IBM with CD-ROM and Windows 3.1 ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6. 000000 000000 O 3000 7000350 Gear Works vid The Special Windr CA ip Ban ICOM Simulations, Inc. 648 S. Wheeling Rd. Wheeling, IL 60090 (708) 520-4440 UNINVITED: Fans of the gothic horror genre who don't mind playing a graphic adventure with closer ties to the simpler, older titles of the past may enjoy this Windows version of ICOM's classic adventure. Though this graphic puzzler offers a return to the less complicated quests of days past, the potential player should not think that this translates into an inferior product. On the contrary, the Windows conversion of Uninvited captures all the atmosphere and enjoyment of the earlier releases and enhances play by providing a high resolution, mouse-and-menu-driven interface employing full 256-color images and smooth spot animations. Windows sound support is also provided for digitized sound effects, including requisite thunder, screams and howls. So, if the player is up to the challenge of uncovering the mystery of House Abraxas, Uninvited will provide a good dose of ghastly fun. Just pick up everything that isn't nailed down and watch out for that swarthy Southern Belle: She's no lady...at least not anymore. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #9. Open Chanc Spear t There is a powerful presente bereYes IMS has a stronge s feel alene. Je neglicant Hero Software, Inc. PO Box 699 Aptos, CA 95001-0699 (408) 662-0536 HEROMAKER: So, who's your hero? Colossal Man? The Cruncher? Mega Ninja? Well, it doesn't really matter as HeroMaker allows you to create the hero of your choice, usable with all Hero System genres. Characters can be loaded and saved (thus, exchanged with other HeroMakerowners), printed out in several different formats, and exported to a word processor. HeroMaker, however, goes beyond a simple spreadsheet for manipulating character data. It is an intelligent character creator that knows all \"people and paper\" HeroMaker rules, making character generation a relatively easy and error-free process. HeroMaker calculates all values according to established Hero System rules, contains the complete Hero System rules database, and allows the user to create his or her own powers and skills. All aspects of hero creation are user adjustable: characteristics, skills, powers, advantages, disadvantages, limitations, talents and more. Stop waiting for the ideal hero to appear. Create your own with HeroMaker! IBM ($25). Circle Reader Service #7. Uninvited 66666666666633 ss Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6655 LORD OF THE RINGS, ENHANCED CD-ROM: Frodo never had it so good, at least not until the enhanced CD-ROM version of The Lord of the Rings spun off from Interplay. Featuring 25 minutes of footage from the Ralph Bakshi film (playing in the largest full-motion video window of any enLord of the Rings, Enhanced CD-ROM Page 214 Computer Gaming World "


"How Could We Ever Improve The World's Best Selling Chess Program? CHESSMSTER -THE Computer chess enthusiasts will tell you that the software \"engine\" is what determines the true power of a chess program. The Chessmaster acts as a mentor and provides a new interactive animated tutorial, ten additional teaching displays and \"rate my plays;\" you predict the correct moves selected from famous games and The Chessmaster will score you. The new \"turbocharged\" 32-bit engine in The Chessmaster Version 4000 is based upon the engine that won the 1992 World Computer Chess Championship in Madrid, Spain. Taking advantage of the 32-bit processing capabilities of 386 and 486 processors, chess for the PC has reached a new level of excellence. New! The Finest Chess Program In The World! New views including 3-D and rotating boards The Software Toolworks has long been recognized as the leader in computer chess programs. Now, we're setting a new standard. Truly, The Chessmaster 4000 Turbo is the finest chess program in the world. The Chessmaster 4000 Turbo has a new custom Windows interface for spectacular graphics. Choose between 3-D or 2-D. Rotate the board. Choose from a dozen chess sets or design your own set or board. THE. We Gave It A Stronger Engine EEEEE CHESSMASTER 4000 TURBO The Finest Chess Program in The World! THE SOFTWARE TO TWISS MARIAGE MAS BEEN To Explose. World Atlas U.S. Atlas Available for IBM PC and compatibles, Windows and MPC CD-ROM For dealer info or to order, call toll-free 1-800-234-3088 Machines Copyright 1986-1993 The Software Toolworks The Cham , The Software Toolworks and logo are repiced tr ack of the Software Toolworks Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Bus Corporation. Microsoft and MS-DOS are registered irademarks and Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks and g roussenarks are the property of their respective holders Circle Reader Service #120 "


"tos 9500 Yadav Help images, over an hour of full-motion video and narration, and text descriptions of every American manned space mission, Americans in Space offers an entertaining and educational adventure for the whole family. ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #12. tertainment title to date), over 40 minutes of high quality CD audio sound effects and music, plus digitized speech from the film, Tolkien's epic tale plays better than ever. As in the original release, the player assumes the role of the hobbit Frodo Baggins, leader of The Fellowship on a quest to destroy the One Ring that has the power to enslave them all. Featured are real-time, party-based combat, and characters with unique personalities and behavior. Also provided is an entertaining eight minute tutorial to help players acclimate themselves to the CD-ROM interface. Tolkien fans will be drawn to this game like Gollum to his Precious. IBM with CD-ROM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #10. The 174 PM wing) O culoa Islande IPA 221 Microsoft Goli for Windows, Multimedia Edition Apollo 07-16-69 Qol 21 New Media Schoolhouse 390 Westchester Ave. Pound Ridge, N.Y. 10576 (800) 672-6002 TIME TRAVELER CD: We have CD'd the future of History, and it is ROM. Here's a history of the world, from 3900 B.C. to 1992 divided by five geographical regions and three categories: history, culture and innovation. The Time Traveler interface lets you select a year and jump to it with the \"GO!\" button, or search a time by subject. Every period features at least one attractive, photoquality image, some accompanied by a short caption, to illustrate a brief text description of that year. The CD is billed as «A Multimedia Chronicle of History,\" yet features no animations, and only a smattering of audio clips. And though the overall package is well-polished, someone should have noticed that Jackie Robinson couldn't have been «Wookie of the Year\" in 1947, 30 years before Star Wars. A decent program, but we're not sure you couldn't get more book for less bread. Macintosh with CD-ROM ($159). Circle Reader Service #13. Zoom Americans In Space Program Maylen tesis The word 'freedom marre the cuture of the Unwd AW 1 Young geplaapke for oran, yuri ca Vorm Wwe for b anect Vantaa Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 MICROSOFT GOLF FOR WINDOWS, MULTIMEDIA EDITION: Golfers wishing to refresh their game, at least visually and audibly, may find this new edition of Microsoft Golf to be just their cup of \"tee.\" Among the enhancements offered in Microsoft Golf for Windows, Multimedia Edition is the ability to call up a video \"flyby\" of each hole, similar to that provided by television golf coverage. This flyby provides the player with an overhead view of the particular characteristics of each hole. Requesting a \"tip\" before taking a shot allows the player to \"consule\" with a video golf pro and gain some helpful on-line advice. More detailed instruction is also available through on-line video demonstrations of stroke technique. Sound capabilities have also been enhanced, allowing the desktop golfer to select and assign their own sounds to specific golfing events. Both male and female commentators are available, and the player can add their own audio comments, too. Other features include instant replays of each shot, playing with up to eight partners, and a driving range and putting green for practicing one's shots. IBM with Windows and CD-ROM ($64.95). Circle Reader Service #11. food 2 Goose of school The track and roof the PARADY froule De Boys Buda G roup of u VUA John Leon, Mocurey Cert TI Murisen, ad Ringo America WOLLTAN MUROTEN TOUTA TI Helplan Time Traveler CD D D TO BETON Acre New World Computing, Inc. 20301 Ventura Blvd., Suite 200 Woodland Hills, CA 91364 (800) 325-8898 MORE VEGAS GAMES: Wannabe gamblers who like to play it safe, where the only \"high stakes\" are one's time and energy, will find New World's More Vegas Games an enjoyable mix of traditional casino games for Windows. Designed by The Dreamers Guild and featuring high quality graphics (in 256color, high resolution Super VGA) and excellent digitized vocal samples (for both male and female dealers), this collection of five casino favorites will assist the player in beating the odds ar Craps, breaking the bank at Video Poker and Blackjack, winning and placing at Horseracing, and hitting it big at Baccarat. Each of More Vegas Games' offerings is a multi-player version of the famous pastime, allowing digital gamblers to play alone against the computer or with up to three additional players. Assisted by pertinent on-line help, More Vegas Games offers a Window to ber at (and for pretty low stakes). IBM with Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #14. More Vegas Games ludurglass of fate Multicom Publishing, Inc. 1100 Olive Way, Suite 1250 Seattle, WA 98101 (206) 622-5530 AMERICANS IN SPACE: Armchair astronauts can now get their ticket to the stars with Multicom Publishing's Americans in Space, an in-depth presentation of the United States' space exploration program. Included on this CD-ROM disc is a complete video and photographic tour of America's space program beginning with the early experimental rockets and continuing through the current space shuttle missions. Projects and missions can be tracked in chronological order or accessed by launch date. The \"Mission Control\" style interface supports zooms of photographs and the printing of any text displayed in the main viewer. With more than 500 photographic Origin Systems, Inc. 12940 Research Blvd. Austin, TX 78750 (512) 335-5200 THE SILVER SEED: Snaking its way from Lord British to Ultima players everywhere is the latest add-in module for Ultima VII Part The Silver Seed Page 216 Computer Gaming World "


"Fun and More! une into Planet Kidz for all the radical new video games and the best in computer software. We'll show you smart game strategies and computer tips that will put you in electronic orbit. My Magic Diary T FORANG PALING vad man MOON MAKIN RORE tones en cua BOCOLE CALENDAR n CALCULATION t o CORVERSION Dede en store ATA MARIO   mond   MAIN DESSVERURYADIW CASIO I Y CR2032X1, CR203241 And there's more...each Saturday at 4:30 (et) you'll find all the latest in fun food and fashion on Planet Kidz. SMITH, MARY BIRTH:UTH MADE IN JAPAN my magic story DAT 0 :00 @ SPACE EXE Keep your innermost thoughts stored on your Electronic Magic Diary! You can lock it, too, so no one else can read it! Use your Magic Diary for keeping all your friends phone numbers and faces (you create). You'll want to get your daily Horoscope, and find out from the Electronic Match Maker how well you get along with that special someone... it's as cool to use as it looks! 10+5= 186+6 11 of the ultration, ultiplication, albo problems Freelingud Yariel Amalde presting for different credits 8X6= M WATERFORD INSTITUTE Mental Math Games is a dazzling way to integrate math into games! There's several to choose from... Maze Game, Moon Flight, Math Match, Raccoon Race, Mental Block, Fraction Fish, and Tip-a-Duck! These exciting games introduce addition, subtraction, multiplication, fractions, decimals, percents, and division skills via games and animation! You'll love it! MATH 3 63 GAMES AGES 6-12 SERIES T See these great products on Saturday November 20th at 4:30pm (et) on CNBC. PAID IROXRAMMING 305-427-9655 "


"in London's greatest appeal will be limited primarily to vampire and gothic horror buffs. Each game takes about an hour to play depending on the number of players involved (up to six, though two to four are recommended). The game claims to have been designed in an \"unstructured problem\" format, so that what works in one game may not work in the next. So, if the idea of tracking down Dracula over and over again with slight variations is appealing, Dracula in London may work for you. Those who enjoy longer, more traditional quests may want to stake out some different territory. IBM with Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #17. 2920 Two: Serpent Isle. The Silver Seed allows those still in Serpent Isle to discover new quests (which take place in a mysterious, war-torn past), explore another land and acquire additional magical items to employ within the game proper. These new adventures can be embarked upon at any point in the original game, enabling the player to increase his character's power and experience. New features at the Avatar's disposal include a magic key ring upon which keys are placed as they are acquired, and from which they are used as needed. Also provided are the Belt of Strength, Gauntlers of Dexterity, Erinon's Magic Axe, the Helm of Light and the Ring of Shal (a source of endless reagents). Other niceries include single button commands for feeding party members, employing the magic key ring, telling time and picking locks. The accompanying Play Guide offers the player maps and solutions to the new quests. The latest version of Serpent Isle is included. UItima VII, Part Two: Serpent Isle is required. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #15. HO Armour-Geddon Tontrold but to Dr Sw.droom trace d led with parcon The ulicks with chrom us the Doctor's loll wr. Rentold lab, on the lowed boqu.ckmu the blood llwallons de um Dracula in London Chapter Four Na. 11 DOWNING STREET Psygnosis, Ltd. 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-5457 ARMOUR-GEDDON: Once again the future is painted dark and steeped in devastating warfare. After the Balkan War of 1997 devastated the earth, two factions survived which developed into hostile surface dwellers and a subterranean society. As a member of the underground dwellers, it is the player's responsibility to defend his or her society from the marauding survivors on the surface and, ultimately, to destroy their supreme weapon, a deadly laser cannon, before the underground is vaporized. Basically a combination of flight sim and arcade acrion, Armour-Geddon offers the player solo play against computer opponents or head-to-head serial link permitting two EDEN warriors to launch a combined attack on the surface scum. Gathering and assembling components into an ultimate weapon are key to success in this post-holocaust game of action and strategy. IBM ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #16. Silicon Alley 8693 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 215 Beverly Hills, CA 90211 (310) 289-1237 NO. 11 DOWNING STREET: Non-linear storytelling is the key concept behind Silicon Alley's first episode in The Adventures of Ninja Nanny and Sherrloch Sheltie series of interactive fiction. Branching storylines and ancillary information enhance the learning value of this title. Available in versions for both Level 1 and Level 2 MPC systems, No. 11 Downing Street introduces children to two unusual characters, Ninja Nanny (a mischievous cow) and Sherrloch Sheltie (a budding computer criminologist). Designed as a series of chapters, this literary adventure features linked \"hotwords,\" animated sequences, enhanced video and music, and museum-quality antique clip art. Help Ninja Nanny and Sherrloch Sheltie defeat the plans of the evil Baron Von Moribund and learn interesting new facts at the same time. However, make sure to purchase the correct version. The MPC Level 2 product is virtually unplayable on Level 1 systems. IBM with Windows and CD-ROM ($69.95 for MPC Level 2, $34.95 for MPC Level 1). Circle Reader Service #18. A tall, broad shouldered nan charged down the stepp of Leonora Bainer Knightcridge Nanny School, bumping into studente in ruffit rightcaps Notebooks and rubber pacifier Cute acroco his path, carcay noticed by him. At the curv. he chewed he car in a quiet rage and through Edmone wreathe lookal down Sloane Street for at available ta. The only one lit ght was the old baap that was here what hdd arwal the sily thing thouldve been retired when Edward VI gave up the throne in a sudden buret of acceleration the cruffy, 9000 cal with google-eyed headlampo and No. 11 Downing Street PULER Take Over SWb eplan LAS OVOR toare CROSSWARE W ant to see you the Crosswire file Settings at 201 SDJ Enterprises, Inc. 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. St. Louis MO 63131 (314) 966-5602 (Evenings only) DRACULA IN LONDON: Based on Bram Stoker's original novel, this modest vampirish tale involves tracking down the infamous Count Dracula, reported to be hiding somewhere within the confines of London. Assuming the role of Professor Van Helsing (or one of five other vampire hunters), the player must put an end to the Count's bloodlust. Too many mistakes, however, and one will certainly cross over to the land of the living dead. Designed for Windows (acceptable, but by no means flashy) and definitely more a game of thought than action, possessing the feel of a board game in play, Dracula SilverSun, Inc. 100 Jersey Ave., D-1 New Brunswick, NJ 08901 (800) 8-silver CROSSWIRE: Think back to a High School History exam. Anyone who can smell the stench of mimeographed paper may also remember the «matching\" part of their History tests. This was where a list of names or dates appeared in one column, and a list of related information appeared in the other. The objecr was to match the item in the first column with the corresponding item in the other. Okay, now return to the present and think of a computer \"game show\" program that plays in the same manner of that History exam. Pretty exciting, eh? Well, in Cross Wire! it's actually kind of fun. One competes against an artificial opponent who has inherent strong and weak areas of knowledge. Qualifying rounds must be completed each game in order to compete in the final round. While the pressure of the clock makes for tense la Blaze Page 218 Computer Gaming World "


"SCENERY FOR MICROSOFTFLIGHT SIMULATOR V.5.0 FOR DOS SYSTEMS INVOINTI PHOTO-REALISTIC SCENERY OF SAN FRANCISCO BAY AND SURROUNDING AREA For more information or to order call 1-800-WEB-FEET  1993 Mallard Softwaro, Inc. Mallard. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"players, the bizarre game show host and offthe-wall prizes make solving the 4,000+ puzzles all worthwhile. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #19. FEEL LLLLLLLLL The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (800) 234-3088 SPACE SHUTTLE: This true multimedia product will soar right to the heart of space exploration lovers. Climb into the cockpit of any past Space Shuttle mission and blast off to deploy satellites and conduct experiments. Space Shuttle offers a tour of the Johnson Space Center, including NASA footage, photos, diagrams and video. A number of intriguing, though pixelated, videos show what it's like for the astronauts to live, work and sleep in space. The audio portion of the program is professionally written and narrated. A Personal Digital Assistant-style interface offers a unique and simple method of getting around. There's even a quiz-style game for testing your Space Shuttle knowledge. Overall, an exquisite-looking offering, though low on the gaming factor. IBM with C-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #23. Microcosm 11 Operation Intercept SoftStream International 10 Twin Ponds Dr. S. Dartmouth, MA 02748-1166 (800) 262-6610 BLAZE: Those who still enjoy running around a little maze gobbling up pills will probably find SoftStream International's Blaze, a full color Pacman clone for the Macintosh, appealing to their taste buds. The goal of this rather simple arcade game is to guide a drop of water through a maze while putting out small fires in its path. However, some local «burnouts\" are determined to turn the player's heroic little droplet into vaporized H20. As such, there is no recourse but to head for the nearest fire hydrant and cool down the overheated opposition. A very cute and modestly addictive (though somewhat overpriced) game, Blaze offers Mac owners some classic desktop entertainment. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #20. MICROCOSM II: Another Mac game from SoftStream, Microcosm II is designed to appeal to the more strategically-minded player with quick reflexes. In this 16-color title, gamers adventure into the microscopic world of viruses and DNA controlling a minuscule robot reminiscent of Wesley Crusher's Nanites from Star Trek: The Next Generation. The object of Microcosm II sees the player maneuvering his or her robor around a maze, shooting DNA-filled pills at spawning and mutating viruses in an effort to free the system from the viral threat. In the process the player must collect computer chips that will enhance their robot, adding special functions to increase their effectiveness at viral annihilation. A level editor has also been provided, allowing gamers to create their own mazes. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #21. OPERATION INTERCEPT: The third of SoftStream International's recently released titles, Operation Intercept brings Galaga (and its numerous clones) to the Mac desktop. As the story goes, the player's solar system has been invaded by an evil hoard from the Spoox Empire. The opposition is great, but the stellar pilot is certainly up to the task. Piloting one of scveral fighters, the player must destroy wave after wave of attacking enemy vessels, all intent upon his or her complete and utter destruction. Destroying an entire attack wave provides one with a special bonus item that can be spent at the upgrade-repair stations to improve or repair one's ship, adding such options as doubleand triple-shot lasers, spawn-shot, special shields and more. A Challenge mode has also been provided, allowing two players to fight the opponents head-tohead. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #22 Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc. 2105 S. Bascom Ave., Suite 165 Campbell, CA 95008 (800) 653-1360 V FOR VICTORY: GOLD JUNO SWORD: In this fourth, and perhaps final installment of the popular V for Victory series (see the Wargaming World editorial on page 164), it's back to the beach for Ike and his shrapnel surfers. Where Utah Beach featured the Yanks, now we have a broader Allied contingent storming Hitler's Fortress Europe. With an upgrade of the entire series to a 4.0 version, Goldo Juno. Sword is the finest tuned of the popular, detailed, hex-based wargaming series. Super VGA graphics are required; math Co-processor and sound cards are supported. IBM ($54.95). Circle Reader Service #24. Space Shuttle UUE DESH BAR 2012 BA V For Victory: Gold Juno Sword WAWANCER Wizardware, Ltd. 918 Delaware Ave. Bethlehem, PA 19105 (800) 548-7969 PC GRAPHICS ANIMATION FESTIVAL (VOLUME 1): Those who enjoy computer graphics may want to take a look, and listen, at Wizardware's CD-ROM collection of computer animations, many with Sound Blaster soundtracks. Operation from both DOS and Windows is supported; VGA graphics and hard drive are required. Unfortunately, only those with cutting edge systems (486 or better with double-speed CD-ROM drives and 4MB or more RAM) will be able to enjoy these animations at anything greater than grass growing speeds (on 386 systems with single-speed CD-ROM drives it can take several minutes for each animation to load). While quality is mixed, there is a good selection of animations to view on disc, including scenes from Lawnmower Man and Steam, plus a 3-D \"virtual reality\" game. IBM with CDROM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #25. CGW PC Graphics Animation Festival (Volume 1) Page 220 Computer Gaming World "


"HALER SNEAARTE The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Railroad Tycoon MicroProse, Inc., 1990 Amiga, IBM, Macintosh RAILROAD TYCOON MICROPROSE Sid Meier holds the record for having the most titles in the CGW Hall of Fame. One of the reasons for this is because he refuses to be stuck in a game design rut. Instead, he looks for new subjects and new approaches. Inspired by a combination of admiration for SimCity and a love for model railroading, Railroad Tycoon successfully blends elements of a \"software toy\" and a game of economic competition into something new and vital. Red Baron Dynamix, 1990 Amiga, IBM, Macintosh ken Bauritiu The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (Micro Prose, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) C64, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats Red Baron may well be Damon Slye's masterpiece. Damon is the designer/programmer who has been pushing the edge of 3-Space since his first vectored graphics game of space-age tank combat, the original Stellar 7 on the 8-bit computers. At Dynamix, Damon moved the company through the Skyfox and Airfox series of 3-D action games (published by Electronic Arts) and on toward their current success with A-10 Tank Killer, Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific Red Baron not only features terrific graphics that dress up the traditional polygon-filled look with occasional bit-maps and shading, but offers campaign play from both sides, the largest selection of aircraft in a WWI air combat simulation, and a multitude of quick-combar missions. It is a rich, satisfying simulation that not only held a prominent position in the top ten of CGW's Top 100 for more than a year, but still stands as the high watermark of realistic air combat for many gamers. November 1993 Page 221 "


"a Top Adventure Games Terracks Reader Poll #110 VOLAWNGAME Day of the Tentacle Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's The Seventh Guest Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis The Secret of Monkey Island Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CD Star Control II Les Manly in: Lost in LA. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes COMPANY LucasArts LucasArts Virgin LucasArts LucasArts Sierra ICOM Accolade Accolade Electonic Arts SCORE 10.15 9.91 9.91 9.80 9.72 9.56 9.55 9.41 9.28 9.20 Top 100 Games COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Mogazine Type SP RP UAWN @*OOOOOO Unultima... Top Role Playing Games The Sus Score 10.43 10.29 10.15 10.10 9.97 9.94 9.93 9.93 9.91 9.91 9.86 9.86 9.83 9.80 9.75 von AON AD AC ST SP WG SI AD AD ST SI WG.ST AD WG AD ST,AC WG SI AC RP GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.57 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.51 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 9.51 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 Wizardry Vi. Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.10 Uluma VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 9.72 8 9 10 AD,RP Top Simulation Games AD WG RP RP Game Company 1 Links 386 Pro Access Ultima Underworld Origin Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Wing Commander 11 Origin 5 Solitaire's Journey QQP 6 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 7 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific X-Wing LucasArts 9 The Seventh Guest Virgin Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 11 Dune II Virgin World Circuit MicroProse 13 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 14 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 15 The Perfect General QQP 16 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 17 Syndicate Electronic Arts 18 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 19 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 20 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 21 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 22 Quest for Glory III Sierra 23 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 24 V For Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 25 Ultima Underworld Il Origin Eye of the Beholder 11 SSI 27 Links Access 28 Warlords SSG 29 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 30 Star Control II Accolade Might & Magic III New World Computing 32 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 33 Hardball III Accolade 34 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World High Command Three-Sixty Pacific Ultima VII Origin 38 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 39 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 40 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 43 Lemmings Psygnosis 44 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 45 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 46 Second Front SSI 47 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra Clash of Steel SSI 50 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 9.66 9.63 9.59 9.58 9.57 9.56 9.55 9.52 9.51 9.51 9.47 9.43 9.42 SP GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts World Circuit MicroProse Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse Stunt Island Disney F-15 Strike Eagle II MicroProse mo SCORE 9.93 9.86 9.59 9.42 9.39 9.19 9.06 9.04 9.04 9.03 WG,ST SI AD, AC RP SI SP 9.41 10 WG RP WG RP WG ST AD SOLITAIRES JOURNEY Top Strategy Games 9.41 9.39 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.28 9.27 9.25 9.21 9.20 9.19 41 SP 42 GAME Solitaire's Journey Dune II Syndicate Chessmaster 3000 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral The Incredible Machine Mech Warrior The Island of Dr. Brain Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 NO CONDO COMPANY QQP Virgin Electronic Arts Software Toolworks Electonic Arts QQP Dynamix Activision Sierra Sierra SCORE 9.97 9.86 9.66 9.32 9.13 9.05 8.98 8.94 8.91 8.78 RP AC,ST AD SI 9.17 9 10 WG AC AD WG ST 9.14 9.14 9.14 9.13 "


"9.11 9.10 9.09 9.09 AD RP AD WG RP WG SI RP ADRP 9.08 JOU AANTop Wargames GAME V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Conquered Kingdoms The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach V For Victory: Market Garden Warlords High Command Pacific War 9 Carriers at War Construction Kit 10 Second Front COMPANY Three-Sixty Pacific QQP QQP Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific SSG Three-Sixty Pacific SSI SSG SSI SCORE 9.93 9.83 9.75 9.63 9.52 9.43 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.17 at SI SI AD,RP SI cornubar U AWNTop Action Games GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Space Hulk Oh, No! More Lemmings Flashback 8 Prince of Persia 2 9. Out of this World 10 Lemmings 2. The Tribes COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HaloByte Electronic Arts Psygnosis SCORE 10.10 9.58 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.92 8.74 8.64 8.57 8.40 51 The Castle of Dr. Brain 52 Eye of the Beholder 53 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 55 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 56 Empire Deluxe 57 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 58 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 61 Stunt Island Red Storm Rising Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 65 Silent Service II F-15 Strike Eagle III 67 Quest for Glory II Gunship 2000 69 Police Quest 3 70 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 72 Space Quest IV The Incredible Machine Western Front 75 Tony La Russa Baseball II Carriers At War 77 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 78 Alone in the Dark 79 Mech Warrior 80 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings Space Hulk 83 The Island of Dr. Brain Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 85 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 87 Indianapolis 500 88 Elvira 89 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 91 Rex Nebular Gateway to the Savage Frontier Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 95 Heart of China 96 Flashback Veil of Darkness 98 Battlechess Gateway 100 Starflight II Sierra SSI Sierra SSI Origin New World Electronic Arts Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Disney MicroProse Legend Sierra MicroProse MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Origin QQP Sierra Dynamix SSI SSI SSG Dynamix 1-Motion Activision MicroProse Psygnosis Electronic Arts Sierra Sierra Dynamix Access Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Dynamix SSI SSI Interplay Legend Electronic Arts AD RP WG.ST AD ST WG SP WG AD AD 9.07 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.97 8.96 8.95 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.91 8.89 8.89 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.74 8.74 8.72 8.72 8.71 ST.SI Broderbund Interplay Psygnosis AC,ST STAC ST AD Top Sports Games AD AD SI RP WG AD ST AD YOU AWN GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Links Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony Larussa Baseball II NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge PGA Tour Golf 4-D Boxing COMPANY Access Dynamix Access Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Electronic Arts SCORE 10.43 9.94 9.47 9.37 9.27 8.97 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.37 92 RP 93 344 10 RP ST AD RP Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. 9 = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy. WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What's Hot What You've Been Playing Lately PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software July, 1993 Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out.. keep em coming! PC Games (MS-DOS) Rank im Ng DON98 Title and Source X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit (LucasArts Entertainment) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Betrayal at Krondor (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Pirates Gold (MicroProse, Inc.) Syndicare (Electronic Arts) Tornado (Spectrum HoloByte, Inc.) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) Hardball III (Accolade, Inc.) Might & Magic: Dark Side of Xeen (New World Computing Wolfenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Prince of Persia II (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Links The Belfry (Access Software, Inc.) Railroad Tycoon Deluxe (Micro Prose, Inc.) Flashback (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Take A Break! Pinball (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Strike Commander (Origin Systems, Inc.) Links Mauna Kea (Access Software, Inc.) Realms (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) inition 001 Playing Lately? Results For CGW #110, September 1993 X-wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, Inc.) Civilization (Micro Prose, Inc.) Lands of Lore (Westwood) Falcon 3.0x/MiG-29 (Spectrum Holobyte) Syndicate (Electronic Arts) Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen (New World Computing) Dune 2 (Virgin) Clash of Steel (SSI) World Circuit (MicroProse, Inc.) 14. Rank cim # Amiga Games Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) A-Train (Maxis Software) Lemmings II (Psygnosis, Ltd.) AD&D Gateway to the Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Medieval Warriors (Merit Software) Even More Recipes From The Readers Our short-answer query in issue 109 asked gamers to act as Game Design Alchemists with the power to extract elements from their favorite games and recombine them to create The Ultimate Gaming Experience. Here are more great responses \"Recipe for Game a la Perfection (serves 500,000) I part Strategy of Civilization 2 parts Perspective of Underworld 1/2 part Flying of Aces Dash of Pirates Mix the above in a bowl made from the egg shells of Dejah Tharis & John Carter's first born. If necessary, add Rights from Burroughs estate.\" Anonymous, Denver, CO I would take the mapped terrain of Falcon 3.0, the promise of Aces of the Pacific, and the ability to assign personality traits, such as in RPGs, and allow the player to choose a squadron, planc type, and customize one's plane with namc, markings, etc., and require the player to keep the plane maintained. Name: Flyboys The WWII Combat Pilot Simulator. Dan Smith, Kingwood, TX \"A role-playing game with the overland perspective of Ultima 7, cut scenes like Wing Commander II, dungeon perspective of Ultima Underworld 2, and with a general Anglophile tone.\" Lord British Austin, TX (actually, postmarked Brooklyn, NY) \"Take the graphics from Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 (one of the few things done right); the implementation, customer support, and in-game print capability of Tront Page Sports Football the statistical basis from True Hockey and the season scheduling, replayability, and league set-up option from Hockey League Simulator 2. Name: NHL The Complete Game. (Sigh) Only in heaven, I guess. Marty Hrovat, Slydell, LA Firse, Id take the character generation from Wasteland, the firepower from Gunship 2000, and the evil Empire of X-ruing. Then. I'd mix in the death scenes from Terminator 2029. We'd need a couple of bugs from Ultima 7(to keep the phones ringing, and the music from Wing Commander when you're running to the ship. We could call it 486 Demander' and label it Super Hi Tech and sell a few copies to a few people.\" Anthony Feliciti, Iselin, NJ Rank Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Brderbund Software, Inc.) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corporation) SimCity Supreme (Maxis Software) PGA Tour Golf (Electronic Arts) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) cimdi Rank CD-ROM Products Title and Source The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) ROMaterial (Moon Valley) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis (LucasArts Entertainment) Corel Art Show (Corel Corporation) Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compton's New Media) Cinemania (Microsoft Corporation) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delorme) Jet Pack F117A/F1511 with Scenario (MicroProse, Inc.) No No I would combine the humor of Freddy Pharkas with the great gameplay of Xwing, throw in a great racing sim like World Circuit and the always enjoyable Links 386 Pro. I would call it: Phunny Pharmacists Phlies and Drives Phearlessly Phast to the Tec.\" Jon Wilson, Landis, NC This list is based on units sold by Software Etc., Babbages. Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025. Page 224 Computer Gaming World "


"patches The Patch File Tomputer game programs have grown so massive and the stated in the README file. 7/19793 number of possible configurations has become so huge that Realms of Arkania Disk 3 Fix: The first print run of this game was missVincompatibilities and glitches scem to be breeding ar an ing some data from disk 3. You only need this file if your BLADE directoexponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at ry has 48 files and 3,030,380 bytes in it. 6/23/93 the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem Realms of Arkania Update #1: Corrects the \"Skeletarius\" problem among to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a others. 7/01/93 while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is ons Rules of Engagement 2 Version 1.05: Latest version of the Rules agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regOmnitrend/Impressions' space war simulation. 8/01/93 ular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. ** Rules of Engagement 2 Campaign Disk Update: Updates Campaign These patches can usually be downloaded from most major netDisk 1 to version 1.01. This update adds 9 new Breach 2 IGS links to the works (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from campaign \"Operation Hammer.\" This update is only useful if you're playindividual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the pubing the game in conjuction with Breach 2. 8/30/93 lisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to ** Shanghai II Version 1.04 Update (Mac): Resolves incompatibilities keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. with After Dark and SuperClock, and fixes a 32-bit addressing problem. If (**) indicates new files) you are getting random crashes or freezes, this update is for you. 8/20/93 Air Bucks Version 1.21: Corrects lock-up and mouse compatibility prob The Seventh Guest Fix: Updates sound cards drivers, installation program lems. 8/06/93 and player program (requiring only 450K memory). 7/28/93 Ambush at Sorinor Version 1.02: Adds a speed control option for fast Tony LaRussa II Patch: Fixes bugs in SSI's baseball simulation. 5/21/93 machines, replaces several bad mission descriptions, and fixes the Al for Unlimited Adventures Version 1.1 Patch: In addition to new files for the VIPs and escorts. 6/17/93 Battles of Destiny V1.1 Patch: Enhancements and bug fixes include: software, this patch contains a supplement to the game's manual. 5/21/93 Patrol Mode, Map Editor, and two player modem enhancements. 5/06/93 ** V For Victory 3.1 Upgrade (IBM): Upgrades Utah Beach, Velikiye Buzz Aldrin Race Into Space Version 1.0b: Fixes a lock-up bug and allows Luki, and Marker Garden Versions 2.0 to Version 3.1. 8/19/93 the removal of some files from the hard drive. 7/06/93 V For Victory: Velikiye Luki Version 3.1 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh Caesar Patch: Allows players to use Impressions' game with disk compres version 2.0 to 3.1.7/09/93 sion utilities, and corrects the \"culture\" problem. 5/19/93 V For Victory: Market Garden Version 3.1 (Mac): Upgrades the Carriers at War Construction Kit Patch: Fixes the \"CAP\" bug and a few Macintosh version 3.0 to 3.1. 7/08/93 other minor problems. 7/13/93 ** V For Victory: Gold Juno Sword Version 4.01 (Mac): Upgrades the Dune II Patch File: Fixes problems with the delivery of items from Macintosh version 4.0 to 4.01. 8/28/93 CHOM. 4/18/93 Empire Deluxe Version 3.1: This new version makes a myriad of feature changes and bug fixes to Version 3.0.4/30793 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten F15 Strike Eagle III Version 3 Update: Corrects minor errors in earlier versions. 4/25/93 Harpoon Version 1.32A Upgrade: Makes changes to the Harpoon game Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for system. 5/18/93 us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted onImperial Pursuit Fix: In the original version, it can be difficult to lock-on line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by to a target with missiles under certain system configurations. This patch should correct this problem. 7/08/93 Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the IndyJones/Atlantis Mac Patch: Corrects the \"desert balloon\" crash bug in CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly the Mac version. 4/15/93 \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a Indy Jones/Atlantis 486 Patch: Allows one to play the game on a 486 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We without color problems or errors. 5/26/93 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" Jordan in Flight SVGA Patch: Allows owners of Diamond Stealth, in computer gaming. Diamond Stealth 24 and Orchid Fahrenheit 1280 Plus video cards to run the game in SVGA. 5/21/93 Jump Jet Update: Corrects the joystick problems some players are reporting and some other compatibility problems. 5/18/93 ** Kings Quest VI CD-ROM Patch: Fixes the problem with the disapTOP TEN RANKED GAMES pearing ball in the Endless Desert Temple Stone Wall trap. 8/24/93 Week of August 27 to September 2 ** Lands of Lore Version 1.11 Patch: Corrects various problems including the inability to retrieve Dawn's second key. 8/25/93 RANK SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE ** Lands of Lore Sound Card Patch: Allows multiple sound cards to be used at one time. Now includes Waveblaster/SB16 support. You need this 2384 Wolfenstein-30 6 1117 Aces of Pacific 1761 X-Wing 7 1044 Spear of Destiny patch only if you use more than one sound card. 8/16/93 * Omar Sharif on Bridge Upgrade (IBM/Windows): The latest version 1562 Kings Quest VI 9 894 Ultima Underworld of Interplay's bridge game for Windows. 9703793 $ 1326_Wing Commander 2 10 883 Links 386 Pro Pacific War V1.1 Upgrade: The official SSI upgrade to Gary Grigsby's Pacific War. 4/18/93 Planning a Road Trip This Summer? Patriot Version 1.1: The long-awaited patch to Three-Sixty's Gulf War MOBIL Travel Guide simulation. 7/27/93 LOOK Pirates Gold Patch: Corrects the \"evil person in the city\" crash, the \"misMenu Xref Jump Path copy Tools Help Exit FORE sion from the governor\" crash, and the V1 switch should now function as GAITERELE November 1993 Page 225 "


"conversions RECEIVED Putt-Putt's Fun Pack (Humongous Entertainment) Ultima Underworld I, Ultima Underworld II (Origin) AMIGA: A-Train Construction Kit (Maxis) Desert Strike (Electronic Arts) Syndicate (Electronic Arts) Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 (Domark) MACINTOSH: Bridge Master (Capstone) Carriers at War (SSG) King's Quest VI (Sierra) Lemmings (Psygnosis) Oh No! More Lemmings (Psygnosis) Where in the USA is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) MACINTOSH CD-ROM: Putt-Putt Joins the Parade (Humongous Entertainment) Putt-Putt's Fun Pack (Humongous Entertainment) MS-DOS CD-ROM: Eric the Unready (Legend) Eye of the Beholder III (SSI) Future Wars (Sony Electronic Publishing) Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43 (SSI) MS WINDOWS: Deja Vu1 & II (Viacom New Media) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) Sim Life (Maxis) Solitaire's Journey (QQP) Uninvited (Viacom New Media) me to Mysley Control Oh No! More Lemmings Carriers at War Empire Deluxe Advertisers List 197 32 360 Pacific 176-177 3DI Productions 125 Access 132-133 Accolade 53 Accoustic Research 198 Activision 135, 137, 139 AldeaLabs 173 Apogee Software 27 Avalon Hill 203 Aztech Systems 183 Bare Bones Software 153 Broderbund 55 CGW Christmas Gift Subscriptions 165 CH Products 181 Cape Cod Connection 124 Chips & Bits 93, 95, 97, 99, 101, 103, 105, 107 Computer Express 142-143 Compsult 173 Computability 185 Computer Systems Solutions 121 Creative Labs 175 Cyberdreams 123 Disk-Count Software 200 Domark Software 145,146,147 Dongleware Publishing 179 Electronic Arts 7, 80-81 Electronic Innovative Design 189 Falcon Northwest 21 Flagship Magazine 98 Formgen Future Vision Gamer's Gold GEnie Genovation Gosselin Computer Consultants High-Tec Expression Homebase Products HPS Simulations Impressions Inner Circle Technology Interplay Keyboard Commander Lance Haffner Games Legend Entertainment Liberty International Logitech LucasArts Entertainment Mallard Software Maxis Megasoft MicroProse Microsoft Miller Associates Mindcraft Software Mission Control New World Computing NovaLogic Origin Systems 112 35, 37, 39 193 136 76-77 136 207 3, 19, 171 127 131 201 54 129 149-209 50, 51.87 227 219 75 205 31, 89 42-43 141 109, 111 154-155 65 115 23, 79, 228 Paper Mayhem 108 Papyrus Psygnosis QQP 59, 61, 63 Quality Computers RAW Entertainment Readysoft Savon Software SDJ Entrprises Sideline Software Sierra/Dynamix 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72 Sierra On-Line 25, 28-29,211 Simulations Canada 141 Sir-Tech Software Software Toolworks 215 Spectrum Holobyte 117, 118-119 Strategic Simulations 45, 47, 49 Thalion Publishing 113 The ImagiNation Network 169 Thrustmaster Triax 161 Tsunami Media 157, 159 Twin Dolphin Games Viacom New Media 91 Viking Software 150-1 Villa Crespo Software 85 Virgin Interactive Entertainment 13. 16-17 WTDT PlanetKidz 217 Zeros & Ones 213 Page 226 Computer Gaming World "


"@ CV to ist OPLOKO TILT solimax 10 TLU GVPX UP te O TECH OG + S OM to AVTOX L te ohi 2 PLN 10:22 +8 ene  Its graphics are lush and colorful, with skewed perspectives and grotesque .characters that could have been lifted from vintage Warner Brothers cartoons. --COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SUU 28 te asic It's one of a kind and one in a million. --COMPUTER GAME REVIEW Maniac Mansion 1714HXus to A UCH 10:22 W to TU ! ASUS 103 TECH 101 SLUJ Enter the world of the Edisons. where Dr. Fred's mutated purple tentacle threatens to turn the human race into a domesticated byeed on pets. Only you and your daring band of friends can stop him. Fix the chron-0-John, travel through time and save humanity from being sucked under MLOOK 2+ Tia 10 23+ TUT + TL  Three different characters to control e Over 100 digitized sound effects\" Progressively challenging puzzles lucludes original Maniac Mansion as a game within a gaine Avallable for IBM, IBM CD ROM and compatibles. Visit your local retaller or call 1-800-STARWARS to order your copy today 20 CATE Hataw soundiliser Siedlaer iga 100% compatible for digiteed said lector and mice. 337 3X 6 TO LUCAS U tu A KUP 144 OLX 9+TION GO PESH TEEN MIX ICT OMIDT GY60 TL 323 5042 TL "


"WING COM A PEF PRIVATEER THE WAR AGAINST THE KILRATHI RAGES ON. TO SOME, IT MEANS DEATH, SLAVERY OR DISHONOR... TO OTHERS, IT'S THE CHANCE TO MAKE A QUICK BUCK.  Make your own alliances and choose the life of a pirate, merchant or mercenary. You accept your assignments from the Mission Computers, Mercenary's Guild, Merchant's Guild or the nefarious fixers that inhabit every bar.  Customize your ship according to your needs and budget-you can modify weapons, armor and other systems. And you'll need them, because your enemies want more than just a new kill stenciled on their prow--they want your cargo.too.  Upgrade your ship, from your grandfather's old Tarsus scout to the sleek Centurion fighter or Orion gunship-combat plays a vital role no matter how you decide to earn a living. Explore a complete universe with more than 50 bases and planets in almost 70 systems-agricultural planets, merchant colonies and mining bases. PRIVATEER WHERE DEALS ARE MADE WITH A HANDSHAKE AND BROKEN BY A VOLLEY FROM. A MESON CANNON. ORIGIN. Actual screens may vary A Stand-Alone Game Made in the USA Douglas 92 We create worlds An Electronic Arts Gompany P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX Privateer is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Wing Commander. Origin, and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Copyright  1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. For IBM PC and 100% compatible systems. Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #94 "

