MENU

May 1987

Number 37

FEATURES
Kilobyte Was Here ! 6
A Survey of WWII Computer Wargames

The Future of Computer Wargaming
A 1988-1992 Prospective Perspective

Killed Until Dead
A Review of Accolade's Mystery Game

Realms of Darkness
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Hints

Stalingrad Campaign
Simulations Canada's Wargame Reviewed

Fiery Ambush
WWII Tactical Wargames Compared

Full Count Baseball
Review and World Series Replay

Titans of The Computer Gaming World
Electronic Arts Company Report

Wrath of Denethenor
Sierra's New Adventure Game Reviewed

Portal
Activision's Computer Novel Reviewed

Tokyo Express
Warship Scenarios

Die Kriegsmarine
German Vessels in Warship

Confuser Gaming Whirl
(Note to Layout Dept.: Delete this article)

Designer Profile
Interview with "Hollywood" Dave Anderson

M. Evan Brooks
12
M. Evan Brooks
14
Roy Wagner
16
Scorpia
18
M. Evan Brooks
22
Jay Selover
26
Fisher and Faust
28
Charles Ardai
30
Scorpia
33
Roy Wagner
36
Bob Proctor
38
Joseph S. McMaster
44
CGW Staff
46
Johnny L. Wilson

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Letters
Industry News
Strategically Speaking
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

4
8
10
20
55
56

TAKING A PEEK

Access Software Incorporated
2561 S. 1560 W.
Woods Cross, Utah 84087
WORLD CLASS LEADER BOARD:
For those of you who have enough
Scotch blood -to want to play the famous St. Andrews course, but are too
thrifty to fly over to the U.K. to play
it, WCLB is the professional golf simulation for you. WCLB has three complete courses (Champions Cypress
Creek, Doral Country Club, and St.
Andrews), as well as an incredibly difficult fictional course (The Gauntlet).
Challenge these courses or modify
them to your specifications. C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Accolade
20813 Stevens Creek Boulevard
Cupertino, CA 95014
ACCOLADE'S COMICS: "Holy competitive edge, Batman! Now, there are
interactive comics!" Three disks contain 150 animated frames, 220 still

frames, and eight different arcade sequences, all you need to solve two different mysteries as Steve Keene Thrillseeker!. In addition to toggling
dialogue balloons in order to communicate with witnesses and suspects,
your cross between Dick Tracy and
Mr. Keene (Seeker of Lost Persons)
must overcome subterranean rivers
with snapping turtles and electric eels;
maneuver through conveyor belts suspiciously reminiscent of earlier arcade
ventures; and wind his way through a
scaffold of rails that would make Indiana Jones break out in a cold sweat.
Apple ($44.95), C-64/128 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #2.
POWER: Your mission, should you
decide to accept it, is to infiltrate the
captured asteroid which contains
earth's vital "Mitonium" conversion
plant and disable the converter before
the diabolical Demoids can demolish
earth itself. There are seven levels of
play in this Avantage product, as well
as enough missiles, light phasors and

force fields to keep arcade-type spacejockeys happy for hours. C-64/128
($14.95). Circle Reader Service #3.

Berserker Works Ltd.
P.O. Box 14268
Albuquerque, NM 87191
SIGN OF THE WOLF: Although Sign
of the Wolf may look like an interactive fiction game, it is not. It is, however, a short story written in the classic Saberhagen hard-hitting
plenty-of-action style. The difference with this
short story is that this one is one a
computer and contains 32 different
animated pictures.
Set in the familiar fictional background
of the "Berserkers," Saberhagen is attempting to blend old and new genres
together for his storytelling palette. C64/128 ($14.00). Circle Reader Service
#4.

Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
SARACEN: With graphics reminiscent
of Epyx' Sword of Fargoal, this game
takes a new perspective on the era of
the Crusades. Instead of defending the
crown with the likes of Robin Hood
and Ivanhoe, the protagonist (Ilan,
named after the designer) in this adventure is actually on the crusade with
King Richard. Unfortunately, Ilan has
been separated from friendly forces
and must fight his way out of a hostile
Saracen fortress without any help. Unlike most dungeon games, this poor
fellow is only armed with a longbow.
C-64/128 ($19.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Gerhardt Software
32600 Concord Drive Dept. 401
Madison Heights, MI 48071
POKER NIGHT: Ready for a little 5
card Draw, 5 card Stud, 7 card Stud,
High/Low split or Texas Hold'em, but
you just can't get the guys (or gals together)? This game accommodates up
to seven human and sixteen computer-

Continued on pg. 49

Conversions
Received

For the Amiga:
Uninvited (Mindscape)

For the Apple:
Destroyer (Epyx)
Flight Simulator Scenery Disk #7
(subLogic)
GBA Championship Basketball
(Activision)
GFL Championship Football
(Activision)
Tsushima (Avalon Hill)

For the Atari (8 bit):
Phantasie (SSI)

For the Atari ST:
Roadwar 2000 (SSI)

For the C-64/128:
Where in the USA
is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund)

For the IBM:
Flight Simulator Scenery Disk #7
(subLogic)
Football (subLogic)
Kampfgruppe (SSI)
Ogre (Origin/EA)
Roadwar 2000 (SSI)
Starglider (Firebird)
Sub Battle Simulator (Epyx)

Kilobyte
Was
Here!
An Annotated Bibliography of
World War II Simulations

by M. Evan Brooks
In deciding upon the aspects of a computer wargame, there are certain selections
that one must make. Usually, levels of difficulty range from introductory to intermediate to advanced, with gradations
shading between these parameters. In addition, the primary medium must be considered: land, sea and/or air. Finally, the
level of the simulation -- tactical (manto-man up to company-level), operational
(battalion-level to division-level) and
strategic (corps-level to theater army or
higher). This review will delineate the
games available by levels of difficulty.
Within each level, the subject game will be
characterized by its medium, simulation
level and overall recommendation. Overall
recommendations are noted in the following manner:
0 = avoid
■ = minimally adequate, at best
■■ = buy ONLY if interested in this period
■■ ■ = recommended
■■ ■ ■ = highly recommended
■ ■ ■ ■ ■ = a MUST HAVE
Availability by computer is as follows:
A = Apple
AT Atari

C = Commodore
I = IBM
These ratings are the author's own,
and reflect a personal opinion as to the
"success" or lack thereof in the product.
Additionally, it must be noted that price
does bear a relation to rating, i.e. the
"bang for the buck" theory holds true, and
an inexpensive game can achieve a higher
rating than a marginally better, albeit
more expensive, product. Following each
Level are the Moribund Products -- no
longer available for sale, but often found in
close-outs and sales.

enjoyable interlude from true wargaming.
Superseded by more recent products, the
repackaging at the lower price still makes
this an interesting offering.
Wargame Construction Set ( ■ ■ 1) [SSI,
AT/C, $29.95, Land] WCS is, basically,
the user-modifiable source code from
Roger Damon's previous designs
(Operation Whirlwind/Field of
Fire/Panzer Grenadier). The game's potential to design-your-own scenarios in
history is limited by the failings of the
system's mechanics. Still, a novice may
well find its flexibility interesting.

Introductory Level

Introductory Level
(Moribund)

Battalion Commander (..) [SSI,
A/AT/C, $39.95, Land) A tactical contemporary portrayal of armored warfare.
With built-in as well as design-your-own
scenarios, the game offers a myriad of options. Easy to play, its utility is damaged
by its ahistorical lessons learned.
Field of Fire (■ ■ ■) [SSI, A/AT/C,
$39.95, Land] A tactical simulation of
squad-level operations on the Western
Front during World War II. Scenarios are
varied and enjoyable; however, this reviewer is not overly enthused about the
historical accuracy and lessons learned
from this simulation. Nevertheless, it is a
good introduction to computer wargaming.
Fifty Mission Crush ■■ ) [SSI,
A/AT/C/I, $39.95, Air] A tactical recreation of the bomber offensive against
Germany during World War II. Realistic
but dull, with little room for player abilities. [Ed.: For a differing view see "50
Mission Crush: A 50 Mission Recall" in our
March 1987 issue #35]
Iwo Jima 1945/Falklands 1982 (N • .)
[Firebird, C, $19.95, Land] Simulations of
two amphibious invasions, these products
make up in price value what they lack in
historical accuracy. Good as an introduction for the neophyte.
Panzer Grenadier (.• I) [SSI,
A/AT/C, $39.95, Land) A tactical simulation of armored warfare on the Eastern
Front during World War II, its lessons
learned are not overly accurate. Reconnaissance by fire is overemphasized, and
opportunity fire is hit-and-miss. Overall, a
solid game, but lacking panache.
Tigers in the Snow (• [SSI,
A/AT/C/I, $39.95, Land] An operational
simulation of the Battle of the Bulge, its
primitive graphics and play mechanics
have been superseded by more recent efforts and limit its appeal.
Top Gunner (s ■ ■ ) [MicroProse,
AT/C, $24.95, Air] Three arcade games in
a package; Air Rescue, Hellcat Ace (World
War II Pacific tactical air), and Mig Alley
Ace (Korean War tactical air) offer an

After Pearl (• ■ ■ 1) [SuperWare, AT,
$19.95, Sea/Air] A strategic simulation of
the War in the Pacific (1941-1945), this
game bears little resemblance to history.
However, it is fun and quick to play (c. 45
minutes for the campaign). Reminiscent of
AH's board game Victory in the Pacific
[Ed. Note: Sometimes referred to as "Dice
in the Pacific."]. Recommended for the
novice.
Armor Assault (0) [Epyx, AT, Land]
Thankfully, no longer available, this game
of tactical armored warfare is guaranteed
to deter the most dedicated player.
Combat Leader (II .) [SSI, AT/C,
$14.95, Land] A tactical simulation of armored warfare (squad/platoon) over the
last 40 years. With built-in (as well as design-your-own) scenarios, the game offers
a myriad of options. Graphics are quite
primitive, but the scenarios are quick.
Battalion Commander, by the same designer, is the more recent design (with
better graphics). Joining SSI's "Classic"
line, it may be discontinued shortly.
Eastern Front ( mmmmm ) [APX, AT,
Land] An operational/strategic simulation
of the German invasion of Russia during
World War II. The cartridge version offers
both beginner and advanced scenarios.
Obsolete by contemporary programming
standards, it is still fun to play and a
bargain at the price (assuming that one
can still find it!!).
Flying Tigers (0) [Discovery, AT, Air]
A tactical air-to-air simulation of World
War II (Pacific Theater). The graphics, realism and play value are sufficient to deter
anyone from further play.
Jagdstaffel (0) [Discovery, AT, Air] A
tactical game similar to Flying Tigers, only
occurring in the European Theater of Operations. Just as bad as Flying Tigers.
Operation Whirlwind (• ■ I)
[Broderbund, AT, Land] The ancestor of
Field of Fire/Panzer Grenadier/Wargame
Construction Set, this tactical simulation
offers an urban assault during World War

II. In many ways, it is more interesting
than its descendants, but it is difficult to
find.

Intermediate Level
Clash of Wills (s .) [DKG, AT/C,
$34.95, Land/Air] A strategic simulation of
war in Europe during World War II (both
Eastern and Western Fronts). Primitive
graphics and poor user interface coupled
with extremely poor documentation will
deter most players. Yet, the sheer scope of
the simulation offers some playability and
enjoyment.
Decision in the Desert (ow ■ ■ 1)
[MicroProse, A/AT/C, $34.95, Land/Air]
An operational study of the Desert Campaign in World War II, it offers a fascinating study, which will teach the intermediate player true aspects of armor
desert warfare. While more accurate than
Crusade in Europe, its scope is much less
broad, thereby delivering less "bang for
the buck". Still highly recommended.
Dam Busters (in [Accolade, A/C/I,
$34.95, Air] An arcade recreation of the
bombing of the Ruhr dams a la "633
Squadron", this product's graphics and
"feel" make it too much of a game and not
enough of a simulation.

Crusade in Europe (1. ■ ■ ■ 1)
[MicroProse, A/AT/C/I, $34.95,
Land/Air] An operational/strategic simulation of the Western Front during World
War II, the scenarios offer more value for
the money than most other games. The
campaign suffers from a certain lack due to
the artificial intelligence, but for the intermediate player, its mechanics and play

give this game a high recommendation.
Knights of the Desert (..)
[SSI,
A/AT/C/I, $39.95, Land] An operational
simulation of Rommel's Desert Campaigns
in North Africa during World War II, it
was the first SSI product to offer multiple
stacking in the same hex. The concept was
a failure; slow and ponderous, its recreation of the African Campaign does not
deliver its potential.
Normandy, Battle of (s ■ ■ I) [SSI,
A/AT/C/I, $39.95, Land/Air] An operational simulation of the Normandy invasion, this game is moderately easy to learn
(although the documentation covering the
actual landings leaves much to be desired)
A real player, it suffers somewhat from
lack of joystick input. But overall, a solid
intermediate level game.

perseded by improvements in computer
simulations. Graphics are extremely primitive.
Panzer Jagd (w) [AH, AT/C, Land] A
tactical simulation of armored warfare
during World War II, it is obviously dated
by newer efforts. [LAND]
Seventh Fleet (w [SimCan, A/C,
$60, Sea/Air] An operational simulation
of modern naval warfare in the Pacific,
this simulation's tense play and "feel" are
oppressed by its slow speed of execution.
Still, an interesting product.
Stalingrad Campaign (w) [SimCan,
A/C, $60, Land] A strategic simulation of
the 1942-1943 Russian Campaign, this
game fails due to lack of user implementation and the sheer inability of the game to
deliver any semblance of player participation.
T.A.C. (0) [All, AT, Land] A tactical
simulation of armored warfare during
World War II. Similar to Panzer Jagd, it
suffers from development obsolescence.

Advanced Level
Battlefront (11 11) [SSG, A/C, $39.95,
Land] A very flexible game covering corps
level combat in World War II. Designyour-own scenarios open the bulk of the
20th Century to gaming; however, the artificial intelligence of the battalion commanders renders this an ambitious failure!

Silent Service ( mmmmm ) [MicroP rose,
A/AT/C/I, $39.95, Sea] A tactical simulation of submarine warfare in the South
Pacific during World War II. Superb
graphics coupled with detailed rules, historical accuracy and layers of complexity
make this simulation a necessity in every
gamer's library. Why wait? If you don't
have it, you should!
Surrender at Stalingrad (.1) [DKG,
AT, $34.95, Land) The World War H
Southern Offensive in the East carried on
in DKG's inimitable format, i.e. primitive
graphics, inadequate user interface and
overall slowness of execution.

Intermediate Level
(Moribund)
Midway (s I) [AH, AT, Sea/Air] An
operational/strategic simulation of the
Midway Campaign, this game has been su-

Carriers at War (w ■ •N) [SSG, A/C,
$49.95, Sea/Air] Similar in coverage to
Carrier Force, it excels in its flexibility,
options and limited intelligence. This simulation put SSG on the map, and deservedly so. Graphics are not as developed
as Carrier Force, but Carriers at War can
do much more in a smoother fashion.

Continued on pg. 48

LETTERS FROM PARADISE

FIFTY MISSION PLUS!
The article on Fifty Mission Crush was great!!!
Mr. Newby added such realism to the story line
that I laughed and cried at the same time. It seems
like such a good idea to continue this style of
review, as it adds such realism to the program
reviews. I was so impressed that I ordered the
program the very next day from Tevex (an
excellent source). Please keep this policy.
Gregory S. Perkins
Metairie, LA
Ed. We had the same reaction to Leroy Newby's
marvelous article and intend to publish other articles
in that vein. Further, it may not be as obvious, but
Evan Brooks routinely invites combat veterans (where
possible) to play the simulations he is reviewing.
Two combat vets from Vietnam flew the Gunship
simulator prior to the review and he interviewed
another staff officer prior to the critical Stalingrad
Campaign review in this issue.
APACHE UPRISING!
Gunship review was very good - except - when
the reviewer states that the Apache is no match for
a fixed wing jet. I have read of exercises where
AH-64's with A AM's did very well against jets.

This is only logical, considering the difficulty of
engaging an extremely maneuverable enemy in a
high speed aircraft. C'mon guys, get your act
together. Don't comment on things you are not
competent on.
K. Maniscalco
Shreveport, LA
Ed.: As mentioned above, our reviewer consulted
not one, but two, veteran combat helicopter pilots in
the course of his research for this review. Which are
you going to trust, the combat exercise or the combat
experience? The helicopter pilots were aware of this
exercise, but insist that a one-on-one confrontation
would be suspect. Even with the same type of
armament, the fixed-wing pilot would have the
advantage of a bigger payload. Of course, the AH64 could outmaneuver the jet by taking advantage of
the terrain features, but what jet pilot in his right
mind would chase a helicopter into low altitudes
where this could happen? Standard army doctrine
remains that one should never employ a gunship
where he does not have local air superiority (i.e.
fixed-wing). By the way, Evan's consultant on the
future PHM Pegasus review will be the author of the
"Hydrofoil" article for the World Book
Encyclopedia.
DOWN AND OUT IN HINT COLUMN
THRILLS!
Why is page number 35 (issue 35) upside down?
Ken Helms
Fort Wayne, IN

GIVE ME THAT ON-LINE RELIGION!
After subscribing for a couple of years now, I
still look forward to every issue! But one small
thing has been puzzling me. Why do you always list
"Psalm 9:1-2" above your Compuserve # and
telephone #?
Ray Forbes
Oak Park, IL
Ed.: Since this is the fourth time we've been
asked this in a month, you're not in a minority.
Psalm 9:1-2 is a scriptural reference to living one's
entire life in an attitude of thankfulness and
glorifying God in whatever one does! The reference
in the masthead serves to remind us and our readers
who agree with Judaeo-Christian tradition of what
our goal in life should be. Oh, by the way!, would
you believe we were told in a vision that we'd die if
we didn't get eight and one-half million subscribers
before 1988?
ACCESSING ARCHAIC ARCHIVES!
Is it possible to get a copy of the review of
Horse Racing Classic (CGW 2.4)? Are back issues
of CGW 2.4 still available?
Tony Maggio
Eatontown, NJ
For the back issues of CGW that are sold out you should consider Xeroxing articles that people
want on a flat price per page to the individual.
Gerry Sackett
Round Rock, TX
Ed.: It is possible to get a reprint of an article
from any sold out back issue of CGW by sending
$1.00 (per article) for postage and handling to the
post office box address. 2.4 is not available as a
back issue, but issues from volume three of CGW
are available on a limited basis for $5.00 each.
MACHINE SPECIFIC MADNESS!
In this last issue (no. 35) you seemed to focus on
too many one machine games. Micro-reviews was
all MAC. Two of the main reviews were only IBM.
Now I have nothing against either machine, I'd like
to own either, but can't you be a bit more generic?
Scott Smith
Sherman Oaks, CA

Ed.: The current editorial policy is to focus on as
much quality software as possible without attempting
to create an artificial and unattainable balance of
machine specific coverage. We were criticized for
doing such a long article on an Amiga specific title
(Defender of the Crown, #34), but it is now
available for five different machines. Balance of
Power was covered in CGW as a Mac only game
(#29), but it now has two other versions with more
on the way. Starflight is bound to be ported over to
other machines (which ones and when is a closely
held secret) and I would expect any successful
68000 software to be ported over to the other
machines. If you are patient enough, the entire
market will become generic, so don't throw away
those old issues of CGW or you may be throwing
away reviews that will eventually apply to your
machine.

Industry
News

UPS AND DOWNS OF SOFTWARE
PROFITS
Whereas Activision, Inc. reported net
sales of $9.6 million and a net loss of $3.9
million ($0.11 per share) for its third fiscal
quarter (which included a $2.4 million
non-recurring legal settlement), Accolade
posted an exceptional $5 million in gross
sales for the initial calendar year (the
company has not released the net profit or
loss figures). Accolade seems pleased with
its first sales year, while Activision seems
to be treading water, even though their
results reflect a 66% increase in sales (due
to the acquisitions of Infocom and
Gamestar). The vagaries of management
are emphasized, however, when one considers that both companies have experienced a change in CEO since those fiscal
periods concluded. Bruce L. Davis assumed
the reins at Activision in January (upon
James Levy's resignation) and Alan Miller
(co-founder of Accolade) has assumed the
CEO position at Accolade (upon Thomas
Frisina's resignation and formation of
Three Sixty, his new corporation).
RUMORS CONCERNING CURRENT
PROJECTS
Electronic Arts is rumored to have a
space station construction simulation under development. Inside sources suggest
that the game will be named E.O.S. (Earth
Orbit Station) and will be unlike other
space station construction simulators in

that this will be a multi-player (up to 4)
game with both economic and "adventure"
overtones. Players must decide whether to
bank on research, commerce, mining or the
meager possibilities of alien contact. The
product is supposed to be simultaneously
released on Macintosh, Apple and C-64.
Following the hoped for May release of
Earl Weaver Baseball, Electronic Arts will
release a "Ferrari" Formula One race car
game as their second title in the Sports
Legends series. "Ferrari" will be a driver's
view action/strategy game using famous
race courses. Look for it late this summer.
The third title in the Sports Legend series
should be "John Madden Football" but EA
is giving no projected ship date.
SSI plans to release an update of
President Elect prior to the next presidential election. The new edition will have
1988 demographics, new candidate files,
and more emphasis on campaigning. This
should be available on the IBM, as well as
Apple and C-64, and will finally reflect
good prospects for Democrats. Remember
also that SSI is rumored to have a
Napoleonics era wargame out by Origins.
Avalon Hill's Microcomputer Games
Division is sitting on top of several different projects. Under Fire is set to be released for the IBM (with mono, CGA or
Hercules options) and C-64; Guderian and
Dark Horn (two releases planned for June
'86) should finally see the light of day before summer; a General Manager's disk for
Super Sunday is supposed to be available
in April or May '87 and will handle stats,
teams, and standings; an NBA-licensed
basketball game (designed by Quest, Inc.
of Pure-Stat Baseball fame) should undergo the playtesting process before summer (Apple version); and two C-64 programs should appear during the summer Wooden Ships and Iron Men (with map
maker, ship builder, and assembled in
machine language for faster operation) and
Computer Diplomacy. When asked if AH
planned to release any products on any
68000 series machines, they stated that
they had signed no contracts, but do have
submissions.
Mindscape's "Cinemaware" Affiliate,
Master Designer Software, revealed a licensing agreement with Columbia Pictures
by informing CGW that their new "The
Three Stooges" project is under development.
GDW (now being distributed by EA)
has picked up Road To Moscow for
repackaging, revising documentation, and
reworking the order of battle to make it
more historical (to be available on C-64,
soon). Also under development is Road To
Berlin, a western front version of Road To
Moscow (a last quarter release for the C64).

NEW STAR ON THE HORIZON
The Astronomical Society of the Pacific has published an annotated listing of
astronomical software. 89 different programs which are commercially available for
seven different machines (Apple, Atari, C64, H-P, IBM, Mac, & TRS-80). Each
listing includes a description of the software, machine compatibility, retail price,
and full manufacturer's address. The eight
page listing sells for $2.00 ($3.00 outside
U.S.) and is only available from:
Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
Computer List Department, 1290 24th
Ave. San Francisco, CA 94122
"VIC"TIMS UNITE AGAINST OBSOLESCENCE!
Even though the Plus 4, Vic-20, Pet,
CBM, and B-128 computers have been
abandoned by Commodore, there is a way
to get new software programs for your
"orphan" machines. The Folklife Terminal
Club is an international Commodore users
group (15 different countries represented)
which offers more than 6,000 public domain programs. The programs which run
from Education and Business to Games
and Graphics are "free," but there is a
$15.00 copying and mailing fee for each
diskette. Contact:
FOLKLIFE TERMINAL CLUB
Box 555-FY, Co-op City Station
Bronx, NY 10475
OPENING A NEW "DISK"USSION
In the fast expanding educational field,
Mindscape is offering pre-fabricated puzzle
disks for their Crossword Magic program
(Apple II). These puzzles are ideal for
math, science, social studies, language, and
spelling worksheets and should be a real
boon to teachers (Entire series, $59.95 or
$14.95@).
subLogic has recently released Scenery
Disk #7 for the C-64/128 computers. This
covers Washington D.C. to Key West, FL
and can be used with either Flight Simulator II or Jet ($19.95).
EA ANNOUNCES CONTEST WINNERS!
In case you missed it, Bing Gordon
announced the winners of the Adventure
Construction Set Contest in January of
1987. Robert Purrenhage of Malvern, PA
took the Fantasy Division with "Festival;"
Albert Jerng of Montville, NJ topped the
Science Fiction Division with "The Cosmos;" and Will Bryant of Dallas, TX
("Panama") shared top honors in the
Spy/Mystery Division with Peter
Schroeder of Buffalo Grove, IL
("Codename: Viper"). A $1,000 prize was
offered in each division.

I

Computer Wargaming 1988-1992
A Prospective Perspective
by M. Evan Brooks (c) 1987
The initial concept for this article was to prognosticate the future of computer wargaming over
the next decade based on interviews with the various entertainment software companies and the author's own perceptions. However, every person surveyed for this article has unequivocally refused to
make any prediction ten years in advance, given
the rapid changes in the market. A two-to-four
year period was the most that anyone felt comfortable discussing. The last ten years would affirm
this type of thinking.
In 1977, Simulations Publications, Inc. and
Avalon Hill dominated
the board wargame
market. The
computer was
only beginning
to appear
and the

concept that any meaningful wargames would appear thereon or be economically affordable appeared to be the "stuff of dreams." Given the stateof-the-art and the volatile nature of the market
(e.g. the "Boom and Bust" of home video games), a
ten-year prediction would be pretentious at best.
I would like to thank the following individuals
for their input to this article: Ed Bever of Microprose, Chuck Kroegel of Strategic Simulations Inc.
(SSI), Steve Newburg of Simulations Canada
(SimCan), Bill Peschel of Avalon Hill Game Co.
(AH). T.J. Peto of Overt Strate g ic Simulation (OSS)
and Jay Selover of Fire & Movement magazine.
The 8/16-Bit Battle
Currently, the 8-bit machine is making way
for the more powerful 16-bit machines.
As a minor debate is occurring between
board and computer war

gamers over the future of the hobby, a similar
debate is occurring between 8 and 16-bit users. The
problem is not that the 16-bit machines are drawing
new users into the market place; it is rather that
they are displacing the 8-bit machines, leaving the
remaining 8-bit users wondering if their machines
are functionally obsolete.
It would appear likely that the 8-bit machine is
safe, particularly for wargamers. There has been
little reason to expand into the more powerful machines. In 1981, Eastern Front for the Atari was the
first breakthrough computer wargame to show the
capabilities of the 8-bit. The 16-bit breakthrough
game has not yet occurred and none of the leading
companies are attempting to design one. Remember,
though, Eastern Front was designed by Chris
Crawford on his own time. In terms of wargaming,
he was unheard of within the hobby. Similarly, SSI,
SSG and Microprose burst on the hobby without
prior fanfare. Thus, it may be that the breakthrough computer wargame is currently being designed. Then again, computer designs have become
geometrically more complex, involving man-years
of programming effort. No longer can the sole designer program a winning effort in a few weeks.
Most companies see the established base of 8-bit
users as too large to ignore. Microprose sees 8-bit
machine designs continuing into the mid-1990s
because of this base. SSI sees the 8-bit machines as
"archaic", but recognizes that the large established
base guarantees them a place in the developer's
mind.
Every company supporting the 8-bit line has
emphasized that future designs will support the
Apple and Commodore machines. However, the
Atari line will continue to "twist slowly in the
wind." Every designer has mentioned the piracy
problem pandemic with Atari. Whether or not this
is true, it is a perception held by the designers and
the fact that the user base does not translate into
the same percentage of sales as Apple or Commodore reinforces this opinion. Many designers
mentioned the Happy Drive as a primary source of
piracy. In effect, it is more difficult to protect a
program on the Atari than on other computers. SSI
noted that the Commodore drive is slower, but
smarter with its own ROM. This allows more flexibility in terms of protection and the computer offers improved graphics . Yet, designers have noted
that the Atari was an easier machine to program.

The problem is that the Atari was easier for everyone. Its user-friendliness became a self-defeating
facet.
The 16-bit machine: ST or Amiga?
There is no definitive answer and even the designers are split. Microprose feels that the Amiga is
easier to program, while SSI has leaned towards the
ST (because it is more affordable and "seems to
have more momentum"). SimCan notes a tremendous slowdown in 16-bit sales, but notes that the
ST is easier to program.
SSI sees improved quality as a result of the 16bit machine. Its strengths are: (1) the mouse/menu
interface, (2) better sound and graphics and (3)
more memory for a "smarter" artificial intelligence.
Yet, the emphasis on the 16-bit machine is now on
upgrades of existing products and not innovations.
The IBM PC
No matter what one's background, the ubiquitous IBM and its clones will have an impact. With
most business users having familiarity with IBMstyle computers, the obvious familiarity and handson training received in the business location will
have an obvious ripple effect into the home. Microprose sees the IBM has an area of expansion. SSI
agrees, but notes the poor graphics available on the
IBM as a significant limitation. OSS intends to continue designing solely for the IBM, and will release
3 new naval titles in 1987. With an emphasis on
naval simulations and no graphics, OSS believes that
the realism of their products will sway buyers
(whether or not this is true is debatable; recent reviews in both Computer Gaming World and Fire &
Movement have criticized OSS specifically for its
lack of realism).
Similarly, SimCan has totally abandoned the
board wargame in order to concentrate on computer
simulations, with a major emphasis on IBM. President Steve Newburg believes that a text-oriented,
limited intelligence and realistic perspective will
provide continued value for consumers. As with
OSS, SimCan emphasizes naval simulations, noting
that such games sell 50% faster initially and the
purchasers are more technically-oriented.
Future Improvements
OSS and SSI believe that the multi-player
Continued on pg. 53

by Roy Wagner
Accolade games are fun and of high quality.
They know the C64/128 and know how to use its
best features to the fullest. They give you value for
your purchasing dollar. Paraphrasing a famous
quote, I've never played an Accolade game that I
haven't liked. (Stepping down from the soapbox...)
Killed Until Dead is a murder mystery with a
few special twists. Instead of solving a murder, you
must prevent one from occurring. To be successful
you must identify the potential victim, killer, the
weapon, location, and motive within twelve "game
time" hours.
To assist you in your task are a set of essential
tools for the modern day crime fighter. These include a set of files on each of five suspects, sophisticated surveillance equipment, a telephone with
video interface, a computerized notebook that
records your investigations and collects clues into a
reference table, and a game time digital clock.
The game begins with an optional tutorial that
will run for about fifteen minutes and illustrates
every aspect of the game. It is very well done and
provides a great introduction for anyone new to the
game. A well written manual will further clarify
any details that might need explaining. The game is
very easy to play and uses a joystick for nearly all
actions. You select your text options from a displayed list and will not be required to type anything.
You play the role of Hercule Holmes, the
world's greatest detective and house detective at the
Gargoyle Hotel. The Murder Club has just checked
in for their annual reunion. The five members of
this club are "famous" crime writers with a passion
for practicing the art of murder. Perhaps you have
heard of these writers before; Mike Stammer,
Agatha Maypole, Lord Peter Flimsey, Claudia Von
Bulow, and Sydney Meanstreet. But then again,
maybe you haven't heard of them yet.
These five will attempt to commit twenty-one
different murders during their stay unless you pre-

vent them. If you have not prevented the murder
by midnight, you will become one of their victims.
There are four levels of difficulty; Elementary, my
Dear Watson (7 murders), Murder, Medium Rare
(5), Cases for the Cunning (5), and Super Sleuth
(4).
ONE STEP AT A TIME
Arriving at the correct solution requires full use
of your available tools. The first step is to break
into the rooms of each suspect. To do this, you
must answer a multiple choice mystery trivia question. If you get it right, you get into the room.
Answer it wrong and a guard will prevent your
entry for ten minutes. The next time you attempt to
enter, the trivia question will be the same. You also
cannot enter a room if it is occupied. Before attempting to break-in, you can monitor it with your
hidden camera.
The break-in will provide you with information
pertaining to the room's occupant. This information
will be needed later when you interrogate the
characters by phone, so you must break-in to all
five rooms. Some of the information will pertain to
scheduled meetings between two of the characters.
These meetings will provide important information
related to the murder motive. You can monitor
these meetings with your hidden cameras directly
or you can set up a video tape to record up to three
separate meetings.

When you phone a character, you must select a
question from a list of four. Each question relates
to a clue found during your break-in. Ask the
wrong question and that person's phone will be
busy for ten minutes. If you ask the right question,
you will then be able to ask some very direct questions pertaining to the possible victim, killer,
weapon, and location. The suspect will become increasingly nervous (and animated) if your questions
are headed in the right direction. After answering
four questions, the character will refuse to answer
more.
The information gathered from your break-ins,
monitored meetings, and phone conversations are
all recorded automatically in your notes. You can
look at these notes anytime. The notes also contain
a table of clues provided from your interrogations.
The table headings are: source (person providing
information), murderer, victim, weapon, and location. The clues can be sorted by any of the five
categories. Clues may also be deleted.
The game starts at noon and the murderer must
be confronted with all the evidence against him/her
before midnight. You must also know the motive
for the crime. If you are correct, you can get a
complete epilogue of the case. If you are wrong,
you are Killed Until Dead. You may then try to
solve the same or another case.
The game is great family or group entertainment. The graphics and animation are tremendous;
the presentation is very much like a movie; and the
humor in the game is outstandingly funny. All puns
are very much intended. The difficulty level is low
and can be played easily by a twelve year old. But
don't let the low difficulty level discourage you
from this game. It is fun to play. (HINT: To stop
the clock while you read the text, press the SPACE
bar.)

by Scorpia
Step in, step in! You're looking well
after those Hijinx at the beach house. All
that running around has probably put you
in good shape for your next little excursion. However, do bring a lantern with
you; it's a bit dark where you're going.
"Realms of Darkness" is a minor roleplaying game from SSI. It does not have
the sweeping scope of, say, a Phantasie;
rather, it is a series of smaller, interconnected adventures, each of which must be
completed before you can go on to the
next. The game has some interesting features, but they are not really used to best
advantage.
It begins with character creation. You
can have up to eight in your party, and
the full complement is advised. A pre-created party comes on the disk, but you're
better off making your own characters. It
will, as usual, take time and patience to
obtain a good group, but the effort is
worth it.
There are a number of classes and
races to choose from: Fighter, Knight
(acquires priest spells at high level),
Champion (acquires sorcerer spells at high
level), Friar (special fighting techniques),
Barbarian (special fighting ability plus
some thief skills), Thief, Priest, and Sorcerer. Races available are Human, Elf,
Dwarf, and Gnome. Characters can be
male or female. None of these has any effect on the basic attributes of a character.
When creating a character, dice are
rolled and five values are generated randomly. You then assign these values to the
character's attributes. There is a sixth,
Luck, but that is determined by the program, and cannot be changed. Care must
be taken when assigning the dice rolls, as
each class has certain minimums that must
be met. If the entire set of rolls is bad, you
can try again. Also, if you are not really
satisfied with the rolls, you can do the
whole thing over. Attributes can range in
value from 1 to 20.
Once the party is created, they go

through the Hall of Heroes, and emerge on
the first adventure disk in the town of
Grail. Fortunately, no monsters roam the
town, so you can walk about safely and
make the necessary purchases of armor,
weapons, and equipment without fear of
being attacked.
Grail is a small place, consisting of
only an armorer, food store, inn (for healing up), equipment store, guard house, and
the Hall of Heroes. It isn't necessary to
map the place. After a couple of tours
around the area, you know where everything is.
It's important that those up front
(usually the fighter types) have the best
armor you can buy, but money, as always,
is limited at the start. Further, and rather
annoyingly, the prices at the armorer and
equipment shops change after every purchase. You might buy a padded shirt, only
to find that the price has now gone down.
Don't be in a hurry to buy anything; go
through a few cycles first and watch the
prices. When you have a fair idea of what
the lowest prices are for each item, then
start buying. Your money will go further
that way.
Try to leave some money for food. You
start with a supply, but it will have to be
replenished as the game progress. Silver
(the medium of exchange) is hard to come
by at the start; the game is very stingy
with rewards. If you find yourself in need
of food and your funds low, you can cheat
a little bit by taking food from the pre-

created party that comes with the game.
It's a tedious process, but it can help in a
desperate situation.
Once outfitted, you pay a visit to the
guardhouse, where you are sent on your
first quest, to find and bring back the
sword of Zabin from the ruins which are a
short distance northeast of Grail. At this
point, you are well advised to (a) save the
game, then (b) reboot and make a backup
of your characters (because the outdoors is
a mean place to wander around in).
The manual instructs you to head
straight for the ruins and they aren't
kidding. Most of the unfriendlies roaming
around are far too powerful for a beginning
group. Further, your chances of bribing
them to leave you alone are almost nil,
since you have practically nothing with
which to make an offer. Move fast, and
hope for the best.
The ruins themselves are nothing, but
there is a passage which goes underground.
It's dark down there, so make sure you
have several torches or a lantern with you.
Then it becomes a matter of mapping out
the underground areas as you search for
the sword. As you might expect, this is
easier said than done.
You must map accurately and walk
over every square in every room to be sure
you haven't missed anything important.
There are never any visible objects on the
screen, so it's necessary to stand on the
right spot to discover an item or stairway
down or whatever. The beginning dungeons are fairly simple to map, but later
on you'll come to some with one-way walls
and teleports, among other things, that
will make mapping somewhat harder. It
pays to be alert down there.
Typical of all games of this type,
Realms uses mostly single keystroke commands, plus extensive menus. However, it
also has what is called "Adventure mode".
This brings up a special window on the
screen and allows you to type in actual
commands, as you would when playing an
adventure game such as Hollywood Hijinx.
Unfortunately, the way the game is
designed, there was really no need to include this feature. Most of the actions you
perform under "adventure mode" could
have been done with the regular game
commands. For instance, one item you find
in the game is an electric fan. It would
have been just as useful to simply (Invoke
it (as you do a torch to provide light), instead of having to enter adventure mode
and flip the switch. More thought should
really have gone into this feature. It has
great possibilities, but they weren't realized here.
The game also provides the ability to
split the party up into two smaller groups:

4 and 4, 5 and 3, etc. Most of the time,
you won't want to do this, as a small
group running into a party of monsters
can easily be overwhelmed. Mapping can
also become a problem if you lose track of
which party is where in the dungeon.
However, there are some instances where
splitting up is necessary. In those cases, do
what needs to be done and rejoin the
groups as quickly as you can.
Combat places unfair burdens on the
party. When the group is walking along a
narrow corridor or in a small room, only
the first four are considered to be "up
front". In battle situations, they are the
only ones who can strike a physical blow
at the monsters. Those in back must rely
on spells or magical objects, if they have
any.
Monsters, however, are under no such
restrictions. ALL of them are capable of
fighting, although they can only reach the
four in front with weapons (spells, of
course, can hit anyone). This becomes serious if you run into large groups, such as,
say, five Goblin Guards and six Goblins
(larger numbers are also possible).
The difficulty is increased by the relative lack of spell points your spellcasters
have. In general, beginning characters
have no more than two, which means they
cast two spells, and are then out of power.
Only a night's rest at the inn can restore
the spent spell points.
Also, spells known are determined randomly. Characters do not have access to
all spells of a particular level. They start
with two or three, and others are acquired
as the character's level goes up. There is
no way to choose which spells a character
can learn, and the process overall is a slow
one.
Basically, this means a lot of running
back and forth to Grail in order to restore
the party, especially at the start when hitpoints are low and spellpoints scarce. One
or two encounters, and you must rush
back to Grail to restore the party. Therefore, you can expect that mapping the first
dungeon, and completing the quest, will be
a time-consuming affair. Later, when the
characters are higher in level, you will be
able to stay somewhat longer in a dungeon.
Graphics in the game are disappointing. All outdoors scenes were done using
Polarware's (formerly Penguin's) graphic
system. The pictures are pretty, but
mediocre. The dungeons are drab: they are
nothing more than line drawings of walls
and doors. No color and no decoration
adorn these important locations. The same
is true of the underground caverns. After
awhile, the scenery becomes boring. At
least, however, the pictorial representa-

tions of monsters (which fill the screen
during encounters) aren't too bad.
The game can be saved at just about
any point, indoors or outdoors, above
ground or in a dungeon. However, I
wouldn't place much reliance in that save,
except when you've finished playing for
the time being. On one occasion, I saved
the game in Grail, just before sending the
party out to the NE ruins.
During the exploration, I inadvertently
set off a teleport, and my group was in an
unfamiliar place. Trying to find the way
out, the party kept running into tough
monsters, really more than they could
handle at their low level. Finally, when
one fighter was down to three hitpoints
left, another down to five, and all my
spellcasters out of spells, I decided to turn
the game off, and start again from my
saved position in town.
Imagine my surprise when, upon rebooting and choosing the "Continue saved
game" option, my party wasn't in town at
all, but down in the dungeon! With the
fighters down to almost no hitpoints as
before, and spellcasters out of spells. Ouch!
Fortunately, in spite of all that and by
some miracle, I got everyone out safely.
After that little experience, I made sure to
back up my characters every time I booted
the game, before sending them anywhere.
Backups are made to a separate disk
and are a good example of re-inventing
the wheel. Each time you backup the
characters, the program reinitializes and
reformats the disk instead of just overwriting what was there before. Then, it
copies over the characters. Fortunately,
the actual copy itself goes rather quickly.
Restoring characters from the backup is
also quick.
Speaking of restores, there is a utility
to restore dungeon status in the event you
do something irrevocable that would prevent you from completing a quest. Unfortunately, this is not selectable. ALL dungeons are restored simultaneously. Which
means if you've finished three, and
screwed up in the fourth, well, you're just
gonna have to go through those first three
all over again. The manual is careful to
point this out. You be careful, too.

There are a fair number of menus in
this game, and it may take awhile to sort
them all out. Not that they are difficult to
learn, just a little confusing at first. Most
choices can be made using the left and
right arrow keys, but some require using A
and Z. It would have been better had the
keys to use been consistent throughout.
The game supports movement with
either keyboard commands or a joystick.
The joystick is better for outdoor movement, where each screen is a separate location and you do a lot of moving on diagonals. Indoors, where you tend to move
along straight lines, the keyboard is sufficient. But you can use either one in both
circumstances, if you prefer.
The manual is fairly comprehensive,
and goes into great detail over many aspects of the game-playing mechanics. It's
a good idea to read the material thoroughly before starting play. Very experienced gamers will probably be able to get
by with a quick check of character descriptions and movement keys, and go over
the manual in detail later.
I haven't said much about puzzles,
mainly because they are so painfully obvious to solve. Most simply require the
proper object or objects, and the way to
use them is readily apparent. It's likely
that this part of the game will give players
the least trouble.
Overall, while "Realms" has some interesting features, they have not been used
to their best advantage. Graphics are, at
best, mundane, and the quests are not especially thrilling, nor the puzzles very intriguing. However, because the game is
arranged as a series of small adventures,
this could be a good choice for the beginner in computer RPG's, who can concentrate on doing one thing at a time, gaining
experience along the way. More experienced RPG'ers might enjoy fooling around
with adventure mode and splitting parties,
but will otherwise find little to challenge
them.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock on
the wall that time is just about up for this
issue. If you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: Stop in at the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Visit the Games Round Table
(type: Scorpia to reach it). On the Source:
Send SMail to ST1030. By U.S. Mail
(remember to include a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the United
States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN
NAME:
STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN
SYSTEM:
C-64/128, Apple II
PRICE:
$60.00
DESIGNER:
W.J. Nichols
PUBLISHER: Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Canada

If This Is
Tuesday,
This Must Be
Stalingrad!

Stalingrad Campaign (SC) offers a general staff study of the
Russian Southern Front between June 1942 and February 1943. In
keeping with Simulation Canada's designs, the program is text
only, with action occurring on a separate mapboard via unit
counters (German corps/Russian armies).
Four scenarios are offered: Kharkov (May 1942), Case Blau
(June-November 1942), Uranus (November 1942 - February 1943)
and the Campaign (June 1942 - February 1943). Victory conditions in the first three scenarios are contingent upon bettering the
historical record. Victory in the campaign is dependent upon performance vis-a-vis one's opponent.
Game turns (representing one week) encompass the following
actions: (a) Front Reports [status and locations], (b) Issue Orders
[objectives, supply prioritization, air support and headquarters
movement orders], and (c) Movement and Combat.
The player represents the Chief of the General Staff (either
OKW or Stavka). As such, he is responsible for achieving the goals
established by Hitler or Stalin. These orders may well represent
military idiocy, but the staff officer must attempt to carry out his
leader's wishes, reasonable or not. The player is in effect graded on
how well such goals are achieved and whether or not his actions
have pleased the Leader of the State.
As a concept, this situation of being a staff officer and not
having complete control is intriguing. Pragmatically, SC fails to
sustain one's interest in the staff study. The flaws are as follow:
(1) DOCUMENTATION: Simulations Canada has been noted
for the paucity of its documentation. SC continues this "tradition".
Documentation is limited to five pages and is inadequate, at best.
Movement, combat, supply and headquarters staffing abilities are
cursorily laid out, but nowhere is there any concept of the meshing
and resolution necessary for successful implementation. In all fairness, it must be admitted that this "lack" is a deliberate design
feature. Developer Steve Newburg feels that most wargames offer
too much data to the gamer. Therefore, his games offer the "bare
bones" that a military officer would presumably receive. Based
upon this reviewer's discussions with the developer, a consensus
emerged wherein we have agreed to disagree as to the relative
merits of the documentation.
(2) MOVEMENT: As the documentation notes "(M)ovement
capability may be modified by the availability of supplies, unit exhaustion level, morale, weather, the terrain involved and the
presence of enemy units. As a result, no specific movement rates
are listed". Ostensibly, repeated play will give the player a "feel"
for movement capabilities. This explanation is inadequate. As a
staff officer, one would know how far a corps/army could move
within a week; while this will be dependent on other factors (e.g.
supply, morale, exhaustion), at least a rule of thumb will exist.
Based upon discussions with the designer, this reviewer learned
that within the scope of a game turn, armored units could feasibly
move the width of the map. Other factors are the critical elements.
A well-rested unit, however, may fail to move for weeks at a time
— and without any apparent rational reason (e.g. partisans, enemy
activity, etc.). Although the documentation is silent, traffic jams
could be the limiting factor. Therefore, be wary of area density
overload!

A Review of
Stalingrad Campaign
by M. Evan Brooks
(3) MAP: In rather dull coloration, the map is the only reference framework. Unfortunately, what appears to be the road network on the map is, in reality, the supply network. Mentioned
nowhere in the documentation, this critical omission drastically
alters the "gestalt" of the game. One would hope that an errata
sheet would be included in future editions.
(4) COMBAT: Combat occurs as a function of movement. The
documentation notes that the player is not concerned with unit
tactical execution. However, there is no way to order a strategic
encirclement. Enemy units simply pop loose from well-planned
assaults, and nothing in the program or documentation explains
the reasons thereof. Mr. Newburg admits that strategic encirclements are difficult. Historically, the Soviets withdrew during
this period and the game reflects this. Yet, the strategic encirclement remains the key to victory.
(5) LIMITED INTELLIGENCE: While limited intelligence is
the keystone of computer games, SC stretches this concept beyond
the limits of acceptability. Enemy formations are noted in terms of
unit identification, but nowhere is size ascertained. German corps
were roughly equivalent to Soviet armies, but disparities did occur;
Soviet army strengths range between 16,000 and 130,000. Given
this differential of 9 to 1, a German commander could be forgiven
for failing to understand why his units have been beaten back by a
single Soviet army. The developer feels that this is acceptable.
This reviewer can comprehend not knowing the strength of an
enemy force upon initial contact, but continued contacts, probes
and battles would reveal its strength within a reasonable period.
(6) UNDOCUMENTED RESTRICTIONS: While playing the
German, there are certain "forbidden" areas. What is interesting to
note is that Stalingrad itself is composed of four sectors (north,
central, south and east bank). As the German, this reviewer managed to seize the first three areas early, but was prohibited from
crossing over to the east bank by the computer. Nowhere had the
East Bank been designated a "Forbidden Zone". However, one has
to stand by and wait while the Soviets built up sufficient strength
to assume the offensive in the campaign game, then passage is allowed. Again, this appears to be a subject that was dropped from
the final printing of the documentation.
This writer has served as a staff officer for most of his military
career. Acting as an assistant operations officer in an infantry
battalion and currently as the operations officer of a Military Police Battalion, this writer found the concept of staff execution of
the Russian Campaign to be fascinating. However, as the game
progressed, nowhere could one ask logical questions. If a unit encountered opposition, there was no way to ascertain whether such
opposition was of sufficient size or combat capability to defeat the

However, the game play itself constrains the player. The German must initially take advantage of his numerical and equipment
superiority. No matter how successful his play, the German will
eventually be forced to assume the defensive. The Russian offensive cannot be avoided, but only blunted by defensive maneuver.
Again, maximum long-range use of objectives coupled with recognition of when and where to yield territory is the key to victory.
Unfortunately, this compels an ahistorical response in that the
player, responding to history as he knows it, will suspend his offensive in order to assume the defensive. A Soviet offensive surprise can be avoided by the German, and should be if victory is
one's goal.
Conclusion

unit. Similarly, movement capabilities were masked beyond reason.
Historically, Napoleon Bonaparte carried a pair of calipers (preset) in order to utilize map studies and determine when and where
he could coalesce his army into a massive strike force. Granted the
vagaries of combat and the chance of noncompliance with orders.
There is still some basis for ordering units with a reasonable expectation of mission accomplishment. Such is missing herein. The
developer contends that this is a misconception by this reviewer.
Mr. Newburg feels that this reviewer has attempted to view this
product through the perspective of a modern military officer and
that World War II staff officers did not perform their duties in the
way that contemporary military officers do. Thus, Mr. Newburg
feels that this reviewer's military experience has worked against an
unbiased view of the design. This reviewer remains unconvinced.
The designer's comments note that this is a "case history simulation... If you can imagine the difficulty of this kind of a situation, and if you think you are up to it, try playing this game a few
times. But if this isn't your cup of tea... if, when you bought this
game, you expected to have perfect control over what was happening, to know everything there was to know, and not to have to
answer to anyone for your actions... then perhaps you should have
bought a board game. or one of those computer games with lots of
pretty pictures from another company. Stalingrad Campaign is for
those players who can think, and deduce. its for those who can
cope with reality." By implication, this states that this product is
for those players who can think and deduce, and not for the bulk
of garners. This hubris cannot be justified given the state of SC. At
best, it is self-serving.
Game Play
As noted in the documentation, German allies are notoriously
unreliable. Italian Corps will seldom be able to stand in the main
battle line given their poor staffing and morale. Hungarian and
Rumanian units fare slightly better. Insofar as tactical expertise is
concerned, long-range targets should be selected if at all possible.
This permits the staff to handle the orders without tiring itself by
constant revisions to operations plans (in reality, there is nothing
so frustrating as finishing an ops plan only to have it superseded
immediately by a new one due in another few hours).

Simulations Canada's hybrid of board and computer wargames
is an interesting concept. While not part of the mainstream in either sphere, the company has staked out a small niche of dedicated
gamers. The basic problem with board and counter assists to the
computer is a space consideration. Most computer owners do not
have the space next to their computer for easy accessibility.
However, this writer recommends that any serious wargamer
should consider having a Simulations Canada product in his library. The naval simulations appear to be both more historical
and more interesting as studies. The design approach is more successful on the open seas than constricted on the land masses.
Bill Nichols feels that though "most gamers weaned on board
games would find this disconcerting," the priority in the design
was to utilize the headquarters as critical elements together with
the abilities of the commanders. Although SC offers some innovative concepts, it does not succeed as a total product.

STRATEGICALLY SPEAKING

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips, including tips
on wargames, sports games, economic and other simulations, as
well as classic style games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those of the authors.
We try to avoid printing tips that don't work, but we cannot
playtest all, or even most of them. So, let the player beware.
We pay $5.00 for each SS tip printed. Tips can be mailed to
Strategically Speaking c/o CGW, PO Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803-4566.
Try to keep under 250 words if possible.

STAR FLEET I
(Interstel Corporation)
Do not hesitate to place a tractor beam on a Krellan ship, even
if a Zaldron ship is in the same quadrant. The "Officer's Manual"
(p. 9) is wrong when it states that the enemy will fire whenever
you use your tractor beam or transporter. This only occurs about
5% of the time. At level 8 and above, mines are more effective
than torpedoes against single, Krellan ships. To use mines most efficiently, enter the edge of the quadrant in the fifth or sixth sector
in that row or column. On your next turn, move in a straight line
for nine sectors across the quadrant and lay eight mines while you
move (laying nine mines may block a torpedo shot). If the enemy
does not collide with a mine, firing a torpedo may prompt him to
move into the mines or destroy him if he doesn't move. If you are
low on torpedoes, firing your phasers at a very low power setting
(around 5 units) may get the enemy to move into the mines.
At the higher levels, avoid speeds above C factor of 3 because
it increases the risk of ion storms which can severely damage your
ship. If you are low on power and far from the nearest starbase,
use two moves to get home. First, choose an unoccupied quadrant
about halfway to the nearest starbase. Ideally, this quadrant
should have few stars (to minimize the risk of collision). Plan to
stop on the edge of this quadrant which is nearest your starbase.

Then, if a Zaldron ship does appear, you will be able to flee the
quadrant and head home without the risk of colliding with the
Zaldron.
John Clarke
Minneapolis, MN

MECH BRIGADE
(Strategic Simulations, Inc.)
When offered the opportunity to purchase Attack Helicopters,
you should turn it down. Your opponent will have no way of
knowing your decision and will be forced to buy an Air Force Defense Unit, which is ineffectual against almost anything besides
helicopters. You can then use your extra purchasing power to buy
more tanks, which you can never have enough of.
Speaking of tanks, when on defense or in a meeting engagement, get the fastest tanks you can. Try to leave a reserve company deployed well to the north or south of your main body. Once
the bulk of your troops are fully engaged and the enemy's main
force has been located, slip this reserve force at full speed behind
the enemy, preferably placing them in covered terrain. They can
then blast away at the enemy's weak back armor with virtual impunity.
During meeting engagements, the computer is slow to get off of
the mark. Thus, you can usually occupy the objective first. You
should take advantage of this, since the objective squares are usually covered and you can often catch the enemy in open terrain.
Whenever possible, use your tanks to support infantry. Speed
can be critical in the game and in this way, you can also take best
advantage of combined arms concepts. Use your MICV's primarily
as anti-tank weapons.
Finally, the old cliche is true. The best anti-tank weapon is
another tank!
Kenneth B. Strumpf
Milwaukee, WI

FIERY AMBUSH:
A Survey of WW II

Tactical Infantry
Systems

By Jay C. Selover
Among wargamers, World War II has always been the most
popular topic to be simulated. Operational level games tend to be
most popular, but a sizeable contingent of wargamers find bliss
with games on a tactical scale. Probably the best selling board
wargame of all time is Squad Leader, from the Avalon Hill Game
Company. It is, therefore, surprising that there have not been
more computer games published on the same subject.
How many computer wargames exist on tactical World War II
combat? Defining "tactical" as using a unit of maneuver of a squad
or less, the three most important are: Computer Ambush, Field Of
Fire, and Under Fire. Despite the fact that they all cover tactical
World War II combat, there is almost no detailed comparison of
the programs, graphics, designs, or presentations of these three
games available, until now.
COMPUTER AMBUSH
The second edition of Computer Ambush (CA) was published
by SSI in 1982 [Apple, Mac, C-64, Atari 8-bit; $59.95]. The
changes over the first edition of the game (circa 1980) solely improved the speed of program execution. The original design was a
real trend-setter and contained many features that had not been
seen before, but the program moved at a snail's pace through the
combat resolution sequence. It never seemed "right" to sit through
a ten-minute pause (seemingly) while the computer simulated ten
seconds of action on the battlefield. So, in looking at the second
edition of CA, we are still looking at an older game.
Despite its age, CA is an excellent game. It simulates squadlevel actions between American and German troops within an urban area of western Europe. The game map never varies. Every
game and every scenario is played on the same map of an unnamed
town. The map varies from the wide open spaces of the town
square to the winding alleys of the working class neighborhoods,
but this is less than optimal.
In CA, you control the individual actions of each man in a ten

man squad (you can specify fewer than ten men per side, but not
more). The action is resolved in "time points" that represent one
tenth of a second each. The map scale is three meters per square.
The game can be played solitaire or by two humans. In solitaire
play, the computer always plays the Germans.
CA is a tactical game in the style of the old SPI boardgame,
Sniper . Each turn starts with a phase where you give orders individually to each member of the squad. You tell them each exactly
what they are to do( "Toss your grenade at square 2834, then fall
prone, then unsling your rifle"). After both players have given orders to their troops, the computer handles the execution phase
with the screen showing the time points being simulated while the
computer resolves all movement and combat simultaneously. Finally, both players can review the course of the turn (who moved
where, who fired, where grenades detonated) before giving orders
for the next turn.
For all of the detail that goes into the make-up of a squad,
there is surprisingly little detail in CA concerning weapon types.
There are only three generic types of direct fire weapon ("rifle",
"autorifle", and "machine gun"), three types of hand-to-hand
weapon (knife, bayonet, and only one garotte for the entire
squad), and two types of explosive (hand grenades and plastic explosive which can only be handled safely by the one expert in the
squad). This is probably forgivable given the extremely close
ranges of most encounters in CA. When you are firing at an enemy
only 30 meters away (actually, this is long range for most of the
encounters in CA), it makes little difference exactly what kind of
"rifle" you are firing.
One highpoint of CA is the rulebook. It is very clear and
makes it as easy as possible to work through the demanding process of entering orders. There is also plenty of detail about how the
program weighs different factors. While the actual combat and
sighting algorithms are not spelled out, one is given the general
effects of almost all activities, making it easier not to commit gross
blunders while learning the system.
FIELD OF FIRE
Roger Damon is a well known computer wargame designer and
his games are very easy to play. That is, the "player-machine" interactions during play of the game are very easy to understand
and execute. Field Of Fire (FOF), released by SSI in 1984, is no
exception [Apple, C-64, Atari 8-bit; $39.95]. The entire game can
be played easily with joystick and fire button.
FOF is a tactical game covering various actions of the U.S.
First Infantry Division ("The Big Red One") during World War II.

It is a "solitaire-only" game, always your
Americans against the computer's Germans.
As a tactical game, actions center on little
pieces of the overall battles. For instance,
the "Aachen" scenario does not portray the
entire battle for the city, but rather shows
one of the small block clearing battles
necessary for the liberation of the city.
FOF contains eight scenarios (with eight
different maps). Each has the "feel" of one of
the actual battles that the First Infantry
fought (a raid in Tunisia, a road clearing in
the mountains of Sicily, and others). In each
case, you command a company (about
20 to 30 of the fireteam-sized units plus a couple of tanks) and
you face variable numbers of Germans depending on the scenario.
The scenarios can be played alone in any order or as a campaign
game where they are played in order and surviving units gain experience and go on to the next scenario, while destroyed ones are
replaced with green troops.
FOF is, above all, easy to play. Each turn starts with an Observation Phase where you can check your units. This phase is
followed by fire orders and movement orders, respectively. After
all orders have been given, comes the Execution Phase, where you
can watch your units and the computer's moving and firing around
the map.
Combat algorithms appear to be fairly true, but one is left
guessing because the rulebook contains very little detail about how
combat is actually resolved.
The graphics in FOF are both a blessing and a curse. The
eight individual scenario maps are done very nicely, with the various terrain features easily discernible. However, the icons for the
units on the board are almost indistinguishable. It is very difficult
to tell whether a unit on the screen is a rifle team, a bazooka team,
an engineer team, or a forward observer (other units are fairly easy
to tell apart). This problem is compounded because units on screen
are only identified by the name of the team leader. In an effort to
personalize the game, Roger has given names and a significant
amount of descriptive prose to all of the units. The rules give no
clue to the importance of all of the verbiage about the various
units.
Further, the rulebook is short on explanations of how important the various combat modifiers are. Obviously, being a target in
the woods or a building is better than being a target in the open,
but how much better? What chance do you have to do any damage if you are firing any weapons at maximum range? Would you
be better off to hold your fire until the enemy gets a bit closer?
How is his chance of spotting your quiet units increasing as he approaches? There is virtually no quantification in the rulebook.
That helps avoid scaring off the newcomers, but it also frustrates
experienced players who want to utilize their forces at maximum
efficiency.
UNDER FIRE
Under Fire (UF) was designed by Ralph Bosson and published
by The Avalon Hill Game Company in 1985 [Apple, $60]. It has
often been referred to as "Squad Leader on a disc," since the scale
is similar to that AH classic. This is an appellation that Ralph detests and he will tell anyone that there is virtually no comparison.

UF is not Squad Leader. The scales ARE very similar, but the
mechanics are very different.
UF is a tactical game of World War II infantry combat. There
are vehicles in the game, but they generally take supporting roles
to the infantry. The game simulates generic engagements between
German and Russian or American troops (you can even design a
Russians vs. Americans scenario if you want). It can be played as a
two-player game or in solitaire mode with the computer playing
either side (the only game of the three where you can command
the Germans in a solitaire game). The units include infantry
squads (10 men) or "half squads," gun and mortar crews, individual leaders, and individual vehicles.
For predesigned scenarios, UF has three maps with three different types of scenario (attack/defend an objective, breakthrough, and meeting engagement) available on each map. Beyond
that, and at the heart of the versatility of this game, limitless
"design your own" scenarios are available by designing your own
maps and by "buying" your own units for a scenario.
UF is played on a map representing a variable 12 to 72 meters
per square. The normative unit of maneuver is a squad or individual and the time scale is described as "relative" (all units are
moving at the correct proportional rates). You play the game by
giving your units movement objectives at the beginning of each
turn (if you want them to go somewhere). The computer then begins executing the movement pulses (of which there are 24 in each
turn), letting both players know as it goes along what units are
visible to the enemy at each pulse. After the proper number of
pulses, a combat interval ensues. Each player can check for targets
for each of his units and order any units currently spotting any
enemy units to fire at them. Units can also fire "indirect" or "area
fire" into locations where the enemy is not spotted but is thought
to be (such fire is much less effective, but you can always get
lucky!). After a combat interval, the cycles continue in the same
way.
UF's documentation is extensive, and provides a real understanding of the various units commanded. It is still a bit light on
explaining exactly how the combat algorithms are constructed, but
there is so much detail on the various weapons carried by your
troops that it is easier to make some educated guesses about the
effect that each of your units is likely to have on the enemy. The
graphics in UF are very good; the maps look more like photographs than with either of the other games and the icons for the
various units are easy to differentiate (if not, cycling to identify
the unit gives a complete description of the number of men and
the weapons they carry).
Continued on pg. 42

Lance Haffner has finally stepped up and taken his swing at
statistically-based baseball games with Full Count Baseball
(Apple II, $39.95, hereinafter FC). FC may be played as a strict
simulation or allows creation of teams and trading of players for
hypothetical league play.
In play, starting lineups are selected from the twenty-eight
man roster (for realism, up to four players can be deactivated).
During the game, the center third of the screen incorporates a
baseball diamond display with names of the pitcher, base runners,
batter, and on deck player. The upper third of the screen is an
inning by inning linescore, while the bottom third contains the
actual play choices. After the play choices are made, the bottom of
the screen gives a text description as each play unfolds, providing
just enough delay to create tension. For instance: "The ball's hit

deep to right field ...(pause)it's going, going,. . .(pause)no,
Strawberry just pulls it down for the out."
The final boxscore prints out with Haffner's usual attention to
team and individual statistics and can be viewed on the screen or
printed out. The program also contains a compiler that provides a
game by game update of each team's statistics (a must for those
who create their own leagues).
The design contributes to detailed simulations because each
major league player has twenty-two different offensive and
defensive factors coded into the program and the pitchers have
sixteen factors considered (including home runs allowed and
percentage of ground outs). The program also factors in how each
individual ballpark's dimensions affects the number of home runs
and extra-base hits (the difference between Minnesota's "Homer
Dome" and Houston's "Astrodome," for instance).
A major strength of FC is the computer manager. He usually
makes the right percentage moves: bringing the corners in for a
bunting situation; playing the infield in with a runner on third in a
tight game; or deciding when to steal or sacrifice.
Several other features of FC aid play. First, the variable speed
of the screen display enables one to speed up play (after becoming
accustomed to the game) and setting the screen speed to one
second allows a computer vs. computer game to be reeled off in
minutes. Second, the game can save a number of team lineups on a
separate disk, so one doesn't have to input an entirely new lineup
for each game.
Negatively, the forty column screen causes the baseball
diamond to appear somewhat squeezed in and hard to read. The
worst problem, however, is that the game is not "idiot-proofed."
For instance, if one is switching disks and inserts a wrong disk, it
puts a break in the program and the entire process has to be
completely restarted. This has been true of Haffner's other games,
as well. Other than this, FC is first rate, by far the best game in
Haffner's line of sports games.

I

I

I

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World
PART II OF V: ARDAI ON ELECTRONIC ARTS
by Charles Ardai

Chapter One
Wherein the serial begun last issue is continued
with a look at the games of Electronic Arts.
There is a great deal to be said for professionalism, much of which has, of course, already been
said. In terms of computer games, for instance, it
has been said many times that no game can be
successful without its having a certain polish, a degree of above-average quality. Back when every
third software company was a two-person, backyard operation, this was a maxim frequently ignored, with universally unenviable results. Where is
Aygee Software now? They packed their games in
plastic bags along with photocopied, handwritten
instructions. How about Arcade 64, whose Ophir
was such a fine game? They used cartridge-sized
corrugated cardboard boxes which didn't go over
too well with the gaming public.
Today, needless to say, no one disregards the
rules of the marketplace in such a cavalier manner.
Some companies, like Infocom, go out of their way
to create an ultra-professional air by stuffing their

games with all sorts of custom-made trinkets. Others, like Telarium, hire celebrities to give their
lines added consumer appeal. At least one company
stands out, however, as being professional simply
because of the quality of its software and its monumental reputation in the field. That company is
Electronic Arts.
Before you get upset, yes, I realize that Moebius
comes packed with a cloth yin-yang headband, and
that Thomas M. Disch's Amnesia and Timothy
Leary's Mind Mirror have celebrity connections.
One can't fault EA for hedging its bets. On the
whole, however, EA is simply known for the extremely high quality of its games and not its accessories.
There is a hard edge to all of EA's products that
really sets them apart from the pack; when you buy
one, you know you're getting your money's worth.
This is especially noteworthy because many of the
programs that EA distributes are not written inhouse. It is very difficult to maintain the uniformly
high standards that EA holds without having direct
creative control over the programmers. Somehow
EA manages to do so, however, consistently releasing unique and interesting programs.
Not all of EA's games appeal to everyone, of
course. An action game like Marble Madness may
not turn the head of the serious musician who buys
Music Construction Set. Even this hypothetical
Haydn, however, would have to admit to the ex-

cellence of the arcade translation. Even a tin-eared
arcader would likewise have a hard time refuting
MCS's claims to fame.
Almost without exception, EA's games are superb. Gamers who don't care for them are generally
displeased by their complexity or the aforementioned hard edge that characterizes all EA products.
With the exception of Marble Madness and Robot
Rascals, EA games are dark visions with cold,
calculating subtexts. There is none of Epyx's cute
graphic decoration here. EA is big, mean and hardboiled. Further, over the past few years, a reputation for exactly this sort of product has helped EA
gain the status it now holds.
You don't believe it? Just take a look at what
EA offers: Dark Lord, Wasteland, Autoduel, and
Make Your Own Murder Party for starters; the excruciatingly realistic space simulation, Starflight, a
psychological program by ex-L.S.D. guru, Timothy
Leary, and Movie Maker with cartoons by Gahan
Wilson for other stunning examples (For those of
you who have never had the pleasure of being exposed to Mr. Wilson's work, try to picture the
Peanuts characters as envisioned by Stephen King.
That's Gahan Wilson in a good mood.).
The striking differences between EA's software
and everyone else's always remind me of George
Carlin's "Baseball and Football" comedy routine. "In
baseball," he says, "you wear a cap. IN FOOTBALL, YOU WEAR A HELMET. In baseball, you
make an error. IN FOOTBALL, YOU PAY A
PENALTY."
Well, in Activision's slot car game, Fast Tracks,
you have bright colors and overpasses. IN EA'S
SLOT CAR GAME, RACING DESTRUCTION
SET, YOU HAVE LAND MINES AND GRAVITY
ALTERATION. In Activision's psychological roleplaying game, Alter Ego, you have simulations of
life experiences. IN EA'S PSYCHOLOGICAL
ROLE-PLAYING GAME, MIND MIRROR, YOU
HAVE STATISTICAL MIND MAPS AND SIMULATIONS OF STANDARDIZED TESTS.
In other words, for good or ill, EA's products
are for people who take their gaming seriously. One
may not always care for this style, but one would
be hard pressed to deny its effectiveness — or its
success.
Chapter Two
A visit to "Software Village." The Activision
connection is explored.

You are in the storeroom at the Software Village
computer store. It reminds you of a walk-in closet.
A small walk-in closet. In front of you, a salesman
is shrink-wrapping a stack of new games. He is also
singing, badly, from "La Traviata."
>SALESMAN, HELLO
You breathe a sigh of relief as the salesman
stops singing. "Sorry," he says. "I didn't see you
come in. I guess I'm just too wrapped up in my
work."
>LAUGH
The salesman thanks you. "You know, something
strange is going on. It's this Activision/Electronic
Arts thing."
>ASK SALESMAN ABOUT THING
"Well, look," he says, holding up two games. "EA
has Racing Destruction Set and Activision has Fast
Tracks."
>AGAIN
"Well, look," he says, holding up two games. "EA
has Mind Mirror and Activision has Alter Ego."
>AGAIN
"Well, look," he says, holding up two games. "EA
has Marble Madness and Activision has Spindizzy."
>AGAIN
"Well, look," he says, holding up two games. "EA
has Amnesia and Activision has Mindshadow."
>AGAIN
The salesman is out of games. "But," he says,
"EA has a golf game that includes a Pebble Beach
simulation, a one-on-one basketball game and Music Construction Set. Activision has a Pebble Beach
golf game, a two-on-two basketball game and The
Music Studio."
>SALESMAN, WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
"Nothing, probably. But it's interesting to think
about."
Chapter Three
Some explanations for EA's success are postulated.
Some of EA's games are based on premises
which have already been explored by other companies, but even when this is the case, EA's distinctive style brings new life to the most over-exploited
of ideas. Dark Lord, for instance, is a graphic adventure in the classic mold of Ulysses and Critical
Mass, with a few tips of the hat to more modern
examples of the genre like Mask of the Sun, nothContinued on pg. 40

WRATH OF DENETHENOR
Name:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Wrath of Denethenor
Apple, C-64
$24.95 (Ap), $19.95 (C-64)
Christopher Crim
Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA

Deledain. Once ruled in peace by the lords of
the four continents, now torn by war and over-run
by monsters of all descriptions. Lord Denethenor,
not content with his own land, yearns to have the
entire world under his evil dominion. Many heroes
have set out to bring about his downfall. None have
succeeded and none have returned. Furthermore,
the day is soon coming when Denethenor's plans
will mature and the world of Deledain will tremble
under his iron rule. Unless, that is, some powerful
and courageous hero can fight through all the dangers, correctly piece together all the clues, and defeat Denethenor in his hidden fortress.
Your first thought on booting this game may
well be "Ultima II". The graphics, style, and playing
mechanics resemble vintage Lord British to an astonishing degree. Shape, color, movement, sound,
layout: you'd almost swear this was a game you've
played before, resurrected under another name.
In spite of that deja vu feeling, "Wrath" was
written by Christopher Crim, not Lord British. Yet,
there is no getting around the fact that, aside from
a few novel touches of its own, the game looks and
plays very much like an early Ultima.
The plot line is a familiar one: a single brave
character (not a party) sets out to defeat the evil
wizard who is laying waste to the land. Naturally,
this will be difficult. There are plenty of monsters
to fight and clues to pick up as the game progresses.
Where "Wrath" differs from most games of this
type is in the creation of the character itself. It is,
in fact, pre-created for you. There is no rolling of
dice for attributes, nor choice of class or race. You
always start with exactly the same character, who
has exactly the same attributes, and there are only
two: strength and intelligence.
Strength is entirely dependent on your weapon.
The better the weapon, the higher your strength,
and of course the more damage you can do to
monsters. Intelligence can be increased only by the
various lords who reside in castles. Some will do it
for free, others will require you to complete a task
or two first. The higher your intelligence rating,

the more effective your spells will be, and the
sooner your mage strength will return.
As you've probably guessed from that, your
character is a combination of fighter/wizard. This
is necessary, since you need both spells and muscle
to successfully complete the game. Most of the
time, you will rely on your weapon ability, but
there are occasions when only spells will do.
A unique feature of the game is how it deals
with hitpoints. They are constantly renewed for you
automatically, unless you happen to be in a town or
castle. You begin with a thousand, and right from
the start, they increase, up to the maximum of
9999. It's a slow process, of course, and your hit
points will go down when you are socked by a
monster, but in general you won't need any healing
other than time in the game.
However, all is not rosy. You still need food, to
keep your stamina up. Just as your hit points increase with time, your stamina decreases. If it hits
zero, you are dead. And stamina goes down wherever you are, even in a town or castle. Each unit of
food you consume (eaten on the spot; you can't
take it with you) restores 100 points of stamina. It
helps to buy a lot at one time, preferably where it's
cheap; different places have different prices, and
the further from Nisondel you are, the more food
will cost.
You start in Nisondel, one of the four continents
of Deledain. This is something of a "training

by Scorpia
ground." The monsters here are not quite so tough
as elsewhere. They don't hit as hard and are easier
to kill, even bare-handed. Of course, this doesn't
mean they are wimps, either. In sufficient numbers,
they can do serious damage, or even kill you. It's
best to get to Backwoods (the closest town to your
starting point) as quickly as you can and buy
yourself a weapon and some armor.
Fortunately, the game booklet contains a set of
rough maps to most of the places you have to visit,
at least the outdoors. While not every important
area is marked, all the towns and castles are shown,
so you shouldn't have too much trouble finding
them. You can also mark on the maps other items
of interest as you explore the various lands, particularly the locations of dimension doors.
These dimension doors are extremely important.
All the continents exist separately from each other.
The only way to reach them is through a door.
There are a number of doors on each continent.
Some will take you just to another area on the same
continent, while others will send you to another
continent altogether. It helps to take notes on which
doors send you where.
These doors, however, don't look like doors.
Rather, they are small spots in the grass, easy to
overlook (or step on accidentally!). You can discern
them by careful observation: each door is a small
disturbance in the grass. If you see motion, you've
found a door. One good thing about them is that
they don't move or vanish. Once you know where a
door is, it will always be there.
Nisondel, naturally, has several of these doors.
You can enter any on the main continent without
worry because none of those will whisk you off to
Cestiona (the next stop along the way). Besides,
you'll have enough to do in Nisondel before you're
ready for the real world.
Mainly what you'll be doing is picking up information and, we hope, enough gold to outfit
yourself properly for the next step. Information
(including spells) is obtained by talking to people in
towns and castles. Anyone who has played Ultima
will find this procedure familiar, if a bit frustrating.
You walk up to a townsman, indicate you want
to talk, press a key to indicate the direction, and
hope for the best. The townspeople, you see, move
around a lot. If there are a number of them in the
area, it can sometimes be annoying, since they tend

to resemble one another. You aren't always sure if
you've talked to the same guy four times (and thus
gotten the same response four times), or if you've
talked to four different people who all had the
same thing to say. Even getting them to stand still
takes a bit of dedication. This portion of the game
requires a fair amount of patience.
Do write down everything you're told (except
for the mundane comments such as "Good evening"
or "So?"). In time these disjointed sentences will
begin to take on real meaning. Just don't believe
everything you hear; a few people will try to steer
you wrong with lies or unfounded rumors.
Towns and castles are generally safe; you won't
find monsters in them (except for CastleDrawn, but
we'll come to that later). Outdoors, however, everything or everyone you meet is fair game. In
other words, if it moves, kill it if you can.
You needn't worry about finding monsters. They
will be attracted to you the way a piece of steel is
attracted to a magnet and they will come in
bunches, not one at a time. This can make your life
difficult, as you will be surrounded by unfriendlies
very quickly. Unfortunately, there isn't much you
can do about this in the beginning except fight
your way out.
Combat, once you get the hang of it, is fairly
simple. You choose a direction in which to hit (the
monster, naturally, must be right next to you), and
whether you want to aim high, low, or medium.
Some monsters are small, so you need to aim low.
Others are man-sized or larger, so you will want to
aim accordingly. A little experimentation will soon
show which types of blows are most effective
against which types of monsters. The thing to
watch out for is the fact that monsters can strike
on the diagonals, but you can't. Try to position
yourself so you are never entirely surrounded,
whenever you can.
Retreating is not really possible, in most cases.
The monsters will simply follow you around. If you
go into a town or castle, you can bet they'll be
waiting for you when you come out again. The
same is true of dimension doors. Just about the
only way to get rid of them is to hop into a boat
(if you have one) and shoot them from a distance
with the cannon. The monsters themselves, of
course, never retreat, although sometimes they will
dance away from you briefly in combat. But they
never go away unless killed.
Continued on pg. 52

PORTAL
Name:
System:

Portal
Apple, Amiga, Atari ST
C64, IBM, Mac
$44.95 to $49.95
Price:
Designer:
Rob Swigart
Publisher: Activision
Mountain View, CA

A Very Novel
Game
by Roy Wagner
Portal, from Activision, is an outstanding computer "novel," the first real computer novel. It is
not a game because your only involvement is selecting from 12 data storage access channels and
reading the information therein contained. There
are no puzzles or arcade "action". The story line
evolves as you access more and more information.
It does not vary based on any of your actions.
The story takes place in the year 2106. You return to Earth to discover that there are no people.
An on-line computer terminal provides you access
to the last fragments of "recorded" history. Several
computer systems, many dormant, are activated in
the course of play. Your only major link to these
systems is an artificially intelligent interface called
`Homer'. This interface is the "storyteller" that takes
the factual data that you access, pieces together the
details, and reveals the mystery of where ALL the
humans on Earth went and why.
The story is interesting and well written, and
well it should be, having been written by Rob
Swigart, a noted science-fiction writer (See Wasatch
File on Rob Swigart). It is a long story, using three
Amiga disks or (five Commodore 64 disk sides).
Rob has estimated that it is the equivalent of a
65,000 word novel. It is a classic tale of a benevolent future society gone bad, a story of adventure,
mystery, suspense, love, and plausible scientific
fiction.
The interface used by the game designer is tedious at times. There are twelve different access
options that must be checked for the availability of
new information. Your computer mentor, HOMER,
frequently helps by connecting data and events
within the story telling and often points you directly to certain data areas.
The problem that occurs with the interface is
two-fold: 1) if you do not know which areas you

WASATCH FILE ON ROB SWIGART
(Designer of Portal)
Rob Swigart has been involved with
writing since college. His graduate studies
were in Comparative Literature. Additionally he has pursued interests in Media
Studies, with a major emphasis on the film.
He has taught several film classes at California State University in San Jose and currently teaches classes in fiction writing.
Rob has published several books (Little
America, Time Trip, Book Of Revelations).
His most recent book is Vector, a biotech
thriller, published by St. Martins. He does
not like to have his writing classified as
science fiction. He describes his works using
the terms "Magic Realism" and "South
American Surrealism".
Rob has been involved with computers
since the early days of the "home brew"
computer systems. A friend of his had an
Apple I (ONE). He bought an Apple II
should check, your random access leads you
through a series of screens that gets tedious and
even somewhat annoying, especially if there is no
data or no new data available (Activision will be
making an outline or flowchart of data areas to
access that will make the reading much easier.); and
2) for the C64, there is a good attempt at an innovative data access technique using the joysticks that
fails in its final implementation. It is minimally
documented and even with the practice tutorial
provided, it is still tricky in actual use. Far too often I ended up doing things that were not my intent. This would require me to repeat several steps
to amend my "error".
The interface on the Amiga, using the mouse, is
much more acceptable. The use of color is excellent. However, data access is not that much quicker
and to save the current status seems to take much
longer than on the C64.
There are several access areas that only contain
statistical data presented graphically. These are data
profiles for several of the key characters in the
drama. These are nicely displayed and though they
add dimension to the story, there are so many of
them that after looking at a few of them they go

(SN# 73) in 1977. He got his copy of Easy
Writer I directly from John Draper (aka
Captain Crunch) and started right off using
his computer for writing.
The Portal project came to him out of
the blue. Rob had been talking with Electronic Arts about various ideas, but they
were not getting anywhere. Then came a
call from Brad Fregger at Activision. After
some discussion, the work began on Portal.
Two years later, after several programming
changes and cutbacks on creative ideas,
Portal made it to the market. The product,
as you see it, is complete and well packaged. A lot of time was spent working on
the user interface and graphic images, as
well as on the data and novel itself.
When not using his computer for writing,
Rob enjoys computer simulations, notably
Gato and Orbitor. He is currently working
on a new book to be printed in the traditional manner, and has some ideas for a
possible sequel to Portal.
unnoticed.
The documentation is also very thorough in providing dimension to the story, but lacking in substance of useful interface information. One can
save one's current data access status, but I could
find NO reference as to how to leave the program.
I just remove the disk and turn off the computer.
The screen graphics, text display, and haunting
sounds are excellent. I think that this program adds
a new dimension to the computerized novel. Once I
got involved in the story, the awkward interface
only bothered me because it slowed my reading of
the story. This novel could not be presented in book
format and have the same impact (I am told that it
may be released as a book). The intriguing difference is that the "story/novel" is built upon the data
found in the various databases.
BEGINNING READING
Portal begins with the entry of your DNA#
(something you are not likely to have) or your
name. The name you enter will be used to SAVE or
"bookmark" your place in the story. When you start
"new" from the beginning, a very artistic graphic
display sets the scene and puts you into the future

and identifies your primitive communication interfaces.
With a little bit of "hacking" (the only real challenge), you are provided with some "online HELP"
to explain your means of interfacing with the various data areas (C64 version only). The Amiga interface is "intuitively" obvious.
Until you have accessed factual data, 'Homer',
the key access area, cannot continue to tell you the
story. Most of the data is found in only three of
the twelve data areas; Central Processing, SciTech,
and History. Secondary areas are PsiLink, Geography, Med 10, and Military. Psychological, Life Support, EdMod, and Wasatch (which provide only superficial gloss).
As you begin your reading, most of the data
areas are empty. The story is slow to begin, but
once it gets going there are several subplots running
at the same time. The reading takes on the anxious
persistence of a book that cannot be put down. Just
one more message, just one more data item, just

one more check to see what HOMER has for me.
'Believe me, you can get involved in this story and
you won't finish it quickly. It will take you several
days of reading. Gee, maybe I can finish reading
this disk tonight.
When you are ready to finish a day's reading, be
sure to save your current set of accessed messages.
Then just take the current disk from your computer
and turn it off. I often found myself leaving the
computer on so that I could just pick up again
from where I left off without restarting.
If you enjoy reading good science fiction and
want to participate in the reality suggested by the
science fiction of less than fifty years ago, that of
using computer to tell a story as it could never be
told before; then Portal is for you. If you enjoy
computer text adventures for their stories, but don't
really enjoy their puzzles; then Portal is for you. If
you want to see outstanding computer graphics and
sophisticated computer programming; then take a
look at Portal.

I

Scenarios for SSI's Warship
by Bob Proctor
During the second half of 1942, US and
Japanese forces battled for control of a small
airstrip on the remote island of Guadalcanal. Control of this base, Henderson Field, gave the US
control of the air over the island, meaning that
American supply ships could unload by day and
Japanese ships could not. At night, though, the
planes were grounded and so, the Japanese adopted
the practice of landing troops and supplies under
cover of darkness. This required fast ships (capable
of starting outside the effective range of the
bombers at Henderson at sunset and getting back to
that range by sun up) and that meant destroyers.
Of course, destroyers are not noted for their capacity as cargo vessels. Consequently, many trips
were needed to keep the army on Guadalcanal supplied. So regularly did the Japanese ships come and
go in the night that the Americans began to call it
the "Tokyo Express". Stopping it was the job of the
destroyers and cruisers (and occasionally even battleships!) of the US Navy. It was no easy task. The
Japanese were better trained in night-time fighting
and had a much better torpedo, the famous Type
93 "Long Lance". The waters around Guadalcanal

were the scene of more naval battles in World War
II than any other region on the globe and the bay
in front of Henderson Field was the graveyard of
so many ships it became known as "Ironbottom
Sound."
SSI's recent game Warship is an excellent way to
simulate the drama of these night-time battles. Two
are already included as scenarios with the game and
it is easy to use the existing map of Ironbottom
Sound to create more. Here are two.

tion the ships for both sides. You can select a solitaire mode when you restart the game. First, you
have to build it.
2. Create the scenario using the data provided in
this article. The answers are in the same order as
the questions. When selecting ships, pick the ship
classes in exactly the order shown so that ships will
follow each other properly in line formation. Double check the name, course, speed and division of
each ship before you leave the deployment phase,
that's your last chance to catch mistakes.

Creating New Scenarios
First, a word of caution. SSI games like Warship
and Kampfgruppe let you create scenarios, not edit
them. This means that once a scenario is saved to
disk, it is generally not possible to go back and
correct mistakes. So, read these instructions first
and then work very carefully to avoid errors.
1. From the opening menu, select Build Scenario. Also make sure you select a Two Player
game, otherwise you won't get to rename or posi-

3. The Build Scenario routine does not set
course and speed for divisions properly (it should
take them from the lead ship but doesn't). Therefore, don't save the game until you go into the orders phase and set course and speed for all divisions for both sides. As soon as the action phase
starts, hit "0" and save the game. Two minutes of
game time will have run off but it's the only way
to get the divisions set properly.
These two scenarios do not work well as Transport missions because the UN ships did not need to
come anywhere near the east edge of the map. Each
Continued on pg. 51

German Vessels for SSI's Warship
by Joseph S. McMaster

[Ed. Note: SSI has just released Battlecruiser,
(the companion game to Warship) based on naval
surface warfare in the Atlantic theatre. The new
game design handles World War I scenarios in the
North Atlantic more effectively (especially with regard to magazine explosions on British vessels) and
does not use approximations in terms of armament
as in the following. This article is presented as a
service to our readers who like Warship and, for
whatever reason, do not have Battlecruiser.]
I was greatly pleased by the recent release of
SSI's Warship, an extremely playable simulation of
combat between World War II surface naval vessels.
Like all Gary Grigsby designs, there is meticulous
attention paid to detail and accuracy, but I was
personally disappointed by the focus on the Pacific
Theater to the exclusion of the Atlantic. I mean,
it's all very well and good to set up engagements
between the super-dreadnoughts Yamato and Iowa,
but where is the romance? I mean, they never made
movies of the caliber of "Sink the Bismarck!" or "In
Pursuit of the Graf Spee" about the Yamato or
Iowa, did they?
Fortunately for those of us who relish the
thought of seeing the Royal Navy and the Kriegsmarine once again in furious battle, Gary Grigsby
was wise enough to include a rather able construction ability in his game. With this in mind, I would
like to present some of the ships and battles of this
theater.
There are two problems encountered when trying to reconstruct German vessels in Warship. The
first obstacle is that Germany mounted different
guns on its ships than those that are included in the
game. Therefore, the characteristics of the German
armament must be examined in order to find appropriate substitutes. For instance, Bismarck
mounted 15" (14.96") guns as its main armament.
However, the 15" British gun does not begin to approach the German 15" gun in performance. The
penetration values of the German gun are

actually very close to
the 16"/45 caliber
weapon included in
the game. Indeed, the
range is actually
farther than the
Japanese 18.1" gun!
In choosing guns for the German ships, then, I
have tried to balance the factors of shell size, range
and penetration. If any one parameter has been
weighted, it is penetration. Further, before you
dismiss this process of approximation as unrealistic,
I would point out that some gun values in the game
are already approximated. The 16"/45 caliber gun is
used by all three nationalities. Yet, this was actually
quite a different weapon for all three and with
fairly diverging values. The gun in the game represents an averaging of these values.
The second problem in simulating the Kriegsmarine is twofold. First, most of the German Navy
was sunk or otherwise destroyed during the course
of the war. Since the exact statistics on the ships
were classified before the war and the vessels were
unavailable for examination after the war, the true
values may never be known. In a similar situation,
the Allies believed until the end of the war that the
Yamato class mounted 16" guns. Only afterward,
when the unmounted 18.1" guns of the Shinano
were found, was the truth discovered. The result is
that some speculation has been necessary and one
sometimes encounters different statistics (depending
upon the source consulted). I have tried to avoid
this roadblock by using several sources.
Second, different values for some characteristics
are often available from the same source. For instance, in calculating flotation ratings should Standard, Trial, or Full Load Displacement be used? I
have generally used the values that appear to have
been used in the game. To cite an exception, I
point to the British battlecruiser, Hood, whose
statistics I have included for use in the Bismarck
scenario. The Hood's design speed was 31.5 knots.

By the time of her encounter with the Bismarck,
however, she was so old that she couldn't even
muster thirty knots. I have, therefore, given Hood a
speed of 28 knots.
The printed table represents my compilation of
data. The abbreviations are the same as those used
in Warship. Ammunition amounts and Ship Selection Points have been estimated. I should point out,
however, that due to its small size, the pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee should be built on a
heavy cruiser "chassis." Also, although the actual
class name of the pocket battleship was Deutschland, I have the Admiral Graf Spee because her
characteristics were slightly superior to her sister
ships, Deutschland and Admiral Scheer. If, however, you build the Bismarck's sister ship, the Tirpit:, add 4xVII TT (4) L-R/T(4).
The Scharnhorst class was scheduled to be refitted with bigger guns by 1944. If you give this class

the 16"/45 caliber main gun, raise the Ship Selection Points to 160. Also on this class, the secondary
guns have been mounted in a more consolidated
fashion to allow room for the torpedo mounts (four
single mounts become two double mounts). Hood
likewise had its tertiary guns altered, as well as
having two of its torpedo tubes which were actually
separate and submerged joined with the others due
to space limitations.
To explain the information listed under
`Armament' in the table, let's look at the Bismarck.
The first line calls for two 16"/45 cal. guns, each
with 120 rounds of ammunition, mounted four
times: (B)ow, (B)ow, (S)tern, and (S)tern. The "M"
after the slash denotes that this is (M)ain armament.
If this were (S)econdary or (T)ertiary, it would be
followed with a number in parentheses giving the
number of guns/tubes per mount.)
Continued on pg. 50

Titans (cont)

TITANS OF THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
Continued from pg. 29
ing particularly unique. The same is true of the
Bard's Tale games which, on the surface, are rather
typical fantasy quests; Skyfox and Arcticfox which
look just like a slew of other action games; and Ultimate Wizard which, at first glance, could be any
of a hundred other climbing games in the Jumpman
tradition.
There is something about these games that lifts
them above the level of their peers, though.
Whether it is a matter of their better graphics,
greater depth of play or unparalleled degree of
complexity, these programs have met with a great
deal of success. Perhaps the best explanation of this
phenomenon lies in the fact that, for all their complexity, they are very enjoyable. They may have
convoluted rules and be almost impossible to win,
but they are so much fun to play that this hardly
matters. I've played the Wizard games for hours
without ever seeing more than the first few screens,
but I still come back for more. I am so bad at
playing strategy games that I am often beaten at
Tic-Tac-Toe, but I keep playing EA's because they
are even fun when you lose nine out of ten games.
Further, even when an EA game's plot line has
turned up in many games before it, one can be
certain that enough about it has been improved and
changed enough to make it worth a look.
Where EA really shines, however, is in its truly
original material. EA is unrivaled when it comes to
transforming intriguing and unique ideas into
trend-setting games. Archon may have had its roots
in traditional boardgames and Robot Rascals in
card games, but they are both wonderfully original
in the annals of computer gaming. After all,
Shakespeare's King Lear has its roots in Celtic
mythology, but no one would use that fact to denigrate either the originality or the brilliance of the
play.
Music Construction Set has been imitated many
times since its release, and it has even been improved upon. MCS, however, is still the standard
against which all other music programs are judged
(and with good reason). Similarly, M.U.L.E. and
Seven Cities of Gold have been copied, but never
bested.
Indeed, EA's games are not all giants from the
past — just look at Starflight. There are other
space games, to be sure, but none with the intricacies of this latest masterpiece from EA. Think of
Radio Baseball with its fresh look at one of com-

puter gaming's oldest standbys [Ed.: Even better,
check out Earl Weaver Baseball when it's released
in late June.). Consider Instant Music, one of EA's
better offerings for the Amiga, which allows even
the most musically incompetent among us ("La
Traviata," anyone?) to play reasonably good music
with very little preparation.
Given this level of excellence, it should not be
surprising that games sold under the EA label have
attained such a high rate of success. An EA game,
like a Spielberg film or a Jane Fonda videotape, is
a known quantity. When you buy one, you know
what you're getting and you know that it will most
likely be good. Of course, I don't care for most of
Spielberg's movies and my idea of exercise is limited to Aerobic Typing, so I suppose there most be
some people who don't like Ea's games. No matter!
Enough people do like EA's style to have made the
company one of today's most powerful forces in
computer gaming.
Chapter Four
In which examination is made of some of Electronic Arts' newest material, chosen jointly by the
author and the company.
Last month, it was simple enough to choose
software to review from Epyx. I just covered all of
their new games. Doing so for EA would be a
formidable task because of the sheer size and diversity of its new product line. To give EA the
fairest representation I could, I called Charlotte
Taylor and asked her to send me the games she felt
were best. I also asked specifically for a few programs that sounded interesting, and the results of
my investigations follow.
Moebius: This schizophrenic game doesn't seem
to be able to decide just what it wants to be. It has
a finely detailed martial arts combat phase which
would stand alone very well, and it has an Ultimastyle adventure could easily have been made part of
that series, especially now that EA is distributing it
for Origin. The two parts don't fit together very
well, but each is individually enjoyable. If you look
at it as getting two entirely separate games in one
package, you'll do fine.
Marble Madness: Though I rarely indulge in
trips to a local arcade, this game caught my eye on
my last trip. The home version has all the elements
of the arcade game and the option of using a joystick instead of a trac-ball to roll your marble

through a series of fantastic mazes improves gameplay immeasurably. The C-64 version loses a bit of
the arcade game's graphic finesse in the translation,
but this is more than made up for by the addition
of an extra level which isn't found on any other
version.
Amnesia: As a New Yorker, I found the idea of
wandering through a computerized version of the
Big Apple very appealing, but even if that appeal
doesn't carry through to gamers in other parts of
the world, Amnesia is an excellent adventure. The
game elements aren't very complex, but the text is
so rich and the story so interesting that one hardly
notices that this is probably the least interactive
piece of interactive fiction ever made. [Ed.: I don't
know. Have you ever seen Portal, reviewed in this
issue.]
Make Your Own Murder Party: Hot on the heels
of the nation's newest fad, this program helps you
set up a whodunnit party in which you and your
guests play the parts of suspects in a murder mystery. The mysteries are fun and there are worse
ways to spend a few hours than playing through
them, but the computer hardly does anything except print your guests' names on their invitations
and clues. You won't do any better, but you'd do
just as well to pick up a non-computer murder
party game at a toy store.
Mind Mirror: Timothy Leary had an interesting
notion in mind when he wrote this program and he
deserves credit for making a valiant effort to bring
it to the home computer screen. His technique of
using numerical scales to make comparisons between a number of people, items or concepts is
flawed, however, and this flaw spoils the whole

game. Instead of making a revolutionary program,
he has made one that is self-indulgent and highly
repetitive. The role-playing portion is entertaining
and contains a witty spoof of Infocom's Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy, but it isn't extensive enough
to offset the statistical analysis portion.
Bard's Tale II: A fine sequel to Bard's Tale
which introduces several new features: dungeons,
magic spells, and a new character class for magicians called the Archmage. Compatibility the Ultima, Wizardry and the first game is what really
makes this game, subtitled "The Destiny Knight,"
especially good.
Robot Rascals: A charming blend of strategy and
luck makes this part card, part computer game
(covered in detail in issue 34 of CGW) unusually
enjoyable. Depending on the company you're with,
this zany scavenger hunt might be a better choice
for a party game than Murder Party.
Chapter Five
Some final thoughts about Electronic Arts.
There is little that can be said about professionalism that does not apply to Electronic Arts and
this comes through in the skill for programming,
fine-tuning, packaging and marketing software that
has allowed EA to succeed where so many others
have failed. Beyond this, however, EA knows what
it takes to make a good game and it puts this
knowledge into each product it releases — and it is
because of this that Electronic Arts has become the
biggest of the computer gaming titans.
Next Month: Part Three of Five: Ardai on Activision

Fiery Ambush (cont)

FIERY AMBUSH: THREE TACTICAL INFANTRY
SYSTEMS SURVEYED!

Continued from pg. 23
UF is by far the most ambitious of these three games. It gives
you some nice scenarios to get you started, but it really challenges
you to set out on your own and start designing custom-built scenarios that can more fully realize the potential of the system.

"THE HIGH GROUND"
Computer Ambush is the only game to deal with the "subtactical" level of giving orders to each individual soldier -- here, it
wins by default. It allows you maximum control over the movement and combat of each of your units. Also, the game does an
excellent job of simulating command control difficulties, since each
squad has a leader and an assistant and your men do their assigned tasks much slower as they get farther away from the leaders.
Field of Fire is distinctive for ease of play. A player has no
trouble getting into the flow of the play within a couple of minutes
of booting the disk. It is also the only game that allows something
of a campaign, where the scenarios can be linked and surviving
units are carried from one scenario to the next.
Under Fire is exceptional in its versatility. This is the game
with limitless potential for "design-your-own" scenarios on almost
any type of World War H tactical combat (in this regard, it is
VERY much like Squad Leader). One other big plus is that UF is
being well supported by Avalon Hill. They have already published
a separate "Extended Units and Capabilities" disk, which can be
purchased separately. This disk contains the data which allows a
much wider variety of vehicles and weapon types in UF. In other
words, UF can form the framework of an ever expanding family of
releases.

In Computer Ambush, you can never have too many hand
grenades! When playing the "Ambush" scenario, set your men up
around the perimeter of the town square (the Germans always pass
through that nice piece of open ground). Have everyone arm a
grenade and wait. The German squad will be spread out, so wait
for the point man to pass right to the end of the square, then have
your men blanket the square and approach road with grenades.
The ensuing mass of explosions could easily take out five or six of
the Germans, leaving only a few to mop up.
Similarly, on the defensive (playing the Barn Defense scenario), don't wait for the Germans to stroll blithely across the
street. Start lobbing grenades into all of the buildings to the north
and west where the Germans could be preparing the attack. If you
wait, they will be tossing a fair number of grenades into your forward positions before they try crossing the street.

"THE LOW GROUND"
Now for the problems! Even the second edition of Computer
Ambush is slow. Who wants to spend one hour simulating an engagement that lasted about one minute? The game is further limited by primitive graphics, its solitary map, and limited scenarios.
The detailed procedure for entering orders is also problematic for
many.
Field of Fire is frustrating because of the difficulty in determining the weaponry of the units on the board. Also, the lack of
scenario variants and two player options limit the long term repeat
playability of the game.
Under Fire takes a lot of work to learn to play well (this is really due to the large amount of information on the units and the
open-ended play possibilities, but could be considered detrimental
by some). There are also a few quirks in the unit capabilities (all
units in the game can fire indirect - this is not correct). The game
is not for novices unless they have someone who can help them
become familiar with it.
THE BOTTOM LINE: I play UF a lot. I admire it technically
and have developed several of my own personal favorite scenarios
for it. I don't play FOF much, but I do recommend it to newcomers to computer wargaming. The game I keep coming back to is
that dusty old copy of CA. Don't ask me why. It's like driving a
Model-T while people keep driving Maseratis. No, maybe it's more
like driving a 1933 Mercedes- Benz. It's got class!

STRATEGIC BRIEFING
None of these three games "crack" easily. Some of the scenarios
are easier to handle than others, but none of the game systems has
any sort of a flaw that allows you to "beat the system."

In Field of Fire, do not (I repeat, DO NOT) sacrifice your
tanks. It is amazingly tempting to let them run on ahead of your
infantry in the scenarios where your forces have a geographic objective. Play the game assuming that there is a German anti-tank
gun or panzerfaust team lurking in every building, pillbox, and
patch of woods. On a tactical scale, tanks should be treated as
mobile infantry support weapons and enemy tank neutralizers, not
as armored hell-bent-for-leather cavalry! The key in FOF is to
coordinate your attacks and arrange to have several units bring
fire down on each enemy position as it is located. The one exception to this rule is the "Forever Road" scenario (where you have to
clear a stretch of mountainous Sicilian highway of Germans and
exit off the north map edge). My best advice for this one is not to
play it (I have obviously never done very well on it)! In the "Night
of Ste. Anne" scenario, just play through it once to realize how
strong and concentrated (read desperate) the German attack is.
Don't bother trying to spread out an east-west line to meet the
Germans. They are going to come screaming down the eastern
edge (where you start out anyway). First. get all of your units into
the buildings in the village or into the hedgerows around it. Then,
wait! The Germans will be along shortly. With the reduced visibility at night, your first indication will be when German units start
popping up adjacent to the buildings and shooting at you. Then,
it's easy. Shoot back with everything you've got! They will be in
the open and you will be in cover.

UNDER
FIRE!
In Under Fire, I never for any reason lighten the load carried
by any of my units! I am probably wrong in making this absolute
rule, but I just can not bring myself to "drop" ammunition or a
weapon, especially ammunition. You almost never have enough of
that stuff to start with, so why just dump it?
The best hint I have for "playing" OF is to be smart before you
start playing and get the best units for the task at hand. Medium
machine guns are very valuable, fairly portable but still packing
quite a punch. I also like to buy fewer troops of higher quality
rather than a larger mob of rag-tag militia. Quality pays for itself.
As for playing the game itself; the computer is a very good opponent. So good, in fact, that I have yet to identify a mistake or
weakness that it displays consistently. Your best bet is to start out
as the defender in the "Defend Objective" scenario played on the
"Shadow Valley" map. This one has the most open ground, and
gives you the best chance of chewing up the computer's hordes
before they get to you.

GAMING WHIRL
TAKING A PUKE

INDUSTRY BLOOPERS

Occult aid
1313 Steinem Gulch Blvd.
Covertwino, CA 5X8 B7Q

Electric Parts Announces "Sports Fables" Series!
Ring Lardner XXVII, Director of Marketing for EP, announced that the company is producing a "Sports Fables" line
for the Mega ST computers. "We wanted
something simple, dumb and cheap," said
the preppy exec, "so, we licensed the most
notorious names in sports. Then, we combined them with unique design features."
The company will publish Bob Uecker
Baseball with graphics reflecting the
"Good Seat" view of the famous beer
commercial; Bobby Knight College Basketball with joystick-driven chair and optional Puerto Rico scenario; and Gump
Worsley Hockey with its "Puck in your
eye" view.

KILLED UNTIL RED: With cover art
reminiscent of ABC television's
"Amerika" series, this arcade/strategy
game features an Oliver North lookalike attempting to sabotage the
military-industrial complex after a
Kremlin buy-out of the Pentagon.
Strategic options include: 1) leaking
rumors; 2) insider trading of defense
industry stocks; 3) congressional and
politburo lobbying; and 4) green paper
offerings, but the beauty of this
program is the graphically stunning
Ramboesque assault on SAC HQ in
Omaha. (Adam, TI99/4A, Vic-20, 83
rubles). Circle Reader Out-of-Service
#007.
Cerebral Studies Group
c/o Electric Parts
64128 Grapeway Dr.
San Marco, CA 8U2 B4E
GOAD TO APPLEMATICS: This detailed division-level game simulates a
modern armored assault on the Space
Needle in Seattle, WA. Although the
simulation is probably accurate with
regard to Soviet bloc armored characteristics, the defense factor allocated to
the Space Needle is much too high. In
reality, a well-placed SA-7 attack
could probably bring it to the ground.
This game uses the long-awaited roleplaying system which allows the Soviet
commanders to be promoted all the
way to the Politburo, if he's proficient
enough. (Cray, $147.50). Circle Reader
Out-of-Service #458-2765.

(OK, so its the May issue!
We didn't have room in April!)

99/4 Boxes of Chips on the Wall
by The Old '99er
Consarn it, I can see ole Pepina's
tryin' to cheat ya' at checkies, again. So,
jest in case you wuz wonderin' what new
games ya' could play, here's my walk-thru
of "Balance of Power" for the unexpanded
TI 99/4A. (cont. on p. 2001).

Cray Corner by Clay Horner
This month, we're covering arcade
games for the Cray, but before we do that,
I want to talk about the finest 10 gigabyte
expansion board on the market. Cray P. S.
Suzette, Inc. manufactures (cont. on p.
2010).

TIMEX/SINCLAIR DINOSAURS

Cerebral Stimulations, Inc Merges
Product Lines!
Due to the unexpected marketing
boom in CSI's fantasy line, Noel Millings
(Pres. of CSI) announced the first crossover product, The Wizard of Oz at The
Battle of Gettysburg (by Cary Cricksby,
Rutger Damien, and Buck Kriegspiel). Full
color documentation features a historical
commentary entitled, "Would the South
have won if the Wizard of Oz had arrived
in time? The use of mortar sound effects
for the wizard's spells is questionable, but
... (cont. on p. 96)

This issue, I want to discuss the problems inherent in porting "War In Russia"
over to the Timex 8K system. Many will
assume that this is an unproductive attempt, but I assure you that it can be
done with minimal streamlining of the design. Just (cont. on p. Brazil 66).

READERS' INKBLOT DEVICE
1. This graphic most looks like:

a) the disk from SSI's "War in the
South Pacific" after being left in the
sun for one afternoon;
b) the mind of CGW's editor after
getting this (or any) issue off to the
printer; or
c) an ink blot. (They always show
you an ink blot, but you never get the
option to say "it looks like an ink
blot").

DESIGNER'S PROFILE

"B"io of a "B" Movie Fan
by Johnny Wilson

DAVE ANDERSON
(author of Hollywood Hi-Jinx)
What do Johnny Carson, Sonny Tufts, Morgan
Fairchild, Xavier Cugat, and Roger Corman (the
king of "B" movie moguls) have in common? What
do "Plan 9 From Outer Space," "2,000 Maniacs," and
"Make Them Die Slowly" have to do with Infocom's
new Hollywood Hi-Jinx? The former are all
celebrity names which are dropped in the course of
playing the game (though the author denies that the
black cat heading in the direction of Johnny Carson's house is Joan Rivers' familiar) and the latter
are the classic "B" movies which spawned the satirical spoof on tinseltown.
Dave Anderson, the author of Hollywood HiJinx, blames the conception of the game on television. Where else could he have seen movies so bad
that he wondered why producers would bother? He
perceives the program as a tribute to "B" movies.
You may be wondering how a relatively normal
journalism major from California State University
at Fullerton could end up as author of a major
software program. It all began with a biology class
where class members were given a limited password
to the school's mainframe. The simple idea was for
each student to analyze his/her diet using a diet
program. Unfortunately for the lovely young co-ed
in the cubicle next to him, Anderson stole her
password and began to explore the system. Spending in excess of five hours of her computer time,
he left the lab with a severe headache, a desire to
learn more, and nothing accomplished. Later, a
friend purchased an Atari 800 and they attempted
to learn basic from books checked out of the school
library. They didn't get anywhere until they found
Atari BASIC for Kids.
That was his beginning, but his present opportunities came about as a result of his securing a position in the testing department of Infocom in 1983.
He soon became the department head in testing and

In lieu of the photo of "Hollywood" Dave Anderson NOT
received at press time, our cracked staff researchers
have dug up these hitherto unpublished (?) photos of
Dave, showing him as a young, naive college journalism
student (on the left), and as a successfully published
Infocom author (on the right).

began to receive attention from the creative staff
due to some humorous material he was writing in
Infodope, the in-house newsletter at Infocom (and 1
thought it was the in-house name for people like
me who rarely play text-adventures). In 1985, he
was invited to become a writer. Liz Cyr-Jones
presented him with an idea for a "haunted house"
mystery. Haunted houses, however, are old hat, so
the idea evolved via one-page synopsis into the
present idea. As it evolved, Aunt Hildegarde was
originally supposed to be a supermarket tabloid
seeress and the Malibu beach house something like
a cut-rate Winchester Mystery House. Anderson
decided, however, that he didn't know enough
about the occult (even the "pop" versions thereof),
but he did know about "B" movies. It seems that he
and Brian Moriarty have devoted a major portion
of their lives to seeking out the worst of celluloid
history. The "B" movies angle allowed the introduction of movie properties into the storyline and facilitated the present shape of the game. This also
gave him a chance to indulge in another avocation.
As a high school student, Anderson had reveled in
writing reviews of non-existent movies with outrageous titles. If Uncle Buddy was a "B" movie pro-

ducer, he could run rampant with phony movie titles.
When asked about his inspiration for certain
ideas in the plot line, Anderson was fascinatingly
candid. Uncle Buddy's picture was a serendipitous
discovery. Dave and his producer couldn't agree on
how Uncle Buddy should look. One wanted early
sleaze and the other wanted contemporary
schmooze. They went to a local stock photo house
in Boston and searched the files for the "perfect"
Uncle Buddy. The search was futile, but on the
way home, they discovered that the manager of the
photo place was an excellent compromise of their
respective images. They asked the manager if he'd
serve as the model, a deal was struck, and Uncle
Buddy had a visual incarnation. Another important
character came to life in the stock photo shop, as
well. The shop had a file of mailman photographs.
While thumbing through the file, the bizarre imagery of Buck Palace, fighting mailman, took
shape.

For those interested in the nuts and bolts of the
game's design, the Infocom process works something like this. After approval of the one page synopsis, the author begins to write on the company's
DEC 20 mainframe. Infocom has its own programming language which is used on the mainframe and
converts readily into the languages used by different machines on the market. It is corporate policy

for the new games to be developed off of the most
recent parser. This means that Hollywood Hijinx
was built off of the Wishbringer parser. Since Moriarty, like his fiendish fictional namesake, had put
in some personalized programming touches which
diabolically appeared at the most inopportune times
during the creation of Hollywood Hijinx, Anderson
had to spend a great deal of time removing Wishbringer references from the program. Fortunately
for Anderson, Dave Liebling (author of Maze Wars
on the Macintosh) was around to solve some of the
programming problems.
In addition to some of the more mundane programming problems, Liebling was responsible for
the complex Hedge Maze found in Aunt Hildy's
garden. The maze consists of 828 possible locations,
but only 260 of them actually unique. Liebling
crunched the entire maze into a table so that the
memory required is equivalent to one room description. Steve Meretzky was also a help in the
program design. Meretzky is really more of a catalyst than designer. Nevertheless, those of you who
have suffered over the elevator puzzle have Steve
to thank for it.
Asked if his journalism background (including
the time spent as Production Manager for the California State University at Los Angeles' school paper) was of any value in the world of game design,
Anderson replied with an unequivocal yes. He believes that the ability to summarize a lot of facts in
a short amount of space is indispensable when
writing adventure games. After all, the less space
used in non-essential description allows for the inclusion of more germane data. Asked if the puzzles
in Hollywood Hijinx weren't less deadly than the
average Infocom adventure, he also replied in the
affirmative. After all, the player is a favorite
nephew of Uncle Buddy and Aunt Hildegarde and
they wouldn't want to kill him, just test him.
Asked if he resented people trying strange things in
his games, Anderson claimed that he did not.
However, he does point out that most of the cannon balls are welded together as ornaments and the
cannon too heavy for one person to move so that
players wouldn't be firing anywhere and at will. We
resent being called a "geek," however, simply because we tried to open the front door with Buck
Palace's bazooka. It could have been real.

KILOBYTE (cont)

An Annotated Bibliography
of World War II
Simulations
Continued from pg. 7
Carrier Force (N ■ a) [SSI, AT/C,
$59.95, Sea/Air] A tactical/operational
simulation of the major Pacific carrier
battles of World War II, this game is extremely slow in execution and its historical
accuracy may be questioned in some areas.
Despite these flaws, it covers its subject in
an interesting way and is worth the effort
for anyone desirous of learning about the
period.
Computer Ambush (■ ■ ■ I) [SSI,
A/AT/C, $59.95, Land] A tactical manto-man simulation of patrolling in World
War II. The graphics are primitive, but
the details make up for this deficiency to a
large extent.
Europe Ablaze (s •N) [SSG, A/C,
$49.95, Air] A simulation recreating the
Battle of Britain and the Bomber Offensive over Germany. Design-your own scenarios allow a much greater flexibility, but
overall, the success of Carriers at War is
lacking.
Kampfgruppe ( mmmmm ) [SSI, A/AT/C,
$59.95, Land] A tactical simulation of
warfare on the Eastern Front during
World War II, this game was Computer
Gaming World's Game of the Year (1985).
Multiple options abound; the only defect is
the lack of joystick input. Still, an essential addition to any wargamer's library.
Kampfgruppe Scenario Disk #1 ■)
[SSI, AT/C, $21.95, Land] Five additional
scenarios for kampfgruppe; they are not
really necessary. Historical accuracy is
subject to question in some of the scenarios, and the basic game itself can recreate
any options the player wishes.
Operation Market Garden (■ .) [SSI,
A/AT/C/I, $49.95, Land] A tactical/operational simulation of the World
War II airborne operation ("Monty's
Folly"), this game suffers from poor
graphics; determining the road network is
a lesson in frustration. Also, moves may
not be adjusted in mid-play, and overall,
the clumsy and unforgiving user interface
dooms this simulation.
Rommel: Battles For Tobruk Om A)
[GDW, AT/C, $34.95, Land/Air] Similar
to Chickamauga, this tactical/operational
simulation of World War II desert battles
suffers from the same defects. Detailed and
complex, the graphics and slow execution
doom it as a playable simulation. The supply and air rules are the most complex yet
seen in a computer simulation, but sheer
unplayability and ennui will deter most

players.
Under Fire. (. ■ ■ .) [AH, A, $59.95,
Land] A tactical simulation of World War
II infantry (with armored support). The
game is open-ended in that it has a
versatile map maker and strong scenario
builder.
U.S.A.A.F. (s ■ ■ ■ 1) [SSI, A/AT/C,
$59.95, Air] An operational/strategic simulation of the Bomber Offensive over Germany (1943-1945) on a daily basis. Scenarios range from one month to two years.
With German production and industrial
devastation the key, it is a fascinating
product.
War In Russia ( mmmmm ) [SSI, A/AT,
$79.95, Land] An operational/strategic
simulation of the entire Eastern Front
(1941-1945), this game is easily learned
and played. Sheer size presents the difficulty; despite its size and problems with
the artificial intelligence in the later stages
of the war, this is an essential addition to
the serious wargamer's library. Several
other companies are planning Eastern
Front detailed simulations, and they may
well detract from War In Russia's appeal;
however, it is currently the only product
with such depth.
Warship (. ■ s) [SSI, A/AT/C, Sea] A
tactical simulation of Pacific surface naval
engagements (World War II). The play
and documentation seem to gloss over
much-needed details as to what is (or
should be) happening, and therefore the
game's main appeal is to true naval aficionados and not to those with a marginal
interest.

Advanced Level
(Moribund)
(It 1.)
A/AT/C, $14.95, Land] An operational simulation of the Battle of the
Bulge, this game suffers from poor graphics; determining the road network is a lesson in frustration. Also, moves may not be
adjusted in mid-play, and overall, the
clumsy user interface dooms this simulation.
Objective: Kursk ■ I) [SSI, AT/C,
$39.95, Land] A tactical/operational simulation of the largest tank battle in history. Extremely detailed, although user
input is via keyboard and somewhat tedious. Overall, somewhat bland as a result
of the game system utilized.
Ardennes, Breakthrough in the

[SSI,

PEEK

(cont)

controlled players. Computer players
have different playing styles and the
program can be modified according to
house rules. It also includes a statistical analysis function which allows the
player to calculate his chances of improving his hand. Apple ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
JOH Enterprises
6911 S. 66th East Ave. #206
Tulsa, OK 74133
MURPHY'S CROSSING: "Yup, thar's
treasoor and advenchoor in thet ghost
town," but you'll have to solve the
puzzles of an all text adventure to find
any. Players explore the abandoned
mining town of "Murphy's Crossing" in
this new release. IBM ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.
Mindscape
P.O. Box 1167
Northbrook, IL 60065-1167
SURVEYS UNLIMITED: This is an
extremely useful tool for teachers of
students from Third Grade up. It
contains a library of 60 different surveys, an editor to create your own surthe
veys, and the capacity to print
results in the form of pie charts, bar
graphs or line graphs. Apple ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.

URIDIUM: "Who is that masked
Manta fighter pilot?" He's the lone
defender of a planetary sector which
consists of fifteen planets which are
being systematically exploited because
of their "uridium" deposits. As that
lone Manta pilot, each player must
strive to eliminate fifteen different Super-Dreadnought ships at each planet.
Graphics are extremely similar to
PARALLAX and there is a "Hall of
Fame" function on each disk (IF your
score is high enough). C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
WORDMAZE: Wordmaze is an educational product that enables teachers
or parents to create "Word Search"
puzzles with the computer. These are
useful for any subject and the puzzles
may be completed on the computer
itself or on a print-out. Apple, C64/128 ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#10.
Prime Solutions, Inc.
1940 Garnet Ave.
San Diego, CA 92109
DISK TECHNICIAN: This is certainly
not a game, but it might save your
hard disk system. DT repairs damaged
sectors, detects single errors (DOS
won't catch them until there are at
least ten), monitors marginal snots in

order to keep them from becoming
major problems, and attempts to recover lost data. Besides these functions, the disk contains a 700 byte
memory-resident program called
SafePark (tm) which automatically
moves the hard disk to a safe zone at
any time there is no hard disk activity
for seven seconds or more. This protects the disk from loss of data due to
power spikes or power loss. IBM
($99.95). Circle Reader Service #11.

Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia CANADA
B4V 2X6
KURSK CAMPAIGN: Like Stalingrad
Campaign (reviewed elsewhere in this
issue), this offering from SimCan is a
command study of the eastern front in
World War II. The historical events
are chronologically later than Stalingrad Campaign, but the system relies
on the same basic emphasis of limited
intelligence which characterizes the
other game. Apple, IBM ($60.00). Circle Reader Service #12.
Continued on pg. 54

DIE KRIEGSMARINE (cont)

Continued from pg.39
THE SCENARIOS

In the following scenarios, the ships involved
will be followed by a parenthetical reference to
their class (unless they are the ship which the class
is named after) so that the reader may find them in
the list above or in the Warship rules. All scenarios
are on open sea with a four hour time limit. Damage control for the Germans should be set at 3.
1. In Pursuit of the Graf Spee: Morning, 13 DECEMBER 1939, near the coast of Uruguay, Visibility (8), Air Control (A), Battleline: Admiral Graf
Spee vs. Exeter, Ajax (Leander) and Achilles
(Leander).
2. Sink the Bismarck!: 0515, 24 MAY 1941, the
North Atlantic, Visibility (5), Air Control (N-for
play balance), German (Japanese) Bombardment:
Bismarck and Prinz Eugen (Admiral Hipper) vs.
Hood, Prince of Wales (King George V) and Suffolk
(Australia). Unlike regular Bombardment scenarios,
require the Germans to achieve only a majority of

points instead of double. This is because the historical battle was such a mismatch. The only reason
the Germans escaped with their skins was that a
lucky hit exploded one of Hood's magazines only
minutes into the battle. Although this can happen
in the game, it is very unlikely. You may wish to
set up this scenario as a regular Battleline with
Hood having already been sunk. I have tried to
make it as even as possible.
3. Invasion of Norway: 0430, 9 APRIL 1940,
Visibility (5), Air Control (A), German (Japanese)
Bombardment: Scharnhorst and Gneisenau
(Scharnhorst) vs. Renown (Repulse) and eight
Jupiter class destroyers. The German ships should
have the older and smaller main guns for this scenario. In this game, however, the Germans do need
double points. As for the British, I was unable to
determine the class of the escorting destroyers and
have given them the benefit of the doubt. Unlike
her sister ship, Repulse, Renown had recently been
refitted and should have its speed raised to 30.

TOKYO EXPRESS (cont)

Warship Scenarios
Continued from pg.37
DD pushed about 200 floating drums overboard and
launched a small boat with troops to tow the drums
ashore. They could therefore unload anywhere east
of Cape Esperance and within a few miles of shore.
Since, in the actual battles, they unloaded with no
more than minor delay to the fighting, I think they
play better as meeting engagements. If it makes you
feel better, add 100 points to the IJN score to represent the supplies delivered.
The Battle of Cape Esperance
The moon set early and the night was pitch
black. USN Task Force 64 was just rounding the
west end of Guadalcanal and heading for Savo Island. Scott inadvertently "crossed the T" of the
Japanese bombardment force, inflicting heavy
damage and sinking Furutaka and Fubuki.
This was one of the few night battles that the
US can claim to have won in 1942, but the "Tokyo
Express" made its delivery on schedule and unmolested this night. The destroyers of the fourth division were the escort for the supplies and never saw
action (although two were sunk by airplanes the
following day). Can you use them to even the
score?
The Battle of Tassafaronga
Tanaka ran the "Tokyo Express" to perfection.
His destroyers delivered troops and supplies to
Guadalcanal and mauled a force more than twice
their strength in the process! A single Japanese destroyer (Takanami) approached the Americans and
drew most of the fire. It was sunk but the rest
withdrew safely after sinking Northampton and
badly damaging Minneapolis, New Orleans and
Pensacola. Can you do as well?
Bibliography
Dull, Paul S. A Battle History of the Imperial
Japanese Navy. (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
1978).
Morison, Samuel E. A History of the U.S. Naval
Operations in World War II, Vol. 5. (Boston: Little,
Brown and Co., 1949).
Silverstone, Paul H. U.S. Warships of WW II.
(London: Ian Allen, 1965).
Watts, A.J. Japanese Warships of WW II.
(London: Ian Allen, 1966).

DENETHENOR (con t)

WRATH OF DENETHENOR
Continued from pg.31

Eventually you will learn some offensive spells
you can use in combat, but sparingly. You can only
cast one spell at a time; in between, you must wait
for your mage strength to renew itself before you
can cast another. How long this takes depends on
how powerful the spell is and how intelligent you
are. So, it's best to save combat spells for times
when you really need them.
That is basically how the game works. You go
from continent to continent, plus a few other
places, killing monsters and picking up the information you need to defeat Denethenor. The trip is
a long one because there is a lot of going back and
forth among the lands as the game progresses.
You won't find any typical magic items in
"Wrath". No plate mail +3 or flaming swords await
you. There are, however, some objects that you
need in order to cast spells. Not every spell requires
an object, however, so it's up to you to figure out
which spells need them and which don't. Most of
the time, you'll get these items after killing monsters. Farther into the game, however, you will find
a place where they can be purchased. It isn't an
easy place to reach.
Without question, the crucial part of the game is
making sure you have talked to everyone in a town
or castle. Otherwise, you might miss an important
clue, or even worse, a critical spell. There are at
least two spells that you MUST learn in order to
succeed in your mission.
Spells (one each) will be learned in Backwoods,
Solrain Argoth, Dry Gulch, Lake Fionell, Bay of
Mirrih, Castle Mirrih, Lotrus Amphitheater, CastleDrawn, The Banshee (a pub), and En Siev. There
is also something of immense importance to be
learned at the old Castle Denethenor.
A word about CastleDrawn is necessary. As the
sign says, "it's different." If you use a mapping
spell, you will see that the castle is laid out in the
form of a giant X, surrounded by a sort of yard. In
this yard is an endless army of unfriendly wizards.
You must find a way of getting past them, without
having to fight (which would be useless, since the
supply of wizards never gives out), in order to
reach the friendly wizards at the top and bottom so
you can learn a certain spell. This requires some
careful planning and a fair degree of patience.
Essentially, though, "Wrath" is not a difficult
game, simply time-consuming. It takes a lot of time
to go through each town and castle talking to ev-

eryone, not to mention running back and forth
among the continents and islands. Attention to detail and good note-taking will get you through to a
successful conclusion.
Game saving has some interesting points. You
can save almost anywhere, any time. In addition,
the game is saved for you automatically whenever
you enter a town, castle, dungeon, or dimension
door. Usually, this is helpful, although there were
times when I wished it hadn't done that.
The save is also a true save: should you happen
to die (or get yourself into some other bad trouble)
you can return to your save point, and start from
there, instead of from the very beginning. However, you can have only one save position at a time,
and the save is always done to the game disk, not a
separate one.
There is day and night in the game, and you do
have to keep an eye on the time, as most shops
(except food stores) close at a certain hour in the
evening, and don't open again until the following
morning. Also, in one place, the hour of midnight
is extremely important. Fortunately, there is a
command you can use to check on the current time.
Speaking of commands, almost everything is
done via single-stroke keys from the keyboard. No
joystick is needed. The first time you cast any
spell, you must type in the entire word, but after
that, the beginning letter will be enough.
Overall, the game is well-crafted. My major
quarrel with it is that it offers nothing fresh
(except perhaps in the way it handles hit points) to
the RPG genre. It's just another hackneyed "kill the
evil wizard" game, with old Ultima-style playing
and graphics, but little in the way of originality or
ground-breaking design characteristics.
This is not necessarily bad. It just means that
"Wrath" is not a major event in the computer RPG
stakes. But at $19.95/$24.95 you do get your
money's worth.
"Wrath of Denethenor" comes with two doublesided diskettes and an instruction booklet. The
manual gives enough information to get started, a
number of helpful hints and tips for getting
through the game, some information on the monsters inhabiting the land, and the small maps of
most of the major outdoor areas.
Bottom line: An easy-playing game of moderate
accomplishments, best suited to those who haven't
played too many games of the RPG type.
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Computer Wargaming 1988-1992:
Continued from pg. 13
wargame may well be the harbinger of the future.
OSS is planning on a multi-user system wherein 8
different computers with one host will be able to
play via modem or in person. These extension
boxes (via hardware card) will permit even nonIBM computers to act as slave terminals and permit
a true multi-user experience. However, there is
some doubt as to the marketability of this. This
writer concurs.
While multi-player games have been designed,
only M.U.L.E. and Lords of Conquest have been
truly successful. The basic problem is that computer
wargames offer the artificial intelligence as the
major advantage. The ever available opponent and
the ability to put the game down at anytime is a
plus. Multi-user games require logistical coordination; with many wargamers now in their 30's and
raising families, it is no longer possible to get together for hours at a time. Thus, this writer does
not believe that multi-user games will be a real
future plus.
(2) Virtually all companies predict an increase in
the sophistication of wargame products. SSI believes
that volume will increase with fewer titles becoming available, but more sales per unit title. What
Jay Selover finds most intriguing is the trend towards real viewpoint gaming, i.e. the player only
has access to what his counterpart would have had.
SimCan, Microprose, and SSG are particularly adept
at emphasizing decision-making at the proper levels. SimCan notes that the "further away one gets
from the action, the less
realistic the situation becomes". For example,
Steve Newburg has
pointed out that in
reality, most land
commanders' concept
of the battle is received
through a set of headphones interspersed with
liberal doses of static.
Thus, his simulations are
attempts to limit one's
perspective to what was
historically available to
the commander. SSG also
attempts to do this via its
artificial intelligence
routines, cf. Battlefront.

Overview
Only one company, Master Designer Software
(marketed by Mindscape) is currently premiering
"wargames" on the 16-bit machines. However, its
products (Defender of the Crown, SDI) are
wargames only in the loosest sense of the term.
Most of the other companies will continue to support the 8-bit systems.
While computer wargaming has traditionally derived many concepts from board wargaming, designers moving from board to computer are relatively rare. Given the complexity of programming,
future computer wargame designers are more likely
to develop as programmers first and then move into
wargaming.
It is likely that the sheer number of new titles
will decrease given the demands for more sophistication in games. The wargaming market will grow,
nonetheless, due to a cross-over of consumer-literate garners. The growing audience may be achieved
through tie-ins (a la Red Storm Rising -- the book
and the game) and fantasy cross-overs. However,
the initial strength of wargaming has been the
"baby boomers." They still represent the backbone
of the hobby and their computer usage is a key to
the hobby of the future.
Conclusions
This writer began with an Atari 800 (having
been swayed by the appearance of Eastern Front at
Origins). Having purchased a Commodore (for title
availability), an IBM-clone is the next watershed.
Utilization of the IBM at work and home will
breed the familiarity that will expand the wargame
and indeed, the computer market as a whole.
Insofar as the 8/16 bit machines are concerned,
no wargame breakthrough has occurred. Wargamers
expanding upwards will be frustrated by the lack of
products available. Thus, the near-future situation
is one of anticipation. Many designers feel that
there is another hardware shakeup coming — the
32-bit machine. However, such machines may well
be too powerful for the home for "mere" gaming.
Office familiarity will increase the IBM-share of
the market in all facets despite its memory-hungry
design and lack of graphics capability.
Sophistication will increase in terms of artificial
intelligence. Despite the designers' advocacy of
multi-player games, this writer thinks that solitaire
efforts will continue to dominate the market.

PEEK (cont)

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
BATTLECRUISER: If you liked
Warship, you'll like Battlecruiser. This
game contains both World War I and
World War II ships and scenarios for
surface battles in the Atlantic. The
tremendous factor in these games is
the option for scenario building (see
Warship scenarios in this issue). Apple,
Atari, C-64/128 ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #13.
PHANTASIE III: WRATH OF
NIKADEMUS: This third adventure in
the trilogy leads the party of six adventurers to their epic encounter with
the evil sorcerer, Nikademus. The documentation has some new flourishes
("Monster Reputation Table" and an
appendix which describes the differences between Phantasie I and II and
Phantasie III) and there are now social
classes and skills for each character.
Bows have replaced rocks as the
ranged weapon of choice. In addition,
hits strike actual body locations instead of representing mere general
damage. Apple, C-64/128 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #14.

Teamwork Software
43 Shadow Ridge Dr.
St. Peters, MO 63376
POWER-PLAY HOCKEY: "Good
play, eh?!" That's what you'll be
telling your friend and teammate when
you play this budget-priced arcade
game. The distinctive factor in this
game is that you and a friend try to
beat the computer instead of each
other. Passing and penalties play more
of a role than other games of this type.
C-64/128 ($15.00). Circle Reader Service #16.

V Ware
2509 N. Campbell, Suite 347
Tucson, AZ 85719
SPECIALIST: This is a truly unique
perspective on the market. If you are
tired of playing economic games where
you are simply making investments,
you will want to challenge yourself
with this simulation of "making a market" instead of being a victim of it.
The challenge is to keep the stock
which you specialize in functioning
within a fair and orderly market. You
determine what price a stock will trade
at next. In the wake of the Ivan
Boesky scandal, this is a simulation
where the SEC can and does get you.
IBM ($89.95). Circle Reader Service
#17.

READER INPUT DEVICE

RID #37 (Use card at p. 5)

On this page, a number of
games and articles are listed for
evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. When
evaluating a game, consider such
things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging and
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, and level of
interest); and LIFE (does the
game wear well?).
For each game which you have
played or each article which you
have read, place a 1 (terrible)
through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number.

GAME RATINGS

CGW readers continue to give strong support to
SSI's Gettysburg by raising it to an impressive 8.00
rating (we had predicted a slight decline... oh
well...). Microprose's Gunship roars onto the scene
with a devastating 7.97 rating to command 2nd
place. SSI's Warship brings an initial salvo of votes
that bracket the game with a 7.16 rating (18th).
As impressive as Gettysburg is over on the

Strategy game side, it is overshadowed by Electronic Art's new Bard's Tale II which tunes in with
an unbelievable 8.10 rating on the Adventure/Action side. Can it be? Yes! Ultima IV has
been dethroned! Bard's Tale II outperformed it this
time, but what will be the ultimate outcome? Firebird's The Pawn just couldn't keep up with more
powerful entries, opening with a 6.73 rating (35th).

