December 1988

Features
Don't Tread on Me!

8

Accolade's "Steel Thunder" Reviewed / Wyatt Lee

The Emperor's New Clones

12

Tips from a Designer of "Empire" / Mark Baldwin

"Stealth Mission"

14

Sublogic's Flight Simulator Reviewed / Brad Bombardiere

Roses and Thorns for Rosella

19

Scorpia Reviews "King's Quest IV"

Interview with Roberta Williams

21

The Force Behind "King's Quest"

"Manhunter: New York"

24

Scorpion's Tale Offers Hints

Point / Counterpoint on "Pool of Radiance"

28

SSI's Adventure Reviewed
Tracie Forman Hines / Ken St. Andre

"Starglider II"

31

Rainbird's Action Game / Frank Eva

Banzai Strike Line

32

SSI's "Typhoon of Steel" / Evan Brooks

The Color of Magic

36

EA's "Sentinel Worlds I: Future Magic" / Scorpia

"Battles In Normandy"

42

Strategic Notes on the SSG Game / Joe Sherfy

Leadership in the American Civil War

44

Notes on the SSI Games / Major David S. Stevens

"Decisive Battles of the ACW: II"

49

SSG's Second ACW Game Reviewed / Jay Selover

"Dragonlance" Invades The Computer

54

SSI's "Heroes of the Lance" / David M. Wilson

50th Issue Contest Winners

69

The Master Scavenger Hunters Revealed

Departments
Taking a Peek
Letters
Video Gaming World (Katz, Kunkel, Worley)
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
6
64
71
71
72

Number 54

Taking A Peek

Access
545 W. 550 South
Suite 130
Bountiful, Utah 84010
HEAVY METAL: This is not a rock
music drum simulator. Instead, players
advance in rank while commanding one
of three weapon systems in this modern
land combat action game. The player
plots strategy on the battle map screen,
then undergoes the test of fire in a
M1A1 Abrams, a XR311 Fast Attack
Vehicle, or an ADATS Air Defense AntiTank System. Anyone for Officers Training School? C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd
Suite 200
San Jose, CA 95128
RACK'EM: Players can "Hustle" up
some action anytime of day or night
with this billiard simulator. The game
plays snooker or four different variations
of pool. Control the strength, aim and
english on each shot against a live opponent or the computer, while learning
the real color of felt. IBM/Tandy ($39.95)
C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
GRAND PRIX CIRCUIT: Players compete against world class drivers, each
with his own characteristics, on a variety
of tracks around the world. After selecting a driving team and car, players must
qualify before venturing onto the tarmac. Then it's "Gentlemen, start your en-

gines." IBM/Tandy ($39.95) C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
JACK NICKLAUS GREATEST 18
HOLES: You don't have to leave the
19th hole to play Jack's greatest 18 in
this challenging golf simulator. Players
select the appropriate club, allow for
wind conditions, slice or hook, and control club speed while trying to stay in
bounds and out of traps. Putting must
allow for breaks in the green. One to
four can play and Jack will join your
group if you like. IBM/Tandy, Apple IIGS,
Amiga ($49.95) C-64/128 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #4.

CEED
13221 Edina Way
Poway, CA 92064
CROSSWORD PUZZLE GENERATOR: You'll never be at a loss for
(Continued on page 66)

Letters

64K machines, but we, as garners, have
become jaded by unfulfilled promises.
. . . [Stellar Crusade] is as close to
my idea of a "perfect" wargame as I
could come to at the time. In effect, I
created the game I had always wanted
to play. The immersion in detail that I associate with the best of the board wargames is coming to the computer world.

Stellar Rebuttal
As the designer of SSI's Stellar
Crusade, I would like to respond to
recent criticisms of the game. I will
begin with a bit of general gaming
philosophy, then move on to address a
few specific questions.
This was
my first
attempt at
a "professional"
game
program.
Over the
years, I
have
played
many of
the
popular
game
programs
available
for home
computers.
Some of these games have been very
good, but almost all have been "thin."
Like many of my age (31), my introduction to the world of gaming was through
the vehicle of board wargames. All of my
personal favorites in that genre have
rules documents which make the
average person not familiar with those
types of games recoil in horror. As one
of my friends once put it, such games
are "too much like work." I realize that
not everyone out there in computer land
has my taste for complete immersion in
detail, but some of us (and apparently
most of those who have reviewed the
game) enjoy complexity.
If there is any major failing in Stellar
Crusade, it may well be in the packaging and not in the rules. One reviewer
has stated that "Stellar Crusade's complexity level demands a warning label . .
. ." Perhaps this is true, in a way. But
part of the problem here is that most of
the games which in the past have been
touted by sales/packaging people as
being rich in detail have, in fact, been
less than detailed in execution. This is to
be expected from programs written for

In the August '88 issue of CGW, Stellar
Crusade was reviewed by Hosea Battles.
I have to admit that your reviewer's comments on the lack of documentation of
the research function in the game were
essentially correct. We should have
caught this in our review of the rules
manual. All copies of the game
produced after the appearance of your
review include an expanded README
file on disk which describes research, as
well as some additional documentation
on other game functions. I am a bit confused about the comment in that same
review that "[the manual] never clearly
explains the economic principles of the
game . . . ." The manual does state the
basic operations of raw materials and industrial production. This is reinforced by
prompts, cautions, and notes on the
economic function screens. Players will
find that assimilating and integrating all
of this information will require that they
become very involved in the game. Experimenting with different colonization
and industrial strategies in an attempt to
exploit the rather complicated "economic
principles" of the game is part of the fun
for those of us who like games that
others feel are "too much like work." All
of the information needed for this is, in
fact, given in the manual and on the
screen. For those who don't mind taking
a bit of advice, the program gives concrete, dynamically calculated suggestions which will help in acquiring an understanding of the economic side of the
game.
The original rules manual for the game
was, in fact, much longer than that
which was originally published. Some
have suggested that the game would be
much easier to learn using the original
manual. This might not be the case.
The primary difference between the
original and published manuals was a
rather tiresome list of menu trees and examples in the original. While it might
have been useful in some ways, most of
the information deleted from the final
version of the manual is easily available
on the screen. Twenty minutes of random fiddling with the menus will teach
players all there is to know about them.
If the information were not available on
screen, it would have remained in the
manual. The decision to shorten the
manual was taken in order to avoid
obscuring the basic principles of the

game with masses of information on
program mechanics. The program
mechanics are well detailed within the
program itself.
Finally, I would like to reassure those
who have expressed concerns about my
use of the term "aborigines" to describe
the indigenous populations of some star
systems. Please consult your dictionaries. I did. The term does not, in
general, apply to any specific racial
group. Within the context of the game,
aboriginal populations are assumed to
be exploited. This may not be the way
we'd like things to be in the future, but
history and current trends suggest that
those without the strength to resist subjugation will continue to be exploited.
Believable futures cannot exist in a historical vacuum. For what it's worth to
the people who worry about my "racist
attitudes," one of my greatgrandmothers was named "Shining
Meadow" (American Indian). My ethnic
heritage is quite mixed and I am offended by accusations of racism. From
my association with the folks at SSI, I
suspect that they aren't very pleased
about the "neo-Nazi" label, either.
Norman C. Koger, Jr.
Huntsville, TX

Ed: We pointed out the dictionary
definition of the word, "aborigine," in
our original answer to Mark Brown's
letter (CGW #52). Be it hereby resolved
that all further references to indigenous
native populations use the term "autochthonous."

No Fooling
I just read the
review of The

Fool's Errand
by Alan
Roberts in the
October '88
issue, and I
was dismayed
by his putdown of what
he calls the
"button pushing" puzzles.
Those puzzles were among the best and
most original puzzles in the game!
Roberts implies that the only solution to
them is trying every possible combination by trial and error. In fact, each button affects the starting word or phrase
according to a hidden rule, such as
"Remove all A's" or "Replace any T with
an E followed by a space." The player
must deduce those rules and then use
(Continued on page 59)

Review

he

very mention of the
M-1A1 tank conjures
up images of cost overruns, technical failures, inefficiency (four gallons of fuel
to the mile), and a vulnerability to Soviet anti-tank
shells. The General
Dynamics M1A1 tank has
had one of the most checkered pasts in the procurement process and has
probably received more bad
press and congressional opposition than any other
military vehicle.

T

Don't Tread
On Me!
Accolade's "Steel
Thunder" Modern Armor

Steel Thunder is an intriguing simulation of
modern armored combat
from Accolade. The
quality of this program
suggests that modern
tanks are getting a bad
reputation and the
scenarios invite the
player to decide the
issue for himself. In fact,
the technical accuracy of
this program will surprise
those who think of Accolade as simply a
publisher of action
games. Until Steel
Thunder's release, Apollo 18: Mission to the
Moon has probably been
the company's most
reality-based product.
The care taken with
Steel Thunder may be illustrated by the length of
the manual. It is 43 full
pages (as opposed to
the 22 in Apollo 18) and
contains enough facts,
figures, diagrams, and
hints to move the player
well on his way to promotion and success. In addition, the product includes a keyboard overlay to
simplify play.

Profiles in Tonnage

by Wyatt Lee

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The Soviet forces are well-represented, with a good
mix from those old T-55s and T-62s to the modern vehicles with
125mm guns, BMP-2s (the most modern armored personnel carriers with their 30mm autocannons), BTR-70s (light-armored infantry carriers—no BTR-80s, but they are still deployed in limited
numbers), Shilkas (self-propelled anti-aircraft vehicles), Gaskins
(reconnaissance vehicles with SAM launchers), and SAU 152s
(self-propelled 152mm guns). The omission of the 2S7 selfpropelled 203mm gun or 2S4 self-propelled mortar might be
something of a disappointment to modern armored warfare enthusiasts, however.
United States forces include the: M1A1 Abrams tanks, M60A3
updates of the Patton series, M3 Bradley fighting vehicles, and
M48A5 Patton medium tanks. The control panels of each of

Steel Thunder
C-64/128
1
$29.95
Tom Lough!),
Accolade
San Jose, CA

' these vehicles have been
meticulously modelled and
offer a distinctive look with
operational gauges, dynamic
toggle switches, and functional indicator lights in the appropriate places. Perhaps of
greatest significance, is the
modelling of the effect of
gun stabilization systems on
all but the M48A5 Patton.
This system has been part of
the U.S. edge in armored
vehicles up until the Soviets
started including it on newer
T72s and T80s.

Even better than the
mix of vehicles, however,
is the way that Loughry
has graphically implemented the various
tanks. When the player
first sees another vehicle,
it appears as a miniscule
black square. As the
player's tank closes on
the other vehicle, it appears as an identifiable
silhouette. These silhouettes are not only important for identification
of friends and foes, but
also provide important information on target
facing and direction of
movement. As the player
becomes more proficient
in recognizing these silhouettes, he gains an advantage in being able to
load the most efficient
type of ammunition
against that particular target as early as possible.
Loughry programmed
this feature by taking the
time to study lead miniature tanks used in table-top battles. By examining
these miniatures from several different angles, he was
able to provide these recognizable silhouettes.

Devil Coaches and Hell Wagons

In Steel Thunder, players take the viewpoint of commander of a modern tank. Although the simulation's design allows the player to view the landscape and action from three
angles (driver, gunner, and commander), the perspective of play
is definitely that of command. The commander is given the mission briefing at headquarters, selects his equipment and ammunition with regard to the mission and expected opposition,
and selects a three-man crew (driver, gunner, and loader). Available crew members are selected from a roster that offers a letter
grade from A (best) to D (worst) in three different facets of their
assignment. Drivers are graded in driving speed, maneuver
speed, and evasion speed; gunners are rated on day accuracy,
night accuracy, and aim speed; and loaders are rated on reload
speed, switch (types of ammo) speed, and fatigue. Crew selec-

tion is not simply chrome, but offers significant impact in the
game.
Tanks have had a tremendous shock value in land warfare ever
since their first major impact on a battle at Cambrai (in World
War I). At Cambrai, demoralized infantry called the tanks, "devil
coaches." In modern combat, the propensity for tanks to catch
fire and metamorphose into smoldering rubble may merit the
term, "hell wagon." The scenarios included in the game have a
tendency to emphasize shock value and suicide missions as opposed to highly coordinated combat team missions. This is
probably the weakest part of the reality being simulated. Many of
the missions would seem better suited to infantry. For example,
ambushing a light armor convoy of trucks, BTR-70s, and a BMP2 would be accomplished more effectively with infantry. Once
the enemy is in the center of the ambush, there needs to be
someone to close
the trap. How can
you do that with
one tank? Another
scenario involves
destroying an
enemy mortar post.
Wouldn't it be better to use artillery
against that position? In fact, the
only armored
vehicle in the
simulation that
would be likely to
get an assignment
like these would be the M3 Bradley, not technically a tank.

Rumbling "Rambo" Raiders
Nevertheless, if one is willing to accept the questionable
military doctrine in the scenarios, the missions can be thrilling
and exciting. In this way, the missions become more Rambo
than reality, but still have plenty to commend them. The missions take place in three different theaters of operation: Cuba,
Syria, and West Germany. The graphics do a good job of portraying the different terrain styles (although the West German
scenarios may allow the ranges to be too long for those broken
landscapes) and the landscapes scroll by realistically, depending
on tank speed, direction, slew rate (how fast the turret or miniturret turns) and viewpoint. The commander's viewpoint offers
the farthest range of view and this is logical, since his position
on the turret is physically the highest. Also, the sound effects for
the incoming and outgoing shells are continuous, effective, and
useful (noise indicates proximity). Particularly satisfying is the
graphic depiction of explosions and the reduction of enemy targets to rubble. Once they are reduced to rubble, the "rubble"
stays at that location. This helps in identifying one's position on
the battlefield and direction of enemy movement.
Each mission has a primary target which is circled on the briefing map (accessed by pressing the "9" key). The commander
chooses the best route to the objective by placing "X"s on the
map as checkpoints and ordering the driver to proceed to those
checkpoints. The briefing map can be accessed at any time and
will show the present position of the player's tank. This is extremely helpful. On missions that require a deep penetration behind enemy lines, it is usually possible to skirt the edges of the
map and avoid enemy contact until one is in proximity of the objective. Simply order the driver to go straight and switch to the
commander's viewpoint (farthest range) in order to stay out of
contact until it is necessary to close on the enemy. This is
cautious and ultimately effective, but consumes a significant
amount of time and fuel, so many players will eschew this in
favor of direct advances.

Once the player has determined to engage the enemy, it is
best to switch to the gunner's viewpoint and utilize the thermal
site (which allows the gunner to see the targets through smoke,
fog, or darkness) to zero in on the target. At this point, it is extremely important to have the right ammunition loaded. This is
where the loader's reload and switch speed is vital. Reload speed
is significant because there is a lag time after one fires a shell
before one is able to fire the next shell. The lag time is proportional to the loader's reload speed. The loader's switch speed
determines how long it takes to switch types of ammo. For example, one doesn't want to waste armor piercing (APFSDS)
shells on BTR-70s or BMP-2s, so it may be necessary to switch
to high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) shells. Players are advised to
pay particular attention to the ammunition effectiveness chart
provided on page 33 of the manual. This information may
provide the difference between a
successful mission
and a failure.
Depending on
range, there is a
lag time between
firing the shell and
observing the explosion. The
simulation has
taken care to
model authentic effectiveness ranges
and realistic angles
of trajectory. This means that players will need to learn to "lead"
the targets in order to be effective, not simply center the sights
and fire. This offers both realism and challenge. In 1973, Israeli
forces avoided this problem and extended their maximum effective range by deducing the narrow passes and gaps which Arab
forces would have to move through. By night, Israeli infantry
would place sticks in these areas and Israeli armor would aim
their main guns until they could hit those sticks regularly. In this
way, they were able to extend their range to ca. 4,800 yards.
Steel Thunder commanders have to zero in the old fashioned
way, so the gunner's.
If the situation gets tough, U.S. armor has an ace in the hole.
The thermal site enables the gunner to make target acquisition
in spite of smoke, while there is no certain knowledge of a
Soviet counterpart to this technology. This means that the U.S.
vehicles can put up a smoke screen and get away. This is a useful strategy in the game, if the commander doesn't wait until his
smoke mortars are hit (usually the first damage taken) to utilize
them.

Thundering Heard
Steel Thunder is the first of an expected barrage of armored
combat simulations to reach the market (Avalon Hill is expected
to release M-1 next year and don't be surprised if Spectrum
Holobyte and Digital Illusions release a tank simulation in
1989). There is much to enjoy about the game: fast-moving
graphics with features that assist game play, effective sound effects that enhance play, and a potential for fast-paced action. It
is to be expected that future simulations will take standard
military doctrine more into account and offer more precise
mechanisms for aiming, loading, driving, etc. However, Accolade has: 1) paved the way for future tank simulations, 2)
proven that the company is serious about developing more than
action games, and 3) published a challenging game all in one
bold stroke. As the commanding officer tells the player after a
successful mission, "Congratulations! They never knew what hit
them."

Strategy

Tips

Everything
You've
Always
Wanted to
Know About

*but were afraid
to blast!
by Mark Lewis Baldwin

Empire
'Wargame of
the Century"*
ark Baldwin is the co-designer
of Empire: Wargame of the Century. He took Walter Bright's
VAX-based game and enhanced it for
use on personal computers in three different formats. The result: Empire has
become CGW's highest rated strategy
game and has won CGW's 1988 overall Game of the Year Award.
M

In this article, Mark shares some
strategic principles which may be of interest to would-be conquerors.
This was getting too easy! In order to
stop the Krellan conquest of the planet,
you and your team had landed three
dekals earlier on Spion Kop, the capital
city of Sassania. Your small team of
specialists were placed there to do what
the Alliance, with its overextended resources, could not do directly. That is, unite
the independent city-states of the planet
before a similar team of Krellans accomplished the same. Now, three dekals
have passed and everything is still going
by "The Book." Over 35% of the planet
is under your control and you haven't
met anything except local resistance.
Something is wrong. It is too blasted

easy!
You think back to the initial days of the
invasion. Sassania was already established as a beachhead when you arrived.
"The Book" was specific about your initial steps . . .

On establishing your beachhead, it is
vitally important that one reconnoiter
the continent and surrounding waters.
For security reasons, as well as delivering the team quickly and quietly, normal geological scans of the planet will
not be available. Make up for this discrepancy immediately! To that end, it is
recommended that initial production be
that of a fighter unit. Use this fighter

unit for your initial quick reconnaissance.
As soon as your first fighter unit is
completed, change your production to
armies. These are your bread and butter. You cannot conquer anything
without your armies. Further, although
that first fighter is infinitely valuable,
the second is virtually useless until you
have expanded the united territories a
great deal.
That was the easy part. Quickly, you
had explored the large island you had
found, discovering two more city-states.
It was, then, an easy matter to send
your armies to include them in your Empire. That was just the start, "The Book"
said more . . .

The unification of a planet can be
broken up into three phases. The first
phase, known as the "Growth Phase,"
occurs from the initial establishment of
the beachhead until contact with
enemy forces occurs. The second
phase, "Contact Phase," occurs while
you and your enemy are establishing
the lines of battle. The third and final
phase of unification, the "War Phase,"
occurs when one force decides to commit most of its resources to the destruction of the other.
Ah, the three so-called phases. Don't
those dunderheads at Star Fleet HQ realize that war is never so simple? They
probably never held a M-23473 blaster
in their hands in their lives. If they did,
the cost of synthetic feet would probably
skyrocket!

Your primary task during the "Growth
Phase" is to build your industrial base
as large and as quickly as possible. If

you have a stronger industrial base
than your enemy when you enter the
"War Phase," his defeat is assured. Most
planets you will encounter in your star
sector are mostly water with small continents/large islands scattered
throughout. As such, your principal
means of transportation is water. Get
transport ships under construction as
soon as possible. It takes time to build
them and you will want them available
as soon as your local land mass has
been unified. So, get the construction
started. While waiting for your
transports, use your fighters to explore
the waters near you. Find targets for
your transports before they are finished
so that they will not be wasted on exploration of their own.
Two strategies have been developed
on usage of the transports during the
"Growth Phase." The first strategy suggests that the transport be sent to the
next independent land mass and its entire complement of armies to be unloaded. This frees the transport to immediately return for more armies.
Meanwhile, the armies left behind can
explore the new land mass, meeting
and defeating all adversaries while supporting each other. The second strategy
is more risky, requires a higher
transport/army ratio of production, but
can achieve much more spectacular
growth. What one does under this
strategy is to keep all armies on board
the transport until an independent city
is found on the coast. Then, you invade
the city using just enough armies to
capture the city. Once captured, the city
should be used to produce new armies
that will be used to subjugate the rest
of the island/continent. Meanwhile, the
transport is continuing to a new island
and repeating the process with its
remaining armies. This strategy allows

to expand faster than the first, but
places you in a much more spread out,
hence weaker defensive position until
all the cities in-between your capital
and the frontier have been unified.

before. She was brilliant in the game
that the two of you had previously
fought. That was what was bothering
you. Where was she?! In trying to find
her, both you and "The Book" concur.

You had outsmarted "The Book" this
time by combining the two strategies,
but your rush to unification seems silly.
There has been no enemy to worry
about. In fact, there has been no contact with Krellan controlled forces at all!

Information is your second highest
priority during the "Growth Phase." It is
critical to find all you can about the
planet and your enemies as soon as
possible so that you may plan accordingly. Fighters are good for local reconnaissance, as well as acting as an
early warning system. To explore
beyond your locally controlled territory,
however, destroyers are the answer.
They are cheap to build and move
faster than any other vessel. Start construction of them as soon as you are
able and send them out to explore.
What is the layout of the planet? Where
are its cities? Where is the enemy?
These are the vital questions they must
answer for you?

you

It is assumed that you have been
directed to unify the planet because the
Krellans, under the command of Henri
Zae IV, have already started an "Operation Big Brother" on the planet. This is
your actual opponent. Depending on
the actual rank of the Krellan commander, he may or may not have control over his/her own forces. Lowerranked Krellans are subject to control of
special computers designed for just the
task you are involved with. Two
programs are known to be used,
labeled by Star Fleet Intelligence (Ha!)
as "Standard" and "Expert." There are
rumors that a new and more sophisticated program is under development.
While both are sophisticated, their tactical abilities are much stronger than
their strategic abilities. They are also
predictable. Star Fleet Intelligence
(Double Ha!) has managed to extract
copies of the programs and have made
them available in trainers. Study their
actions well on the trainers. You will
not only learn how they execute a conquest, but you may also learn a few
unification tricks.
Some known advantages of the "Expert" versus the "Standard" program
are: 1) more intelligent control over industrial production, 2) more aggressive
use of transports, 3) more efficient use
of aircraft carriers, along with their assigned aircraft, 4) more active use of
capital ships, 5) coordination of ships
into fleets, and 6) better utilization and
allocation of armies. Since Krellan
programming techniques are different
than those in the Alliance, it has been
difficult to extract and analyze the differences. Therefore, this is only a partial list.
Your most serious problem will exist if
the Krellan commander has authority
to make his/her own decisions. In that
instant, all bets are off. You will be
working against a complete unknown
(unless you have met the Krellan
com-mander in combat before) and must
use the utmost of your skills to defeat
him/her.
That part of the answer you knew.
Kadma Pztlam was on the planet somewhere. And you had tangled with her

Contact reports are starting to come
in. You have finally found Kadma to the
west. One of your destroyers found the
city of Isandlhwana in enemy hands. Unfortunately, it was immediately sunk by
enemy fighters. Fortunately, one of your
newly completed cruisers and a
transport happen to be nearby. Won't
Kadma be surprised when you return
with your transport flanked by a task
force to protect it.
Once contact has been made with
enemy forces, the "Contact Phase" has
been initiated. During the contact
phase, it is recommended that minimum forces be used against the enemy
unless a major weakness is seen in
his/her defenses. Most of your resources
should still be expended in capturing independent cities. Although an enemy
city is worth twice what an independent city is worth (because its capture reduces the enemy's production at
the same time it increases yours), the
cost of capturing such a city is normally a magnitude greater than capturing
an independent city.

Although you wish to invest minimal
forces in contact with the enemy, you
also desire the enemy to invest as
much as possible in trying to hit you.
So, utilize quick tease strikes and feints
to cause your enemy to invest large
resources in defense and ineffective offense.
Hairy Neubats' Guano! A report has
just come in from the transport Jervis
Bay. Hundreds of Kilobids east of our
first contact with the Krellans, she has
just been attacked by an enemy
destroyer and is now sinking, taking all
five armies aboard down with all hands.
How did they slip that destroyer so far behind our lines? Now, just to stop that

one destroyer, I have to change the orders to half a dozen ships and aircraft.
What a waste of resources!
At least, we got our own licks in. The
invasion at Isandlhwana turned out better than expected. One enemy cruiser
was destroyed while it was in port and
the cruiser Siano Maru was effective in
giving our land forces additional protection. It will certainly cost Kadma a great
deal to get that city back!

Be aware that once contact has been
made, it is highly likely that enemy
ships have infiltrated your own lines. It
is now necessary to sanitize your
unified areas of enemy forces and insure that no new forces sneak in. Such
forces are not only dangerous to unescorted transports, but they force you to
drain a much larger force to track them
down. A pattern of fighters and
destroyers on patrol duty can effectively
defend large open areas of water and
thus, prevent enemy intrusions. Be
aware that your fighters will normally
be unable to detect enemy submarines.
This is why you need destroyers in
coordination with the fighters.
This is also the time you should be infiltrating your own destroyers and submarines into enemy waters. Knocking
out enemy transports can bring your
enemy down to its knees faster than
any other technique. If he cannot invade you or cannot support his own infrastructure when you hit him/her, the
war is all but won.
At this time, you should also be
preparing for the final "War Phase." Bat
tleships and carriers can take a great
deal of time to construct, hence they
should be started long before they are
needed. So, plan and balance out your
city production accordingly. Also, since
you are going to start losing transports
more frequently to enemy attacks,
match transport production, as well.
In addition, this is the time to start to
reorganize your city production. Those
cities well-protected and far away from
the front lines should be used to build
fighters and large ships. The rationale
for building fighters is that they can be
moved up quickly to the front lines. The
rationale for building large ships behind
the lines is that you will not be forced
to retool in order to build other kinds of
forces because enemy forces just appeared nearby.
Things are settling down to a slugfest,
now. Your beachhead at Isandlhwana
has been able to hold out while you've
been taking a task force past the island
for an end run to hit the continent behind it. If you can cut them off, the Krel(Continued on page 63)

Review

Stealth Mission
Sublogic Unveils Their
"Stealth" Simulator
by Brad Bombardiere
This one's for all of us who "feel the need . . ." the
need for speed! Mach 2 with our hair on fire,
that's how we'd like to spend our weekends. Unfortunately (or perhaps, fortunately), the military doesn't
rent out fighters for the
weekend. Of course, it's
doubtful that most of us
could afford the rental
charge (much less the
damage waiver) on a $20
million aircraft. So, to fulfil
our fantasy of flight, we
turn to flight simulators.
Well, strap yourselves in
and fire up your computer for another Mach 2
fantasy, because there is
a new kid on the block.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Stealth Mission
C-641128
1
$39.95
Steve Setzler
Sublogic Corporation
Champaign, IL

Sublogic, those guys
who wrote the book on
computerized flight have
released Stealth Mission,
a simulation that allows
would-be pilots to fly one
of three different aircraft:
the F-19 Stealth Fighter,
the X-29 Swept Wing,
and the F-14 Tomcat.
Each offers different flight
characteristics and the
missions have been
designed to emphasize
the strategic aspects of the game more
than anything else.

Each pilot expecting to fly the vicarious
skies of Stealth Mission should begin with
the documentation. Unfortunately, this
material lacks the technical support one
would expect from a game that seems to
be so sophisticated. The data provided for each of the
aircraft was sparse, at best. It is obvious that these are
top secret weapons systems, but the average public
library lends itself to providing more information than
the manual contains. In fact, the manual vaguely
describes weapons and their characteristics in a sum
total of only two pages (plus diagrams) and there is almost no information on what type of weapons you are
up against. For example, there is really no pertinent
data on types of anti-aircraft missiles a pilot might have
to face. All of this type of information would have made
the game both more interesting and easier to play. Fortunately, the information on navigation and other
characteristics of flight was helpful.
After the start-up screen, players have the option of

choosing the type of mission preferred from various
types. These types include objectives located in the
mountains, around ancient ruins, or at sea. There is
even a mission that is essentially a marathon bomber
run. The problem is that these missions are virtually
generic. Sublogic does not specifically mention either a
theatre of war or a possible war. In fact, the only mention of enemy strength in the manual involves some
general notes about MIGs. In other words, the manual
leaves players strictly on their own to figure out the
best strategy to use in the different scenarios.
Next, the game asks players to choose the jet and
weapons to be used. This reviewer recommends that
no matter which plane is selected, players load each
given aircraft with as many Mavericks as possible. The
F-19 is the least maneuverable, but it is, of course, almost invisible to radar. The X-29 is extremely
maneuverable, but has the least amount of weapons it
can carry. The F-14 is not only fast, but it has medium
maneuverability, great range, and carries a tremendous
amount of weapons. Matching the type of aircraft to
the type of mission is an extremely important consideration with regard to success in this game.
At this point, players can throttle up and take off. The
difficulty is that the controls are sluggish, at best, and a
lag time of nearly half a second is so annoying that it
makes dogfighting almost impossible. If, however, the
lag time in Flight Simulator II was not perceived by
players as annoying, this one will not either. It is essentially the same. This reviewer is bothered by the fact
that the lag time leads to a severe oversteering
problem. There are two ways to get around this
problem. One way is to hit Control-F. This eliminates
all of the scenery and allows the computer to speed up
(Continued on page 16)

made taking a quick scan of vital information somewhat difficult.

Stealth Mission
(Continued from page 14)
the animation. This, in turn, makes the controls more
responsive. The other way of getting around the sluggish controls is to achieve
lock-on, then, hit Shift-G.
This automatically levels
and centers the aircraft. It
is also a great way to get
out of those suicidal
maneuvers that we all
simply must try from time
to time.
The game's graphics display is a mixed bag. The
cockpit graphics lack the
attention to detail that
many of us have become
accustomed to in other
flight simulations. The instruments were somewhat confusing in their placement on the control panels and this

Outside the cockpit, however, the scenery graphics
are fantastic! Instead of the usual 3-D stick figures,
mountains and other scenery are filled in. One of the
most exciting aspects to this is flying through the
canyon in the ancient ruins campaign. Additional visual
effects involve the different views available. Pressing the
right key gives pilots the ability to see their aircraft from
any angle. Pressing Function-7 allows a given pilot to
see a "missile's eye view" as it homes in on its target.
Another amazing viewpoint is observing the aircraft
from one side or the other as the pilot ejects, his
parachute opens, and he gently drifts to earth. In addition, Sublogic has made Stealth Mission compatible
with its full line of scenery disks. Of course, there is a
price to pay for such quality, especially on a machine
with limited memory like the C-64/128, and that price is
paid in the lag time.
Since Sublogic wrote the book on flight simulators,
consumers expect quality graphics, attention to detail,
and interesting situations from those products. Therefore, even though this game doesn't really offer the intensity that one could expect from other recent flight
simulations, the potential buyer must weigh the
abstract nature of the scenarios and somewhat slower
pace against the graphic excellence and technical
quality of the Sublogic line.

"

:

Review

hen you first open the package of this game,
you may feel a little startled and possibly
hesitant: it comes on nine 5.25" disks or four
3.5" disks. Further, if you install the game on a hard
drive (highly recommended), it will eat up about 3 meg
worth of space (make sure you have room!). So, you
might think that this is some incredible epic adventure
that will take months of playing time.

W

Actually, most of that space is used for graphics. They
are very pretty, full-screen and beautifully detailed.
Many of the screens also have animation, which has
both good points and bad ones. The animation adds a
nice touch, but slows Rosella's movements by a large
factor whenever she's in an animated screen.
The game begins, in fact, with a very long animated
sequence (you can skip this later on) explaining just
how Rosella came to be in a strange land dressed as a
simple peasant girl. Boiled down to essentials, King
Graham is dying and Rosella can cure him by obtaining
a special fruit. However, she also has to help the good
fairy Genesta, the only person who can send her back
to her own land. Genesta herself is dying and only a
special talisman, stolen by the evil witch Lolotte, can restore her. Thus, Rosella must find the magic fruit and
get the talisman from Lolotte before she can return
home to save her father.
Rosella starts on the seashore, where she is left pretty
much to her own devices. Genesta doesn't tell her very
much about the land or indeed, anything else. Rosella
must find out everything for herself. The first thing to
do is walk around the area, which is only about 30 loca
lions or so, to see what's there (the area wraps around
at the edges in most places to the north and south).
Movement is done with the arrow keys. One touch on
any key sends Rosella in that direction and another
touch on the same key stops her. Rosella will, therefore, continue to walk automatically unless she comes
to an obstacle or reaches the next screen. Beyond this,
keyboard input is used to accomplish actions, such as
"get lamp." There is also a set of function keys for often
repeated commands, especially save and restore.

Walk-thru On The Mild Side
Warning: This section of the review contains
specific hints related to "King's Quest IV" and
should be avoided by readers who would prefer to
complete the game without assistance.
Watch out for the weird trees and the ogre hut. If you
walk into a screen with strange trees, leave immediately
or that will be the end of Rosella. The ogre hut and surroundings should also be avoided for now or Rosella
will end up as dinner. It's a good idea to save periodically, in case you run into trouble.
You should visit Lolotte early on in the game. She
doesn't especially trust you, but for her son Edgar's
sake, is willing to give you the benefit of the doubt by
sending you on little quests to bring her certain items,
one at a time. Therefore, much of the game is taken
up in solving puzzles to obtain these items.
Many of the puzzles are based on old fairy tales (a
Roberta Williams "trademark"). So, if you're up on
those, you may have a little easier time of it in some
situations. Most people know about kissing frogs, but
that's just one of several in the adventure.

King's
Quest IV
Hints and Harangues for
"Rosella"
by Scorpia
Some of them
are also not too
fair. For instance, one object Rosella
needs is a bridle.
Finding this can
be a frustrating
experience,
since it is not
visible on the
screen, and you
would never
know it was
there unless you
had Rosella
search every possible spot on the
screen. There
are no clues at
all to this, therefore you might
not even search
very long, if at
all. And as the
location itself is
not easy to
reach (you have
to so some swimming, among other things) it makes the
situation that much more exasperating.
Another irritation is all the climbing
around that has to be done. Early on,
you'll probably find the secret door that
leads to a winding staircase. As you
might expect, one wrong step and Rosella falls to her death. That's bad enough,
but what you don't know at the lime is that there's no
need to climb the stairs until after evening has come
(and you've done some other things as well), meaning
many people will make the tedious trip at least twice, if
not more.
There are other staircases to climb (also winding), as
well as a whale's tongue (probably the hardest climbing
sequence in the game). Saving often is the best thing
when you're in one of these situations. That's especially
important inside the whale, as you have only a limited
number of moves before Rosella is overcome by
noxious fumes.

Review

You will also have to sit
through some tedious
animation in the dwarfs
house. This is a puzzle in
the game, the solution to
which is rather sexist, although obvious. When
the dwarfs come in (after
you're done), Rosella
stands there as a dwarf
enters, walks to the
fireplace, gets a bowl of
soup, walks to the table,
and sits down. The next
dwarf enters, walks to the
fireplace, gets a bowl of
soup, walks to the table,
etc. This happens seven
times and there is no way
around it. Save the game
when this is finished so
you don't have to go
through it again.
After nightfall, you'll find
ghosts in the old house in
the graveyard. They appear one at a time and
each has to be satisfied
with something before the
next one shows up. Once
you've figured out what
do to for the first one,
you know pretty much
what needs to be done
for the rest of them, so
solving this puzzle becomes pretty much a matter of boring repetition.
Getting back to Lolotte,
the first thing she wants is
a unicorn. There's one roaming around the meadow,
but it's rather shy, so you'll have to make friends with it.
Then you need the infamous bridle so you can ride the
unicorn. Among other things, it will be necessary to get
the pole from the fisherman, as well as taking a long
swim, before this task can be accomplished.
Still not entirely satisfied, Lolotte will send you to get
a hen that lays golden eggs from the ogre. You'll need
to have found the troll cave (which is hidden)
beforehand. It also helps to snoop carefully around the
house once you're inside, but save first in case you
walk into the wrong room. This is probably the simplest
sequence in the game.
Speaking of the troll cave, it's a dangerous place.
Even with light, you don't see very much. The graphic
effect is very nice, but if you're not extremely careful in
there, Rosella could fall into a chasm. The best thing to
do is watch the edges of the light and move slowly. If
there's a troll around (his appearance is random), get
out and try again later. Save often.
Somewhere in all this you need to take some time
out to find the fruit that will restore King Graham.
There are a number of things you must do before you
can obtain the fruit, among them dealing with the frog.
What you need is in plain sight in another screen, although easy to miss if you don't look carefully. You'll

also have to solve the Pan riddle as well; the minstrel
can be helpful with that one.
Now Lolotte sends you out after Pandora's box. This
is a tough one. You'll have to make it past the weird
trees (if you've mapped, you probably know the spot)
to the weird sisters. You shouldn't have too much
trouble avoiding their clutches if you move carefully
and don't get too close. They have something you
need later on, so you'll have to work out a trade of
some kind. Just don't be too nice to them (they are
evil, after all).
You will also have to get into the mysterious crypt in
the graveyard (you've been wanting to do that for
awhile, I'll bet). There's a key somewhere, although obtaining it will take awhile; there are a few things you'll
have to do (more than once) before you find it.
Unfortunately, after you give Lolotte the box, she
doesn't quite keep her word to let you go (you didn't
really expect her to, did you?). Instead, she locks you
into a room in the castle. Luckily, you have a friend
who provides you with a means of escape, but that isn't
quite enough. After all, Lolotte might come after you,
and she might not be too charitable the next time. Besides, you still have to get the talisman so you can help
Genesta and get back to save your King Graham.
Once out of the room, you come to (did you guess?)
a winding stone staircase. Negotiate this carefully, and
also be careful what rooms you walk through. Lolotte
had all your items taken away, and you'll need to find
them before going further.
What to do about Lolotte when you finally reach her
is not very hard to figure out; there aren't many things
that would work in this situation, after all. Her big death
scene is a trip to watch, and rather funny (if you can imagine a funny death scene).
However, Rosella isn't done yet. She still has to get
the talisman back to Genesta, and she'll have to take
the long way to do it. There's also a couple of other
things she might want to do on the way back to make
things tidy, as well as pick up a perfect score.
The actual ending, like the introduction, is all
automatic; you just sit back and watch. Rosella is
returned home, King Graham is saved to rule many
more years, and all's well that ends well.

Tell-tale Part
King's Quest IV is not your typical adventure game.
Some puzzles are clever, others merely tedious. The
storyline is wrapped and connected with cinematic
touches which utilize sparkling graphics and surprisingly good music (I'm told this is especially true with one
of the new sound boards from Ad Lib, Roland, or IBM!).
Garners who demand constant interactivity will probably become impatient with these cute cameos, but many
will be pleased.
Bottom line: Excellent graphics, good music, uneven
puzzles, and deliberate pace. The overall impression of
the game is more gentle and non-violent than most adventure games. So, the bottom line is that it's a matter
of personal taste.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

C

GW met with Roberta on a
recent public relations tour. She
was travelling throughout the
country demonstrating King's Quest IV:
The Perils of Rosetta and autographing
copies of the game and photographs.
CGW: Was the original Adventure the
first computer game you ever played?
Roberta: Right, I mean, if you don't
count Pong. We had a Pong machine
before we bought our Apple. In fact, I
played the original Adventure before we
had our Apple. Ken brought a terminal
home from work and would use a
modem to hook into an IBM mainframe
down in L.A. somewhere. We would play
it and our moves would be printed out
on hard copy. That was a long time ago.
I usually just say that I played the
original Adventure on the Apple because
it is so difficult to explain.
CGW: As both a female designer and
a female game player, we wonder what
the original attraction of Adventure was
and why you liked playing it.
Roberta: I've always been a book
reader. I love books more than anything,
almost, especially in the fantasy area.
When I played Adventure, it was words
and it was like reading a book. You
would get these paragraphs about what
you had done, but I could talk to it and
it could talk back to me. I felt like I
could manipulate the story and that was
better than a book.
CGW: Why there aren't more women
involved in the hobby?
Roberta: The only answer I can really
give, and I see it all the time with kids, is
that you put a computer in front of a
boy and they automatically go toward it
and get comfortable with it. Girls need a
little extra push. Even today, you have to
say, "Don't be afraid. It's okay." They're
better than women, though, but I still
think girls are mostly uncomfortable with
technical things. Even if you go into a
stereo store, what do you see? Mostly
men and boys looking at them and the
women standing back saying, "Can we
get help?" Don't you think that's true,
kinda'?
CGW: That brings up a related question. You've set up a situation in the
"King's Quest" series where two characters, one male and the other female,
seem to have an equal chance to inherit
the throne. In fact, you've veritably set
up the sequel to follow the boy in King's
Quest V, but you chose to follow the girl
in King's Quest IV. Is your intent to involve more women, even as Mixed-Up
Mother Goose was an attempt to involve
young children in computer gaming?
Roberta: Yes, I designed King's Quest

IV with that in mind. I figured that men
and boys would accept a female heroine
and think it was okay. Then, possibly the
women and girls would notice it and become attracted to it.

They had never seen it before and the
parser understood everything they typed
in. I'm very pleased with that. Beyond
that, they're getting a little bigger, which
I've got to stop.

Yes, with the children, too. However,
this was also true with Mixed-Up Mother
Goose. In Mixed-Up Mother Goose, you
have a choice as to whether you are a
girl or a boy. Originally, I designed the
game where you were going to be a
boy, but I said, "I can't have that!" So,
now it asks if you're going to be a boy
or a girl. Then, all of a sudden I realized
that if you were going to be a boy or a
girl that it ought to look like them. Now,
they can choose color of hair or even

CGW: Is it true that Mystery House,
your first design, was inspired by Agatha
Christie's Ten Little Indians?
Roberta: Yes, as well as the game,
Clue.
CGW: Is there was any direct literary inspiration for the King's Quest series?.
Roberta: Well, as a kid, my all-time
favorite
reading

Interview with Roberta
Williams
Designer of the "King's Quest"
Series
color of skin.
CGW: Besides the fact of a female
protagonist, what do you think will bring
the women and girls to the game? The
music? Animation?
Roberta: Hopefully, all of it. The game
is certainly more colorful and prettier
than games that I'm used to. The animation is more like what you would see in
an animated cartoon series. It should
feel more comfortable to them because
the music is more interesting.
CGW: What about violence? Is there
going to be any violence that would put
them off?
Roberta: Not really. The only violence
in the game is at the very end and then,
it's unintentional. You don't mean to
commit violence, but you do.
CGW: Besides the obvious differences
of improved graphics, sound, and
memory capabilities, what would you say
is the biggest difference between your
recent designs and your earliest design,
Mystery House?
Roberta: The storyline. I'm really trying
to develop a sophisticated storyline.
Even in King's Quest I, there wasn't
much of a storyline. I'm trying to
develop the plot more and be more sensitive to characterization and why characters do what they do. Also, I'm trying to
do better in understanding what people
type in and why. With this game, I
watched a person sit down and play it
for an hour without ever typing in something that the game didn't understand.

was fairy tales, literally, fairy tales. I don't
know why but I read every fairy tale I
could get my hands on. I read them and
re-read them.
CGW: So that's why there's, at least, a
cameo by fairy tale characters in each
game?
Roberta: Apparently.
CGW: Besides the introductory and
final wrap, what cinematic effects have
been added to King's Quest IV?
Roberta: The way we change screens.
We have a dissolve, wipes, iris in, and
iris out. Those are all cinematic approaches. Of course, the use of music
to create an atmosphere and the use of
more dialogue to have conversations
with characters. Dialogue may not be
cinematic, but I think it is.
CGW: As the author, what is the most
satisfying aspect of the King's Quest IV
story to you?
Roberta: I like the heroine, Rosella. I
guess because she's a part of me that's
coming out. I really identified with her.
Sometimes she's delicate, but she's
strong, knows what she wants, she's not
afraid to do what she has to do. She's
courageous. It was fun for me to do a
female character.
CGW: Is there a love interest for Rosella?
Roberta: Well, let's just say that the
possibility exists for a love interest that
could be developed in a future game.

Game Hints

Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up
illuminating hints
about games. If the
gentle reader eschews
hints, let him beware.
Ah, it's Christmas time
again! Fred has his
shrunken head garland
on the wall, snow is drifting past the windows, a
cheery blaze burns in the
fireplace, the Christmas
Tree Monster blinks its
lights in the corner, and
all's right with the world.
Then again, maybe all's
not right with the world,
if the date happens to
be 2004 AD.

This is very important, since the number of locations you can travel to are
rather limited. In most cases, for example, you can't go to a location until

As Told by Scorpia

Manhunter: New York,
from Sierra, is a wickedly
humorous and bizarre game set in
the near future. Strange aliens that
look like flying eyeballs (called orbs),
have invaded and taken over the
city of New York. The resident
population, or what's left of it, is
restricted to Manhattan and a small
part of Brooklyn. In addition, by
order of the orbs, all humans must
wear only brown robes as clothing.

blinking yellow squares). Hitting the
"Enter" key takes you there immediately.
The first day, you track a mysterious
person who sets off an explosion at Bellevue Hospital. Trekking
(tracking?) on over there,
you discover a rather
gruesome corpse. There
will be several other unpleasant bodies to view
as the game progresses,
so get used to it now.
There's nothing like
protruding tongues and
upturned eyes to make
your day Having seen all
there is to see at Bellevue, you continue tracing the path of the unknown bomber, which
takes you to a bar in the
Flatbush section of
Brooklyn. Before you
can do anything else in
this bar, you'll have to indulge in a little knife throwing.
Most of you know by now how I
feel about arcade stuff in adventure
games (boo! hiss! bah! humbug!),
and, unfortunately, there is a fair
amount of it here. On the other
hand, the authors have added a feature to the game, for which I can forgive the arcade sequences.
In the knife throwing, you try to get
four knives safely between the
fingers of an outstretched hand. A
small knife appears on the screen,
moving slowly back and forth. At the
right moment, you hit return, and
hope the knife hits the table and not
a finger. Should you make a mistake
and allow the knife to draw blood,
you will undoubtedly lose your head
(the authors are really into blood
and gore).

For secret reasons of their own,
the orbs choose certain human individuals to become manhunters.
Guess who's just been chosen to be
a manhunter? Right! Of course, you
haven't the faintest idea of what
being a manhunter is all about or
why they picked you. Maybe it's better that you don't know (ask too
many questions, and you might be
sent to Chicago . . .)
In any case, you get a neat little
computer called MAD (Manhunter
Assignment Device) to help you,
and then, you're off on your first assignment. They all begin the same
way, with an orb floating into your
apartment to tell you what it wants
you to investigate (by the way, keep
the manual handy; you have to
enter a word from it each time you
play).

you have already learned something
about it, usually (although not always)
through MAD tracking.

Then, you get out MAD and do some
tracking. The computer shows you the
vicinity, plus a little revolving square with
a T in the middle. This is the person
whose movements are being tracked.
You watch where they go and what they
do until the tracking ends for one
reason or another.

Travel, by the way, is extremely fast.
Whenever you want to move from one
place to another, a map of Manhattan
(and part of Brooklyn) comes up on the
screen. A small blue and red sphere is
moved around the map with arrow keys
or a joystick until it's over the area you
want to go to (available areas show as

However, there's no need to reach
for the restore key. After you watch
your demise, the authors appear on
the screen, dressed in regulation
brown robes. Sometimes, they have
a snide remark to make, sometimes
they will give you a clue. Either way,
they back you up to just before
whatever it was that killed you, as
many times as you need it. If there
has to be arcade sequences in an adventure game, this is a good way to handle
them. Once you manage to throw the
knives properly, you can play the video
game in the corner (I recommend using
the arrow keys to manipulate the little
figure rather than a joystick.).
Now, you'll be able to visit Coney Island. Sorry to say, though, you won't be
able to ride the Ferris wheel or the
parachute jump. All that's available are

three (oh no!) arcade games: break the
balloons with darts, knock the kewpie
dolls off the shelf, and toss a ring
around a bottle.
What's it all about? Well, that's where
watching the screen carefully comes in.
This game is extremely visually oriented;
clues and parts of clues can be
anywhere, and it's up to you to make
the necessary associations. There is, for
instance, a subtle connection between
the video game and Coney Island which
is not readily apparent. Remember, practically everything you come across is important in some way.
Two other locations to visit today are
Trinity Church and a public restroom in
Prospect Park. You can look around the
church, although there isn't much you
can do there right now. As for the
restrooms, well, what does one do in
them (aside from scrawling graffiti on
the walls?).
You'll know when you're finished for
the day when the orbs send an override
to MAD, and request one or more
names from you (this is how each of the
first three days end). Let's hope you
have all the names they want. If you've
been messing around a long while and
the orbs don't contact you, this is a hint
that you haven't done everything that
needed doing. Travel around to the
various locations and see if you can
figure out what you may have missed.
Day two begins with the orbs wanting
you to investigate a break-in at Grand
Central Station (now, of course, closed).
There are three people to track, and it's
vital that you follow all of them. It can
be a little tricky to get the tracker on the
right people, but it can be done.
Of the several places to visit today, the
worst by far is Central Park. The park is
now a minefield, and travelling through
it is, well, dangerous. You have the MAD
tracker to help you, but even so, you will
probably end up as manhunter mush
several times if not more. The tracker
can give you the general direction in

which to go, but figuring out the precise
direction from several close together is
not easy (this part of the game I could
have done without; it was on the tedious
side). There's no trick to this, just careful
observation along with trial and error.
The night club is only slightly better.
You can't get in the front door, but
there's a convenient alleyway you can
sneak into. Unfortunately, you aren't
alone. There are four nasty punks you
have to get past, one at a time. The first
two throw knives, the third hurls Molotov
cocktails, and the fourth has some sort
of weird gun (he's the fastest and the
hardest to overcome). The process of
getting past them is the same for all
four: jump the low ones, duck the high
ones, and get close enough so you can
knock out the punks (pow!). They get
harder as you go along, but if you are
killed along the way, you only have to
start again with the current opponent.
You aren't forced to start over.
Once inside the nightclub, save the
game. So, if you get tossed out before
obtaining what you need, you won't
have to do the alley again. Remember,
you didn't kill those punks, just knocked
them out.
There's not much to do at the Deli .. .
you can't get anything from the
machines, and given the menu tacked
to the bulletin board, that's probably just
as well. Still, like all the other locations,
this one too is important.
I see I forgot to mention the apartment. This is one place you have to
figure out on your own; you don't track
anyone to it. Mainly this requires a name
(a full name). MAD's other ability (aside
from tracking) is to give you addresses
of people's homes. The catch is that you
have to know the full name first.
Now, improve your cultural background with a trip to the Museum of
Natural History. Hmmm . . . well, maybe
not, since all the exhibits were removed
awhile back. Oh, well, at least, you know
the route to take from MAD . . . make

sure you take it exactly, because your
supply of door openers is extremely
limited. One mistake and it's time to restore.
Day three gets off to a cheery start at
Greenwood Cemetery, where you can admire the view of an orb impaled on a
spear stuck into a grave. After you've
had your fill of that, you might want to
visit the theater, where the wall safe is
easily found, but not so easily opened.
Guess you're missing something, huh?
Maybe it's at the pawnshop. All you
have to do is pick the right badges from
the display. Simple, eh? Do be careful
that you don't end up losing your head
again, though. It looks much better attached to your shoulders.
Once you've done that, there are a few
puzzles to solve. Don't worry, if you get
crunched, the designers will pop in with
a helpful clue for you (I waited the whole
game for them to pop up one time
saying "No one expects the Spanish Inquisition", but they never did).
There's another apartment to find, by
the way. You've seen (or should have)
both halves of the name this day, so it
shouldn't be hard to locate the place.
What you need to do there is another
matter; just don't be taken in by the obvious.
Now, it seems you're at rather a loose
end, since there's nowhere else to go (at
least it looks that way). Of course, looks
can be deceiving. What you need, of
course, is a name. One might even say
the name. You got half of it a long time
ago and most of the rest of it, too, for
that matter.
This leads you to the final area, complete with computer monitor. Go ahead,
log in . . . you won't learn anything if
you don't! Most important here is to
note the locations of the four sites .. .
you should know what all of them are.
Also note that you have a certain
amount of control over them. Not
much, but enough.

The final day begins with you tracking
. . . yourself. Hmmmm. Not too good.
What are you going to do about this?
Well, now is the time for a nostalgic revisit to some places you've been to
before, particularly to any places where
not much went on before.

your life difficult (or short, if you aren't
careful). As you have no weapons, all

Don't worry about roaming the corridors (what corridors? That's for you to
figure out! grin), you're supposed to be
caught. This leads to the last (well, kinda
sorta) of the arcade sequences in the
game, something along the lines of
Jumpman. There's lots of climbing and
hopping around, so save often.
Before long, you should find yourself
comfortably ensconced in an orb
spacecraft. Why not save the game and
fiddle with the controls to find out what
they do? Then, in no time at all, you're
on your way. Where? Well, there is a
rather tedious maze to negotiate first.
After that, you should know where to
go and what to do. I recommend starting with the one place you haven't been
to, since after that you're going to have
someone on your tail, thereby making

is a clever game that requires you to really look at the screen and remember
what you see. Note-taking is helpful, in
case you forget later on what you saw
where (or even that you saw it). Nothing
is pointed out to you directly, and there
is no "look" command. Everything that's
there is there in front of you on the
screen. You just have to be sharp
enough to see it and make the mental
connections where necessary.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock it's
about that time again. Remember, if you
need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:

you can do is avoid the pursuing ship
while you get on with the business at
hand.
Success! Ummm . . . maybe yes,
maybe no. The ending is in tune with
rest of the game, namely twisted (heh).
You'll just have to experience it for yourself.
In spite of the arcade sequences, this

On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
On The Source: Send SMail to ST1030.
By US Mail (Enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Review: Point & Counterpoint

Mirror Images in a
"Pool of Radiance"

In 1975, I started
the "revolt" against

Dungeons and
Dragons with my
game, Tunnels
and Trolls. My
opinion, then and
now, is that D &
D is too complicated. With a
simpler system,
one can get to
the essence of the
fantasy role-playing experience
more quickly and
experience more
adventures. In the
years since 1975,
D & D has
metamorphosed
into Advanced

Dungeons and
Dragons and a

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Pool of Radiance
C-64/128, IBM
1
$39.95
Keith Brors
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, CA

Two expert adventurers have differing
perceptions of SSI's Pool of Radiance.

Point

It's Only D & D,
But I Like It!
by Ken St. Andre

en

St. Andre is the designer of Tunnels & Trolls, the pen
and paper adventure game (soon to be a computer
game), and was one of the designers of Wasteland. In
this article, he tells us what he likes about another designer's
game, Pool of Radiance, the first "Advanced Dungeons and
Dragons" scenario from SSI.

K

You're going to be outnumbered . . . all the time! You're going
to face incredible odds, but you'll get to like it, even if those
monsters fight hard and show no mercy! I've been spending
every spare moment trying to clear the monster-infested slums
of Phlan, somewhere in the "Forgotten Realms." It was hack and
slash computer fantasy role-playing at its finest. I am beginning
to see how the system works and I'd like to talk about the game
from a design perspective. It may be predominantly one man's
opinion, but it is, at least, an experienced opinion.

merely complex
rules system has
grown into a
labyrinth of truly
Byzantine
perplexity. With
my "less is more"
fetish, you might
think I'd hate
SSI's A D & D
product, but you'd
be wrong.
As far as I can
tell, George MacDonald insisted
that SSI faithfully
incorporate an
authentic A D &
D system into

Pool of Radiance
(actually, I think
they've fudged the system a bit in the player's favor, but it
needed it). It's okay with me, though, for one simple reason.
That is, the computer keeps track of all the rules and the player
interface is beautifully transparent. That gives one the real feel of
playing Advanced Dungeons and Dragons without needing to
have all of the rulebooks close at hand. Frankly, this has proven
irresistible to me.
Regardless of what rules system may be used, however, any
game rises or falls on other factors. First of all, the game world
must have internal consistency. Phlan, the environment where
the game is played, has that. Of all the other CRPGs on the
market, Pool of Radiance has about the best excuse for groups
of people wandering around and killing monsters—They are
reclaiming a city that had been lost to the forces of darkness centuries before. There is no world-threatening wizard to overcome—
just a simple case of us against them.
Secondly, the game has to have repeatable elements that will
keep the gamer's interest. Pool manages this with personally
designed character icons that move during the combat scenes.
Because I was able to choose what my little fighters, clerics, and
wizards look like, I never get tired of seeing them on the screen.
(Continued on page 60)

Review

A

s sequels go, they generally lose some of the flavor and
excitement that was generated by their predecessors.
Fortunately, this is not always the case in the software
world. In the continuing evolution of three dimensional modelled
graphics, Rainbird Software has continued to build upon the
experience gained from Starglider
I and its wire-framed vector objects by keeping pace with the
present industry benchmark of
color-filled vector generated
objects.

Starglider package, specifically for ST single sided drive owners,
is an audio cassette containing the musical score.
As is the case with most titles issuing from the United
Kingdom, the documentation, complete as it may be, lacks the
most important information: How to succeed at game play, the
^ philosophy being that the player is
expected to learn by trial and
error. Other than the fact that no
real hints are given on succeeding at Starglider II, the game has
no real weak points! However, a
by Frank Eva
few suggestions are in order, that
The historical background of
- may facilitate a more ideal
Starglider II takes up where its
method of play. First of all, even
predecessor left off. It is your basic Star Wars
though there is optional joystick control, the
premise, in which you, as the last hope of
use of the mouse is preferred. The basic
free civilization, must do battle with the overproblem here is the fact that most joysticks
whelming odds against you. You must atcome with only one trigger button, or a comtempt to push back the evil Egron empire
bination of buttons that accomplish only one
and save Novenia and all other free worlds.
task. With new joysticks entering the game
The Egron war machine has devoured planet
play market, perhaps we will someday see
after planet in their quest for absolute
computer programs that remove the major
domination. They must be stopped!
drawback to the use of a joystick: the number
of available functions is just too limited. Both
In Starglider I, the player was confined to
joystick modes can be equally frustrating. The
the vicinity of the planet Novenia, his vehicle
"one hand" mode forces the player to issue
lacking the ability to leave the planet's atmosacceleration and deceleration commands in a
phere. In the sequel, it's possible, with the
method similar to firing weapons systems,
newly perfected "star drive", to leave Novenia
and
this can actually be damaging to game
and travel to other worlds. Possible,
play. Whereas a quick tap of the fire button
nay.... necessary; for the Egrons are constructcauses the current weapon to be fired, the
ing powerful beam projectors on the seven
player must remember to hold down the butmoons of Millway, which will be used to
ton and push the stick forward to increase
protect a vast space station during its conspeed, or backward to reduce speed. You
struction. It is this space station that will be
may find yourself holding the button down
turned against Novenia, unless it can be
too long when trying to fire your weapons
destroyed first. (Shades of the Death Star in
and instead reducing or increasing your
The Empire Strikes Back!).
speed.
TITLE:
Starglider II
SYSTEM:
Amiga, AU,, S r
As previously mentioned, Starglider II features
The other joystick mode forces the player to use
1
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
$44.95
three dimensional modelled graphics. It also has a
the SPACEBAR to fire weapons! Now, if you hapPUBLISHER:
Rainbird
Software
patterned, full perspective, scrolling landscape.
pen to own a joystick that attaches to your work
Menlo Park, C A 94025
This is also an enhancement of Starglider I, since
surface with suction cups, and provides a fire butthe original provided no real landscape, whatton on the control stick, this method will be a valusoever; merely objects scattered over a dark and dismal plain.
able option. However, if you don't, you will find the weapon
However, should you find the patchwork landscape a distraction,
firing sequence very awkward.
there is a key function to disable it.
The best alternative is to use the mouse. Since this is already a
one hand device, your other hand can be used to issue specialHas the use of three dimensional modelling been improved,
ized commands from the keyboard. The mouse, with its standard
over previous releases? Undeniably, yes! As an example, I point
two button configuration, is the perfect tool for flying the Icarus.
to the "walkers", reminiscent of those in the opening scenes of
You can bank left or right simply by moving the mouse in that
Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back. They move with a fluidity
direction. (A "mouse pad" will help to limit the desk space rethat has been heretofore unseen in computer games. Also, the
quired). Also, changing altitude is accomplished by moving the
use of color renders these animations more real and life-like
mouse forward or back. And finally, changing speed is acthan ever before.
complished by holding down the right button, while simultaneously moving the mouse forward or back. The left mouse
button fires the currently selected weapon.
New to Starglider graphics are the energy bolts that you can
In Starglider II, you must learn to control your speed. New atfire at your opponents; they are no longer mere lines drawn on
the screen, and then erased. They are now actual objects, resemtack patterns your enemies have devised will frequently leave
you flying in circles, since some of them like to get you from the
bling elongated two dimensional diamonds.
rear. So, slow down and analyze these patterns, thus saving
The feeling of actual flight has also been improved. The land
energy.
and space stapes are redrawn with such precision and speed,
Who will like Starglider II? Certainly the arcade fan, for the realisthat Starglider could very easily be referred to as a "mini-flight
tic air and space combat, but also the ardent adventurer, for the
simulator".
exploration of some sixteen planets and moons making up the
An ST with a single sided drive will not be able to access the exSolice System, the closest star cluster to the Novenian system.
cellent soundtrack and the digitized sound effects. Instead, comSince this includes most computer game players, I would imputer generated sounds replace the very real crashes of stereo
agine that the only person who would not enjoy Starglider II is
digitized thunderclaps, and explosions, etc. A nice addition to the
one who likes only text adventures! Starglider II is a good buy!

Starglider II

Review

Banzai
Strike Line
Pacific Theater Combat in
"Typhoon of Steel"
by M. Evan Brooks
yphoon of Steel is SSI's Pacific Theater sequel to
Panzer Strike (cf. CGW, May 1988, No. 47, p. 22).
While Typhoon of Steel is a stand-alone simulation, its
mechanics and options are such that it is the Pacific mirror
of Panzer
Strike that so
many garners
have wanted.
Here, one may
utilize the
Americans, the
Japanese, and
of course, the
British and the
Germans.
Climates of
conflict
include the
Pacific
Theater, Asia
and Europe.
While the
author of the
Panzer Strike
review (see
above) noted
that the system had become his
favorite World
War II tactical
simulation, this
"curmudgeonly
critic" will note
some other
considerations.

T

NAME:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Typhoon of Steel
C-641128, Apple
1-2
$49.95
Gary Grigsby
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, CA

The Philosophy
of the
Tactical Wargame

As each unit represents a
squad or an individual vehicle,
abstraction, as such, is no longer a valid consideration.
Generally, military simulations are accurate insofar as they
reflect the mass, i.e. one can predict what 10,000 men will

do in the aggregate (a division). It is much more difficult to
predict what 10 men (a squad) will do.
However, tactical games have always been popular, e.g.
the boardgame, Squad Leader and its descendants, advanced squad leader (no longer a game, but rather a way of
life). As long as the consumer realizes the inherent difficulty
of predicting actions on so detailed a level, there is nothing
wrong with such simulations.

Typhoon of Steel:
The Advantages
(1) Design-Your-Own Scenarios. This feature is easily utilized; in fact, the map maker and unit designations are
among the easiest available on the market (although one is
restricted to the unit mix and terrain types included in the
program data [which are
numerous and varied]), cf. Tables 1 and 2.
(2) Command Emphasis. One may play with limited or full
communications. The
former emphasizes the reality of World War II combat
operations and the limitations of the chain of command.
Such usage may prove frustrating, but it does give a more
accurate understanding of the difficulties of conflict at the
lower levels of command.
(3) The Campaign Game. One may take a battalion-sized
or smaller force through World War II. Updating weapons, efficiencies and morale will show the effects as early losses
can escalate into brittle units suffering from "combat
fatigue" (or "malingering", as General Patton would say).

Typhoon of Steel:
The Disadvantages
(1) TIME! The game is not a quick play. In a battalionsized engagement (c. 32 squads per side), to play one hour
of "combat" time takes around 15 hours with the computer
playing both sides. If a human is playing against the
machine, time can easily stretch to 30-45 hours. The pulses
are simply too slow in their execution for a tactical simulation.
Scenarios can be designed for play in 15 minutes.
However, they would have to be of a skirmish at companylevel. The program mandates a game-length of 30 or 60
turns. Therefore, only a lower unit density scenario would
allow play to be completed within a short time period (as
soon as the crisis point has been reached, one can choose
to end the game and the computer will declare the victor).
This reviewer can conceptualize operational goals in a
simulation over a long period. However, with a product
simulating a one-hour maximum, it becomes quite difficult

to remember after a number of saves as to which ridge line
or pillbox was the prime objective.
(2) Terrain Types. A plethora of terrain types exist for one's
usage. However, nowhere in the documentation is there
any pictorial representation of such types. The documentation strongly urges the user to go through the design
parameters in order to become familiar with the terrain
types, but this reviewer does not think that a pictorial representation of such types would have required an inordinate
effort. Even more confusing is that certain terrain types are
the same!—e.g. Pacific wheat (level 3) and high grass {level
1), Pacific clear terrain (levels 1 or 3) or stone buildings
(levels 1 or 3). While a map recon may well serve to
delineate the type of objective, it becomes difficult to remember them in the aggregate.
(3) Order of Battle. Nowhere in the scenario explanation is
an order of battle given. While this may have been done in
order to have one experience the incomplete intelligence as
to the enemy, this reviewer would have preferred to have an
order of battle. It would have greatly assisted in deciding
how to tailor one's forces in order to maximize command
emphasis.
(4) The Military Misconceptions. One may choose to advance his units, e.g. across an open area to a building.
However, once the units are spotted or fired upon, they immediately slow to a cautious advance and are often
rendered hors de combat. While this may occasionally be
true in actual combat, it is idiocy to seek cover in an open
area instead of rushing into a region offering both cover
and concealment.
Terrain is defined in terms of "cover." In military parlance,
terrain offers "cover" and/or "concealment." Concealment
simply reduces one's visibility; cover offers protection from
enemy fire. Since even wheat fields offer "cover" in Typhoon
of Steel, this apparently represents concealment rather than
cover and should be noted as such.
(5) Non-Interchangeability: Typhoon of Steel may not be
readily mixed with Panzer Strike. Thus, one cannot mix Russians with Japanese in a replay of Khalkin-Gol (the 1937
divisional-level battles wherein the Japanese were
repulsed by General Zhukov's Far Eastern Command).

Random Observations .
(1) HISTORICITY: SSI has done an admirable job of detailing unit weapons and vehicles down to squad level.
Typhoon of Steel utilizes 50 yards per hex with 20-second
phases and 1 minute turns at the squad level. By comparison, Kampfgruppe utilized 200 yards per hex with 30second phases and 2 minute turns at the platoon level.
Weapon ranges from both games are generally comparable
(e.g. Typhoon/Kampfgruppe rifle, 500/400; SMG, 300/200;
HMG, 900/1000; PZIV-G, 2500/2400 yards). As ranges increase, lethality decreases in an algorithm available in the
documentation for the true grognard.

On a higher level, however, historicity does not appear to
be totally accurate. For example, the Omaha Beach
scenario postulates a landing by the 116th infantry assault
regiment. The scenario postulates a landing by 8 Sherman
DD tanks. Historically, by H +5, there were 16 tanks available. On Dog White Beach, only 8 got ashore. Thus, if one
utilizes an Order of Battle for H +60, the scenario would
reflect Company G. Yet, the number of squads available in
the game does not correlate with Company G's historically
available manpower (cf. Omaha Beachhead, Center of
Military History, 1984, pp. 44-57). Granted that liberties may
be taken with the OB, it would have been nice to have a little more explanation as to the who, what, where and how of
the scenarios.
(2) Map Recon: a detailed map walk-through is a must in
order to succeed at Typhoon of Steel. It would have been
nice to have a hard copy option available. At the squad
levels herein, it is incumbent on the commanders to establish "kill zones" and for squad positions to establish "fields of
fire" and interlocking firepower schematas. In order to do
this, a hard copy map would have been of inestimable
value. Also, it would assist in the playing of a scenario, since
one could note the axis of advance and the intermediate objectives and phase lines on the offensive. This would
prevent the user from becoming bogged down in a visual information overload.

(3) Command Control. Command control is essential. As
the senior commander, one must insure survival and communications (remember, Move-Shoot-Communicate—the
elements of sucess). If a
subordinate commander is killed,
he computer
tikes over such
formation. If
he senior level
filled (e.g. unit

bereft of the
user's input. He
has been killed!
So, take ap-

optimize such usage. Given the pulse system, it is difficult to
get the armor and infantry to move in tandem; but judicious
use of indirect fires should yield effective results.
In the latest issue of Inside SSI (Vol. II, No. 2), a game
replay is offered. Lessons learned include: protection of
leaders and MG sections, unit cohesion and durability of
American Marine squads vis-a-vis their Japanese counterparts.
In fact, the Japanese offer an interesting study. Rather
than suffer rout, they "banzai" when faced with heavy losses
and extreme suppression
comanderis
(similar to the "Mad Russian"
syndrome so familiar to the Squad Leader aficionado). This
sAim0)u,lat-he ideal for the novice gamer. Of course,
"tactic" makes them
the American should seek to use massive indirect fires to ef- tionsw
fect this state and then destroy them with small arms fire
from squads taking advantage of both cover and concealment.

propriate precautions and stay alive!
(4) Firepower: Determining the optimum tactics can be a
frustrating experience. This reviewer has reservations concerning certain gun ratings, e.g. a 16" gun has a penetration rating of zero. Well, a direct hit by a naval 16" gun on
even a heavily armored vehicle would ruin the crew's whole
day.
Combined arms tactics are essential. Therefore, one
should practice using artillery and naval gunfire in order to

Conclusions
For the casual user, Typhoon of Steel may well offer only
a "Storm of Indecision." However, for the dedicated gamer,
Typhoon of Steel offers an engaging, albeit time-consuming, study of small unit actions during World War II in the
South Pacific. This should not be surprising, given the
game's roots in the Panzer Strike system which was
awarded Strategy Game of the Year (see last issue).

Review

Deep in the dark
reaches of space lies
the Caldorre system.
Ordinarily peaceful, it is now
wracked with horrendous difficulties. As though from
nowhere, mysterious raider
ships appear and attack cargo
vessels. They ask no quarter
and they give none. They
come not to steal, but to
destroy; and they destroy very
well indeed. To combat the
menace, the Federation dispatches a squadron of interceptor ships to seek out the
raiders and protect shipping. Yet, there is more
here than mere raiding, much more .. .

Magical,
Mystery Future
Electronic Arts Conjures
"Future Magic"
by Scorpia

Sentinel Worlds I: Future
Magic is built around the efforts
of an Interceptor team to discover who or what is behind the
transport raids. Aside from finding that out, the team must
also end a dispute between two
native cultures on Caldorre, as
well as stop a raging fight between the farmers and the
ranchers on Norjaenn. In between, they have to earn money
to keep their ship in fuel and
themselves supplied with ammunition and training funds.

With that in mind, it's best to
scrap the entire beginning
team and start over, giving
everyone a 20 in Comprehend. They will advance
faster in the skills that are
most important. These tend to
be combat skills, such as
using projectile and hand
weapons. I recommend putting
the points into projectile at first,
and doing edged and contact
weapons later on, with blaster not
being built up until late in the
game.
Also, put a point into Recon for
each character until the cumulative score is at least 16. The
sooner you do this, the better off
you'll be, as recon is very helpful
for finding armories and other
places in the game.
Dexterity is also important. How
quickly a weapon can be used in
combat is governed by this attribute. Each time a weapon is
used, whether an "up close"
weapon such as a dagger, or a
long range weapon, such as a
shotgun, there is a period of time
when the weapon is "not ready".
The more dexterous the character
is, the shorter the waiting period
before the weapon is ready to use
again.

Recruitment
All in all, a lot to do, although
it's taken one step at a time.
The first order of business is to
create the Interceptor team of
five. Each member of the team
has a specific function: Medic
(heals people), Navigator (plots
ship courses), Computer Officer
(works on ship programming),
Engineer (repairs any damage
the ship takes), and Pilot
(moves the ship and operates
the weaponry in ship combat).
If any of these should die, they
must be replaced as no one
else can do their job.

at that skill. Nevertheless, the
number of points a character
gets is governed by Comprehend. Those with low Comprehend will get only one or
two points, while a Comprehend of 20 will give four
points.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

There is a pre-set team that
comes with the game. You can
use those or "reroll" if you
prefer. Actually, there is no "rolling." Instead, you get 70 points to distribute among 5 attributes,
with a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 20 per attribute at the
start.
At first glance, you might think the pre-created team seems
well-balanced. However, this turns out not to be the case. One
thing (among several) that the manual doesn't tell you is just
how important it is to have a high rating in Comprehend (think
of that as intelligence). Each time a character receives a promotion to a new rank, he or she gets a number of skill points to
put into a variety of skills (there are 14 in all).
Naturally, putting points into a skill makes the character better

Sentinel Worlds I:
Future Magic
IBM
1
$49.95
Karl Buiter
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Stamina controls how many additional hit points a character gets when he or she
advances a level. Also, in conjunction with
strength, it determines the initial number of hit
points a character has (the two are added
together). Further, note that increasing stamina
after the start of the game will also increase hit
points. That is, for each point of increase in
stamina, there will be a one point increase in hit
points as well.

Strength is a factor when using close range
weapons such as daggers or energy blades; it adds to the
damage the weapon does. It is also used, as mentioned
above, in determining a character's starting hit points.
Charisma is pretty much your looks and charm. While it's supposed to help you when talking to people, I didn't find much difference in their responses even with a character of Charisma 20.
While I'm sure the authors didn't plan it that way, it seems the
best approach to creating a team is to give them all the same
values in all the attributes. When it seemed to me that the
original team was advancing too slowly, especially those with low

Comprehend, I started over again, scrapping the originals and
making my own.

my way so I could go on, assuming there was no other way
around it.

Everyone had a Comprehend of 20, Dexterity of 15, Stamina
14, Strength 11 and Charisma 10. These worked much better
than the originals. The characters went up faster in the skills that
are important at the start, and as the game progressed, training
raised the other attributes.

Combat also has its frustrations. The team leader is the only
one you control directly; the rest of the team fires independently.
This is actually a very nice feature, saving you the time and
trouble of directing everyone's shooting. Where it breaks down,
however, is in the fact that the team members don't ever move
independently.

Improvement
I concentrated on getting everyone's Dexterity up to 20 as
soon as possible, since weapon use is almost instantaneous at
that level and this can be a lifesaver in
some circumstances. It also allows the
Medic to heal people much more quickly,
which can also be a lifesaver.
This training, by the way, is available in
the Caldorre Towers. There are three of
them and they are all pretty much alike.
They all have the same facilities, only on different levels. You'll have to go through
each tower to find the various spas, as
they're called (there is one spa for each attribute in each tower, or five spas per
tower). Training costs 1000 credits, and
raises the relevant attribute by one point. A
character can train once for each level he
or she has attained.
One thing the manual doesn't mention
and you may not find out for yourself is
how to set the Medic to help a specific person in the team. This person should be the
team leader, since the leader is always up
front, and therefore will be the target 90%
of the time. By setting the Medic on the
leader (or anyone else) you enable healing
during combat. Any injury sustained by the
character will be restored as it happens.
You won't have to wait until fighting ends
to order the Medic to do healing. How fast
this healing occurs depends on the dexterity of the Medic, another reason to get the Medic's dexterity up
as quickly as possible. Of course, after a combat you can have
the Medic heal anyone else who was injured; just remember to
set the Medic back on the leader when everyone else is fixed up.

Disparagement
The game does have drawbacks. The worst of these is the very
slow movement when the team is indoors, and long, journeys in
the ATV (All Terrain Vehicle) outdoors. The view for movement is
always overhead. Indoors, your team shows up individually as
dots, green for the team leader and yellow for the rest. Other
people (and animals) are also dots, either blue (friendly) or red
(hostile). When the team leader moves, the rest of the team
moves, following behind in single file. This movement is slow.
This situation is exacerbated by the necessity for making long
trips on foot, such as the five levels of the volcano, the three
levels of the battle station, and the towers on Caldorre, to name
a few. Getting anywhere seems to take forever.
Travel by ATV is not much better. It's a little faster, but on
several occasions you have to follow a long, long trench to get
to some special place. The need for such long journeys escapes
me. There are no outdoor dangers at all. Nothing will attack you
when you're tooling around in the ATV. The only use I could
find for the laser turret was to blast some hapless animal out of

Consider the use of doors, for instance. When the leader
moves through a door, it closes automatically again. If he runs
into something on the other side of the door, he has to fight it
alone, since the person behind him isn't
smart enough to open the door so the rest
of the team can help and he may not have
time to turn himself around to open the
door himself. Also, in some corridors or
rooms, team members may end up stuck
in a corner and unable to shoot at anything, even though there would be room
for them if they would just move a little bit.
The manual is not one of the better ones.
Aside from omitting certain information
you really should know (as mentioned
above), there is no table of contents,
making it hard to find specific information
without a lot of page flipping. Also, reading
it the first time (or even second) can be
confusing without having experienced
some of the game first.

Encouragement
On the positive side, the graphics are absolutely gorgeous. The pictures of people,
places, and animals are outstanding. The
coordination of events on multiple screens
is fantastic, especially the orbit/landing sequences, where the event is shown on
three screens at once with each displaying
different views. This is the most exceptional
use of EGA graphics I've seen yet in an adventure game.
Music and sound effects are also surprisingly good, but they
were too loud on my speaker (oh, for a volume control!), and I
played the game with them turned off. On the other hand, if
you're not up in the wee hours like I am, you might want to
have them on. They're pretty jazzy.

Judgment
Overall, Sentinel Worlds is a series (a second game is mentioned at the end) that shows promise, although the defects in
this game need to be addressed in future adventures. Faster
movement is a definite necessity. So is a better coordination of
plot elements; too much of what happens in Future Magic is on
a linear basis, which makes the early part slow going, particularly
as the player has no idea of what's going on.
Bottom line: Mixed reactions on this one; recommended, but
patience is required.

Supplement
Warning: This section contains specific hints for playing
"Sentinel Worlds I" and should be avoided by readers who
do not want to utilize Scorpia's clues to solve the puzzles.
(Continued on page 53)

U

Strategy Tips

[Ed: In June of 1984, the author had
the pleasure of attending the fortieth anniversary of the Allied landings in Normandy. As a result, the history of that
campaign has been of especial interest
to Mr. Sherfy. So, when
Strategic Studies Group
released Battles in Normandy, he purchased a copy in
order to get a "hands on" appreciation of what the commanders of forty years ago
were confronted with. These
notes are the result of his
successes with the Battlefront system utilized in
this game and other popular
SSG games.]

within a few hexes of a German objective (Briquebec), which lay well within his
grasp.
This does bring up a problem, though.
Assume that the Allied commander

of the harder ones for the Allied commanders because the Allies have so little
room to move. The first concern for
these forces must be to expand the
beachhead in order to allow more troops
ashore. Should the Allied
commander have difficulty
cracking the German position
on the hills by Beauville, he
should assign the 4th Regiment of the 6th Airborne
Division to assault this position. This regiment is comprised solely of infantry.
Checking the terrain chart
reveals that infantry is best
suited for attacking this position. It is surprising how
many players use troops that
are at a disadvantage to attack this position, specifically
armor.

Avoiding
"The Longest Day"
Strategic Notes for SSG's
"Battles In Normandy"
by Joe Sherfy

Optimal
Deployment

Another vital point is checking one's
divisional assets each and every turn
and deciding where they can be used to
the greatest effect. When units have
taken a lot of casualties, be certain to
pull them out of the line and put them
in reserve. In the Omaha Beach
scenario, Allied commanders should be
careful not to let their armor get chewed
up by the Germans in their forts. Instead, the armor should be saved for
when they break out of the beachhead
and are attacking in the open. Careful
commanders can reassign their
divisional armor to non-attacking regiments until the "breakout" occurs or
simply hold them in reserve while the
"slugout" on the beaches is proceeding.

Prior to ordering troops off their landing barges (as the Allies) or into their
coastal fortifications (as the Axis), take a
careful look at both the objectives and
the forces available. Access the information from the "Create" submenu and
look at the information for the scenario,
all of which would naturally be available
to a given commander. Write down the
data concerning friendly troops, including their strength, rating, and range of
their primary weapons. It can be very
useful, for example, to know that a
specific artillery unit can hit a target five
squares away. Knowing this, one can
more effectively utilize the artillery included in a division's assets. If an artillery unit is too far away to assist in an attack with its current regiment, it can be
reassigned to another regiment in the
division for purposes of the current turn.

Maximal Play Value
Next, check the victory points awarded
to each player for the elimination of
friendly and enemy units. This helps
commanders decide who has an advantage in a war of attrition. Also,
though it may not be as realistic, it enhances play value to know the enemy's
objectives. In some of the scenarios, the
Axis and Allies have different objectives.
It can be very frustrating to be next to
an enemy objective hex at the conclusion of a scenario, be unaware of this
objective, and end up losing the
scenario by only a few points.
In one playing of the Utah Beach
scenario, the Allies swept completely
around the German's right flank and
took all of the objectives on the other
side of the Cotentin Peninsula (Portbail,
Carteret, Barnville). The Allied commander still lost the game, however, because he did not realize that he was

wants to take a German objective which
is unoccupied. Since the Allied commander cannot order his units into an
objective not specified by the scenario,
the system works against said commander and the German gets victory
points for an unoccupied town that
could easily have been taken by the Allies had the game system allowed him to
move into it. Therefore, it is recommended that when a player does his pregame survey of enemy objectives, he
alter the scenario so that any additional
objectives are added to the list of friendly
objectives. No victory points should be
awarded for their capture, however, because the reward is simply keeping the
enemy from gaining those points.

Exceptional Management
Paying close attention to the terrain is
one of the keys to success. For example, the Sword Beach scenario is one

"Supporting formations" are extremely
crucial to success. When attacking, observe how many enemy formations the
enemy has within supporting range
(generally two hexes). If there are quite a
few, it is usually better to "probe" his
defenses prior to launching an all out assault. When attacking a battalion which
does not have any supporting troops in
range, however, it is usually worth gambling on an "assault" before he can
bring up reinforcements.

Beneficial Creativity
Creating personalized scenarios gives
one considerable insight on playing the
game. This reviewer has developed a
scenario of the United States troops
landing on Sicily which has provided
considerably more understanding of the
game system. Those who would like to
have a copy of the Invasion of Sicily
scenario should send a self-addressed
stamped envelope to: Joe Sherfy, 1201
W. 24th #204, Austin, TX 78705. Finally, Allied commanders should not forget
to order some Calvados for General
Sherfy at the first cafe they liberate!

Strategy Tips

The Role of

Leaders
in SSI's
Civil War Series
by Major David S. Stevens

tant role on the battle field. Their individual abilities could often make the difference between victory and defeat. A
leader's presence and active involvement at a critical point in the battle
could prevent a unit from fleeing in
panic or inspire one to perform feats of
heroism. Corps commanders were also
known to have personally directed their
divisions into battle. This, of course,
sometimes lead to their untimely deaths.
General John F. Reynolds, the senior officer on the battlefield during the first
morning of fighting at Gettysburg, was
killed while directing units of his I Corps.
No one can predict what might have
happened at Gettysburg had he not
been killed. Likewise, General Winfield
S. Hancock, taking over for Reynolds
several hours later, had a profound and
immediate effect on the morale of his
previously disheartened soldiers. There
are many accounts of how his presence
renewed the fighting spirit in his men
and restored their confidence and their
belief in the Army's ability to carry the
day.
In SSI's Civil War series, the effect that
leaders actually had on their units is
simulated very effectively and realistically.
However, understanding the intricacies
of this complex game feature is not
easy. The documentation is not as helpful in this area as one would generally
like. To obtain a victory in these games,
one must effectively command his units.
In order to accomplish this, one must
master the essential leadership concepts
of the game.

Unit Modifiers in Combat

Major Stevens is currently on active duty
with the United
States Army. He has
submitted this article
based primarily on
Rebel Charge at
Chickamauga and
Shiloh, but notes that
the earlier games
dealing with Antietam and Gettysburg are similar
enough to be relevant
to this discussion, as
well.

Premise
During the Civil
War, leaders played
an extremely impor-

Before attempting to describe the role
of a leader, one must understand the
mechanics of combat in this game system. There are several things that determine the combat capability of a unit.
First and simplest is a unit's "strength" in
terms of men. A unit with 1,000 men
would theoretically be twice as strong as
a unit with 500 men. Next, representing
the experience and training of a unit is
the measurement termed "effectiveness."
For example, a unit with 1,000 men
may have an effectiveness rating of
80/80 at the start of the game, which
could drop to 70/80 after suffering losses during the game. In this case, the
70 indicates the current effectiveness,
while the 80 indicates the maximum effectiveness this unit can have. In this
game, the overall strength of the unit is
reduced by one percent for each two effectiveness points below 100. Thus, a
unit with 1,000 men would begin the
game as if it were fighting with a
(Continued on page 47)

(Continued from page 44)

The Role of Leaders
in SSI's Civil War Series
strength of only 900 (1,000 * .90, a
10% reduction computed by (100-80)/2).
Fatigue also modifies the combat effectiveness of a unit. As a unit moves and
fights, it becomes tired. For every two
fatigue points a unit accumulates, its
strength is modified by one percentage
point. Thus, if a hypothetical unit of
1,000 men with an 80/80 effectiveness
rating had 10 fatigue points, its combat
strength would now be equal to just 855
men (1,000 * .90 * .95). Note that all
modifiers are cumulative. Thus, in this
example, the unit's strength of 1,000
men was multiplied by .90 for being 20
effectiveness points under 100 and .95
for having 10 fatigue points.
Other modifiers are also considered
when determining the fire power of a
unit. These include the type of terrain in
which both the attacker and the
defender are located, the density of the
attacker and defender, and whether the
attacker or defender is in a column
mode. Terrain and column modifiers are
common sense concepts. For example,
on would like to attack on opposing
force that is located in the open while
one's own force is located in covered terrain, as opposed to making an assault
across an open field against a fortified
position in the wood line. Tables are
provided in the rules which list the
modifiers for the myriad of combinations
possible.

Command Influence
in Combat
As the commander of an army, you
can control the above modifiers relatively
easily by simply using common sense.
Two other modifiers also affect the unit's
strength and they must be monitored
just as closely, if not more so. They are
the "Command and Control" rating assigned to each unit and the "Leader
Bonus."
In these games, a leader is assigned to
each brigade, division, and corps.
Brigades can be split into demi-brigades
with the assumption that a brigade
leader affects both units equally. Several
brigades are grouped together to form a
division and several divisions are
grouped to form a corps. This hierarchical structure forms the chain of command. Each leader in this chain of command affects all units under him.

Each leader has been assigned a
bonus or proficiency rating representing
his historical leadership ability. In Shiloh,
this value ranges from a low of "4" to a
high of "50" (the latter is the rating assigned to General Grant). The leader
bonus is a direct modifier on the
strength of the unit. Thus, if Grant is attached to a unit of 1,000 men, it will, in
effect, assault or defend with 1,500 men
(1,000 * 1.5). Of course, the other
modifiers mentioned above would also
affect the unit's final strength.
The "Command and Control" modifier
is also a direct modifier. It can assume a
value between 0.5 and 1.5, which can increase or reduce a unit's strength by
50%. Several factors go into determining
this rating. They are: the distance a unit
is from its brigade or demi-brigade, the
distance the unit is from both its division
and corps leader, and the state of mind
value of both its division and corps
leader.
At the beginning of each turn, all
division and corps leaders are randomly
assigned a state of mind as being either
confused, indecisive, cautious, or confident. Values of -0.3, -0.2, -0.1, and 0
are appropriately assigned for each state
of mind. The leader's bonus rating is
used to increase the probability that the
leader's state will be confident. Thus, the
higher the bonus rating, the less chance
there is that the leader will become confused.
A "Command and Control" modifier is
determined for each individual unit at
the beginning of each turn. It represents
the commander's influence over a unit.
This modifier is primarily based on how
far away the unit is located from the
leaders in its chain of command. In
Rebel Charge at Chickamauga, for instance, five points are accumulated for
every square that the unit is away from
its other demi-brigade (if divided). Five
points are also accumulated for each
square the unit is away from its division
leader. For each square a unit is away
from its corps leader, two points are accumulated (Note: These values vary
slightly depending on the particular
game). The resulting total is divided into
28. The results will be rounded up or
down to insure that they are between
0.5 and 1.5. This quantity is further
reduced by adding in the state of mind
values for both the division and corps

leader, with the lowest possible result
again being limited to 0.5.
What this all means is that each
brigade should stay in close proximity to
their respective division leader, three or
four squares away at the most, and the
corps leaders should be positioned near
the center of the units he commands or
near key points of action. It also means
that leaders with high bonus ratings
should not exposed needlessly to combat. As stated above, a leader with a
high rating has less of a chance of becoming confused and a confused leader
will greatly reduce all of his subordinate
units' ability to move and fight effectively. For example, a unit obtaining the
maximum value of 1.5 for distance factors can still end up with a command
and control modifier of 0.9, should both
its division and corps leaders be confused. Thus, one should not casually involve division, and especially, corps
leaders that have high ratings; in combat. The loss of a highly qualified corps
leader will have numerous and severe
negative effects on the corps' ability to
function effectively for the remainder of
the game. Finally, before sending a unit
into combat, one should also consider
how the "Command and Control" rating
will affect the unit's strength in conjunction with other modifiers.

Other Effects
Related to Leadership
In order to perform any operation such
as moving, firing, engaging in a melee,
building fortifications, or changing
modes, a unit must have the appropriate number of operational points.
The more operation points a unit has,
the more it can accomplish in one turn.
The number of operation points a unit
is allocated each turn is based on the
"Command and Control" rating in conjunction with the unit's morale and a random number. Thus, the "Command and
Control" rating directly affects not only
the unit's combat strength, but its ability
to function effectively on the battlefield.
Each time a unit engages in combat,
whether in the offensive or defensive
mode, it expends one of its ammo
points. At the beginning of each turn,
the unit is resupplied. Again, the higher
the "Command and Control" rating assigned to the unit, the higher the probability that the unit will be resupplied. A
unit without ammo cannot attack and
defends with a 70% reduction.
A unit that is disrupted or routed cannot attack and is, in effect, useless. The
ability of a unit to recover from disruption is based on the "Command and

Control" rating and whether the unit is
in an enemy zone of control. Rallying a
routed unit is likewise based on the
"Command and Control" rating, as well
as its morale. In both cases, it is clear
that the rating has a significant and important role toward influencing the play
of the game. Here, the higher the rating
is, the better the chance for that unit to
return to service.

Using Leaders Effectively
As explained above, insuring that
leaders maintain control of their units is
the key to obtaining higher "Command
and Control" ratings. These higher
ratings, in turn, affect practically every
aspect of the game and it can severely
impede one's progress toward total victory if they are not taken into consideration.
The added firepower, in terms of increased unit strength, which is obtained
whenever division and corps leaders are
included in an assault, makes including
them in combat whenever possible a
tempting strategy to follow. While this
tactic can sometimes cause the additional casualties needed to disrupt or rout
an enemy unit, the down side of this
strategy is that the leader is constantly
being exposed to fire and thus, runs the
risk of being killed or captured. Every
time the unit to which a leader is attached takes casualties, a probability
check is made to see if the leader was
one of those killed or wounded. The
elimination of a key corps or division
leader, as stated above, can reduce the
combat effectiveness of many units for
the remainder of the game.
I have found that it is not wise to split
up the brigade to which a division or
corps leader is attached. This reduces
the possibility that a key leader will be
killed during combat. I use units with
division leaders assigned to attack
enemy forces that are known to be
weaker and where the possibility of
being outflanked is small. I also try not
to attack with units that have corps
leaders assigned to them, unless a flank
attack presents itself and I can protect
that unit from a major counterattack by
utilizing friendly units which are nearby.
SSI has done an excellent job at
simulating the effects that leaders had
on their units during that era. they have
also captured the feeling for the difficulty
that the generals must have experienced
attempting to command and control
their units in combat. In the final
analysis, these games test one's own
ability as an Army commander to the
limit.

Review

T

he period from mid-1862 through the end of

1863 saw the tide slowly changing in the
American Civil War. Especially in the eastern
theater, Union forces began to give as well as they
got. Were Union tactics improving? Were Union
troops improving in quality? Or was the balance in
the "on-the-field generalship" changing? SSG's
latest offering, Decisive Battles of the American
Civil War, Volume ll (DBACW-II) is your opportunity
to explore the last question in particular. In keeping
with their tradition of designs with "viewpoints," the
latest puts the player onto the battlefield as the actual commanding general. It is a highly accurate and
historical simulation, as well as a product which
raises some interesting questions about the true role
of the overall commander in the midst of battle.

Boilerplate Special
DBACW-II is SSG's second offering in their series
of American Civil War titles, with this game covering
five battles from mid-1862 through the end of 1863.
The scenarios cover the battles of Gaines Mill,
Stones River, Gettysburg (scenarios for Day One
and Day Two), Chickamauga, and Chattanooga.
The game uses brigades as the units of maneuver,
and one hour turns. The system uses an "orders
phase" at the start of each turn, where players can
check the status of their army and issue orders to
particular units and formations. Next, the computer
resolves combat and moves all units. As usual, SSG
gets high marks for laying bare the guts of the combat routines, so that you can get a feel for which factors have significantly greater or lesser impacts in
combat.
The game system places great emphasis on the
maintenance of a proper command perspective for
the player (another signature mark of SSG games).
You play each scenario as the battlefield commander and the decisions made each turn are
relevant to that position. You send orders to subordinate formations (corps and divisions), and can personally direct the actions of a limited number of actual brigades. Orders to corps and Divisional commanders will be received (or perhaps not), interpreted, and acted upon by the subordinate commanders (played by the computer), and may or may
not work out the way you planned. The possible orders which you can give to various subordinate formations (corps and divisions) and units (brigades)
will vary with the individual situations. Formations
receive orders to adopt offensive or defensive attitudes and map objectives. Individual units can, on
the other hand, generally be given more specific
directions. Command control, sighting, and communications are all handled by the computer; and
these are what decide how many of your formations
and units are able to receive orders from you each
turn.
While the player typically maintains contact with
most of his formation leaders and directs the specific
actions of a few nearby brigades, one other command option exists. You can move your Army HQ
adjacent to a specific corps HQ and take personal
command of that corps (sometimes you simply must
do this to keep some dunderheaded commander
from completely messing up the battle). Of course,

Decisive Battles
of the

American Civil War
Volume Two: Gaines Mill
to Chattanooga
by Jay C. Selover
while you are so engaged, you
can usually watch as things go
completely off course all over
the rest of the battlefield! All in
all, the frustration and exasperation level is quite high as you
begin to realize how much of
your Army's potential remains
underutilized because you can't
assume the classic gamer's
perspective and move all the
brigades together in a concerted effort.

Aye, There's
The Rub!
So, the game effectively transmits the frustration of true command—isn't that the whole
idea of a game designed with a
"command perspective?" Right,
well I guess my basic problem
with the game then is that it
was basically no fun being a
1
Civil War battlefield commander, so it's no
fun playing the role of one! Every scenario
starts out with starting units in position
SYSTEMS:
# PL AYERS:
and with initial orders given (more on this
crucial point anon). You plop down out of
DE SIGNERS:
the sky into Meade's boots and spend the
whole game trying like hell to make your
PUBLISHER:
presence have an impact on the battle.
The boys already know what to do, and
there are just too many of them for you to run your
personal headquarters around giving them all orders. The scenarios all tend to evolve along historical outcomes; not that this is necessarily bad—perhaps it teaches us that these battles were all destined to turn out the way they did regardless of the
presence of the individual commanding generals. If
that's the lesson, thanks very much but I would have
rather read it in a book. If that's not the lesson, then
I'm at a loss to explain my inability to achieve a
gratifying level of involvement in the battles. Maybe
I've missed some "trick" to successful utilization of
"the commander" or maybe I'm just a poor leader,
but I've played a lot of games (including quite a few
excellent "command perspective" simulations) and I
just don't get it. I feel the same involvement playing
the game or just watching the computer play both
sides.

Decisive Battles of the
American Civil War—Vol. Il:
Mill to Chattanooga
Apple. II, C-64/ 128
1-2
$40.00
Roger Keating,
Malcolm Power,
and
Strategic Studies Group
Gaines

Wald

CA

Any Bodies Left Breathing?
Actually, there is one missing design feature which
I'm sure would have raised my excitement level for
DBACW-II considerably—a pre-battle briefing to
determine "rules of
engagement" a la the SimCan games. In those
games, the commander establishes a guiding set of
principles or battle
doctrine establishing
proper procedures and
priorities when the enemy
is encountered. The biggest problem in DBACW-II
is that the scenarios all
start with the battle just
about to be joined and all
of your forces have already been given their "standing orders" as to posture and objectives. A critical
element of being the commander is what you tell
your subordinates to do before a battle actually
begins. That way, when communications become a
shambles during the battle, you have some hope
that your minions will continue to pursue your overall objectives. Now, in all fairness, you can do this
with DBACWII; it's just a pain. Thanks to the excellent scenario modification and design kit included
with the game (have I forgotten to laud this standard
element of all of SSG's designs? As usual, their

games are basically worth the price if only for the
tremendous scenario design capabilities in these
marvelous utilities!), you can take any standard
scenario and create a modified version. In this
modification, you can go in and play around with
the standing orders of all subordinates. By doing
this, that key division that starts the game way at the
other end of the map can immediately make the
flanking attack which you would have ordered the
night before the battle, had you been the actual
commander. Get the idea?

Turn Your Radio On
Wait just a minute now, some will say. The game
does include a perfect mechanism to raise your involvement as commander, a "radio flag". Yes, it is true,
the start up menu includes a couple of options—
one places all units visible on the screen whether
"sighted" of not, and another toggles on a radio for
you. Playing a game with the radio allows you to
send orders to all of your subordinates at all times,
regardless of the actual communications situation.
First of all, the fact that SSG included the radio option in DBACWII tells me that they realized that playing without it would not give the gamer the same
satisfaction one is accustomed to from SSG designs
(after all, this series is the first of their designs to
allow anything other than a strict "command
perspective" playing) Ed: Objection! This is calling
for assumption on the part of the reviewer and
does not take into consideration the rationale expressed by SSG; to wit, that the radio option is
provided as a tutorial mode to get players accustomed to the mechanics of the game.]. Second,
DBACWII with the radio on is now like any of the
other "God's-eye-view" classic-boardgame-style computer games. It is all right, but not noticeably improved over them. No, SSG games are "command
perspective" games in my book. The radio is a nice
touch and that's the way it plays most effectively, but
for this design to make a statement it needed to
work as intended; as a classic study simulating Civil
War battlefield command.

Final Verdict
Few games have ever been as difficult for me to
review as this one. I have dragged myself back to
the computer time and again, fought more than thirty battles (mostly solitaire, but a couple against live
foes), and can now enjoy the relief of being able to
put the game up onto the top shelf of my "hallowed
archives" for awhile. Why does a game which starts
out with so much going for it ultimately leave me disappointed? Perhaps, because it destroys our illusions
about the impact of ACW commanders or perhaps,
because it isn't actually realistic simulations that
garners are looking for. Anyway, then, there you
have it. This game is an excellent simulation of Civil
War combat. brigades and larger formations all tend
to behave in realistic ways. Computerized subordinate commanders adopt historical strategies and
objectives. The results are realistic; both on the
smaller scale of the individual brigade combats, and
on the larger scale of the typical flow of the battles.
Yet ultimately, I found no joy in the task of trying to
move my men to glory.

(Continued from page 37)

Magical,
Mystery Future
Once your team is created and their ship named, the game
begins. It's a pretty frenetic beginning, as your transport ship
comes under attack by raiders immediately upon arrival in the
Caldorre system. Be certain you understand how to move the
ship, raise or lower speed, target, and fire lasers, because there
won't be much time to learn in the middle of battle.
I his brings up an important point: never go into battle against
raiders alone. Always make sure your fellow Interceptors are
there with you or you could find your team dead very quickly.
Carefully check the Federation display and observe where the
rest of the squadron is before rushing off to fight.
For awhile, most of the team's experience points will come
from shooting down raiders. This nets you 25 experience per person, plus 100 credits from the Federation. When nothing is happening in space (the raiders aren't always out there), you can
make some quick cash by dropping off science missions. It's dull
work, but it's safe and you get 700 per science packet dropped.
Mining isn't really worth the effort. Rambling around in hilly
areas in your ATV to pick up the three types of ores is not only
time consuming, but doesn't bring much money, either. If you
do decide to mine, always sell your ores on the other planet,
where you'll get a little bit more for them.
After awhile, you'll be up to where you can board raider ships.
This is where you can experience some up close combat, for
which projectile weapons are recommended. The only reason to
board these ships, aside from the experience gained in fighting,
is to raid the armories. These are always in the same place and
always have the same items. Grab as much as you can, the tesselator if nothing else, as this will bring you 600 credits when
you sell it. A few raider boardings, and you'll have a fair amount
of cash for training and ammunition, as well as replenishing fuel
supplies.
By the way, all those odd items, such as arisian lens and
holophones and everything else, have no purpose (that I could
discern) aside from being sold for cash. Don't buy any in the
general store, just sell what you have there. In fact, you can sell
almost anything even to the weapons stores; they'll buy your
trinoculors and tesselators, too. The only things no one will purchase are the proscribed weapons, such as long range lasers
and AK-4700's. However, you can buy and sell ammunition for illegal weapons anywhere.
In between blowing up raider ships and training up attributes,
your team can pay a visit or two to the one town on Norjaenn.
Here you'll learn about the feud between the farmers and the
ranchers. Most of them have pretty much the same thing to say.
The really important people are the ones who show up (in EGA)
as pale blue dots; make sure you speak to all of them.
Speaking of blue, be on the lookout in space for blue ships,
and hail each one you meet. One of them is Grager's space
yacht and you really want to talk to him. For one thing, he'll do
some nice things for your vessel (only once, though, so there's
no point in going back again later).
The people in the towers are, for the most part, rather uncommunicative, and you won't learn very much from them. Caldorrians in particular will tell you nothing and most of the people in
the bars are the same way. After awhile, this becomes rather
frustrating.

Sooner or later, you will be called upon to settle a dispute between two races on Caldorre, the Warhaka and the Koshol. This
is actually a simple mission, involving little more on your part
than visiting the two races. The Koshol bear an uncanny
resemblance to, well, Aliens, but they are quite peaceful and
generally non-aggressive. Be sure to look around in the rooms,
you might find a few useful things.
Some time after this, you'll hear about a distress signal from
Borkin on Ceyjavik (an Icelandic-sounding planet where you
make most of your science drops). You won't be able to find
Borkin before you get this message on the Fed channel (it's a
good idea to look at the Fed channels every so often, so you
don't miss something important).
Be prepared for this mission, as Borkin is deserted except for
rampaging ice tigers. They are very nasty customers and can do
a great deal of damage. Come well-armed and well-armored for
this one. To save you some time, the most important building to
explore is the control center. The rest have little in them besides
the tigers. However, fighting tigers is a good way of building up
experience, if you're looking to do that.
Eventually you will find your way to an underground lab that
leads in turn to an undersea volcano with five levels. Be
prepared, since green dragons with acid breath are lurking down
here (really!). They are most prevalent on the fifth level, but they
also wander around in the upper levels.
At the end of this trip, you'll find the first part of the explanation for the raids on the transport ships and some idea of what
you have to do next, although what is not entirely obvious. Fortunately, you do not have to go through the volcano to get back
out again.
Actually, this is the time to pay a return visit to Norjaenn; you'll
notice that some people who were there before aren't there now.
Talking to the ranchers and farmers will provide the information
you need to find the missing people. This, in turn, will bring you
to the next major stepping-stone in the game, reaching the Sentinels.
One of the things you'll learn about from them is the battle station from which the raider ships are launched. This battle station
can be a tough place, although it will also provide you with
some neat armor and weapons. You'll probably make several
trips to the station (once you find out where it is and how to get
there) before you're ready for your actual tasks there. Note that
the battle station armories are restocked between visits, so each
time you arrive, there is a fresh set of weapons, ammunition,
and treasure items to take.
Now, we come to the ending. Unfortunately, the final showdown with the chief bad guy (yes, there's one of those here)
lacks any excitement. However, the worst is yet to come. Having
dispatched the villain, you loot his chest of goodies (and there
are some nice goodies in there) and hurry back to your ship.
As soon as your team is in the ship, it leaves the battle station.
You get a brief "Congrats, you did a good job" message, followed by your team being put automatically into cold sleep. The
game is saved at this very point to one of your two save positions. That's it, game over.
You don't get a chance to turn anything into cash or train
anyone who might have gained levels while in the station. Just
ZAP! it's all over until next time. This is one of the crudest endings since the days of the old two-word adventure games and
considering the effort that was put into the rest of this game,
you'd expect the authors to come up with something a little
more elegant than that.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

T

he dragon's fiery breath burned across Goldmoon's
self, Caramon became his brother's protector and this has given
arms. The young cleric held aloft her blue crystal staff,
Caramon a much needed honing of his battle skills. Sturm
source of her powerful magic, and began summoning
Brightblade's father, a knight of Solamnia, sent Sturm away for
forth the spell to deflect the dragon's breath away from her.
his own safety when enemies sought to destroy the family.
Before she could finish the spell, her lover, Riverwind, darted
Sturm was never again reunited with his father, but swore that
swiftly between the black dragon and herself. Without a spell
all ideals of knighthood would forever govern his life. His skill
to protect him, he was literally
with the two-handed sword
roasted alive. It was left to
marks him as the best fighter
Sturm Brightblade to dispatch
in the party and a logical
the dragon with a vicious
choice for point man.
slash of his mighty
Goldmoon and Riverwind are
broadsword.
two young lovers who have left
their tribe and are now looking
by David M. Wilson
Goldmoon knelt by her
for a group called the seekers.
lover's scorched and blackThe lovers hope the seekers
ened body. As tears glistened
can explain the strange powers of
on her cheekbones, she raised her clerical
Goldmoon's staff. Riverwind was sentenced to
staff and summoned forth its most powerful
death when he brought the staff home from a
spell. In just a moment, Riverwind began to
quest, but could not make it work for
stir! Working feverishly, Goldmoon called
Goldmoon's father, the tribal chief. With the
forth healing spell after healing spell until
aid of the Blue Crystal staff, Goldmoon magithe young warrior was completely whole.

Heroes and Heavies
of the Lance

"I thought I'd lost you," she said in a
hushed tone.
After a brief healing session (faster than
you can say Oral Roberts) the party con-

tinued their quest through the musty ruins of
Xak Tsaroth.
—Roll Credits

Scouting Locations
Sound like one of your own scenarios?

Heroes of the Lance is based on TSR's
DragonLance game world, Krynn.(More
specifically, it is based on the DragonLance
game module: DL1 Dragons of Despair)
These modules have already inspired a series
of fantasy novels and a "DC" comic book
based on the fantasy world. Now, courtesy of
SSI and U. S. Gold, the fantasy moves onto
computer disk. The player controls eight heroes
in his search for the disks of Mishakal.
It seems appropros for the goal in a computer
game to be recovering disks. This time it is not
floppy disks, but the disks of Mishakal. These circular plates of platinum contain all that our
heroes will need to restore the knowledge of the old gods to the
people and help fight the Queen of Darkness. Once the people's
faith is restored, the old gods will be able to intervene on behalf
of their followers and the balance between good and evil will be
restored. However, the Queen of Darkness has surrounded the
ruins of Xak Tsaroth with mercenaries and monsters, so the
party of heroes has no choice but to fight their way through the
ancient temple until they get to the disks. When they find the
disks, they face the biggest challenge of their warrior careers, a
behemoth black dragon named Khisanth who guards the disks.

Cast of Characters
The characters will be well-known to followers of the DragonLance saga. They are a well-mixed crowd. Tanis is the halfhuman, half-elven warrior whose skill with a sword is surpassed
only by his excellent marksmanship with a bow. Caramon and
Raistlin Majere are twin brothers who seem to be the opposites
in this party. Raistlin is a young mage who recently completed
"the test" which gave him his powers, but ruined his physical attributes. Because his brother was constantly endangering him-

cally spirited Riverwind away from the danger.
Tasselhoff Burrfoot is a kender, a member of
that race of small people who have earned a
reputation for "appropriating" anything that is
not nailed down. Tasselhoff has explained to
the group that the kender don't steal for
stealing's sake, but because of their overly
developed sense of curiosity. (They probably
still closely watch the little man, anyway.) His
main weapons are a combination staff and
slingshot. The last individual in the party is
also a little man. He carries a huge battleaxe
and villains and monsters don't seem to enjoy
meeting him at axe-throwing range.

Each time this game is booted, players are
greeted with a portrait of each character.
Before play begins, the program checks to
see if players have read the manual, utilizing
a pop quiz (copy protection) with questions
like: What is the strength for the character Riverwind?

Stage Directions
Players must select a marching order for their
eight people. It is imperative to keep the mage
and cleric id the front line. Raistlin and Goldmoon
are free to work their magic only if they are one of the first four
characters in line. Although your magic users should be in the
front ranks, great pains must be taken to protect them from
harm, especially Goldmoon. Her clerical staff is of no use to any
other characters. Since she is the group medic, keep her alive at
all costs.
Personally, I like the following marching order: 1) Sturm, 2)
Flint, 3) Raistlin, 4) Goldmoon, 5) Tanis, 6) Riverwind, 7)
Caramon and 8) Tasselhoff. This order can be changed at any
time throughout the game. The player controls the marching
order, except when a hero is killed or Goldmoon is badly hurt. At
any point that Goldmoon is in serious danger, Riverwind
automatically races to the front to defend her.
Combat is handled via joystick. Only the hero in the very front
can fight. He gets all the glory and most of the wounds.
However, players may also use magic during a combat round.
Don't be afraid to stop a battle round and utilize a magic spell
because to survive it will take everything that the party has.
The attributes in the manual play more of a part in the game
(Continued on page 56)

(Continued from page 54)

than is easily discerned. For instance, Raistlin is extremely weak
and is easily defeated in any type of a physical battle. He moves
slowly, almost walking with a limp. He doesn't jump, he levitates
(you've got to see this). Other attributes also impact the game's
play, since this is "hack and slash" role-playing without the paper
and dice. No one will win this game solely because he knew how
to handle a joystick. Each character is programmed in and it's
up to the player to make the most effective decision in utilizing
each character.
The enemies are: mercenaries, Baaz Draconians (gargoyle type
creatures) who turn to dust when destroyed; Giant spiders,
(remember to swing that sword down); Trolls who are almost impossible to kill in a pitched battle unless a magic spell is used
(either charm or hold person) to freeze them while the heroes
slash away; Gully dwarfs who are scummy little nuisances and do
little or no damage, but will remove character's deserted bodies;
Wraiths who drain away your lifeforce (charm and slay these
quickly); Hatchling Black Dragons (these are easily killed once a
character who is protected by a "Deflect Dragon Breath" spell
pursues them into a corner and swings for their legs and lower
body); and the BIG MAMA dragon herself, Khisanth.
The game manual advises strategic withdrawals when an opponent is overpowering a party. These strategic retreats provide
the party with a time for healing. Also, it is good to keep in mind
that the further a party progresses, the more monsters it will encounter.

Players will eventually find their way into a room that is a complicated maze full of chasms and pitfalls. Remember that when a
group turns, they are not moving in that direction only spinning
on their heels. The maze is a bit complex for the average player
and may prove to be a serious drawback to some (Hint: Don't
turn your back on the South or you might not rise again!).
The graphics on the ST version are extremely satisfying and
visually appealing. Rarely does a program lend so much attention to detail outside of the title screens. Each character is
presented in a manner consistent with the illustrations of the
DragonLance game modules, comic books and fantasy novels.
The sound effects are above average with appropriate grunting
and groaning in battle sequences. The sound of sizzling
dragon's breath sounds like a blazing campfire. Repeatedly
wounding an enemy may produce a series of quick groans
which is similar to someone tossing their cookies. The sounds
really add to the flavor of the game. The theme music is the only
exception, it just didn't seem to fit the tone of the game.

Press Clippings
Heroes of the Lance is a quality product that will leave most
players with the strong conviction that TSR selected the right
company to produce the computer versions of AD & D
products. DragonLance fans are not the only group that will be
impressed. If you like an action/strategy blend in a fantasy game,
this product is for you.

(Continued from page 6)

product will not support SubLOGIC
Scenery Disks.

them to create a new readable phrase.
I'd hate to see any sequel to The Fool's
Errand which didn't include such a unique and fun type of puzzle.
Steve Meretzky
Cambridge, MA

Ed: We presume that, as Infocom's
gregarious guru of goofiness and a
prominent game designer yourself
("Leather Goddesses of Phobos," "Zork
Zero," "Planetfall," and "Stationfall,"
among others), your observation will
bear enough weight to send Cliff
Johnson (designer of "The Fool's Errand") happily back to include a new
puzzle in his sequel and to offer Alan
Roberts (our reviewer) a new perspective on the previous puzzle.

Fly The Scenic Skies
We have been swamped with phone
calls from owners of Microsoft Flight
Simulator version 3 concerned that the

The following information is crucial for
loading and operating Scenery Disks
with Flight Simulator and applies to
Europe Scenery Disk as well as Scenery
Disks #1-#7, Japan and San Francisco.
Although Flight Simulator's manual
does not include any reference to
Scenery Disk support outside a mention
on page 75, a "readme.doc" file on the
disk itself does explain the procedure for
converting a Scenery Disk to a scenery
file and loading the file to a hard disk.
You can load a Scenery Disk in either
of two ways: as a copy protected disk
from drive A or as a scenery file loaded
into the same hard disk subdirectory as
Flight Simulator. To load the scenery
disk from drive A, you first need to load
Flight Simulator from the hard drive or a
floppy drive (preferably on drive B but
you can operate both from drive A in a
pinch).
When you're positioned for take-off,
press shift-E to bring up the Scenery
Library menu. Choose option 1 (Floppy
disk in Drive A) or the number associated with the scenery file you wish to

use. Then invoke the NAV/COM menu
and choose selection A to set your position within the scenery area.
This should have Flight Simulator soaring through the scenery in no time. Of
course, if further assistance is required,
the SubLOGIC customer support department can be reached, toll free outside Illinois at (800) 637-4983 or (217) 3598482 within the state.
Thanks for helping to get the word out.
Sincerely,
Deb Israel
SubLOGIC

(Continued from page 28)

Mirror Images

(even if it scrolls up on the screen step-by-step as you explore).
Finally, even though the programming is done well (except for
the introduction, the program is in assembly language), the disk
access time required on the Commodore forces a slower than
optimal pace.

The game is personalized for me and keeps my interest.
By allowing the player to mix and match character heads
and torsos to create portraits of our player characters,
I was even able to make one that looks something
like the real weasel-faced me. I like that!

Still, no matter how many quibbles I throw into this article, they
are only quibbles. Overall, I like this game and think the entire
SSI design team has done a very good job. Take it from a "rival"
designer, Pool of Radiance has my recommendation for every
computer fantasy role-playing gamer.

In fact, while I'm talking about art, SSI has put together some
of the best art to be seen in any fantasy role-playing game. The
colors are well-chosen for the C-64/128: bright green, yellow,
blue, black, maroon, orange, red, and white. There is a variety of
different walls, doors, shop entrances, buildings, etc.—more
variety than I have seen in any other crpg, including The Bard's
Tale series (which used to be my standard of excellence). The 3D perspective is very effective and the portraits of the monsters
are brilliantly realized. Some, like lizard-men, have spot animation and some don't, but when they do, it is cleverly done. Nice
job!
The third important factor in game design is that the game
must seem winnable and be worth doing. Every CRPG currently
on the market seems too tough on the players. This is probably
a holdover from the days of arcade gaming when the idea was to
separate customers from their quarters. Killing a never-ending
stream of monsters to build up hit points and other attributes
gets boring after a while, no matter how good the art is. Mixing
the monsters with puzzles to solve and tasks to accomplish
keeps the game fresh for a longer period of time. In spite of always being outnumbered in this game, most of the combats
seem winnable. Beyond this, a very nice touch in the combat algorithm is that NPCs in the game have morale and must succeed at a morale check or be forced to run or surrender. My
fighters may be on their last legs, but we know we're home free
when the foes begin to run or surrender. I love it!
Fourth, the world of the game must hold surprises. Pool is holding up nicely. It blew me away the first time I went to a tavern in
town. It seemed to be a one-trick place where you could play a
simple even-money gambling game. Suddenly, I was jostled by a
thief. When I chose to react violently, I found myself in a noholds barred tavern brawl . . . to the death! Even better, half the
fighters in there turned out to be on my side. It was a real
brouhaha, but we won. Then, when it was over, the watch
showed up. One of these times, I'm going to stay and see what
happens if we don't run away when the "cops" arrive.
There are several other surprises that I've encountered in the
city of Phlan. The scenario designers fairly dare the players to let
their antisocial impulses go by challenging you to break into
shops or the town hall at night when they are closed. The watch
wanders around in huge gangs of mid-level fighters (much
tougher than my beginning-level fighters) and practically dares
you to make trouble. In addition, the training halls will allow you
to recruit NPCs for your party, but they'll also cut you off if you
go through too many choices. I'm still at the beginning of the
Pool of Radiance adventure and I look forward to surprises to
come.
In a more critical vein, Pool of Radiance is not a perfect game
design. Several parts of it leave me unimpressed. Even with the
computer handling the complexity of the A D & D rules, some
parts of the game are too cumbersome. I have wasted hours
having my characters memorize the same spells over and over
again. The automap function is also a big waste of time. It only
shows you where the walls in the vicinity are, whether you've
been there or not. This is illogical. How would you know? Part of
the fun of this kind of game is doing the mapping involved

Counterpoint

It's D D
and I Don't!
by Trade Forman Hines
Trade Forman Hines is an experienced adventure gamer.
CGW was surprised to hear that she was not impressed with
"Pool of Radiance," so we asked her to share her reasons in
this article.
The best thing you can say about Pool of Radiance is that it is
real, by-the-book, Dungeons and Dragons ... the rules . . . the
play . . . the original role-playing adventure. Of course, that is
similar to saying that the best thing about an 8K, build-it-yourself Apple computer is that it was the first.
In the last few years, computer dungeonmasters like Lord
British, Andrew Greenberg, Robert Woodhead, and Brian Fargo's
Interplay team have helped to evolve computer role-playing
into absorbing, innovative worlds you can get lost in. Pool of
Radiance does not accomplish this for me.
The box says Pool of Radiance is based on the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons system. Funny—it looks a lot like Basic, or
non-Advanced D&D to me. This battle-scarred ex-dungeonmaster noticed a number of "advanced" enhancements missing.
Notice that the more exotic character classes like Ranger,
Paladin, and Druid are not included. Further, the choice of
characters is limited to the standard Fighter, Mage, and Cleric
classes . . . just like the "basic" game.
Moreover, advancements and spellcasting are severely curtailed, leaving players with only first, second, and third level
spells. So, no matter how much experience a cleric might earn,
he or she will never be able to cast the most valuable incantation of all, "Raise Dead." "Magic Missile" spells are the best a
mage can aspire to, albeit, they are a bit more potent than
similar spells in other games since they strike multiple enemies
(and sometimes, friends) within a large radius.
One area of the game is truly innovative for CRPGs: the
player's ability to customize his or her own character icon. In
Pool of Radiance, players not only choose their race, class, and
sex, but also pick what they look like. When new characters are
created, one can pick from a large assortment of character faces
and body types to illustrate the new arrival in close-up mode. Battle icons can also be customized according to the type of armor
and weaponry the new character wears. This feature is especially
nice because it enables each character to be differentiated at a
glance during battle sequences.
Customizing characters is a great idea inspired by face-to-face
role-playing with miniature figures. It would be nice to see this
feature incorporated into other computer RPGs. Alas, however,
(Continued on page 62)

(Continued from page 60)

Mirror Images
even this feature has its murky points in Pool of Radiance. When
you customize your icon, you are presented with a choice of a
large or small icon. Good luck trying to figure out the difference,
though. As many times as we selected first one option, then the
other, we never did find a difference. The rule book was no help
on this point.
Another oddity about the character creation sequence is its apparent sexism in one area and its complete disregard for gender
in another. Any female character automatically begins the game
with less strength. It may be realistic, but since there is no corresponding increase in charisma (as in Basic Dungeons &
Dragons), having female characters becomes a poor strategic
choice.
Players who go ahead and create female characters anyway will
be surprised to be offered a number of bearded faces when they
customize their character pictures. This after the rule book states
so emphatically that the choice of illustrations is based on the
type of character chosen.
The documentation is excellent, but I take exception to the
rune-wheel copy-protection. Although code-wheels are certainly
a common form of copy-protection, this one consists of dozens
of tiny, squiggly runes that can strain eyes to distraction.

The game consists of a series of mini-quests which grow
progressively more difficult. If you prefer puzzles and strategy to
hacking your way through armies of orcs, however, you will
probably be disappointed. Most of the early mini-quests consist
of such strategic missives as "Clear out the bad section of town"
or "Go to the woods and kill everything in there." I never heard a
word about secret messages or people, fantastic objects or
wandering mages.
As time passes in the game, the world becomes more populated with fiendish creeps. Rather than run into a few more lethal
creatures, however, players are apt to find groups of 20, 30, or
even more orcs. Needless to say, the ensuing battle can be
mind-numbingly long.
During battle, you have to wait for each and every monster to
move, even if all they are doing is guarding something. With a
big group, a melee round can take upwards of half an hour.
It is not even safe to stop into a tavern for some beer and a
chat. While our party was visiting, a brawl broke out and we
were literally trapped in the middle of the melee, a sequence that
lasted 40 minutes—too long for a sideline event.
Dungeonmasters (DMs) have always been the heart and soul
of RPGs. Personally, I always found the best DMs were those
who didn't stick by every single rule. Pool seems to have a DM
problem—the rules and restrictions often seem more important
than the game. Don't get me wrong—Pool of Radiance is not all
bad. However, with so many truly outstanding adventures on the
market, Pool of Radiance does not make my "A" list.

(Continued from page 13)

Everything You've Always
Wanted to Know About

"Empire"
Ian forces should be easy to stop and
mop up. To the northwest, however,
things are not moving as smoothly.
Kadma has hit your protecting fleet hard
with battleships and a carrier. Once you
lose control of the seas in that region,
your land forces will not be able to hold
out. Nevertheless, you are, even now, assembling your own invasion forces. 'The
Book" does have some good advice in
invading enemy-held territory, though . .

The time will come when you will be
required to invade a strongly held island/continent of the enemy. This is no
small matter. You will need to build a
large armada for the operation. Assemble as many transports as are available for the core of your fleet. The more
armies you can deploy in the initial
strike, the better chance you will have
of overwhelming the enemy. Provide
several heavy ships (battleships and
cruisers), not only to protect the
transports, but to provide shore bombardment for your invading armies. If
the invasion is to occur outside the
range of land-based fighters, an aircraft
carrier is a must. Its fighters are important for scouting for the fleet, softening
up the invasion area, and stopping
enemy counterattacks. Destroyers
should be used to scout around your
fleet, acting as both an early warning
system and protection from enemy submarines just waiting for a juicy
transport or carrier to sink.
Upon landing your armies, send your
transports back immediately to carry
additional armies to support the invasion. Be sure to escort these returning transports so they don't fall prey to
enemy submarines. Keep the pressure
on the enemy and soon he/she will be
falling back on all fronts. Once this has
happened, his/her doom is sealed and
the war becomes a simple mop-up action.
Things are going better, but at what a
cost. The incursion to the northwest has
been turned back and, all along the
front, Krellan supported forces are in
retreat. Kadma Pztlam will be working in
the pleasure houses after the Krellan
Command gets done with her. They do
not appreciate commanders who fail!
What! New combat reports are coming

in from the east! Invasion fleets are
reported outside the cities of Dupplin
Moor, Shijo Nawate, Ypres, and Blenheim. What is happening? These cannot
be Krellan-controlled forces! They aren't.
Those foul-smelling Zaldrons have

decided to initiate their own Operation
Big Brother. More enemy fleets are
being reported and all your forces are
tied up fighting Krellan half a world
away!
New reports! Zaldron transports are
now outside your home city of Spion
Kop. You have no forces to stop them.
Explosions can now be heard in the distance and the sky is lit with the macabre
beauty of multi-colored power rays. As
you destroy "The Book" to prevent it
from falling into enemy hands, you
wonder if the Krellan pleasure houses
may have room for one more employee.

Video Gaming World

Video Gaming World
12 month period ... The Nintendo Power Set, available at
most retail outlets, is a complete
system for high-energy players.
It comes with everything to get
started, including the Nintendo
Control Deck, two game controllers, the Zapper light gun,
and the Nintendo Power Pad.
The two-sided vinyl pad
measures 38" by 37" and plugs
into the #2 controller socket,
where it affects on-screen game
action by the player standing or
pressing on the red and blue
colored circles. The Power Set
comes with a three-game
cartridge including: Super Mario
Bros. (played with the regular
controllers), Duck Hunt (for use
with the Zapper light gun), and
World Class Track Meet (controlled by the Power Pad). Track
Meet includes a 100 Meter Dash,
Long Jump, 110 Meter Hurdles,
and Triple Jump. The events are
combined in a special Olympics
format for multiple players. Victory depends on the ability to
control pace, as well as coordinate speed, and timing. Other
games available for the Power
Pad are Dance Aerobics and
Super Team Games. The Power
Pad's smoking hot play
mechanics come with a warning:
It may be hazardous for persons with heart, respiratory,
back and joint problems, high
blood pressure, or pregnant
women.

by Bill Kunkel, Joyce
Worley, & Arnie Katz

Video
Gaming
World's
Newswire
-Compiled by Joyce Worley
Sega is going head-to-head
with Nintendo this Christmas,
with their own version of the arcade hit Double Dragon. The
Sega version has a two-person
cooperative play option and 64color arcade translated graphics
... The "Atari Advantage Collector Promotion" is a bonus for frequent buyers. The gamer picks
up a free poster and catalog
from a videogame retailer, then
attaches a proof of purchase
seal from each game pack he
buys. When enough are accumulated to earn a prize, the poster
goes back to Atari for redemption. Five games gets you a free
"Atari Advantage" T-shirt and fifteen games nets a free game
cartridge (for any Atari system).
Twenty-five games gives the consumer a special reduced price
on Atari hardware (the 7800 system for $25 or choice of either
an XE system or disk drive for
$50), plus a chance to win a
seven day expense paid trip for
two to the Atari headquarters in
California . . . Mickey
Mousecapade (Capcom USA,
for NES) sends Mickey and Minnie through a fun house, across
the ocean, into a forest, onto a
pirate ship, and into a
mysterious castle, as they seek a
missing friend. Obstacles include: falling spiders, wizards,
scorpions, and pirates (who
heave skulls at the pair of mystified mice). The game is
designed for younger players in
particular, but is suitable for
adults, as well .....More than 50
million Othello games have been
sold world-wide," says Robert
Holmes, Senior Vice-President of
Acclaim. Rob went on to explain
that people in 106 countries
flipped their wigs over the classic
"Reversi" game and now, it's
coming for Nintendo ... WWF
Wrestlemania, (Acclaim), featuring Hulk Hogan, Randy Savage,
Andre the Giant, and other WWF

fighters, lets Nintendo players
use bodyslams, headlocks, dropkicks, and other maneuvers to
recreate WWF battles ... Tengen Inc. (a subsidiary of Atari)
has signed a licensing deal with
Mirrorsoft of England for Tetris.
The license covers all video
home formats, including the
NES. Players rotate and flip
moving blocks as they fall down
an on-screen shaft, to form unbroken rows. Developed by two
Soviet programmers, the mental
skill game intrigued computer
games in both Europe and
America, as well as copping
numerous "Best of the Year"
awards . Sega's Shinobi is a
19-round martial arts war
against street thugs, commandos, and Ninjas, fought against
realistic backgrounds. The
landscapes include: warehouse
districts, mountainsides with underground fortresses, and an

oriental palace. The attackers
have swords, bombs, guns, and
steel boomerangs, but the
Shinobi hero wins secret Ninjutsu powers as the game progresses. This "Ninja magic" can
freeze the enemy in his tracks,
make the gamer's on-screen surrogate fly through the air, or
cause lightning to strike the
enemy. Still more ominous is the
magic that commands eight miniature Ninjas to burst from your
(on-screen) body to fight and
subdue your foes . . . Business
Week magazine chose Nintendo of America as one of the
best companies in the world. In
an article called, "The Global
1000—The Leaders," the journal
of business news ranked the
entertainment company as
#321. The companies were
rated on price/earnings ratio,
return on equity, sales growth,
profits, and total assets over a

Batter Up!
For some reason, sports
games have been among the
weakest entries on both the
Sega and Nintendo systems.
Bases Loaded is a distinct improvement on most of the team
sports videogames we've seen
so far (including Nintendo's
own Baseball cartridge), but it is
still far from the ideal simulation
of the national pastime.
Bases Loaded resembles
Hardball (Accolade) with its emphasis on the pitcher vs. batter
confrontation. The problem is
that it is not nearly as successful
in realistically depicting that interaction.
The brute fact is that it is too
hard to hit the ball. The perspective employed for pitching/hitting
(either a shortstop or second

baseman's viewpoint, depending
on whether the pitcher is left or
right-handed) simply does not
allow the player at bat to easily
gauge the ball's position vis a
vis the plate. The ball is easy to
track as it leaves the pitcher's
hand, but about halfway to the
plate, the depth of field collapses
and the ball seems to hang brief
ly in mid-air before appearing
suddenly in the
catcher's glove.
The scene is further confused by
the fact that the
on-screen umpire
calls strikes by
punching his
right fist into the
air. However,
since the umpire
wears a dark blue
suit and stands
against a similarly colored background, all that's
visible is his
pumping white
fist, which, of
course, looks just
like the ball. As a
result, when the
ball would be called a strike, the
ball (which is actually the
umpire's hand) seems to leap
into the air at the last second.
It isn't just mere mortals that
find the batting tough, however,
even the computer-controlled
team can be struck out almost
at will. During one inning, ;this
reviewer struck out the side on
nine pitches—all of them
thrown at slow speed right
down the middle of the plate.
Moreover, no pitch was faster
than 72 mph (the speed of each
pitch is displayed on screen).
This boils down to games that
take far too long to play (one
nine inning contest took almost
75 minutes) with way too many
pitches thrown. This is unfortunate because it destroys much
of the game's excitement and,
even more disappointing since
Bases Loaded portrays
on-the-field action, especially infield
play, quite well. Again, there are
exceptions, but once the ball is
hit, this game's excitement level
rises dramatically.
Bases Loaded uses a multipleviewpoint play mechanic. So,
when the ball is hit, the perspective shifts to an angled overhead
view of the relevant portion of
the field. The graphics are attrac
five in both modes, but the onfield view is superior from a
gameplay point of view. The individual player animation is very
nice.
When a ball is hit into the cavernous outfield (they could hold

a rock festival in right center
without greatly disturbing play),
an overview diagram of the
diamond is displayed so that the
user can track and, if desired, ad
vance his/her baserunners.
There are several annoying
flaws in Bases Loaded that almost ruin the game. On balls hit
to outfield, the field scrolls from
the infield back. The problem is,

TITLE:
Bases Loaded
SYSTEM:
Nintendo
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$44.95
PUBLISHER: JaIeco

the defensive player has no idea
where his outfielders are so can
only guess which one is under
his/her control.
There's a tendency for fielders
to begin running in random patterns once the ball is hit. This is
especially annoying when, for example, the shortstop breaks
toward third base on a ball hit
up the middle. There is also a
pick-off play, but no real reason
for one since there's no stealing.
In fact, the player at bat can't
even set the length of his/her
baserunners' lead.
Most annoying, however, is the
game's pretense at offering
strategic options. Twelve teams
are available, each containing
non-existent players, most of
whom have no statistics or
ratings in any skill areas. So,
there isn't a dime's worth of difference between them. The sole
statistic offered to the user is the
pitcher's ERA, but this is meaningless. The only thing that really
matters is how fast and accurately the pitcher throws.
This game is a mixed bag. It
has attractive animation and
good graphics combined with a
very intensive hitter-pitcher
simulation. However, the frustrations frequently threaten to overwhelm its virtues.—Bill Kunkel

Start Your
Engines
R.C. (radio controlled) Pro-Am
is a compelling, innovating approach to car racing
videogames. Because the player
isn't pretending to be inside the
car, the designers were able to

TITLE:
R.C. Pro-Am
SYSTEM:
Nintendo
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$29.95
DESIGNER:
Rare, Ltd.
PUBLISHER: Nintendo

do away with the over-used
pseudo-first-person perspective
seen in games like Enduro
(Sega), Mach Rider (Nintendo),
and Pole Position (Atari). Instead of watching the action
from behind the wheel of their
vehicle, the user views an idealized version of what the radiocontrol racing fan sees: a
smoothly scrolling, angled overhead perspective of the four-lane
track.
The result is an enormously
satisfying contest in which the
player guides his/her remote control pick-up truck (complete with
antenna receiver) against a trio
of computer-guided drones over
32 different courses. In fact, the
game's major weakness is the
lack of a two-player mode.
Its strengths, however, are
legion. The player's driving skills
are really put to the test as
he/she maneuvers around puddles, oil slicks, squalls, pop-up
metal barriers, deadly skulls, and
other vehicles. Meanwhile, the
player must attempt to pick up
the various bonus objects: roll
cages, zippers, missiles, bombs,
and ammo.
The flimsy instruction booklet
fails to mention what these items
actually do, but some are obvious. Missiles are fired from the

front of the vehicle while bombs
are dropped from the rear.
Others are less clear in their purpose. After countless play sessions, it's still unclear what a "zipper" is or how a roll cage is useful to a radio-controlled car.
There is no such problem in
figuring out how the weapons
work: if you can't outrace 'em,
you blow 'em up. Demolished
vehicles
reconstruct themselves quickly, but
precious time is
lost in the
regeneration. The
missiles are more
valuable than
bombs, of course,
since you must be
in front of the targeted vehicle in
order to employ
the bombs, while
missiles can be
fired at the drones
up ahead.
The major
bonus items are
the Turbos (which
increase acceleration around turns), Engines
(boost top speed), and Sticky
Tires (provide superior traction).
Also crucial are the bonus letters. If a player spells out "Nintendo," the pick-up is replaced by a
faster four-wheeler. A second
spelling of the company monicker allows the user to trade up to
an even faster off-road vehicle.
The play system used is
delightfully simple and very
reminiscent of the control
mechanic employed in real radiocontrolled racing. The "B" action
button serves as the accelerator
and the control pad steers the
vehicle while the "A" button fires
any weapons (or, if no weapon is
available, beeps a horn).

R-C Pro-An-is sounds and
graphics are just fantastic and
help make this the best game of
its kind ever produced in any
electronic game format. Even
the scoreboard is gorgeous.
Each win, place, or show is represented by an on-screen trophy of
some sort (including golden
wrenches, loving cups, and
statuettes).
Players who put a great
premium on realism and are
bothered by the idea of "picking
up" things like engines and tires
on the fly must take warning.
There are many such surreal
touches in this game. For
players in search of a super
racing simulation, R-C Pro-Am
fills the bill perfectly.
—Bill Kunkel

Taking A Peek

words with this interesting puzzle generator. The player can design his own puzzles, modify an existing one, or try to
solve one of the 40 that are provided on
disk. Devise a puzzle based solely on
politics or some other equally "virtuous"
activity. IBM with graphic adaptor Circle
Reader Service #5.

CRL
Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
ALIEN DESTRUCTION SET: Players
choose from four different missions in
this group of action games. The
documentation consists of an audio cassette that sets the background for each
game and gives tips on how to succeed.
Ready, set, die. C-64/128 ($29.95) Circle
Reader Service #6
BLACK SHADOW: Attractive
graphics enhance this action game in
which the player must destroy the "death
asteroid". Top down view and smooth
scrolling add to the impressive feel of
the product. Documentation comes on
an audio cassette. Amiga ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.
DESERT RATS: The only thing you
can't change in this historical simulation
of WWII desert warfare is the "gerbil" insignia of the "desert rats". Players
choose from one or two player option,
scrolling maps, and six scenarios to
recreate all or a portion of the desert
campaign. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #8.

Interplay Productions
1575 Corporate Drive
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
NEUROMANCER: Based on William
Gibson's cyberpunk novel, this role-playing adventure game combines great
graphics with a soundtrack by DEVO.
Players use a variety of skills to break
into government and corporate computer systems. That could never happen
in real life, though. Apple II ($44.95), C64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#9.

Lyric Software, Inc.
6 Beach Plum Drive
Northport, N.Y. 11768
UNDER THE ICE: Players control
either NATO or Soviet subs in this
detailed, submarine combat simulation.
Multi-scenarios; radar; infra red detection; active and passive sonar; tor-

pedoes; cruise missiles; jammers; they're
all in this future WWII! game. Time can
be compressed or speeded up depending on the situation. You'll really feel the
chills of future warfare down under the
ice. Atari ST, IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #10.

Atari 520 ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #11.

Maxis Software
953 Mountain View Drive
Suite 113
Lafayette, CA 94549

VISIONS OF AFTERMATH: THE
BOOMTOWN: One to sixteen can play
this post-holocaust, survival simulation
which allows the player to customize the
world and tailor the environment.
Rebuild civilization, conquer society, or
just survive; you'll find new meaning for
the words "Home, Sweet Home."
IBM/Tandy ($39.95) Circle Reader Service #12

SKYCHASE: Full stereo sound and
smooth wire-frame animation highlight
this joystick driven, jet simulator. Players
choose from six different jets, or fly a
lightening fast paper airplane against
human or computer opponents.
Fighters can be customized as can the
computer. Side by side view screens and
joysticks keep both players locked on
the screen, not the keyboard. Amiga,

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062

Psygnosis Ltd.
1st Floor, Port of Liverpool
Building

($39.95). Circle Reader Service #14.

Wesson International
1439 Circle Ridge
Austin, TX 78746
TRACON: An incredibly detailed, air
traffic control simulation that will keep

Pier Head, Liverpool
Merseyside, U.K. L3 1BY
CHRONO QUEST: The player must
find a time machine, hidden in a
chateau, then travel forward and back in
time to track down his father's murderer
in this graphic adventure game. Beautiful graphics and icon-controlled play
make this interesting product worth a
second look. Time travel, anyone? Atari
ST, Amiga ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #13.

Titus Software
20432 Corisco St.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
OFF SHORE WARRIOR: Players battle opponents and the elements in
futuristic, missile-armed speedboats.
Maneuver between rocks and hard
places while attempting to overtake and
vaporize the other boats. Weekend water
skiers, watch out! Amiga, Atari ST, IBM

you glued to your screen. Created by a
FAA manager and professional controllers, this program plays like an ATC
trainer. "Players" adjust traffic loads,
weather and pilot ratings as they run
any of five different cities. You win by
not losing! IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #15.

Contest Results

Scavengers of
Significa!
The 50th Issue Trivia Contest Results
The entries for CGW's Scavenger Hunt were so excellent, they
even surprised us. Since we received two perfect responses and
a couple of near-perfect responses, it seemed ludicrous to try for
a tie-breaker. Our philanthropic playboy publisher has decided to
dig deep in his wallet and pay a $100.00 first prize to both:
William N. Moes of Defiance, Ohio and Alan Mandell of DeSoto,
Texas.
In addition, the second prize (a two year complimentary subscription to CGW) goes to Kenneth Helms of Fort Wayne, Indiana. Unfortunately, Ken missed question #41 and that was an
extremely difficult question. The question asked, "What is the current name of the game reviewed on page 12 of CGW #30?"
When the game was reviewed, its name was American Dream,
but the name was later changed to Managing for Success.
Third prize (a one-year complimentary subscription to CGW)
goes to Steve Wadsten of Livonia, Michigan who only missed
two questions.
One surprising response was in regard to question #1: "What
is the score of the Dodger baseball game in issue 5.3?" The expected answer was Brooklyn Dodgers 2, New York Yankees 0.
However, several readers correctly pointed out that the SSI advertisement on page 6 had the Yankees ahead by a score of 2-1.
Alan Mandell suggested that the screen was difficult to read, " . .
. but with the pitchers involved [Ed: Don Newcombe is listed on
the screen], it had to be the Dodgers leading the Yanks by a
score of 2-0."
Question #4 was one of the hardest to answer. Vince
DeNardo's first issue as Art Director was technically CGW 5.5.
However, he was not listed as such during the next four issues
(#25-29). He was listed as "Graphics Coordinator" during that
period and not referred to again as "Art Director" until #30. Congratulations to those who discovered the first time he was listed
in 5.5 and apologies to those who were tricked into thinking it
was #30.
Question #9 had two correct answers. Respondents could
have answered either CGW 3.3 or 3.5 as the debut of
Electronic Arts. 3.3 mentioned the formation of the new company in Hobby and Industry News and 3.5 had a feature article
on "Trip Hawkins' Dream Comes True."
We liked Robert Thurman's perceptive answer to Question
#16, "What do Douglas Adams, Isaac Asimov, Jerry Pournelle,
and Roger Zelazny have in common?" We were merely looking
for the observation that all of these famous science-fiction
authors contributed to the article on the future of computer
games in CGW #45. Thurman observed a more technical
relationship: "All are sci-fi writers who have had their work transferred to computers. Doug Adams co-wrote Infocom's
Bureaucracy and had his Hitchhiker's book turned into a game.
Roger Zelazny's Nine Princes in Amber is a computer game.
Jerry Pournelle writes computer books. Isaac Asimov was one of
the first sci-fi writers to convert to word processing (It did not increase his productivity, but his editors loved his spelling checker). His Robots of Dawn is a computer game."
Those of us at CGW offer our sincere thanks to all of those
who participated in this scavenger hunt and our congratulations
to those who won prizes. We also offer our respectful congratulations to those who offered us more than we asked for.

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been
well spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they
have been enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all.

Game Ratings Chart

"Empire," CGW's overall Game of the Year, continued
to conquer all opposition on the Strategy list, but has
found a stellar opponent in "Reach for the Stars - 3rd
Edition." Both games of imperialistic space combat offer
multi-player capability and ease of play. "Panzer Strike,"
winner of Strategy Game of the Year, improved its position to a solid 7.00 rating.

"Wasteland," Adventure Game of the Year, continued to
irradiate all opposition on the Action/Adventure list.
"Pirates" keelhauled "Ultima V" to take third place in this
rating period and "Stealth Fighter" confused the bard's
"Detect Competition" spell to overtake "Bard's Tale Ill"
and land in fifth place.

