"ZD ZIFF-DAVIS a SOITRANK comun ZD21E... 9 Voodoo2 Cards Tested  Win 98: Good For Gamers? COMPUTER September 1998 The #1 PC Game Magazine WORLD Annual Fall Preview! ROGUE SQUADRON PAGE GAMING 100 GAMES 2 SPECIP CIAL! WWII FIGHTERS Hot New S UIT MECHWARRIOR 3 GRIM FANDANGO $3.99 USA, $4.99 Canada 09> + And 10 Potential Duds + 1140240695213 "


"You command turn-of-the-century Tanks, Size doesn't matter. Battleships and Observation Balloons. Strategy does! The command 200-foot Fighting Machines. "


"It's not how big your units are, it's what you do with them. When the Martian war machine lands on the green and pleasant land of 19th century Britain, strategy is all you've got. And in this revolutionary non-linear war, you'll need it. Deploy your forces anywhere on the map of Britain. Define your missions. Pick your battles. Choose your side. Man or Martian, you can lose a battle and still win the war. Maybe. It's your primitive Tanks against their Fighting Machines. Your Biplanes against their Flying Machines. Your Observation Balloons against their Xeno-telepaths. 150 30-rendered units stand between you and Martian domination JEFF WAYNICS The War of the Wilds OS the original british invasion Based on the classic novel by H.G. Wells and featuring a fully remixed 45-minute score licensed and composed by best-selling artist Jeff Wayne LATINE PORTAS TOULDS * *Race O E GT lateractive Software EAN Microsoft Windows 95 www.glinteractive.com Available soon at your local retailer \"The War of the Worlds 1998 I Software nited. All Rights Reserved. Published and Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp Gl is a tradem and the GT Loga kaa tegistered trademark of GI Interactive Software Corp. The Story, script, artwork and logo from Jull W.vies Musical Version of the War of the Worlds Ollie Record Productions. The musical score from Jett Wayne's Musical Version of the War of the Worlds 1970 Jill Want Music Publishing in Mierest and Windows 40 are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective connus. "


NA


"Glass oto #171 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"DIRECT Killer 3D Games ZACU POSITION Test Drive Off-Road 2 The Hummer is back and better than ever! Get behind the wheel and tear through the backcountry where the terrain is as unpredictable and threatening as the real thing. Puddles splash, mud sloshes, leaves fly from the wheels, trees shudder, logs smash apart, and boulders fall as you race to the finish. Off-road mayhem at its best! VANE POSITION TEST DRIVE OFF-ROAD2 Christmas 1998 NECODE HARDBALL 6 OP NG HardBall Gives new meaning to \"take me out to the ball game»-including all 30 Major League Baseball stadiums and teams in 3D. Motion-captured polygonal players include minute details such as names, numbers and authentic team logos on their uniforms. Just try to hit this 90MPH fast ball! MCGWIRE EVERYONE Now Available Ava I A Die ACCOUDE The 3Dfx Interactive logo is a trademark of 3D1x Interactive, Inc. All Rights Reserved. "


"POWERED BY From Accolade HOT SOUNDTRACK KMFDM FEATURING THE Music of Test Drive 5 Bigger, Badder, Faster! The clash of modern super cars with muscle from the past continues. 28 cars, 17 tracks, spiltscreen mode, branching tracks, and photorealistic graphics make this the ultmate racing challenge TEST DRIVE5 ACCOWDE Christmas 1998 WEWELS Redline The future of gang warfare! Work your way through the gang ranks by foot or vehicle through fully destructible 3D environments. Wage a one man crusade, or head to the Arena for insane multiplayer action. GANG WARFARE: 2066 de Christmas 1998 Download the demos at: www.accolade.com "


". THE INVASION . IMI i TROR MENU Parg wat Hatching HO FIDE 2001208 3 UNIQUE ALIEN SPECIES Whether you command the nomadic Terrans, mysterious Protoss, or voracious Zerg, you must devise totally unique strategies to master the specialized units, abilities, and technologies of each. INTENSE INTERNET COMPETITION Challenge the world with FREE* access to Blizzard's Battle.net. Up to 8 player Internet support including worldwide player rankings, tournaments, and challenge ladders. 3 O UNEQUALED CAMPAIGN ECTOR Construct individual inissions or entire campaigns with unrivaled options and ease. REVOLUTIONARY SPECIAL EFFECTS Real-time light sourcing, true line of sight, and an advanced translucency engine combine for unparalleled visual and tactical realism. IYULTIPLE THEATERS OF BATTLE Engage in a deadly mix of space combat, planetary assault, and covert base infiltration. Command Ghost Espionage Agents, Protoss High Templars, and Zerg Defilers as you seek to conquer the galaxy. STARTRAF STARODA STARURAFT Collector's Special Edition Boxes Each box cover features one of StarCraft's 3 species. Available for a limited time only. ENTERTAINMENT www.BLIZZARD.COM "


"HAS BEGUN \"** **\" (out of five stars) Computer Gaming World \"Amazing! XXXXX\" -C/NET Gamecenter.com \"StarCraft is the best real-time strategy game yet seen.\" -Next Generation Magazine \"Pure, unadulterated, unhindered fun.\" -Adrenaline Vault \"Starcraft is simp a great game.\" Online Gaming Review ITARRAFT  AVAILABLE NOW ON WINDOWS 95/NI CD-ROM Go to 220 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Free access to Batllo.not requires access to the Internet. Player is responsible for all applicable Internet tees. StarCraft and Battle.net are trademarks and Blizzard is al tered trademark of Davidson & Associates, Inc. Windows is a registered trademark ol Microsoft Corporation. 1997 Blizzard Entertainment. All rights reserved, "


"HOWD-002 RE artial Voodoo BETTER 050278 GTV Interraplanie literas logo are registered trademarks and le a d to loans 30 de loco are trademaris lakerraple t i. Electro Ano baleto trark EA trademark Eestrook matkalland's is a real tradukone's In Arts. Mote Racerbatadearkidhiae Sacrate tion Guip dunder . Thruh is a registered trademark of a diary of Golden Dails Famil i es, they dog. Voodoo Craphics and Sodro Baliar totuur of t he active, Inc idoras bartered trademark of Nicotxp Other brands and man trademarks the race Ganda lyginant particulitik. AL 38994. CODE OMST "


"Now «I play PC games to win. just $99! INTENSE AUG Voodoo And if that means kickin' some T. Rex butt, I'm just the ol' man to do it. It's why I love my Intense 3D\" Voodoo graphics add-in card. With Voodoo Rush 3D technology and a full 6MB of RAM, it's a great 2D/3D PC graphics solution. And it supports the largest library of titles available for any 3D accelerator. Now you can get one down at your local computer retailer. My favorite feature is TV-out. It lets me connect my PC to my big-screen television. I like standing really close to the TV when I play. Granny says I get too close to the set, but she's just an ol lady. Getting close makes me feel like I'm in the game... kind of like I'm TUROK. Granny likes Intense 3D Voodoo, too, even if she sits back a ways. She says it's a dandy 2D Windows accelerator for her recipe database and home financial software. So listen to me, you young whippersnappers, if you have a PC at home, you need one of these 3 Intense 3D Voodoo add-in cards. It's goin' make your PC a whole lot more fun!\" 6MB 2D/3D GRAPHICS ACCELERATOR MIRRAZY TENSE w Voodoo Champion TUROK: DINOSAUR HUNTER player, \"Gramps,\" recommends $99 Intense 3D Voodoo. Tuomas INTERGRAPH Includes full-versions of TUROK: Dinosaur Hunter, 99 Moto Racer and Jane's Longbow FX Intense 3D Voodoo delivers super-sharp graphics for stunning realism and intense game play. COMPUTER SYSTEMS Go to #072 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Buy Intense 3D Voodoo at your local computer retailer. www.intergraph.com/voodoo 1-800-763-0242 $99 is Suggested Retail Price. Actual prices are set by retailers and may vary by location, "


"O 0 NOT YET RATED NOT YET RUTE "


"Hes Suave! | He's Debonair! Hes DEAD! HE'S GRUDANGO FROM THE CREATOR OF FULL THROTTLE AND DAY OF THE TENTACLE COMES AN EPIC TALE OF CRIME AND CORRUPTION IN THE LAND OF THE DEAD. FEATURING MANUEL CALAVERA AS YOUR TRAVEL AGENT OF DEATH IN THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY 3D ADVENTURE EVER MADE. SET YOUR TRAVEL PLANS FOR THIS FALL. FOR WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM. LUCAS Download the amazing playable demo at www.lucasarts.com/products/grim  LucasArts Entertainment Company LLC. All rights reserved Go to #246 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"COMPUTER September 19 September 1998 No. 170 GAMNG The #1 PC Game Magazine WORLD FEATURES 100+ Hot New Games very year, we at CGW don our Nostradamus caps (we like pointy things) and attempt to unweave the tangled web of products that every PR rep in the industry assures us will \"definitely ship by Christmas.\" After hundreds of hours of painstaking research with alphas, betas, and even more arcane builds of software, we are confident that this year's crop of hits (and a few duds, which we graciously warn you about) will ship sometime in the next six months. Really. We mean it. Would we lie to you? Turn the page, already. ............70 Windows 98 Voodoo2 and You s Windows 98 really good for gaming, or is it just more hype from Microsoft? Get the inside scoop on Win 98 from Features Editor Denny Atkin................168 here's a whole lotta Voodoo2 goin' on, so if you want to get the best graphics card for your gaming needs, but aren't quite sure what to buy, check out Loyd Case's comprehensive Voodoo2 roundup...179 PREVIEWS Hunting Games: The Bubba Factor Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri Sid's Newest Venture Is Much More Than Just CIV II in Space....... .....54 Homeworld This Game Might Singlehandedly Revolutionize the Tired Real-time Strategy Genre .........62 oin CGWS resident deerslayer, Joe Vallina, as he locks his sights on the hottest-and most unexpected-new game genre... 170 170 "


"READ.ME REVIEWS Action Unreal ......... Celebrity Deathmatches We'd Pay to See Skeletons in ULTIMA IX's Closet Fallout 2 DUNGEON KEEPER 2 WARLORDS III 32 HARDWARE Quake II: The Reckoning .224 SpecOps ....................225 Monster Truck Madness 2.228 Army Men ..................229 Adventure/RPG X-Files ........................230 Hardware News, Pipeline Can 3DNow! Technology Give AMD an Edge Over Intel? New Riva TNT Tech Watch ......191 Loyd Case Wild World of Trade Shows ............193 Killer Gaming Rigs ............ .196 Dell 400MHz ...201 Metabyte Wicked3D ........204 Asus 34x CD-ROM............205 Abit 440BX Motherboard ...208 Diamond Monster Sound MX200 .............. ..208 Starship Titanic .............236 Sanitarium ................238 GAMER'S EDGE Jane's F-15 Successful Air-to-Ground Combat Is the key to Success.......... 268 StarCraft Mastering the Terrans: Beyond Marines............ 272 Gamer's Edge Tips ARMY MEN, FIFA 98, MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2, THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR, BLACK DAHLIA, and More ..... Simulations Team Apache ..............240 747 Precision Simulator ...247 Comanche Gold ............247 F-22 ADF.....................247 Strategy/Wargames Operational Art of War .......... 250 Industry Giant ............261 Extreme Tactics ........... 262 268 DEPARTMENTS Sports Game, Net & Match .......264 ........21 .......... 25 .213 ......217 Johnny Wilson A Lesson in Seduction ....... Letters Our Readers Speak Out ................ Reviews Introduction. Reviews Index: Three Months of Ratings .. Top 100 Readers Rate the Top Games ..... Hall of Fame The Greatest Games of All Time. CGW Online/GameSpot The Best Game Coverage on the Web On the CG-ROM Demos Are Good, Play Some Every Day ... Greenspeak Girl Trouble ....... .........290 ...292 Puzzles/Classics World Cup Monopoly .....266 Ultimate IQ Test ............267 Sorry ..........................267 Ultimate 3D Puzzle ........267 ..293 ..295 .296 "


"WELCOME TO YOUR NEW RELIGION You're about to experience a Herctic revelation like no other. Powerfully intense action. Divine 3-D worlds. Almighty weapons and spells. And awe-inspiring third-person gameplay: a true out-of-body experience. 2CO | Revolutionary Quake\"-Powered Action Seeing is believing. The enhanced Quake II\" enging delivers fluid 3-D animation and fast-moving action, plus stunning special effects, and a smart camera that stays with the action. Heretic Meets Third Person You never knew it could be like this. Surrender to insancly fast-paced action from a frighteningly immersive third-person perspective. Cooperative/deathinatch multiplayer has never seemned so real. PREPARE FOR THE SECOND COMING www.activision.com Heretic II\" O 1998 Raven Soltware Corporation. Heretic is a registered trademark and Hurdic II\" is a Irademark of Raven Software Corporation. Duveloped by Raven Software Corporation. Published and distributed by Activision, Inc. Allivision\" is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. This product contains sollware technology licensed froin id Sollware, Inc. (\"ld Technology). Id Technology 1997 Id Software, Inc. Quaku is a registured Iradcinark and Quoku II\" is a tradernark ut id Sollware, Inc. All Rights Reserved. All other trademarks and trade nuines aru proporties of their respectivu owners "


"ACTIVISION RAVEN Go to #236 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"EPIC SCALE: 20 huge landscapes allow u to 32 players to battle simultaneously i 16 vs. 16 player combat. Play eithe side: Human or alien Sway. THE ENTIRE PLANET IS YOUR BATTLEFIELD. Suppe Play with 32 players over the Internet. 1st or 3rd Person Action. Fully 3D World. Actual game screenshots except where noted. 1998 Broderbund Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Extreme Warfare and Red Orb Entertainment are trademai "


"MULTIPLAYER GAMEPLAY: 20 competitive team multiplayer missions require pre-battle strategy, working together as a cohesive unit, and of course-a quick trigger finger. UNIQUE LEVEL DESIGN: the seamless integration of indoor and outdoor environments allows you to take tunnel shortcuts or fight in underground bunkers as the battle rages above you. * SINGLE PLAYER GAMEPLAY: 20 unique, compelling single-player missions enhance the fast-paced action and require you to think as you fight. * REDORBI TRILOBYTE LATINE PER EBRE ERTREME WARFARE 3D ACTION ON AN EPIC SCALE AUTREME CHEREARE Prepare for an epic planetary war where there are no limits to the action. Whether you choose to fight as the Humans or the alien Sway you'll be immersed in a huge campaign of bruising, epic-sized battles that will demand all the precision fighting, strategy, and courage you can muster. CINEMATIC Think you have what it takes? Epic Battle. Epic Story. Find out by downloading the demo at: www.extremewarfare.com Go to #199 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Broderbund Software, Inc. All other company names and products are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective owners. "


"PORSCHE 911 GT1 BMW M3 "


"PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CAR RACING THE REAL CARS Porsche 911 GTI BMW M3. Panoz Esperante GTR-I.. Saleen Mustang. And more. THE REAL TRACKS Laguna Seca Raceway. Sebring International Raceway. Sears Point Raceway. Las Vegas Motor Speedway. Road Atlanta. And more of the best all-American tracks competed on for over 45 years. INTER active THE REAL FEEL Maximize your racing experience with performance upgrades and authentic modifications. Throw a turbo in your stock car and leave the competition in the dust. Ultra-fine physics and handling intensifies the action. THE REAL CHALLENGE 8-player simultaneous multiplay und superior A.1. based on world-class racers. THE REAL EXCITEMENT Dangerous sprints and treacherous endurance events with extreme weather and track conditions. PANOZ CALLAWAY CORVETTE ARE YOU HARD YET ? Listen LATING PENDING    Www.vie.com CONTENT RATED ST ESRB IMAGE SPACE 1998 VIRCIN NERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. VIRGIN IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARX OF VIRGIN ENTERPRISES. LIB. INCORPORATIO Go to #160 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"rgan donors Li have not always been volanteers. W ANLINING STONES ***RESSY DEATHTRAP Dungeon B efore the days of stain-free carpets, earplugs und novelty known us mercy, things were generally qu crimson. What with the slow of wit and the wnk of li expilling their guts on a daily basis, surely you can imag SSSSSSSSSSSSS EIDOS HINT LINE 1.900.773.4367. Cost of call $0.95/minute. Must be 18 years or have parent's permi Touch-tone required "


"Dend enemies off in a Dragon's bile blaze of gory 3-D detail. platter your way through 10 torturous levels of mazes, corridors, dungeons, and traps. Vex or ventilate 55 contrary denizens including Orcs, Dragons, Mummies and Zombies. Play online with up to 4 mutually demented peers (pc version only). Klaster 13 horrific implements, including swords, hammers, muskets, magic spells and your bloody bare hands. the grim Tun you've missed. Now it's time for your bath. So plunge on in or look away, but make up your mind. While you still have a choice. www.deathtrapdungeon.com ES EIDOS TERACTIVE You've been warned. PlayStation 1997 do Deten Dungeon and I dos are trademark ol Edat. Ple PlayStation and the PlayStation logo are trademarks of Sony otta Entren Inc Go to #228 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"IT TAKES A DESERT FOX TO CATCH A DESERT RAT! CAMPAIGN SERIES AWARDS \"Never Before Have I Seen Such A Realistic And Thrilling Interpretation.\" — PC Player LE COMING FALL '98! TALONSOFTS PANZER ACTION! FENEN WEST FRONT. TALONSON Call (410) 933-9191 or visit our web site at www.talonsoft.com Copyught 1998 TalonSolt Inc., P.O. Box 43730, White Marsh, MD 21236 Go to #242 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"ILSON A Lesson in Seduction Innovation Is Nothing Without Implementation in my mind. He simply shrugged and said, \"Hey, don't think that we game producers) don't get seduced by technology, too!\" I remember that statement on every occasion I go to a trade show or meet with a publisher or manufacturer that has developed ing Gordon, the chief creative officer of Electronic Arts, is probably the smartest person in the interactive entertainment industry. Whenever I've seen EA make smart moves (and that's happened more often than 1 can remember), I've seen Bing Gordon there, either as an outspoken advocate or as the puppet master pulling the strings. He has a significantly higher batting average in this business than any other executive I can think of and, in spite of our occasional disagreements, I've probably learned more about this industry from Gordon than from any other individual. One of my most vivid memories of a \"lecture\" from professor Gordon occurred at a Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. I was performing my typical pseudojournalistic shtick of needling Gordon about a technology that EA failed to support after the company had made a lot of PR and marketing blather about it being the \"next big thing.\" The actual technology would only be meaningful to longtime Amiga zealots, but the lesson from Gordon will forever ring true and resonate e nce relative recoil from firing a weapon with your force-feedback joystick? Where are the games in which you sense taking damage from the feedback in your con troller? Where are the games in which you feel the controller being wrenched from you as you hit different surfaces? Where are the games in which you feel the different weights of thrust as you pull back on the throttle? In short, where are the designs to match or stretch the developer kits? Even Microsoft's new Freestyle Pro controller, the most impressive new game controller I've seen in years, has a problem. Its problem is that it is so easy to implement blows by moving the controller swiftly in front of the screen. It will require real design innovation to match the potential excellence of this controller. At the 1998 Computer Game Developers Conference, I experienced an amazing new technology that fed electric impulses into my inner ear through my earlobe. You could dial the sensation up or down according to your personal sensitivity. It was a very fascinating experience and I can see it working well in games. However, such a technology would require a visionary producer/designer to see that the process worked throughout the game. Otherwise, it won't use the We've been seduced by the technology, but we were hoping for a relationship. some cool new technology. The fact is, technological innovation doesn't mean squat until it's united with design innovation. Like the often prescient Mr. Gordon, we in the gaming community have been briefly seduced by technology, but we were hoping for a relationship. Where are the games in which you experiby using the joystick drivers that no game producers may bother taking advantage of its unique ability to read the physical 3D position of the controller. No one may bother experimenting with a swashbuckling game in which you really move your hand in the air to fence with the cardinal's guard. No one may allow you to party technology enough and gamers will just turn it off, just as many turn off their force-feedback controllers. The same principle applies to thunder seats, VR goggles, and gimbals, which give gamers the sense of being in a vehicle from the vibrations of the subwoofer under their seats and the sensation of flight from literal movement of their game chairs. All of these exotic peripherals can add to the gaming experience, but they'll do so only if the design community figures out ways to give gamers the \"Ah, ha! I never knew it could be like that!\" experience. Above all, let's remember the essence of what Bing Gordon was trying to tell me on that day. Technology by itself has no soul. It is only when it is implemented well in actual games that we begin to be excited by its potential and experience a satisfying relationship-instead of a brief seduction. I think it's one of the most important lessons I've ever learned. CGW BING, GOES THE STRINGS! At the 1988 Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Electronic Arts Executive Vice President Bing Gordon (left) demonstrates a game to CGW founder Russell Sipe. During this session, Gordon stated that \"We are seduced by technology, too!\" www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"Upon further , reflection, E QUESTO QUEST GLORY \"Dragon Fire will raise the bar for RPG Adventure games.\" GameCenter \"Sierra pulled out all the stops for this beautiful game.\" PCFan TEEN sosial ANTALS WANYOSEMITE Entertainment 1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc.  and/or TM designato trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. CONTENT RATED BY CONTENT AB "


"maybe you don't Explore the depths of Atlantis. There lies the answer to an ancient prophecy and the key to the kingdom. want Come face to face with Hydras, Minotaurs and a myriad of creatures magically brought to life. to Prepare to use sword, dagger, axe, and bare lists to defend the realm-and your life. King. QUEST-GLORY DRAGON FIRE SIERRAFX  Over 25 spectacular  100's of hours of gameplay spells and 70 unique in exquisite 16-bit color characters to face in multiplayer or solo challenges  CD surround sound and fully orchestrated score in  Over 100 exotic stereo locations to explore with many sub-quests  Available on PC & Mac Go to #077 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Original music soundtrack album also available, ce preview at www.QG5.com. Orders 1.800.757.7707 "


"HELICOPTER COMBAT Top-notch 3D graphics showcase cities, scorched terrain, real-time lighting effects, and the AH-64A Apache combat helicopter. v Test your combat skills in two full campaigns and 18 stand alone missions; mission editor provided for extended gameplay. TAS Interactive flight environment registers turbulence from explosions, blasts, and other aircraft support for force feedback joysticks included! Manage your team of ace pilots! Options include skill ratings, fatigue and morale management, recruitment, and courts martial. Training mode with instructor feedback, adjustable difficulty settings, and easy/advanced flight models will get you in the air fast. m. Supports both head-to-head and cooperative multiplayer for dogfights over the internet, on a local network, or modem to modem against your buddy. TEEN Armed to the teeth and dressed to kills SIMIS AGES 13+ CONTENT RATED BY ESRB MINDSCAPE ENTERTAINMENT  Simis Holdings Lid. All rights reserved. Team Apache is a trademark of Simis Holding Lid. used under license by Mindscape Inc. Go to #189 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.teamapache.mindscape.com "


"Addre) le llegue apor.com/ Dead Web? ZDNet Wise $5001 Garies GameSpot videogames.com COW ow come you have allowed the Computer Gaming World Web site to die? It hasn't been updated in almost a month. I am sorry to see it go. I visited it almost daily, and am hoping you will start refreshing it again soon. -Ron Raducanu via the Internet Software LRY Chick mesPOL SURVEY Updated April 1, 1985 HICHLICHTS Battlecruiser:3000AD to ship in 91! Intel's 80286 Overkill for gaming? Commodore's Amazing new Amiga! Subscribe to our free newsletter itype your e-mail PREVIEWS Warcraft: The Best Strategy Game Ever! REVIEWS Ultima III: Proof that Lord British will Never Sell Out! CAMER'S EDCE Falcon AT: Unprecedented Realism, 16 Colors! waret zore Okay, maybe it HAS been a while since CGW's web site was updated... Good question. We've been wondering the same thing. ZiffDavis has chosen GameSpot to be CGW's online provider, and we're currently working out a design with them. Actually, by the time you read this, we should have a new home page with cool new features, such as downloadable demos and upto-the-minute news. Best of all, the URL remains www. computergaming.com. We apologize for the delay, but with GameSpot's reputation as the leading source for gaming on the Web, you'll be in good hands. the latest in military simulations. I particularly enjoy your annual wargame blowout, and your reviews help me separate the \"wheat from the chaff\" (or something like that). Anyway, just wanted to write and let you know that your Army has not completely overlooked military simulations as a tool for our professional development, and many of us eagerly await each new military simulation that hits the market. Keep up the good work! -Peter A. Martinson Major, United States Army Columnapping I hear tell that there will no longer be columns in CGW. Huh? Jonathan Baron via the Internet During the summer months, as we pasty-faced gamers don our shades and venture out to the beach in an effort to get enough of a tan to last us through long winter months of STARCRAFT and QUAKE II DeathMatches, the magazine inevitably gets smaller. Not wanting to sacrifice the length and quality of our reviews or strategy features, we put a number of columns on summer hiatus. The good news is that you'll see the return of the most popular columns in a new format in next month's issue. Watch for them! term, participated in an experimental course here called Military History Through Simulations. As a longtime wargamer I probably do not have to tell you how excited I was about the course. Having been in the Army for more than 14 years, I could never understand why my profession did not make use of all the wonderful military simulations that were available in the commercial market. The simulations we played, evaluated, and then wrote about were all historical battles. As you might suspect, most of those in the course (including the instructor) were old gamers like myself. From the V FOR VICTORY series to Sid Meier's GETTYSBURG, We evaluated the simulations on their ability to re-create as accurately as possible our understanding of actual battlefield conditions. So what does this have to do with your magazine? Not much, guess, except that from time to time I pick up a copy to learn about Sweet Release As the release date nears, anticipation sets in and I find myself constantly calling up Best-Buy and checking the Internet to see if the game has made it to the shelves. After hearing the news of UNREAL'S release I quickly head off to the store, pick up the box, scream cries of thanks to God Almighty, and then I check the infamous system requirements on the bottom of the box. The label says Intel Pentium 200 MMX recommended. That isn't a problem, I have that exact processor. Next I read 32MB of RAM recommended. Thank God I opted for the 64MB DIMMS! I then see 450MB available hard-drive space. Just installed new 4.3GB hard drive, no problems there. At this point I am feeling pretty good about myself and I wipe the sweat off my forehead. I turn the box to the back and read the Optimized for Intel MMX and 3Dfx. Yes!!!!! I have it all!!!!! go home and put the shiny disc into my 24x CD-ROM drive and listen to the spinning CD purr.I start up the game and I am dazzled by the graphics and characters. I am blowing away aliens enjoying myself as if I were Bill Gates spending money. Then I get out of my tight corridor and into an open arena. Out comes the Titan!!! As soon as he comes out, my system slows down as if my PC had \"Gump\" syndrome. \"She can't do it, Captain!\" was all I thought to myself. I read the system requirements again. Nope, I wasn't dreaming-according to the box, 1 met the recommended system requirements! In desperation quickly got online and read the most recent documentation. In several places I read that UNREAL runs optimally on a Pentium II. Nooo!!! Denied!!! I thought I had the recommended system for running UNREAL!!! I write this letter in desperation that this never again happens to anyone else. Someone should make them pay! Game manufacturers should tell us, the gaming public, clearly on the box what actually runs the game well. Oh well, I guess for now I will have to replay Army Men I recently graduated from the U.S. Army's Command and General Staff College in Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas. During my third, and final, www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"The Evoluti 250 Watts. 6 Speakers. 3 Graphics process «This is the company that created the Gaming PC. Falcon Northwest was marketing high-end computers to gamers since before other computer makers knew such a market existed. The long tenure has given Falcon Northwest a distinct advantage; to be frank, nothing else we've seen comes close to the gaming power in the everevolving MACH V.» -PC Gamer Hic dal Hp Doce D ) QOCUKLEDGE Ree 51 FALCON NORTHWEST CILITIE FRAM ER FRAM ACV FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS "


"of a Legend: . And the history to know how to use them. Falcon Northwest Computer Systems The Falcon MACH V series of custom built PCs has been in production since before there were competitions to judge them before there were awards to be won. In that history many big-name challengers and small-name imitators trying to clone our systems have come and gone. There will always be those that try to copy instead of innovate. A copy is never as good as the original. Own the legend. Windows 98 4.10.1691 3965:P CALL: 1-888-FALCON-T www.falcon-nw.com Go to #257 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Custom built PCs starting at $2,495 for game playing, game design, graphics, or even getting some work done. Computer & Net ORATE IPCGAMER EDITORS CHOICE AWARDS 43800291 BEST OF THE BEST EDITORS AWARDS CHOICE RATED A June '97 June '97 July '97 TOP Aug '97 GAMES 1998 7 Feb'97 GAMES RATED A CHUICE OF FAME A List Dec '97 July '97 Jan '97 Jan '97 Jan '98 Dec '97 Mar '98 Mar '98 "


"COMPUTER GAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine W ORLD ETTERS PUBLISHER 100 SLOW MO UNREAL's no smoothy on a Pentium 200. entertainment. I try to keep my computer fairly well upgraded, although I am usually behind the cutting edge by about 6-8 months, for financial reasons. I have yet to purchase a 3Dfx card and am desperately wanting to. So here is the question...How long will Voodoo technology be usable? Would you recommend I save a lot of money and buy a Canopus Pure 3D LX for $109 (a Voodoo board) or wait? I may not ever buy a Voodoo2 card, I am not sure. But I have read your reviews of the Canopus Pure 3D and you guys gave it your Best Hardware of the Year award last year so you must have been impressed. Is a Voodoo card really worth it now that Voodoo2 is out? If Voodoo [1] will be good for the next two years, then I might go ahead and get one, but if you think it will be obsolete in three months I'll forget it. Please write back so I can make up my mind. Dave Edwards via the Internet games like JEDI KNIGHT that are really good and run really well on my system. So, LucasArts, got any new expansions planned? Chad Dayton via the Internet Lee Uniacke EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Executive Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Atkin (Simulations) Reviews Editor Terry Coleman (Wargames) Technical Editor Dave Salvator (Hardware) Associate Editor Jeff Green (Adventure, Sports). News Editor Charlotte Panther (Classics/Puzzles) Copy Chief Joe Vallina Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Editorial Assistant Matthew Schaefer CG-ROM Editor Jack Rodrigues CG-ROM Assistant Thierry Nguyen Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games). Charles Ardai (Interactive Fiction), Loyd Case (Hardware) Founder Russell Sipe DESIGN Art Director Dan Fitzpatrick Associate Art Director Steven Wanczyk PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Production Manager Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Group Manager Michele Kellogg Assistant Manager Tamara Gargus Senior Prepress Technician Jackie Cuneo Technician Roger Drake HOW TO CONTACT THE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to: CGWEditorial, 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via: Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 CGWletters@zd.com Web site: www.computergaming.com ADVERTISING SALES East Coast Sales Manager Laura Pitaniello (212) 503-4851 East Coast Sales Assistant Megan Moran (212) 503-3926 Southwest Sales Manager Pat Walsh (949) 851-2556 Southwest Sales Assistant Sandy Marciniak (949) 852-5914 Midwest Sales Manager Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4944 Silicon Valley/Northwest Sales Manager Dru Montgomery (415) 357-4925 Marketing Manager Sat Sharma (415) 357-4935 National Account Rep Joann Casey (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Leslie Ventimiglia (415) 357-4930 Assistant to the Publisher Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 Sales Assistant Tallie Conner (415) 357-5398 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address inquiries to CGW Advertising, 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105; or call (415) 357-5398, fax (415) 357-4999. CONSUMER MEDIA GROUP Vice President Jon Lane Business Manager Cynthia Mason Executive Director, Marketing and Research Randy Cohen Creative Services Manager Francesca Koe SE SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call (303) 665-8930 within the US and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-7445 or write to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. The one year (12 issue) subscription rate is $27.94 in the U.S., and 543.94 outside the U.S., the rate for one year (12 issue) subscriptions with the monthly CD-ROM is $42.94 in the U.S., and 558.94 outside the U.S. Checks must be made payable in U.S. Currency only to Computer Gaming World BACK 1550ES (SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY Back issues can be purchased for $8 in the US and $10 outside the U.S. (CD-ROM version not available). Prepayment is necessary. Checks must be made payable in US.currency only to Computer Gaming World Mail your request to Back Issuers. Zdi-Davis Inc. P.O. Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. MAILING LISTS We periodically make lists of our customers available to mailers of goods and services that may interest you. If you do not wish to receive such mailings, please write to us and indude a copy of your mailing label. Unfortunately, our experience is that the so-called minimum requirements for most games spell out the horsepower you need to simply run the game. You'll almost always need at least \"recommended\"-level hardware to see the game running smoothly and in all its graphic glory. We've considered trying to include suggested minimum requirements with our reviews, but the problem is that \"playable\" is a very subjective term. For instance, Jeff Green, apparently accustomed to the slow pace of adventures, RPGs, and football, found the original release of INTERSTATE' 76 playable at 640x480 resolution on a Pentium 166. Simspoiled early-adopter poster-child Denny Atkin, on the other hand, found it way too jerky at that resolution, and had to drop down to 320x200. (Although Denny spanked Jeff in the game, so perhaps it's not such a subjective call after all....) If you don't want to drop a game's resolution down or deal with jerky play, make sure you have the \"recommended,\" rather than \"minimum,\" hardware at hand. While there are already graphics cards out that outperform the original Voodoo chipset, that chipset is far from obsolete. Given that game developers are just now finding ways to harness any of the Voodoo features, other than higher screen resolutions, we feel that it will be early '99 before you even see games that really look all that different on Voodoo? as compared to the original Voodoo chips. Even then, because Voodoo-level technology isn't yet even considered the low-end of the gaming spectrum, you can look forward to games running well on it well into the year 2000. They'll be flashier on the Voodoo and perhaps run in higher resolution, but the gaming experience on a card like the Pure 3D LX will still be better than what you're seeing on a 2D-only or first-generation 3D card now. Another consideration is that, unless your system has at least a Pentium Il processor running at 266MHz or faster, you won't see much performance difference between a card equipped with the original Voodoo chipset and one with the Voodoo chipset. The Voodoo really requires a very fast processor to work its performance magic. Matrox has just lowered the price on its M3D PowerVR PCX2 to under $40. It doesn't support as wide a variety of software as do the 3Dfx Voodoo cards, but at that price, there's no longer any excuse not to have some 3D capability in your system. For more detailed information regarding Voodoo vs. Voodoo?, check out Loyd Case's feature on the subject, which begins on page 179. CGW Which Voodoo? I am a poor graduate student with the horrible hobby of loving computer DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS In our July cover story we incorrectly identified Rick Goodman as the codesigner of AGE OF EMPIRES. He was the lead designer. We also omitted the fact that Goodman left the team after the release of the game. We apologize for the oversight. Also, in our July review of M1 TANK PLATOON II, we inadvertently listed the game with a 2.5star rating. The game should have received 3 stars, as it was listed on the reviews Index. We regret the error. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Odds of landing this move: 10 to 1. Odds of fathering children afterwards: 1,000,000 to 1. w Gr9 MOTOCROSS MADNESS Start the madness at www.microsoft.com/games/motocross Sick stunts and even sicker crashes. 16 get-some-serious air stunts, like the outrageous Heel Clicker and insane Nac-Nac. Loads of notify-your-next-of-kin wipeouts. Either way you land it you're a crowd favorito. Boredom is a four-letter word You'll constantly admire the mind-messingly photorealistic environment, whether you're face-down in the dirt or 20 feet In the air. And keep it all fresh with a built-in track editor and 8-person multiplayer capability, What makes a phat ride? Physics. Choose a track. Or not. Over Separate physics models fr rider 30 tracks, including Supercross and bike mean you can pull Nationals, Baja, and the dreaded wheelies out of the gate, dive into Stunt Quarry, plus off-track hairpin tums, and showboat during terrain that's so hairy you may your Big Kahuna stunt (as If the Big find yourself saying, \"Track? Kahuna ain't showboaty enough). What track? EVERYONE E 2NE ( INTENET SAMING ZONE Motocross Madness requires a 3-D card. Microsoft EURS PLAY IT OR ENCIM 1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Motocross Madness are eller registered trademarksterademarks of Microsoft Coronation in the l and onl i ne "


"The Wreckage Charge headlong into the complete Total Annihilation universe and you'll immerse yourself in one of real-time strategy's most explosive sagas. Through all three chapters, you'll dominate over 100 maps with 250 different units to produce massive wreckagefilled battles and quick explosive skirmishes. Pile on full 3D environments, explosive multiplayer capabilities and most importantly fast and easy gameplay and you're crushing the universe with \"...the new king of real-time strategy games.\"* INNIHILATTO Game of the Year Game of the Year -GameSpot Editors -GameSpot Reader's Choice Awards Best Real-Time Strategy Game -PC Gamer On-Line, Reader's Choice Award Best Real-Time Strategy Game -Adrenaline Vault Best Real-Time Strategy Game -Ultra Game Player's magazine TEEN Taredes CONTENT RATED BY ESRB A GT Interactive Company www.cavedog.com "


"Just Doesn't Just Doesn't Stop! www.cavedog.com Over 9,000,000 Total Annihilation hits per week! Check out what fans are saying about the world's most explosive strategy saga. Total Annihilation: The Core Contingency The second chapter in the world's most explosive strategy saga! TOTAL ANNIHILATION THE CORE CONTENGERCY 75 New Units 50 New Maps 25 New Missions 6 New Worlds Game al TioN Expansion is to the 3D Combat Bang Gan Total STRATEGY IS EVERYTHING Total Annihilation: Battle Tactics« TOTAL ANNIHILATION BT T A GT IS JOM THIMM Game Year Dive right into a new batch of quick missions for the world's most explosive strategy game! Total Annihilation: Battle Tactics features smaller, quicker battles to satisfy that nagging Total Annihilation fix. Blast through 100 rapid-fire ambushes where the action is fast and furious. New maps provide fresh opportunity for ambush. Varying degrees of difficulty give new Total Annihilation players a chance to learn the ropes while offering advanced players a new challenge. arbo Total Annihilatient 100 Quick and Explosite M Go to #170 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Cornuter Gaine Entertainment "


"THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD READ.ME Wasteland Paradise Fallout 2 Sends You on a Quest for the Garden of Eden he exploits of the Vault 13 wanderer are well known to fans of Interplay's FALLOUT, but perhaps you're wondering what became of our hero, last seen walking off into the sunset? There are no documented accounts of the events following his heroic deeds. However, in the far northern wastes, a village has kept the tales of the first Vault Dweller alive. This tribal village is the home of the wanderers' descendants. changes. The character selection screen allows you to choose from preconfigured or customizable characters. While characters' basic attributes remain unchanged, there will be new features such as a hand-to-hand combat skill called \"flaming dragon punch.\" Inhabitants still walk in a zigzag pattern and can count only up to three digits when bartering. You'll still have the venerable PIPBoy 2000 at your The wastelands remain harsh and unforgiving, and a decade of drought has plagued the inhabitants. The descendants are in dire need of a hero to save them from starvation. So, the task has come to you, the Chosen One, the future leader of the tribe, to save the village. Like your predecessor, you must venture into the unknown, brave dangers, and find an artifact that promises salvation: the Garden of Eden Creation Kit. First, however, you must prove yourself worthy of tackling the challenges ahead by passing through the Cave of Trials. If you succeed, you will be given the honor of wearing your ancestor's Vault 13 suit as you embark on your quest. For FALLOUT Veterans, the interface and interaction will be familiar: The game engine remains the same with only a few cosmetic NYOMST 049 LOMA OOR 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Digital Living READ ME Shifting From Analog to Digital Could Be Good News for Gamers he Internet has proven to be a gale-force wind tossing around the giants of the con sumer electronics, communications, com puting, and entertainment industries. Those giants are now feverishly constructing disposal during your travels, with its status, automaps, and archives just a click away. Fans will also appreciate that the members of your party are no longer just pack mules and bullet fodder. In FALLOUT 2, they are much smarter: Not only do they use the best weapon they have, they also wear the armor you give them. Nonetheless, watch your six. Your reputation no longer precedes you; it's alive only in the town where you earned it. Weary travelers will be happy to hear that for 2,000 bottle caps you can be the proud owner of a car. It even comes with a full tank of gas...it's just missing one rare part. As you journey through the many new settlements, you'll discover the world has changed, but not all for the better. Sex, drugs, bigotry, organized crime, and slavery have proliferated. This new world confronts you with decisions that have dire and immediate consequences. Your refusal to help an anxious boy 000 opt for \"taking a home wireless\" (the Holy Grail of inhome connectivity, using radio frequencies to connect all your consumer electronics)—theHPNA has a working solution very close at hand. Some refinements to the technology are being made, and a product is scheduled to ship later this year. This presents some interesting new game design possibilities as families can stay together and play together (more easily using multiple PCs in their homes) from different rooms in the house. I'm sure the future holds another M.U.L.E. game that will do for the computer medium what Monopoly has done for boardgames. The days of inviting friends over to play games on your home PCs are closer at hand, and when you combine that with Net access during play, the possibilities are endless. It was also interesting to learn that by the year 2000 there will be 5 million homes with DVD players on their TVs, but 100 million with DVD players in their PCs. This means that Hollywood must focus its DVD content toward PC entertainment (namely, games) and not just movies. Finally, for the ever-young, LEGO unveiled its Mindstorm Robotics Invention System. This little computer, along with a couple of motors and three sensors, gets snapped into your LEGO pieces to make programmable robots. Programming is done by simple logic modules via your PC, but the hands-on learning value of LEGO blocks (not to mention their inherent fun factor) will shoot through the roof with this product. The play and addiction value of a LEGO robot is so high, I predict we'll all be taking a turn rolling around on the floor getting our blocks off. Alan Emrich CIDCO Internet Phone retrieve his lost dog will ensure the child's death, as he runs headlong into a wooded area full of toxic waste puddles and dangerous silver geckos. The decisions get more complex, as you must weigh your responsibilities, loyalties, and morals. But in the midst of all the fighting and bickering, there are little love stories that will bring a tear to even a mutant's eye. -Jack Rodrigues alliances like shelters lest they be destroyed by the nature of this force. At the Digital Living Room-a conference convened by Upside magazine to explore how the consumer experience will change as the world shifts from analog to digital—it was clear that the media convergence creating the high-tech home of the 21st century will have a definite impact upon gaming The Home Phoneline Networking Alliance (HPNA) is the very real first step in that direction. This rapidly growing consortium of communications giants (including AT&T and Lucent) announced its forma tion at this show. The HPNA's lofty goal is to provide simultaneous Internet access and domestic network ing-with Plug-and-Play simplicity-for all of a home's PCs (15 million US homes now have more than one PC, and the number is growing rapidly) at a consumer price (about $100 per PC for adapters). Instead of consumers having to wire their own Ethernet, however, the HPNA proposes using a home's current telephone wiring (every RJ11 jack becomes a node that moves data at about 1 Megabit/second) without affecting phone usage. While other ideas are in the works--some folks suggest using a home's internal electrical wiring as a built-in alternative (with every plug a node); others Philips DVX8000 Multimedia Home Theater (PC CD-ROM and entertainment software titles included) www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"CelebrityDeathmatch Battles We'd Pay to See, if the Lawyers Would Let Us Indiana Jones PRO: He's a rugged, rough-and-tumble, manly action man. CON: He's getting a little long in the fedora. Lara Croft PRO:She's a gorgeous, no-nonsense action woman. CON: Back problems, always wears shorts regardless of season. Winner: Lara gets jump on Indy in Arctic, but frostbite prevents her from pulling the trigger Mario PRO: Eats mysterious mushrooms and grows to enormous size. CON: Three-pixel plumber's crack can be a distraction. The Avatar PRO: Virtuous, strong (did we say boring?) and can feed himself in later versions of game. CON: Can't even beat the Guardian in his own game, so how's he gonna win here? Winner: Mario bounces from platform to platform with ease, while Avatar drowns in first creek Derek Smart PRO: The most brilliant, innovative, creative, and modest game designer in the history of the hobby. CON: Doesn't take criticism that well. Coke The Coke Machine PRO: Can take a lickin' and keep on servin' cold ones. CON: Passive-aggressive method leads to long, boring fights. Enjoy Winner: (The Rematch) Jury still outDerek promises victory as soon as BATTLECRUISER 4000.0.423 ships. Luke Skywalker PRO: Good pilot; can bring down tall Empire AT-ATS with a swipe of his lightsaber, CON: Whiny and hot-tempered: has weakness for Ewoks. Colonel Blair PRO: Best pilot in Confed history: many years of experience. CON: Ready for Galactic Social Security; we liked the blue hair better. Winner: Mark Hamill gives up after a few rounds and takes himself out for a beer. Darth Vader PRO:Dark Side Force Master; cool suit; great voice. CON: Horrid asthma problem. Putt Putt PRO: Always happy; has killer sidekick, Pep the dog. CON: Has no nose; sometimes runs out of gas. Winner: Cornered at zoo by Putt Putt and Pep, Vader is goaded into embolism. Johnny Wilson PRO: Can talk on virtually any subject. CON: Does talk on virtually any subject. Richard Garriott (Lord British) PRO: Has medieval act down pat-great hairdo, too. CON: Too many frilly shirts; been a while since last big hit. Winner: Wilson challenges Garriott to a M.U.L.E. showdown, but game won't run on Garriott's P-11 400. It's a tie. 34 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"The Death of READ.ME Atima IX Former Team Member Tells All Computer Gaming World talked to Mike McShaffry, former Project Director for ULTIMA: PAGAN, about the shift from the promised ULTIMA IX, which Origin professed would return to the ULTIMA tradition, and its current incarnation as ULTIMA: ASCENSION. -Johnny Wilson CGW: People who don't know you might wonder why you're going on the record about the changes in ULTIMA. Can you start by explaining how you came to be involved with the ULTIMA series? Mike McShaffry: I started playing ULTIMA on the old Apple II. It was the most complex and amazing game in existence. I always eagerly awaited the next ULTIMA in the series because each new ULTIMA completely shattered the old barriers of immersion and realism in a fantasy RPG. It's true that god was in the details—flags waving in the breeze, mind-numbing moral messages and dilemmas, and a game system that let you think instead of guess. It's safe to say that I was a hard-core ULTIMA player. About the time that Origin released ULTIMA VI: THE FALSE PROPHET (which I preordered, to get that special version signed by Lord British himself!), I was offered the job (at Origin); it was like a dream come true. After all, it was ULTIMA that really captured my interest in computing and motivated me to go to college and get my B.S. in Computer Science. That was October 1990. So, what did you do at Origin? My first project was MARTIAN DREAMS, an ULTIMA VI spin-off proago about how Lord British and Warren Spector were going to get back to the core-ULTIMA. What happened with that? It was pretty obvious after Origin released ULTIMA VIII: PAGAN that the game design wasn't making the die-hard ULTIMA fans happy. Richard Garriott and others at Origin knew that ULTIMA sales weren't accelerating as fast as the rest of the market; so certain changes were made in the design of ULTIMA VIII to interest more than (just) hard-core ULTIMA fans. That's why the story took place away from Britannia, the duced by Warren Spector. I was a grunt programmer... the guy that let you dig holes in the Martian soil and push those cool mine carts around. Next, I was \"lent\" to the ULTIMA VII team for what was supposed to be six weeks. Well, I never made it back! On ULTIMA VII, handled a lot of user interface tasks, using a system called Gumps. After ULTIMA VII, I was promoted to Project Director, and got my first lead position on ULTIMA VIII. In addition to programming managed the tactical needs of the project on a day to day basis. I was responsible for getting Origin to allocate some time and budget to create the ULTIMA VIII patch, as well as the programming on the patch itself. We learned that managing an ULTIMA is just too big a job for one person to handle, so we created a management team on ULTIMA IX. Could you explain exactly what happened to ULTIMA IX? We printed a story some time \"As for ULTIMA IX, Lord British observed that, as is traditional with their flagship series, the technology is being built from scratch. Yet, the feel of the game will be much more akin to ULTIMAS IV through VI. As the third installment of the third ULTIMA trilogy (1-111, IV-VI, VII-IX), ULTIMA IX is intended to be the epic of all epics-completing the Guardian trilogy of VII, VIII and IX once and for all. Explained Lord British, \"We also reach back to ULTIMA IV and resolve the relationship between the Avatar and the Guardian. And as long as we were reaching back to ULTIMA IV, we decided to reach all the way back to ULTIMA I and to Mondain and his magic gem and tie up everything back to the beginnings of Britannia.\" -Taken from an article in the October 1995 issue of CGW (Issue #135, READ.ME, page 24), in which Richard Garriott discusses the direction he plans to take with ULTIMA IX scope of the game was drastically reduced, and the puzzles were more like what you'd expect in a game like PRINCE OF PERSIA. Needless to say, when the game was originally released there was a lot of negative feedback. Right after the release, Origin's customer service department compiled a list of complaints. It weighed about 10 pounds! The Continued on page 294 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"PREDTACK 2 * REVENGE OF THE BRETHREN From the makers of Titanic: Adventure Out of Time In-depth storyline Stunning scenery Challenging puzzles Non-stop action IN-GAME CINEMATIC IN-GAME CINEMATIC THU An epic graphic adventure coming soon for PC/Mac hybro Microoft MacOS Macros Mode Movenga el modern treats of Canapenporried. WWW.U RedJack: Revenge of the Brethren, the RadJedlo Revenge of the Brothean logo, Cyberlix and mam Feater Go to #153 www.computergaming.com/infolink .CO "


"Q4 '98 2 NEWS FLASH READ.ME 04 '98 Z&& requested features straight from drag-racing fans. & SouthPeak Goes Looney Tunes SouthPeak Interactive has entered into an agreement with Warner Bros. to become the chief developer of family entertainment CD-ROMs featuring Looney Tunes, Pinky and the Brain, and the Animaniacs. The 1998 games lineup will include a multiplayer arcadestyle strategy game tentatively & &  $ $ $ $ $ $ $                 & & PIPELINE Abe's Exodus GT Interactive Age of Empires II Microsoft Qi 99 Alien vs. Predator Fox Interactive Q4 '98 Asheron's Call Turbine/Microsoft 04 '98 Battleground: Chickamauga Talonsoft Q4 '98 Battle of Britain TalonSoft 04'98 Birth of the Federation MicroProse Blackstone Chronicles LegendSSI 04'98 C&C Tiberian Sun Westwood Combat Flight Simulator Microsoft Creatures Il Mindscape Daikatana lon StormEidos Dark Vengeance GT Interactive Diablo II Blizzard Drakan Psygnosis Duke Forever Apogee/3D Realms/GT European Air War Microprose Falcon 4.0 MicroProse Fallout 2 Interplay Fighter Duel 2 Ocean Fighting Steel SSI Final Countdown Impact Flanker 2.0 SSI Fleet Command Jane's/EA Force Commander LucasArts Freedom in the Galaxy Avalon Hill Gabriel Knight 3 Sierra Q498 Grim Fandango LucasArts Q4 '98 Harpoon 4 SSI Heavy Gear Il Activision Heretic II Raven/Activision Q4 '98 Homeworld Sierra 04 '98 King's Quest: Mask of Eternity Sierra 04 '98 Klingon Honor Guard MicroProse Knockout Kings EA Sports Q 99 Indiana Jones/Inf. Machine LucasArts Q2 '99 Jagged Alliance 2 Sir-Tech LAPD 2100 AD EA Qi 99 Legend of the Five Rings Activision Q4 '98 Luftwaffe SSI Madden '99 EA Sports MechWarrior III MicroProse Q2 '99 Messiah Shiny/interplay Myth II: Soulblighter Bungie NASCAR Racing 99 Sierra Sports 04 '98 National Hockey Night ESPN Digital Q4 '98 Omikron Eidos Panzer Elite Psygnosis Prey 3D Realms/GT Interactive Prince of Persia 3D Red Orb Quest for Glory V Sierra Railroad Tycoon II Pop Top Reach for the Stars II Microsoft/SSG Requiem 3D0 Return to Krondor Sierra 04 '98 Revenant Eidos Q1 (99 Screamin' Demons Activision Q4 '98 Smart Games Chal 3 Smart Games/Hasbro Q4 '98 Squad Leader Big Time/Avalon Hill 01 '99 StarCon Accolade Starship Troopers MicroProse StarSiege Sierra Swords & Sorcery Virgin Tiger Woods '99 EA Sports Tomorrow Never Dies MGM Ultra Fighters Interactive Magic Wheel of Time Legend/GT Interactive Wings of Destiny Psygnosis WWII Fighters Jane's/EA You Don't Know Jack 4 Berkeley Quake III Is Dead John Carmack announced recently that QUAKE III is dead. Instead, id Software is working on a new project that will be called QUAKE ARENA. According to Carmack, the new game will consist exclusive. ly of DeathMatch-style gaming: The single-player game will be a progression through a ranking ladder against bot Als. The change came about because Carmack felt that id had been designing two games at once the single player game and the multiplayer game-with often conflicting goals. Choosing not to focus on the single-player game will allow id to make sig. nificant advances to the multiplayer experience. The graphics engine will still be OpenGL-only, with significant new features not seen anywhere before, but it will also have fallback modes to render at roughly QUAKE II quality and speed. The game is still on track for an end-ofyear release. Novalogic Releases Three Games in One Novalogic recently released WORLD OF COMBAT 2000, a military sim compilation that includes the helicopter sim COMANCHE, the flight sim F-22 LIGHTENING II, and the tank sim ARMORED FIST 2, all for the price of one product. Also in the works at Novalogic is DELTA FORCE, a commandostyle action game, based on the activities of the U.S. Army's top secret special forces unit. The most impressive feature of DELTA FORCE is that gamers can see and engage the enemy beyond the 75-pace viewing limitations typical of this kind of game. DELTA FORCE can be played from both a firstand third-person perspective, and will include large-scale multiplayer capabilities via NovaWorld, Novalogic's free online gaming site. The game is slated for a fall release. Look for a full sneak preview in next month's issue of CGW. \"Thats all rolle titled PINKY AND THE BRAIN: WORLD CONQUEST, a sidescrolling Animaniacs adventure game, and eight LOONEY TUNES ANIMATED JIGSAW puzzles. &&&&&&& & 3653  & & & Duke Gets Unreal According to a recent announcement from 3D Realms, the upcoming DUKE NUKEM FOREVER will now be built around Epic MegaGames' UNREAL engine. The game had been originally built around id's QUAKE II engine. DUKE NUKEM FOREVER project leader George Broussard says the team realized that the direction they wanted to go could be better achieved with the UNREAL engine. Broussard is confident that the game data will transfer easily to the new engine, and he expects the transition will set the team back only about a month to six weeks. The game is scheduled for a Q1 '99 release. SHRA Burns Rubber Online The Simulated Hot Rod Association (SHRA) recently held its inaugural online dragracing event, the Kali/ThrustMaster Open Bracket Challenge. The SHRA was created for users of Bethesda Softworks' BURNOUT: CHAMPIONSHIP DRAG RACING. The preseason events offered prizes of more than $5,000, and, according to SHRA founder Tim McArthur, the official season will offer bigger events and better prizes. For more information on SHRA, head to www. shra.com. In related news, Bethesda plans a September release for BURNOUT: CHAMPIONSHIP DRAG RACING PLAYER'S CHOICE EDITION, featuring the top 10 mostThrust Master Reduces Work Force by 30 percent In an attempt to improve profitability and increase the value of its stock, controller giant ThrustMaster recently cut 30 percent of its work force. With only 90 remaining employees, ThrustMaster hopes to position itself for higher profitability. Although firstand secondquarter revenues were lower than expected, ThrustMaster CEO Stephen Aanderud said, \"[the company) is confident that our introduction of new products for 1998 will be successful and position the company for a strong fourth-quarter holiday selling season and beyond.\" &&& &Z SS www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"24 NEW WAYS TO TELL YOUR FRIENDS HOW MUCH YOU LOVE THEM. dai VU. AK SLON PACK of 19.07 0 9.06 0.01 30.016.07 .01 0.01 0.0 Pulib sinu kolicitados QUAKE II Misstan Pack: GHOUND ZERO\" 01998 1D SOFTWARE, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, DEVELOPED BY ROGUE ENTERTAINMENT INC. FOR 10 SOFTWARE, INE. DISTRIBUTED BY ACTIVISION, INC., UNDER LICENSE. QUAKE IS A TEGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ID: SOFTWARE, INCQUAKE I MISSION PACK: GROUND ZERO, QUAKE II\", The lo SOFTWARE NAME, THE LOGO AND THE 10 LOGO ARE TRADEMARKS OF ID SOFTWARE, INC. ACTIVISION IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ACTIVISION C. Rocu5 ENTERTAINMENT IS A TRADEMARK OF ROGUE ETTERTAINMENT INC. ALL OTHER TRADEMARKS AND TRADE NAMES ARE PROPERTIES OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS. (ROINT) 2071403 "


"11* NEW ENEMIES GET READY TO FACE THE TOUGHEST HORDE OF STROGGS, STRAIGRT FROM THE BIO-VATS. THE STALKER, TURRETS. 2. DAEDALLIS, MEDIC COMMANDER, CARRIER AND THE QUEEN BITCH HERSELF, THE BLACK WIDOW. --14 ENTIRELY NEW LEVELS AND 10 NEW DEATHMATCH LEVELS BRAND NEW REAL ESTATE WITH THE SAME DYNAMIC SENSE OF REALITY AND DRAMATIC VISUAIS AS QUAKE II. THESE NEW ENVIRONMENTS WILL CHALLENGE EVEN THE BIGGEST QUAKE II\" AFICIONADO, w NEW POWER-UPS TAG 'EM AND BAG'UM. DEATHMATCH SPECIFIC POWER-UPS: THE VENGEANCE SPHERE, HUNTER SPHERE, AND ANN-MATTER BOMR. WITH EVERYTHING THAT WE VE COOKED UP FOR YOU HERE, YOU RE SURE TO ANNIHILATE ANYONE OR ANYTHING FOOLISH ENOUGH TO CALL YOU FOE. NEW WEAPONS THE CHAINSAW, ETF RIECE, DISRUPTOR, AND PLASMA BRAM, IF YOU CAN'T GET THE JOB DONE WITH THESE BABIES, IT'S TIME TO GO BACK TO BASIC. GROUND ZUR O\" CHAIN SAW NO NEED FOR SOME FANCY WEAPON WHEN THE ENEMY S JUST SPITTING DISTANCE AWAY FROM YOU. WHEN YOU NEED A LITTLE ELBOW ROOM, THIS BABY CLEARS A CROWD OUT IN A HURRY. GREAT PERFORMANCE WITH PLASMA BEAM WITH THIS HI-TECH LASER THERES NO NEED TO WORRY ABOUT SHRAPNEL BACKFIRING ON YOU. THIS ONE REALIY GETS TO THE HEART OF THE MATTER WHATEVER IT MAY BE. ROGUE ETF RIFLE EXPLOSIVE TIPPED FOECHETTE RIELE. PIERCES THROUGH ARMOR AND BODY EFFORTLESSLY, THEN GOES OFF EXPLOSIVELY Now You SEE THEM, NOW YOU DON'T. Go to #230 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink ACTIVISION "


"READ ME Beat Me Again DUNGEON KEEPER || Offers Improved Graphics, More Creatures, and Better Ways to Torture Playing Lately hough DUNGEON KEEPER was an excellent game, there was some room for improvement, and the expansion pack, DEEPER DUNGEONS, did little more than provide new levels. In the current wave of sequelitis, the concept of the game as an evolutionary beast is becoming more and more acceptable. With that in mind, DUNGEON KEEPER II looks as if it will be the title we all wished the first one could have been. The pixelated sprites that were used for the creatures have been replaced by polygons within a full 3D world, and the overall look is much more polished as a result. While Bullfrog has managed to maintain the sinister atmosphere, the dungeons themselves are now Temple Sketch brighter and clearer; this is most noticeable when you play from the first-person view. The water and lava are also noticeable: In the Works They now clearly move and have mass and force-you can flood caverns and watch both CGW Survey * heroes and minions get washed (or burned) away. Last Month Months on Chart Creatures are now designed within their own spatial 1. StarCraft (Blizzard/CUC) 2. Quake II (id Software/Activision) area so that they won't cross through each other. This 3. Age of Empires (Microsoft) will allow single creatures to block narrow passages, 4. Might and Magic VI (BDO) delaying the advance of larger numbers of foes. The 5. Total Annihilation (Cavedog/GT) 6. Panzer General II (551) game has 20 levels and 17 new characters, including 7. Diablo (Blizzard/CUC) Rats and Salamanders. You can now punch and slap to 8. Jedi Knight (LucasArts) maintain discipline, and your methods of torture have 8. Heroes II: POL (New World Computing) also been improved. In addition to torturing creatures 8. Wing Commander Prophecy (Origin/EA) conventionally in the chamber, you can look forward to Check your mailbox: We mail a survey to 1.500 randomly chosen subscribers each month. The results of Playing Lately indicate what games readers are blowing the most time on, as opposed to manually pulling off their limbs. the readers overall quality ranking in the Top 100, DUNGEON KEEPER II will include LAN and Internet multiplay and will support 3D acceleration. Look for a full sneak PC Data Best-sellers ** preview in an upcoming issue of CGW. --Alan Dykes Last Month 1. StarCraft (Blizzard/Cendant Software) Dungeon 2. Unreal (GT Interactive) Sketch 3. Deer Hunter (GT Interactive) 4. Titanic Adventure Out of Time (Cyberflix) 5. Myst (RedOrb) 6. Might & Magic VI (3DO) 7. Cabela's Big Game Hunter (Head Games) 8. Army Men (3DO) 9. Rebellion (LucasArts) 10. Flight Simulator '98 (Microsoft) * This list indicates what the top-selling PC games were, as calculated by PC Data, for May, 1998. wa U 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"E ONLY EIDOS brings you the most INNOVATive and challenging gaMES THIEF TOMB RAIDER PUMU FANTASIA VIP NOW for the PG. ADVENTURES DE LARA CROFT EIDOS     R  C   . SOU3WOW.UHOF The Nomad Soul www.eidosinteractive.com Final Fantasy VII 1998 Squaro Co., Lid. All rights reserved. Final Fantasy and Square Soltare registerod trademarks of Square Co...Lid ION STORM, DAIKATANA, HIRO MIYAMOTO, SUPERFLY JOHNSON and Mikko EBIHARA names and logos aro trademarks of lon Storm. L.P. All rights reserved  1990 Ion Storm. L.P.Thiol The Dark Project and the Looking Glass logo are trademarks of Looking Glass Studios 0.1998 Looking GIANG Studios. Tomb Raider III and Lara Croltare trademarks of Coro Dosinn. 19971998 Core. Eidos Interactivo, Rovenant, and Omikron aro trademarks of Eidos. Plc. O 1997-1998 Eldos. Go to #115 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"(Many come here to seek saluation. Others, to seek the fellowship of the congregation. You, you're just casing the joint. Sneak off to (www.eidosinteractive.com) LOOKING GLASS STUDIOS "


"THIEF THE DARK PROJECT EIDOS  ERA      Thiet: The Dark Project and the Looking Glass logo are trademarks of Looking Glass Studios. -1998 Looking Glass Studios. Eidos Interactive is a trademark of Eidos plc.  1998 Eidos. All Rights Reserved. Go to #116 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Gangsters ORGANIZED CRIME EXPECT A HIT SOON www.eidosinteractive.com EIDOS INTERNE www.eidosgames.com House INTE RA "


"GAMING "


"-WUWWLUAU CUNPLETE O TEL@<0.08. E=\"/!9&BOEIC VAOER RACO 21 OBW-E=\"449&1895107 MUC VQ0B (04C C, E 2. NGOI 119&2895 1P8719TONTA DAG STE2L@ 308W-EST MZQU<WIR8710_11123 0,2RUSHES POVL:W5«V%G93H@FQAEVLES VAI=&44%), U1496UP & %1940>#H SV #YS'S,#8@ SDN25!23-? 7158. EL34)0>H@ 300+3$${#44,8 X,#84%, U1$; V U 65 %! R979197<Z W ABVEN&IS:%#VORE!I8PTEX45N9, 06UGI S24E0F5G:6 YO<FIL VJ25\"96=1; EXE<VIU<P "


"TOMOTI100001001 100101110101101110110 1110101110000101011 11010111 11010111 10111010 110 FINAL FANTASI. Now for the PC. SQUARESOFT Sipos www.eidosinteractive.com 01998 Eidos. Eidos Interactive is a trademark of Eidos. Pic01997, 1999 Square Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. Final Fantasy and Square Solt are trademarks of Square Casa Go to #277 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Just when you start to get your social life back. We drop the bombshell on  gain. Eidos Interactive, Core, Tomb Raider Lara Croft and her teness are trademarks of Eidos, Ple. 1998 Eldos www.tombraider.com EIDOS YOU'VE BEEN WARNED. TERACT "


"TOMB JVENTURES DE LARA CHOFT Go to #111 @ www.compa red tigfatink "


"\"The performance is excellent... The graphics are sharp. colorful, and imaginative.\" -Gamesmania \"New ideas to keep even the most battle-hardened gamer interested.\" -Hotgames 0096 16485 INTERACTIV STORM www.cidosgames.com WWW.EIDOSINTERACTIVE.COM Play DOMINION...with up to eight others online at www.eidosgames.com with MPlayer technology, EIDOS INTERACTIVE is a trademark of Eidos, PLC Copyright  1998 Eidos ION STORM and DOMINION: STORM OVER GIFT 3 names and logos are properties of lon Storm, L.P. Copyright  1998 lon Storm. "


"\"Its intuitive gameplay and fast-paced, Red Alertstyle action deserves your attention -Gamecenter ? 0283 09243 \"The best real time strategy available....92 out of 100\" PC Force WWW.DOMINION-STORM.COM  STORM Over GFT Go to #279 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink La A TODD PORTER GAMES "


"READ ME Rising Higher SSG and Red Orb Add New Features to Their 5-Star Game TOUUUUUUU A New Hero! SG's classic and popular WARLORDS series will soon give rise to another addition, WARLORDS III: DARKLORDS RISING. This new game is essentially WARLORDS III+, in that you get the original, 5-star WARLORDS III game with a host of additions and general improvements. It's the perfect pack for the WARLORDS rookie, while still promising enough new features to capture the interest of hard-core WARLORDS III fans. YOU CAST A SPELL ON ME While the new hero portraits are a big step up from WARLORDS III, this hot sorceress might warrant a PG-13 rating. In the Works AD Arraies you can just make your own; you can even edit the stats for the heroes, magical items, and army units. All in all, if SSG keeps on track, this \"gold edition\" of WARLORDS III should be a good buy for WARLORDS fans everywhere. It should be available by the time you read this.-Thierry Nguyen Number 1 Chance: 100% Nightmares Lord Paladin Storm Osts Dwei Lord brero Een rice 200 No Terran Bonus, 2 luns, Upcep 2 Baran Horse Lords Liche Keo ge Ranso w Concel WELCOME TO MY NIGHTMARE Undead hordes, a WARLORDS fixture, are even more of a treat in DARKLORDS RISING due to the new, nastier unit types. Commande DARKLORDS RISING adds 30 new armies, 5 new Hero types, 6 new abilities, and 15 new spells. Each unit, ranging from the numerous, but weak, Giant Bees to the powerful Silver Dragon will have entirely new art for both the portrait and the tile. The new Hero types (Summoner, Alchemist, Monk, Bard, and Barbarian) will also use some of the new spells, abilities, and artwork. DARKLORDS RISING will also include seven new game types and victory conditions, including the popular \"Capture the Flag\" game and the \"Instant Chaos\" victory, in which everyone starts off clustered in the middle of the map. Add to this a host of new scenarios, maps, and entire campaigns, and the shelf life of this game is sure to grow. Finally, DARKLORDS RISING will ship with both a scenario builder, to create your own maps and scenarios, and a campaign builder that will let you string scenarios together. So if you get bored with the multitude of scenarios bundled in this release, Player Stats Top 10 Best-Selling Games, 1993 Present  3 @ 5 6 7  9 O Game Myst Microsoft Flight Simulator Doom II Doom Shareware Riven: The Sequel to Myst WarCraft II SimCity 2000 7th Guest Star Wars: Dark Forces Monopoly Company Broderbund Microsoft 2 GT Interactive id Software Broderbund Cendant Software Electronic Arts Virgin Lucas Arts Hasbro Interactive #Sold 3,822,638 ,369,906 1,815,882 1,361,943 1,061,226 1,020,623 1,019,345 929,611 N et Revenue $141,749,132 5106,896,432 $74,785,378 58,743,997 $46,255,705 $39,820,239 $43,469,189 540,060,258 869,709 $30,379,607 Best-selling games, as tracked by PC Data, between January 1993 through April 1998 XPLANE 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"\"...a little rebellion now and then is a good thing.\" Thomas Jefferson INDEPENDENCE U22 Total command of a 8,520 ton, 150 meter Dreadnought class Corvette.  Four bridge workstationscommand, engineering, weapons, navigation Detailed ship systems including multiple propulsion options, remote over ride controls, docking maneuvers, and much more.  Visually stunning 3D graphics (includes enhanced versions for 3Dfx Voodoo 1 and 2 boards). Join the Commonwealth Navy and do your part to fight the Independence War. Bleron YOUTcal Electronics Boque Babbages, and other major retailer EVERYONE CO ocean O PARTICLE Www.independencewek com INFOGRAMES INTERTAININ SYSTEMS  1998 Infogrames/Particle Systems Go to #118 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS YOUR BEST SOURCE FOR THE HOTTEST GAMES IN DEVELOPMENT Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri Eagerly Awaited Space Odyssey Makes a Real Splash Landing 3D, so now your little formers, Rovers, and other vehicles can roll up and down amongst the hills, instead of simply sliding around. Terrain supplies the three necessary variables for survival: nutrients, energy, and minerals. Each tile has a visual indication of how much of each resource it supplies, and the information window in the corner gives more details for you to decide how to develop the tile. As for the fog-of-war, you can either turn it on, and explore a black-screened landscape, or you can set it so that it shows you the preliminary information gathered from the probes sent earlier. You will get a basic layout of the land, but no idea where everyone is, by Thierry Nguyen Ithough many gamers' favorite path to victory in SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION II was to try to conquer the entire world, the ideal method was to lead your nation to the stars. After all, if you could colonize the vast reaches of space, you would build an empire that could truly stand the test of time. It is here, in the aftermath of the successful space launch from CIV II, where SID MEIER'S ALPHA CENTAURI picks up the action. Designer Brian Reynolds maintains the style of his magnum opus, CIVILIZATION II, but he and Sid Meier throw in enough twists to make ALPHA CENTAURI more than just Civ in space. From what we've played so far, it could be the most satisfying science fiction grand strategy game yet. and runs off to make a colony with his or her own agenda. Before starting a game, you will select which faction to lead. Of course, as with previous sciencefiction games (like the MASTER OF ORION series), each faction has distinct advantages and disadvantages, and these differences great ly come into play later. The fac tions run the gamut from Godloving fundamentalists to militaristic zealots to nature-worshipping environmentalists. If you played Civ II, you won't have any problem with the game mechanics. You begin with both a colony base, and formers (a space version of Civ II's settler unit) to explore the land and perform a variety of terraforming tasks to the alien landscape. Meanwhile, you will manage your colony's growth, research new discoveries, and build machines to expand and enforce said expansions militarily. And finally, you will run into the various factions that have set up shop on the planet, and wheel and deal through the exchange of treaties, technologies, and, occasionally. blows between you and them. However, in keeping with the science-fiction nature of the game, one of the many options that can be toggled is \"Victory through Transcendence only.\" Thus, if you optimize your research and sociology options, you can eventually have your people evolve into the next evolutionary being-superhumans, if you will Setting the Galactic Stage ALPHA CENTAURI's story goes something like this: As the United Nations colonization starship UNS Unity nears the Alpha Centauri system, its leader, Captain Garland, is mysteriously assassinated, and the vessel crash-lands onto a mysterious planet. The UN team selected to lead the expedition splinters into seven different factions, as each member takes a colony pod and some colonists, Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri GENRE: Role-Playing RELEASE DATE: 04 98 DEVELOPER: Firaxis Games PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts The Search for Intelligent Life The actual landscape is of much more importance than in Civ II. First off, the tiles are in true COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"and perhaps bring about life forms for further destruction. As an homage to Stanley Kubrick's classic 2001: A Space Odyssey. you can occasionally run into a mysterious monolith that will inspire your units, giving them free upgrades of varying types. Or you'll find a wayward alien artifact for your scientists to study and thus acquire free technology. The most science-fictional and fascinating aspect of ALPHA to an idyllic plain. As with most games from these two designers, there are consequences. If you terraform the alien landscape too vigorously, you risk being perceived as a threat by the native life forms; too cautiously, and you will fall behind your neighbors in the all-important resource and technology race. which is a nice and realistic compromise The various alien life forms are what make the landscape here much more interesting than that of CIV II. Although the more advanced alien species are still being fleshed out as of press time, I did get spend some time with the mysterious Xenofungus. Xenofungus serves as both a barrier (units have a hard time moving in it), and as a breeding ground for such beasts as Mind Worms or Psi Vortices. Xenofungus also adds a defensive bonus to your units-whether this makes up for having your units trapped in it is a matter of individual taste. Xenofungus is supposed to expand and destroy structures, tions. The other factions built their colonies while closely adhering to their basic agenda, and much of their diplomatic policy is based on that agenda. For example, I was playing the Human Hive, whose destiny is closely tied to creating a police state; I encountered the Spartan Federation, representing SNEAK_PREVIEWS The Calculus of Ethics and Other Dilemmas My Mind is Going What struck me most about this build of ALPHA CENTAURI were the tech trees and the Al of the other facof terraforming. Depending on your timetable and the technology level achieved, either you can sim ply plant more trees imported from Earth or you can take a temperamental volcano and convert it Creative Gelas Doctrine. Secrety The US Hypcrengineering He Marc Transit Tosul Tuels Synthetic Air VEHICLE DESH PRESETS NEM Tan At uite Crasle Neural Grufting The To Impact Grove Detalles Doctrine: Total War The e Per 1 LOU wwel Filetype Esst to ou can peruse the bewildering paths of discovery through ALPHA CENTAURI'S copious flow charts (only a fraction of the possible tech paths are shown here) for the ultimate in sci-fi techno-geekness. DATOR SMS. BUTY Teile SPARTA FEDERATIO Missia Year 3124, Encgy 502 SELECT RESE:20H GOL Nonlinea Mathematics Slikster alloys Planetary Helvark SECRETS OF PLASMA STEEL The discovery of new technologies in ALPHA CENTAURI lets you design your own units, as well as build them from a template. Ethical Cakulus boru. gr Secrets of the Human Brain Opikal Computers pole r you can watch your various advisors argue over which technology to research (in all fairness, these guys are much more sensible than the advisors in CIV were). This is actually an easier process than in MOO II. all the wall Theie sie only twowa w we can account for a necessary agicement of experience with the concepis osts objets eithel apciencemake these conceptspessulcer these concepts make posse S IKU WISH Neurs PANANAS tentare de tener este manti Kant \"Critique of PurchELon. Datalinks gos S . Tas alam Ou Escarchers hare made a new tre Human Drain 2 . Hypnotie TCANCE Techbolages Con Empathy BRIEF INTERLUDE We don't think Larry Niven needs to worry, but the back story of ALPHA CENTAURI (shown in vignettes such as these) helps to develop the game's hard science-fiction concepts. nce you discover a new technology, you are treated to a quote from Kant, Hegel, or even some character in the game leave it to Meier to put things in perspective. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 55 "


"CAMERA CAMER AREHOUSE AREA 1809.01.319 WARRNOUG 1. AREA 18 09.01.322 W AREHOUSE. AREA 18 09.01.32 2.27.99 SWARENOUSE. AREA 18 09:00.00 hrs. Enter warehouse. Maintain stealth 01:11.02 9.27.99 9. 27.99 9. 27.99 .... Sanction Level Alpha... Primary object 10:30.31 7.95 1025093 10:30.38 ... Sanction Level Omega...... Search and des \"...the odds-on Goldeneye killer for PC.\" -Next Generation Vigilance Counter-Terrorism. Covert Operations. Extreme Prejudice RP ANY SEGASOFT FOOTUNDA! WORLD 1.888. SEGASOFT 1998 SegaSoft Networks, Inc. All rights reserved. Vigilance, HEAT, the HEAT logo, SegaSoft, and the SegaSoft logo are trademarks of SegaSoft Networks, Inc. All other logos are the property of their respective owners. 11.12.59 W ANGO a 30 92SO QUE 1113369 27099 13.36 9.27.99 ........Recon munitions and depot.. Determine preparedness level of targe "


"CAMERA.03 CAMERA.03 .  CAMERA OS WAREHOUSE. AREA 18 .01.35 99 WARENGUSH, AREA 18 09.01.383 MAREHOUSE. AREA 6 09:01:52 9 2799 WARENDUSE Operative is sanctioned to terminate resistance with extreme prejudice.. p.7.99 9. 27.9 01: 11.069 01:11.1929 telligence gathering. ...... Avoid enemy contact If at all possible... CAMERA.32 CAMAN.30 10:41.31 227.99 DEPOTEA 10241.357991 10:41.302 DEPOT. AREA * ************ itter cords, armaments, personnel...... .... Inflict maximum possible damage at key target areas...... THE REAL UNDERWORLD Welcome to the Here and Moul. In the cold clear light of day. here the darkness is in men's hearts, riot their environments. where the white hot brilliance of Anyworld 3D technology is applied to reality, where the erierny is scurn. But, hurrian scumn. As fast, sty and lethal as you. where you can actually look the enemy in the eye. And watch hirti look back. Where kriowing the right gun to pierce a bulletproof uest is as important as the ability to hack a security code. A world of surveillance, secret weapons, Strategy and photorealistic action. A torld where 8 playable counter-terrorist agents must compete over 30 deadly mission objectives. where up to 16 agents compete in multiplayer battles derrianding stealth and Firepower in equal measure. Forget Hell. This is the real underworld. www.vigilance.com Go to #090 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.heat.net Fast, Free, Online gaming 11:13 50 OIL RIG. AREA 16 11:13.52 9. & OIL RIQ. AREA 1 11:13.53 9.27.99 D epan ........... Eliminate resistance where feasible, and report home............4 "


"ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED www.AccessSoftware com 1-800-800-4880 Judey Links LA EXTREME RSAC ADVISORY SUITABLE FOR ALL AUDIENCES AL ALLES Go to #076 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink COMING FALL '98! LinksLAR EXTREME "


"SID MEIER'S ALPHA CENTAURI Morgun Bank SNEAK PREVIEWS * FAULTY TOWERS? Monoliths dotting the landscape give your units free upgrades when discovered, but they may also attract alien life forms. 'S QUESTION: free Arad There's two outs with a CHOOSE YOUR DESTINY Factions differ in general philosophy and are given appropriate advantages and disadvantages. runner on third, count is two and two, and the game is on the line. As the pitcher winds up, you see Ethical Calculus (which deeply affects the sociological structure of your faction) are found along with Superstring Theory, the Secrets of the Human Brain, and the infamous Genome Project. Every discovery is summarized with a relevant quote either taken from a real person or written by one of the faction leaders within the game. The effects of research play out into another new feature: unit customization. No, not just editing the rules.txt file and matching it to your own .BMP as in CIV II, but where you're allowed to choose from a list of different chassis, weapons, armor reactors, and special items to create your own units. For example, you may opt to make something sporting the biggest gun, but having the weakest armor as a consequence. Or you might just create a supermachine that will take an absurd amount of resources and time to build. Finally, some discoveries yield options to change your society. You can make yourself a police state or a free state, or an industrial people versus an agricultural people. Other issues covered in the sociological outlook include health care and education, so you can take your debate on such topics out of current politics and see how they play out in the game. In effect, this is how you alter your faction structure during the course of the game, as each change in society will add or subtract bonuses in production, research, morale, and so forth. Gameplay is more streamlined than in Civ II, which means you might actually finish a multiplayer game (multiplayer is still being tweaked though it will almost assuredly use a simultaneous turn system). For example, the Governor Al lets you specify how you want the computer to manage your colony-this will allow you to focus on the big picture and micromanage only as you desire. Whether you prefer multiplayer contests or still play most of your strategy games solo, ALPHA CENTAURI looks extremely inviting. It retains much of the old-school depth of games such as CIV II and MOO, while adding enough enhancements to bring in more casual strategy gamers. ALPHA CENTAURI should be yet another big hit from Sid Meier and Brian Reynolds when it ships this fall. Then again, what else could we expect from two of the best and brightest in the business? CGW your teammate barreling towards home and you step away from the plate. The ump yells \"Strike Three,\" at the same time your teammate touches home. the militaristic survivalists. They asked for a trade of technologies: their Nonlinear Mathematics (which yielded a powerful gun) for my Doctrine on Movement and Expansion. Essentially, it was like having NRA Extremists asking me to teach them how to drive around to \"spread their views\" more efficiently. I declined and instead locked an alliance with the Morgan Conglomerate, which, in the best Bill Gates manner, was rapidly cornering the free market. Another amusing anecdote was how the Peacekeeping Forces (the Humanitarian UN-descendent) kept trying to impose peaceful sanctions between warring factions. Later on, when the factions have had full contact with each other, you can, similar to MASTER OF ORION (MOO), convene a Planetary Council to vote on policies and mandates that affect all factions, and to vote even for Planetary Governor. And, of course, as with CIV II, you can edit the necessary files to create your own fac. tions with their own philosophies and applicable bonuses and tradeoffs. ALPHA CENTAURI is a \"hard\" science fiction title. Instead of employing the questionable physics of Star Wars or Star Trek, ALPHA CENTAURI extrapolates from current science fact and theory to determine the technologies we might investigate in the future. So, items such as The run scores? TRUE Go to Page 189 or FALSE Go to Page 271 Go to #164 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 59 "


"He I HAVE AN ENORMOUS TANK BATTALION. I HAVE AN ARSENAL OF WEAPONS AT MY FINGERTIPS. I'VE DESTROYED BUILDINGS IN MY WAY. SO WHY S I AM ONE WITH THE CROSSHAIRS, TES Ess DME RLD 0000000000 MI I AM A FORCE TO BE RECKONED WITH. ALERT TELL edidit AMFOOD00000 50% TERRATOOLS Computer Graphics Solutions Hey hot shot, you're dead because you didn't think. To save the Earth in Urban Assault you must manage your resources, upgrade your technologies, control your squadrons, and deploy your troops using an interactive map. All this at the same time you're shooting everything in sight. 1998 Microsolt Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Urban Assault are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the US and/or other countries. "


"Microsoft I'VE TELEPORTED INTO MY SATELLITE. I'VE DRIVEN MY VEHICLES LIKE A MANIAC. AM 1 DEAD? I HAVE THE FIERCE AIR FORCE. I TORCHED A TAERKAST BIPLANE. VI KNOW HOW TO DEFEND MY HOST STATION. It's the perfect blend of action and strategy that you can make even more challenging with multiplayer capabilities. So use that gray matter. Or you'll lose it. Think yourself over to www.microsoft.com/games/urbanassault URBAN ASSAULT "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS Homeworld Relic Attempts to Launch Strategy Games Into a Bold New Direction Then you have to harvest more resources to make another jump. Each time you exit hyperspace, whether due to resource shortages or by your own decision, the game will randomly choose an encounter from the list of essential and side by Elliott Chin OMEWORLD, Relic's unique space strategy game, has already hit it big. Last month, we crowned it the Game of the show in our report on E3. This month, it's the top strategy game to watch for in our fall preview feature. \"Game of the Show?\" \"Most promising strategy game?\" Those accolades don't happen every day for a project that's still in the works from an unknown start-up company. But then, it's not every day that you see a game like this. It's a game with incredible potential. Potential that Relic could parlay into the most innovative strategy game of the year. and Relic have succeeded in creating a fantastic engine. But what about the other things that make this game so intriguing? Well, there's the campaign, which is persistent and unconventional. And then there's the attention to detail, with extensive combat commands, context-sensitive voice help, and dynamic resources that allow for economic sabotage. It's a package that could herald a new breed of strategy game. HOMEWORLD's campaign will feature more than 20 missions strung together with a tight story. You play a race of nomads who are returning home after centuries of wandering. Awaiting you at your homeworld is the evil race that exiled you from your planet ages ago. Along the way, you'll learn more of the story by befriending strange traders and battling pirates, alien marauders, and the fleets of your nemesis. The game's campaign is linear, but not fixed. There are 14 essential missions in the game, but also a dozen possible side missions that you can play or ignore. These side missions won't be necessary for completing the game, but they could offer new technologies or story information. Basically, your hyperspace trip home comprises the \"campaign,\" while the possible stops you make along the way are the campaign missions. Hyperspace isn't an automatic trip. Each hyperspace jump requires a set number of resource units, while maintaining hyperspace requires additional resources. Once you run out of resources, you exit hyperspace. INVISIBLE THREAT Cloaked fighters on the move. Special Kind of Magic HOMEWORLD'S 3D universe is by far its standout feature. Alex Garden, the founder of Relic, wanted to make a game that would perfectly re-create a Star Wars-style battle, with fighters and cruisers swarming within a massive sphere of lasers, explosions, and ships. From the looks of the early beta we played, Garden CGW Online ALL 3D, ALL THE TIME Everything in HOMEWORLD is rendered in real-time 3D, from the ships to the nebulae to the explosions. Want to read more about HOMEWORLD? See GameSpot's preview at www.gamespot.com features! homeworld. Homeworld GENRE: Strategy RELEASE DATE: 04 '98 DEVELOPER: Relic Entertainment PUBLISHER: Sierra Studios ER MOVE OUT Moving in 3D is simple. Move the destination cursor on this disc to the desired area, click to freeze the 2D location and move up or down. 52 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Fuel for an Empire the kit, you'll be able to traverse the Storm unharmed. If you refuse or can't afford the kit, you can still go through, but you'll take a pounding and lose a number of ships. The persistent universe bodes well for those of us who have gotten tired of having to build from scratch in every scenario of every real-time strategy game. Now, ships built in one scenario can be taken to the next. Research will also be persistent. If you start research in a scenario and then enter hyperspace, it will be completed when you exit. SNEAK_PREVIEWS missions. Once you drop out of hyperspace, the scenario begins as your ship's computer alerts you to any events that might demand your attention. Not all the missions will be combat-oriented. At times you'll drop into the middle of a massive battle (sometimes appearing in the middle of a two-party engagement or as the sole target of a pirate ambush), but at other times, you might drop out of hyperspace to meet a tradeship arriving to sell you advanced technology. Or you might drop into a barren region of space, with sensors indicating a nearby derelict that requires exploration. These are just a few of the mission types Relic promises will be in the game. Just as you can leave hyperspace to enter a mission, you can also leave a mission to enter hyperspace-even in the middle of a massive battle. If you are getting pounded in a scenario, you can actually flee, provided you have enough resources. Keep in mind, though, that the game will be designed so you can't just flee until you arrive at the homeworld. If you keep running away, you'll never harvest enough resources to make the jumps home. Also, because the gameworld is persistent, retreat might not be the best idea. If you flee to hyperspace before all your small ships safely dock with capital ships, you'll lose them, leaving you even more vulnerable for the next encounter. ike other real-time strategy games, HOMEWORLD requires that you harvest resources. Those resources come from asteroids, gas clouds, dust clouds, and nebulae, although all gathered resources contribute to a generic pool of resource units. Yet, the original resources look and act differently. As 3D objects, the asteroids and clouds react dynamically to what you do. When you extract resources from a cloud, it shrinks. When you mine an asteroid, it's drawn in pieces into the harvesting bay. However, you can forgo harvesting and use resources in tactical ways. You can ionize gas and dust clouds so that they become volatile energy clouds that shoot lightning forks at any harvesters that come near. You can thus create a mine field and deprive your enemy of potential resources. Large asteroids can be broken into smaller pieces by laser fire, pounding any enemy hulls that enter the newly created asteroid field. Nebulae can be harvested and charged just like clouds, but you can also hide inside their foggy mass and escape detection. The enemy will see you only if he places probes inside the nebula. higher up the tree, but some technology might be available only from certain derelicts or trade encounters. If you go through hyperspace past those encounters, you'll miss these technologies. In multiplayer, research will be highly accelerated, and there will be an option to make all ships immediately available. The Secrets to Ship Design HOMEWORLD's array of ships will be impressive. There are gunboats, interceptors, defenders, carriers, cruisers, frigates, cloaked fighters, cloak generators, research vessels, probes, long-range sensors, and floating cannons, to name but a few. However, not all ships and technology will be immediately avail. able to you. You'll have to research them, but not as in other RTS games. Instead of researching a ship, you'll have to research all its components before you gain access to it. Simple ships will be easy to figure out. For instance, acquiring mine-laying corvettes requires you to research mine laying. However, getting to a heavy cruiser might mean researching megaton drive, multiple gun control, increased chassis strength, and advanced targeting system. The technology tree at your disposal is vast, but it won't always be visible. You'll see more technology as you climb right-click menu. Every command in this menu, including attack, move, select formations and tactics, and specials (like a carrier's launch command), can also be issued with hot-keys. You can move ships via a two-click system that pulls up an overlayed disc or by simply clicking on a target. Attacking can be as simple as clicking or as advanced as selecting formations and tactics. HOMEWORLD's formations are similar to those in MYTH. You group ships together and then give them a Battle Stations in 3D Once you exit hyperspace and have an encounter, the real fun begins. You command ships from a BB It'll Come Back to Haunt You The persistent universe also means that decisions you make in one scenario will affect the rest of the game. One example Relic presented involved the Galactic Storm, a cloud of violent energy that lies on the path to your homeworld. In one of the game's many cutscenes, you'll launch probes into the Storm only to see them torn to pieces. At that point, the game's ubiquitous traders will arrive and offer you an exorbitantly priced Storm Navigation Kit. If you buy STAY IN FORMATION The Claw and Sphere are just two of the many formations you can issue to your ships. Both take advantage of the 3D space to envelop their target or their charge. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 63 "


"Hallucinate without the hangover. Copyright  1998. Piranha Interactive Publishing, Inc. Expand your mind. Explore www.morpheusgame.com SOAP BUBBLES PRODUCTIONS "


"(Morpheus\" X COMING THIS FALL. PIRANHA INTERACTIVE PUBLISHING Go to #137 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"HOMEWORLD The Generation of Extreme Control SNEAK PREVIEWS MOTHERSHIP NO LIMITS HOMEWORLD offers an expansive 3D environment with no physical boundaries. You can move 360 degrees in any direction to the limits of the horizon. You've been gaming ever since you got weaned on Pong as a kid. Now you want a stick that'll do it all. Programmable. Digital. Analog. Comfortable. Cool. Different. New. GenX 700 by QuickShot is all that and more. This programmable stick comes complete with switches to move between digital and analog modes for the HAT, rudder, handle fire buttons and X & Y axes. Plus a 3D rotational handle and a multiI view HAT switch. This stick's superergonomic with a contoured BioThrottle complete with extra fire buttons. And the GenX 700 is a really cool metallic purple color --sure to look perfect anywhere. Don't forget to check out our streamlined GenX 500 and 500L — the world's first joystick made for lefties! Punish yourself no more. Enter the generation of extreme control. GET THIS STICK! formation. Ships then move and attack according to formations. Several formations, such as the Claw and Sphere, take advantage of the 3D environment. The Claw formation looks like its namesake. When it encounters a target, it closes over the ship and attacks on all sides. The Sphere, by contrast, is a defensive forma. tion that provides 360-degree protection to any ship within the sphere. Tactics govern how your ships behave. There are three settings: evasive, aggressive, and neutral. Neutral is the normal setting, and ships in that mode will accomplish their missions as they are ordered. Ships in aggressive mode will fight to the death to accomplish their missions, even going so far as to kamikaze when situations get desperate. Ships in evasive mode will harass enemy ships and expend their fuel dodging fire (all small ships and frigates consume fuel when moving, but they can be set to auto refuel). They'll survive by evading fire, but they won't be able to accomplish their objectives because they'll be constantly fleeing. and enemy ships in a limited sphere around your mothership. For a full view of the battlefield, you can switch views to a \"Sensor Manager\" that shows a full map of the scenario. All resources and ships can be seen from this view, although the map beyond your mothership will appear as unexplored fog unless you cover the area with probes. Just like the combat screen, this screen is rotatable 3D. Limited orders are possible in this screen so you can issue strategic move orders before you switch to the main view to engage in combat. There is so much more to discuss with HOMEWORLD, but we can't fit it all in these pages (for more, read GameSpot's preview). While the game certainly sounds impressive, and the graphics are gorgeous, several questions remain about the game. The build we played was a technology demo with limited gameplay, so single-player missions and computer Al were still works in progress. Also, the unit balancing, animation, and interface still need testing. If Relic devotes the same attention to these things that it has to the 3D engine and campaign design, HOMEWORLD has a very good chance of living up to its promise. CGW . God stengistered tradecar el acto PABA QuickShot www.quickshot.com Multiple Viewpoints To track the battle, you can rotate your view, zoom out until your ships look like ants, or zoom in until a fighter fills the screen. You can also lock the camera to follow a ship or formation. A minimap on the screen shows friendly 1XBASA dolog GEN Go to #260 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 66 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Serious Fishing... \"The best bass fishing game ever made!\" dummet  The only fishing game with completely 3D lakes and underwater views BASS MASTERS Network play for up to 8 tournament anglers -competitive online fishing at its best MASTERS ClavieTOURNAMENT ? Slassico  Tips from the sport's best, real U.S. lakes and thousands of lures to choose from VALE TOURNAMENT EDITION THE ONLY 3D W EDITION TOURNAMENT A tutorial and multiple difficulty settings -fun for the whole family FISHING GAME! THOE Completely 3D. CHE LTELE THE OFFICIAL GAVE OF Available this August EVERYONE B.A.S.S. Dorota TLTY WWW.THQ.COM www.BASSMASTER.COM THQ WEST CONTENT RATEDOT BASS ANGLERS SPORTSMAN SOCIETY Hass Vaster Classes Bass Anglets Sport Society registrades of ASSA Go to #107 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"DREAMWORKS INTERACTIVE THE LAWS OF NATURE AND SOMEONE IS \"THE MOST ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY WE'VE EVER SEEN IN A PC GAMING TITLE!\".COMPUTER GAMING WORLD *** PHENOMENAL PHYSICS-BASED GAME PLAY: IF IT CAN HAPPEN IN REAL LIFE, IT CAN HAPPEN HERE "


"cen HAVE BEEN BROKEN. GOING TO PAY va 3*** Tresme 1998 UC.S. Comptor Peo 1198 DWI All Rights Reserved YOU ARE ALONE, WASHED ASHORE ON INGEN'S REMOTE RESEARCH ISLAND, SITE B, IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE LOST WORLD EXPEDITION. BEFORE YOU LIES A DENSE, TROPICAL JUNGLE FILLED WITH PREHISTORIC L&LMACMWW // Anachwa CARNIVORES THAT ARE VERY MUCH ALIVE. YOUR ONLY CHANCE OF SURVIVAL IS TO USE YOUR WITS TO BATTLE THE RELENTLESS WILD LIFE WITH ANYTHING YOU CAN GET YOUR HANDS ON. KRPES TRESPASSER THE LOST WORLD THE EVOLUTION OF IST PERSON 3-D GAMING. WWW.TRESPASSER.COM "


"COVER STORY 100 Index 101 124 120 156 Abe's Exodus GT Interactive Age of Empires II Microsoft Aliens vs. Predator Fox Interactive Anachronox lon Storm Apache Havoc Empire Asheron's Call Microsoft Asteroids Activision Axis & Allies Hasbro Baldur's Gate Interplay Baseball 3D Microsoft Basketball Pro 99 Sierra Battle of Britain TalonSoft Battleground 9: Chickamauga Talonsoft Beneath Activision Birth of the Federation MicroProse Black and White Electronic Arts Caesar Il Sierra Centipede Hasbro Chaos Gate 551 Chessmaster 6000 Mindscape Combat Flight Simulator Microsoft Command & Conquer: Tiberian Sun Westwood Studios Creatures 2 Mindscape The D Show Disney Interactive Daikatana lon Storm Dark Reign II Activision Dawn of Aces l-Magic Diablo II Blizzard Dissolution of Eternity Rogue Don't Touch That Dial Berkeley Systems Drakan Psygnosis Duke Nukem Forever GT Interactive/3D Realms Dune 2000 Westwood Studios European Air War MicroProse Everquest Sony Interactive F-16 Aggressor Virgin Falcon 4.0 MicroProse Fallout 2 Interplay Fighter Duel 2.0 Infogravis Fighter Squadron: Screaming Demons Over Europe Activision Fighting Steel SSI Fireteam Multitude Fleet Command Jane's Combat Simulations Flight Unlimited III Looking Glass Flight: Combat Looking Glass Fly! Terminal Reality Football Pro 99 Sierra Force Commander LucasArts Force Feedback Wheel Microsoft Fox Sports Golf 99 Fox Interactive Fox Sports Soccer 99 Fox Interactive Gabriel Knight III Sierra Good & Evil Cavedog Great Battles 1-Magic Grim Fandango LucasArts Gubble 2 Actual Entertainment Gunship III MicroProse Half-Life Sierra Harpoon 4 SSI Head Rush Berkeley Systems Heavy Gear || Activision Heretic II Activision Heroes of Might & Magic III 3DO Homeworld Sierra iF/A-18E CSF 1-Magic Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine LucasArts 145 108 148 108 129 148 136 156 124 140 156 136 131 NO 140 140 1326 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.cols,  "


"Computer Gaming World's COVER STORY HotNew Games Annual Nostradamus Simulation % 164 96 101 101 136 124 124 105 Interstate '82 Activision Israeli Air Combat DID Jeopardy Hasbro K6-2 Motherboard AMD King's Quest: Mask of Eternity Sierra Klingon Honor Guard MicroProse Lands of Lore Ill Westwood Studios Legend of the Five Rings Activision Life Hasbro Luftwaffe Commander SSI M1 Tank Platoon Il MicroProse Madden NFL 99 EA Sports Man of War II Strategy First MechCommander MicroProse MechWarrior III MicroProse Medieval HPS/Incredible Sims Messiah Interplay Middle Earth Sierra Mig Alley Empire/Rowan Myth II: Soulblighter Bungie NASCAR Racing 99 Sierra Sports National Hockey Tonight ESPN Digital Nations: Fighter Command Psygnosis NBA Basketball Tonight ESPN Digital NBA Live 99 Electronic Arts Newman-Haas Racing Psygnosis NFL Gameday 99 Sony Interactive NHL 99 Electronic Arts Outburst Hasbro Panzer Elite Psygnosis Peoples General SSI Populous III: The Beginning Electronic Arts Prey GT Interactive 3D Realms Prince of Persia 3D Red Orb Quake II: Ground Zero Rogue Railroad Tycoon 2 Pop Top Redguard Bethesda Requiem 300 Return to Krondor Sierra Revenant Eidos Rogue Squadron LucasArts Secret of Vulcan Fury Interplay Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri EA/Firaxis Sin Activision Slave Zero Accolade Smart Games Challenge #3 Hasbro Star Trek: Klingon Academy Interplay Star Com Accolade StarCraft: Brood Wars Blizzard StarSiege: Tribes Sierra Stratego Hasbro SU-Flanker 2.0 SSI Super Hornet Titus Swords & Sorcery Virgin Tartan Army Eidos Tiger Woods 99 EA Sports Tomb Raider III Eidos Top Gun: Hornet's Nest MicroProse Total Annihilation: Kingdoms Cavedog Trespasser Dreamworks Ultima IX Orgin Ultima: Ascension Origin Ultra Fighters Magic USB Speakers Microsoft Velocity 4400 3D Card STB West Front TalonSoft Wheel of Fortune Hasbro Wheel of Time GT Interactive Wingman Force Joystick Logitech Wizardry VIII SirTech WWII Fighters Jane's Combat Simulations X Games Pro Boarder ESPN Digital Games 134 131 128 148 131 136 124 117 101 129 108 128 145 81 101 128 129 108 108 136 120 164 164 156 136 84 161 101 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES WIZARDRY products. Finally, we'll see Raymond Feist's brilliant RETURN TO KRONDOR reach store shelves prior to the holidays. \"The curse is broken! Thus sayeth CGW.\" great animation, virtual cockpits, and head-to-head action for everyone. You just have to decide which one's best for you (with a little advice from us, of course). COVER_SITORY t doesn't take a Nostradamus to foresee that more than half the titles covered in this year's 100+ Hot New Games won't ship in 1998. Yet, if there is one thing that we have learned over the years, it is that you like to be in the loop in terms of the games that are coming. You want a lens trained on the future of games—and you want it now. Control Factors This year marks the release of some of the most interesting game controllers ever. Microsoft's Freestyle Pro allows you to use body language to control the action on screen, all with the familiar interface of a gamepad. You don't even have to wait for developers to figure out what to do with it. If your game supports joysticks, it supports this peripheral. Force-feedback steering controllers are here just in time to take advantage of the great racing games coming out this season. Plus, some gamers will get a kick out of all of the seats that allow movement and provide feedback via sound vibrations. It's a wild time. Race Track Fever In the past, you had to look to Papyrus for authentic, physicsbased racing games in which cars could be set up to handle realistically. Papyrus will still lead the way with GRAND PRIX LEGENDS and NASCAR RACING 99, but Ubisoft (F-1 RACING) and Microsoft (CART PRECISION RACING II) will not be far behind them with the latest revs of their racing products. Newcomers such as Virgin, with its sports car simulation, GT Interactive, with its late-'60s muscle car simulation, and Intense Entertainment, with its new F-1 simulation, will round out the field. Meanwhile, those who don't like realistic sims can opt for the experience of NEWMAN-HAAS RACING from Psygnosis or games from the EA racing stable. It has been our tradition at Computer Gaming World to offer in our Fall Preview a far-ranging, early-warning view of what's coming during the next year and, in December's Holiday Hot 100, to try as near as possible (with mixed results) to augur the games that will actually ship for the holiday season. In that way, you get two hot lists, a macroand a microlook at the state of the industry. subject matter. This year's list is no exception. Though cynics can look at 1998 as the year of \"More of the Same\" games, it is also true that those of us who are paid to be cynical can find evidence for that position in any year. Instead, let's focus on encouraging trends. 3D Positional Audio We haven't seen the game masterpiece that uses 3DPA yet, but it is beginning to be included in games. There is nothing like hearing the monsters behind you. This type of ambient noise provides clues as to the presence of your enemies and really adds a sense of being there.\" High-Wire Act In this year's list of 100+ Hot New Games, we have attempted a high-wire act that may be riskier than the divining task for December's Hot Games for the Holidays list. We've looked at pre-Alpha code, Alpha code, and E3 demos and attempted to discern the topranked games in their particular genres. For the sake of controversy, discussion, and utility, we've given our expert opinions on the hottest games--as well as the games that seem likely to disappoint. The good news is that we may at times, be wrong. The better news is that this has provided an interesting exercise for us, and should, as a result, make for better reading for you. We know you'll let us know. Our fall previews have also sought, over the years, to provide some sense of trends: in technology, in design, and in Role-playing Is Back Whether or not ULTIMA: ASCENSION will be classified as a role-playing game, 1998 has already seen the release of MIGHT & MAGIC VI, a rich, big traditional RPG. Soon, we'll be confronted with WIZARDRY 8, a worthy competitor for M&M VI in the lists, which was designed by a longtime WIZARDRY player, play-tester, tech support, and documentation writer working with an experienced team. Then, we'll be challenged by SWORDS & SORCERY, designed by David Bradley, the person who designed the last three WWII Flight-Sim Heaven After years of neglect, we're thrilled to see the trend of World War Il combat flight sims. All of this year's crop have features to commend them. Jane's WWII FIGHTERS, Microsoft's COMBAT AIR FLIGHT SIMULATOR, and MicroProse's EUROPEAN AIR WAR have marvelous looking planes, rich campaigns, Small-Unit Action Another trend is in support of small-unit actions. SPEC OPS: RANGERS LEAD THE WAY from Ripcord has realistic handling of elite troops in the real world's hot spots. Meanwhile, Tom Clancy's Red Storm Entertainment plans to do even more with RAINBOW-6 and, in the science-fiction realm, REBEL MOON REVOLUTION, from GT Interactive, is almost a smallunit strategy game instead of a shooter. Naturally, some of the recent trends in design style are continuing. We'll still see a plethora of first-person shooters and real-time strategy games over the next 18-24 months, but it appears that they are about to become options in gaming style instead of prerequisites. We think that's healthy for gaming in the long run. So, now that you've been indoctrinated by our quick Nostradamus impersonation, read on to discover the most exciting 100+ games currently in development. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Works better. Plays better. 98 WINDOWS 98 SUPPORTS YOUR RIG ETO PLAY. Where do you want to go today? www.microsoft.com/windows98/gaming/ 1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft, Where do you want to go today, Windows and the Windows logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries Other product and company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners. "


"Microsoft Windows 98 radically accelerates your access to your favorite applications. It does this by figuring out what programs you use most and rearranging them at a tiny micro level to be quicker and more efficient. «YEAH, YEAH BTIS | FA LIL 98 Works better. Plays better. 01998 Microsoft Corporation All rights reserved. Microsoft, Where do you want to go today. Windows and the Windows logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. Source: NSTL 4/98. Results based on differences in application load times on identical hardware systems running Windows 98 versus Windows 95 "


"YEAH you say Well, yes. An average of 36% faster, now that you mention it. You know, you should relax a little and read at a more leisurely pace. Let your operating system do the hurrying. Where do you want to go today? www.microsoft.com/windows 98/ "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES  ACTION DRAKAN COVER STORY Psygnosis (650) 287-6500 www.psygnosis.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW's ETA: Q1 '99 f all the third-person shooters on the horizon, DRAKAN is the one that looks most promising. This is the game that is most likely to carve its place in the third-person subgenre. The reason? You get to indulge every fantasy buff's dream: You get to ride a dragon. Better yet, you get to spit fiery breath and toast goblins and ogres before you. DRAKAN is an action-adventure game in which you play a female warrior-decked out in skimpy armor and wielding a keen blade of steel-who splits her time between riding a dragon into monsterinfested skies and delving into dark dungeons and caverns. You play from a familiar third-person perspective and journey through game environments that are more detailed and expansive than TOMB RAIDER's, with both large open spaces and claustrophobic, winding caves. Because you can literally fly across the world on the back of a dragon, you'll be able to see far into the distance and spot towns full of civilians under attack from marauding humanoids. How you choose to deal with these menaces (from afar with claw and breath or up close with sharp steel) is really up to you. In RPG style, you'll talk to various townsfolk as you try to combat (what else) an evil threat to the realm. Once you acquire your dragon companion in the early part of the game, the rest of the world will open before you, including snowy mountains, dank swamps, sweltering deserts, and many other environments. You'll get to ride the dragon between dungeons and increase his power as you progress through the game. You'll also acquire spells and new weapons for yourself. Psygnosis has packed incredibly detailed 3D graphics, a rich fantasy setting, and the lure of a playable dragon into DRAKAN and is banking on the game being one of its hottest titles. Read a more detailed preview in our August feature. REQUIEM 3DO (650) 261-3000 www.cyclone.com Company's ETA: 0398 CGW'S ETA: 04 98 yclone's debut title, UPRISING, was a good first effort, but its next game, game, REQUIEM, will blow you away. REQUIEM is literally a game of biblical proportions. You play an angel sent to a futuristic Earth to combat the evil of the Fallen Ones. Unveiled in three acts, the game plays as a fairly nonlinear actionadventure, but features plenty of puzzles, NPCs, and quests to elevate this shooter beyond the traditional run-and-gun mind-set. Aside from the divine storyline and more evolved gameplay, what sets this game apart from the rest of the pack are your angelic powers (think of them as pumped up Force powers, à la JEDI KNIGHT). You'll be able to possess enemies, turn them to salt, cast lightning, fly, summon plagues of locusts, and call earthquakes. There are nearly two dozen powers, and a plethora of monsters (everything from menacing cyborgs to frightening angels) acting as your unwilling victims. in a genre crowded with too many copycats, REQUIEM distinguishes itself with a unique look and setting. HALF-LIFE Sierra (425) 649-9800 www.valve.com Company ETA: Q2 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q2 '98 he industry buzz touts UNREAL, HALF-LIFE, and SIN AS the troika of 3D shooters that will take QUAKE-style gaming to the next level. UNREAL has beaten the other two to market, but will it be the best? Not if the Valve guys have anything to say about it. HALF-LIFE is inching closer to release, and all the pieces are starting to come together. The latest milestone was multiplay, which was up and running at this year's E3. Technologically, HALFLIFE will hold its own with the best of the 3D shooters. It will sport 16and 24-bit lighting, DSP sound, skeletal animation, and higher polygon counts on enemies. The famed Al still looks good, although recent rumors of Valve looking for a new Al programmer this late in development might not bode well for the final product. Still, the Al we saw as recently as several weeks ago was smart and organized. With integrated levels, fantastic-looking enemies, and prescripted events that present compelling narrative, HALF-LIFE is one of the brightest shooters to watch out for. 76 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ACTION  100+ HOT NEW GAMES ALIEN VS. PREDATOR Fox Interactive (310) 369-7000 www.foxinteractive.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA:Q1 '99 COVER STORY SIN Activision (310) 255-2000 www.ritual.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: 03 98 quality of work there certainly bodes well for Ritual's SIN, which will combine DUKE NUKEMstyle interactivity and level design that surpasses SCOURGE. There are plenty of things for you to blow up in Sin, but what you destroy (or don't destroy) will affect how you navigate levels. If you don't stop an enemy from blowing up a bridge, you might have to take a detour through a new level. Sure, the level design will be great and the weapons themselves will pack some surprises, but this interactivity, which translates directly into long-term gameplay, promises to be one of Sin's most exciting features. Expect plenty of puzzles, smart monsters, the usual assortment of 3D shooter advancements, and some raucous deathmatch levels to round out this potential blockbuster title. gameplay changing dramatically depending on your pick. The predator, with its slow but powerful weapons, can cloak itself and strike from concealment. Other gamers will see it only as a warping shimmer. The alien will be as insidious as it is in the movies, scurrying through hallways and ducts inaccessible to other gamers. It can attack from above or below, through ceilings or floors. Its attacks are shortranged but strong, and its dying gout of acid can kill its attacker. The marines are at an obvious disadvantage, so they get big, nasty guns. Single play will feature three distinct campaigns. Despite the fact that the single-player mode is running a bit behind schedule, Fox says it will still adhere to a November ship date. e've already mentioned HALF-LIFE and UNREAL as two games that have the potential to turn the shooter genre on its head. But SIN, the last of this upcoming triumvirate, might just be the one to do it. Why? Well, the team responsible for SIN also produced SCOURGE OF ARMAGON, a paragon of brilliant level design. While SCOURGE was only a QUAKE expansion pack, the -ox's ALIEN VS. PREDATOR, in development for years, is finally nearing completion, and it could actually be the game Aliens and Predator fans have been waiting for. At this point, the most stable part of the game is the multiplay. You can be an alien, a predator, or a marine, with INTERSTATE '82 Activision (310) 255-2000 www.activision.com. Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW's ETA: 04 '98 STOP interactivity, true 3D fires and effects, facial expressions on characters, and even limited character interaction. What's more, Duke is starting to look like a cinematic action hero: He sprays chasing vehicles while racing down a highway à la T2, plugs jet-ski assassins 007-style as they drop from an Army helicopter, and blasts through mining tunnels on speeding railcars (tip o' the fedora to Indy). 3D Realms vows to push the boundaries again with ribald humor and risqué graphics. Some of this will arrive in the form of a leggy female sidekick named Bombshell. There might even be nudity in the game, in which case you probably won't find it at Walmart. But DNF looks so great it's bound to be a hit anyway. NTERSTATE '82 is the sequel to the '70s funk-fest, INTERSTATE 176. This time around, there's vintage '80s music blasting away on your radio while you do battle with more autovigilantes and villains. The plot centers around secret skirmishes against Central American governments and presidential assassins. The game's story will take you through sewers, down into mines, to shopping malls, to Las Vegas, and onto a DUKE NUKEM FOREVER GT Interactive/3D Realms (800) 610-4847 www.3drealms.com Company ETA: \"When it's done.\" CGW'S ETA: Q1 '99 UKE NUKEM FOREVER may seem to be taking forever, but it is starting to take shape-despite the delay incurred when switching from the QUAKE Il to the UNREAL engine. In addition to colored lighting and 3D architecture courtesy of the UNREAL engine, 3D Realms overhauled the code to deliver more secret military base (Area 49). While gameplay will remain basically the same (ride around in vehicles and blow up stuff), there will be enhancements. You'll be able to drive motorcycles and helicopters, and get out of your car and explore some indoor environments on foot. There will be weather effects like rain, snow, and fog, as well as more detailed graphics and (we hope) faster frame rates. However, Activision is currently saying that 1-82 will be a hardware-only game, so you'd better upgrade to a 3D accelerator. There should be more complex levels (rather than simple open areas), and Activision says it will implement in-game saving. We can't wait to check this feature out. With its hip graphics look and music, and enhanced gameplay, INTERSTATE '82 could be Activision's flagship title for '98. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"EXPLORE DISCOVER BUILD CONQUER FIRAXIS GAMES LATING PENDING 2 ESRB C1998 Electronic Arts. Electronic Arts is a trademark or registered trademark of Electronic Arts in the U.S. and/or other countries. All rights reserved. Alpha Centauri and Firaxis Games are trademarks of Firaxis Games, Inc. Sid Meier's Civilization, Sid Meier's Colonization and Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon are registered trademarks of Microprose Software, Inc. "


". FOR THE FUTURE OF MANKIND SID MEIER'S ALPHA CENTAURI The next strategy masterpiece from the creators of Sid Meier's Civilization I & II, Colonization and Railroad Tycoon Login at www.alphacentauri.com "


"AMERICA DIDN'T GET TO BE THE Cipcord most powerful nation on earth Zombie BY ASKING NICELY. www.ripcordgames.com Highly skilled and expertly trained, the U.S. Army Rangers are the most revered and feared  Rocord Games reserved. Dettbuted by Panasonic Forordning litrato please call of Zombie All other trademarks are the property of the fupectie ganen All rights 19Zombie Specs: Aangers Led the way is a trademark fighting unit in the world. Now you can put it all on the line and be one of them. UTINE PES SA Intensely real, SpecOns: Rangers Lead the Way takes you from snowy Korean forests to steamy South American jungles. Everything is authentic, from uniforms and vehicles to the tandem Ranger \"fireteams.\" Everywhere you go, another Ranger goes with you, watching your back, following your commands, and trusting you with his life. SPEC OPS Rangers Lead the Way So let's go, soldier Your country needs you. Your COUNTRY. Your HONOR. Your TURN. "


"ACTION  100+ HOT NEW GAMES HERETIC II Activision (310) 255-2000 www.activision.com Company ETA: Q4 '98 CGW'S ETA: 04 '98 COVER STOR TRESPASSER Dreamworks (425) 635-7134 www.dreamworksgames.com Company ETA: Q3 '99 CGW'S ETA: Q4 '99 hinders you when you push boxes, the ripples that appear in water, even the way jeeps fall down ravines and dinosaurs snap back with each bullet fired. This is a world that is as realistic as it gets But what about the game design? While the engine sounds fantastic, the design is still being fleshed out. For starters, this isn't a run-and-gun game. You die with one hit, so you have to sneak around and use the environment to evade and outwit dangers. The dinosaurs you face will behave realistically, as their intelligence is governed, many factors, including hunger, fear, curiosity, pain, and anger. In conjunction with the physics-based engine, these realistic dinosaurs could wind up creating a world rather than a game. And we don't think that's necessarily bad. reamworks' digital sequel to Lost World is speeding along like a 'raptor and itching for a kill. Much has been made about TRESPASSER's physicsbased engine, but it bears repeating. This game could present the most realistic environment ever in computer gaming. Every object in the game is governed by the rules of science. The way barrels float in the water, the way friction n a departure from the traditional HEXEN line of games, Raven's HERETIC II will embrace a third-person perspective. Raven has done this in order to make the HERETIC line a more adventure-oriented game, while bringing the Hexen franchise more in-line with traditional first-person shooters like QUAKE. The company hopes the change in perspective will further distinguish the differing directions for the two franchises. The sort of puzzles and exploration evident in previous HERETIC and Hexen titles will flow naturally into HERETIC II, but the pacing will be a definite step up from that iconic third-person game, TOMB RAIDER. Expect plenty of bad guys to hound you throughout this game's many beautifully rendered locales. This time out, you play Corvus, the elf you controlled in HERETIC. Many of the enemies you'll fight will be tough hombres, so the powers at your disposal will be equally strong. There will be many powerful spells at your disposal, some with spectacular visual effects. Expect this blend of intense action and exploration adventure in Raven's signature fantasy universe to arrive in stores sometime late this year. body is burning, you can crawl along to add to its excruciating pain. Apart from letting you indulge in your most sadistic fantasies, possession will play a huge role in navigating the game's puzzles. You might have to inflict selfinjury on a guard so that his cohorts will carry him (and, by extension, you) to an infirmary deeper into the base, thereby bypassing locked doors and sentries The graphics in Messiah look good. Using an engine called RTDAT (real-time deformation and tesselation), Shiny will maintain the optimal frame rate by adding or subtracting polygons from inconspicuous areas of the screen. If you want to indulge your most twisted desires in a good-looking game, watch for MESSIAH this winter. FIRETEAM Multitude (888) 689-TEAM www.fireteam.com Company ETA: 03 '98 CGW's ETA: Early Q4 '98 IRETEAM will be an online-only game from start-up Multitude. The focus of FIRETEAM is on team play. Traditionally, though, team play on the Internet has been stifled by the problems of gamers having to type while playing. In a fast-action game like FIRETEAM, there just isn't time to type commands to teammates. FiRETEAM looks to solve that by supporting voice technology and bundling a headset with each game. MESSIAH Interplay (949)553-6655 www.interplay.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW'S ETA: Q1 '99 There are at least four different game types, including gunball (lethal football), capture the flag, base tag, and team deathmatch. Teams consist of four gamers, with each gamer able to pick one of three different character types: gunner, sniper, or scout. Obviously, each class has different abilities, and you'll need to complement each other's abilities while coordinating your actions via the headsets. The real-time speech capability should position FIRETEAM as the first Internet game to really make good on the promise of fun and workable team play. Chat rooms and tournaments and Multitude's promised support of clans will ensure that a community (which, along with gameplay, are the foundations for a good online game) is firmly supported for FIRETEAM. If you want to see for yourself how much fun this game is just go to www.fireteam.com. in Shiny's MESSIAH, you play a baby angel who must stop the devil's work on Earth. However, to do so, you'll engage in some pretty evil deeds yourself. Because you're too small to put up much of a fight, you have to possess and use the bodies of your enemies. You can walk your possessed body off a catwalk and make it fall to its death. Or you can walk the body through open flames. Then, while the www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 81 "


"THE SAGA CONTINUES. 30 NEW SINGLE PLAYER MISSIONS 120 NEW MULTIPLAYER MAPS AVAILABLE SOON AT YOUR FAVORITE RETAILER OR CALL: 1-800-229-2714 W IM (2011 Published by WIZARDWorks Stardock Monilla A GT INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE COMPANY PLYMOUTH, MN 55441  WizardWorks, Inc. All rights reserved. Starcraft is a trademark and Blizzard Entertainment is a trademark or a registered trademark of Davidson & Associates, Inc. In the U.S. and/or other countries. 01998 Blizzard Entertainment. All rights reserved. "


"am PETALIATION Authorized Add-On for TARTRAFT Go to #173 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES  ACTION WHEEL OF TIME GT Interactive (800) 610-4847 www.gtinteractive.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW'S ETA: Q2 '99 COVER STORY third installment of the PRINCE saga. This time, the graphics and engine are pure, gorgeous 3D. While the over-the-shoulder 3D look will be new, the gameplay that signified the previous POP games will definitely be back. The setting is again ancient Persia, and the goal is to rescue the princess for yet a third time. Mechner, the consummate storyteller, will weave the game's 15 levels into a detailed story that escalates as the action increases. There will be quite a few enemy swordsmen and beguiling ladies to confront and subdue, but there will also be plenty of reflex-based puzzles and action sequences, such as jumps and evasion. The most striking feature of PRINCE OF PERSIA 3D is the excellent animation of the Prince himself, which rivals Lara Croft's fluidity. HEEL OF TIME is a tough game to describe. You play a hero who has to retrieve several artifacts from your rivals' well-defended castles. The conventional part of the game is that you travel to these castles, acquire some dazzling spell-like powers, surmount the PRINCE OF PERSIA 3D Red Orb (415) 382-4400 www.redorb.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW'S ETA: 02 '99 The Prince is back. Like Indiana Jones, this classic adventurer-explorer has returned to show Lara and her clones just how action-adventures are supposed to be done. Jordan Mechner, the designer of the previous two PRINCE games and the animated adventure game LAST EXPRESS, is plotting this traps and enemies within, and take what you need. However, while you are doing this, your own castle is undefended. That's where the level design part of the game comes in. Before you leave to plunder enemy castles, you have to lay down traps and place monsters using a map editor disguised as an integral and intuitive part of the game interface. While the castle-storming part is very action-intensive, the castle design is a cerebral challenge that evokes the most intense of strategy games. You have to anticipate the moves and likely entry points of would-be robbers and design credible deterrents. The single-player part of the game should also add a rich fantasy storyline and some interesting NPCs. PREY GT Interactive 3D Realms (800) 610-4847 www.3drealms.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW'S ETA: Q1 '99 SOSYASY MACHINE will be a 3D action/adventure set in the early Cold War. The perspective will be familiar thirdperson, but the adventures, puzzles, and combat will be classic Indiana Jones. The Soviets want to build a machine that will open a rift to another dimension in order to gain great power. Indy has to stop them by finding the pieces to this machine before the Soviets do. Thus begins a chase to exotic locales around the globe, as Indy encounters fierce enemies, dastardly puzzles, and pursuing Commies. Expect Indy to use his wits to solve environmental and logic puzzles, as well as his whip and several different weapons to fend off bad guys both human and animal. ne of the highlights for us at E3 was being given a private demo of Prey. The game looks to be the next level in first-person shooters, with its powerful engine, advanced geometry and mind-bending potential for interactivity. It features an American Indian named Talon Brave, who has the ability to use conventional weapons and magic as he develops spiritually throughout the game. PREY'S 3D engine abandons BSPs in favor of a new system known as Portal Technology. Portals allow destruction of the levels in a way never seen before. Whole walls, rooms, and levels may be changed or destroyed, and suitably devastating weaponry is planned to facilitate this. The engine appears to handle huge levels and large reflective surfaces with no slowdown. It's also capable of rendering scenes with much higher polygon counts than we've seen before. Prey could well be the most sophisticated and gorgeous 3D game to date. INDIANA JONES AND THE INFERNAL MACHINE LucasArts (415) 472-3400 www.lucasarts.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW'S ETA: Early QZ '99 t had to happen. Indiana Jones, after seeing the fortune Lara Croft has made ripping off his signature derring-do in exotic tombs, has come out of retirement to show gamers how a real adventurer hunts artifacts. INDIANA JONES AND THE INFERNAL 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ONE MAN AGAINST AN EMPIRE SECONDO The Elder Scrolls Adventures EDGUARD BETHESDA SOFTWORKS PRESENTS THE ACTION-ADVENTURE EPIC OF A LIFETIME FEATURNG AN EVOLVING STORY WITH SWASHBUCKLING DUELS NALIVING 3D WORLD FALL 1998 WWW. REDGUARD. ELDERSCROLLS.COM Go to #177 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Bethesda Softworks. 1370 Piccard Drive, Rockville, MD 20850 Fax: 301 926-8010. www.bethsoft.com and Redguardare trademarks of Media Technology Limited. Copyright  1998 Media Technology Umited. All rights reserved. The 3Dix logo is a trademark of 3Dfx Interactive. Inc Bethesda Softworks. The Elder Scrolls "


"Have You Driven An Urban Assault Vehicle Lately? TAOHINE GUN GUNMETAL 24 MACHINE GUN Trhold HEADLIGHTS: 0 RAILGUN 396 "


"SECURE CONTROL SYSTEM with realtime fractal encryption keeps your datalink untraceable and unbreakable. Drive with confidence. FLAMETHROWER 2X RADAR GUIDED MISSILE LAUNCHER FUSION POWER PLANT delivers smooth running power at temperatures up to 700 degrees Kelvin FUSION BEAM ARMOR FACINGS of renewable ceramic polymers protect your vehicle from adverse conditions such as plasma bolts and autocannon fire. ELECTROMAGNETIC REPULSOR DRIVE with gyrostabilization and inertial dampers goes from 0 to 180km/h in 0.0014 seconds The Argus Overlord Armor Trend netmagazine's 2219 Assault Vehicle of the Year JA HEADLIGHTS: ATI AUTOCANNON CANNON HAQIT HEADLIGHTS: OFT 999 HH TARGETTING OUT All Nataka Remotely Piloted Vehicles ship with version 56.9 of Battle Helper, Nataka's award-winning operating system. Some vehicles not exactly as shown. All performance specifications given for unencumbered vehicles in 1 G of gravitational force and 101.9 kPa of barometric pressure unless otherwise indicated. Battle Helper is a registered product of the Nataka Corporate Empire. Unauthorized use of the Battle Helper name is a violation of applicable treaties and will be met with military force. Gunmetal and Mad Genius Software\" are registered trademarks of Mad Genius Software Ltd. MAD GENIUS TRI SYNERGY Go to #130 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES  ACTION anime film and have it be just as much fun as QUAKE and MECH 2. COVER STORY SLAVE ZERO Accolade (408) 985-1700 www.accolade.com Company ETA: 03 '99 CGW's ETA: 04199 havoc are limitless. You can swing from bridges and gun down enemies below (taking out chunks of nearby buildings in the process), crawl up skyscrapers, and jump onto freeways and overturn cars with each thundering step. The action will be more imme. diate than MECHWARRIOR 2's, as you fight multiple robots in intense battles in various city scapes. Sean Vesce, the designer for MECHWARRIOR 2 and the director for INTERSTATE '76, is creating SLAVE ZERO, and he hopes to make gamers feel as if they're in the middle of an exciting giant robot rawing inspiration from such anime films as Evangelion and Macross Plus, Accolade's giant robot game SLAVE ZERO adds QUAKE-paced action and a sprawling, populated urban environment to the MECHWARRIOR formula. You are the sole pilot of an experimental robot called Slave Zero, the only thing standing between a wave of marauding evil robots and the city's destruction. Since the game takes place in a Blade Runner-like city with skyscrapers and mile-high freeways, the possibilities for creating mass ROGUE SQUADRON LucasArts (415) 472-3400 www.lucasarts.com Company ETA: Q4 99 CGW's ETA: 04 '99 ucasArts knew that the best parts of last year's mediocre SHADOWS OF THE EMPIRE were the flight portions-especially the Battle of Hoth, in which you got to pilot a snowspeeder, destroy probes and AT-ST walkers, and rope up giant AT-ATS. A blast for any gamer, Star Wars fan or not! Well, LucasArts is taking that gameplay and blowing it up into a full game. This time, you play Luke Skywalker as you pilot a variety of spacecraft through more than a dozen free-roaming levels. Taking point for the famed R ogue Squadron, the Rebellion's crack fighter squadron, you'll fly X-wings, A-wings, Y-wings, and other ships against a gauntlet of Imperial fighters and machines. The levels you'll experience include familiar Star Wars planets such as Tatooine and Mon Calamari, while the environments include deserts, canyons, lava flows, and forests. Don't think that the missions will just be killing sprees, either. You'll have to rescue prisoners, escort convoys, and conduct surgical strikes on Imperial strongholds. ABE'S EXODUS GT Interactive (800) 610-4847 www.gtinteractive.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW'S ETA: 04 98 ur man Aboman is coming back, and his next game should truly shine. The biggest reason-apart from all the creative stuff that developer Oddworld Inhabitants dreams up-is that now you'll actually be able to save the game whenever you like. This time Abe must journey to his homeland to stop the Glukkons from mining his ancestors' remains. The Glukkons (remember Mollock?) need bones to make SoulStorm Brew, and they have plenty of slaves to toil for them. Abe has to rescue the slaves and save the burial grounds, using sly moves, new speech commands, and new powers. He'll encounter familiar enemies, most of whom he can now control, and new ones, like Fleeches and Slurgs. Oddworld games are truly brilliant in design and execution, with rich worlds and consistently clever challenges. This should be high on your list of coming attractions. 1998 Luconin d. IN THE WORKS TARSIEGE: TRIBES is under development and takes place in the STARSIEGE universe (what used to be EARTHSIEGE before the change to a more rich and alien game universe) The main difference between this and the combat sim STARSIEGE is that you run around in a power suit instead of a giant robot. QUAKE II: GROUND ZERO is the expansion pack coming from Rogue, the same folks who created DISSOLUTION OF ETERNITY. It will have some exciting multiplayer maps and new weapons, including tesla bombs that shoot lightning at campers, proximity mines, a lightning gun-like laser rifle, and several other nasty toys. Look for it in September. Also from Activision is BENEATH, a 3D actionadventure in which you play an archaeologist who explores huge underground caverns and tunnels. It should be a good-looking game with plenty of action and exploration. Look for it to arrive in mid-1999 KLINGON HONOR GUARD promises to be another exciting first-person shooter. What will set it apart from the crowd is its Klingon universe. You'll be a Klingon, wield Klingon weapons, and shed alien blood across the Star Trek universe. Expect it sometime this winter. Lara Croft will be back for her third adventure, and Core is very mindful of the fact that people want a real sequel and not just a rehash of TOMB RAIDER. Read our August cover story for the full scoop on TOMB RAIDER III. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Tired of waiting for your turn to get on the Internet? Computer Gaming World Software Included on the CD-ROM SHOPPING ONLINE Join EarthLink Network GET OUT OF AOL FREE BF NO MORE BUSY SIGNALS \\ / DON'T TAKE A CHANCE CHATS & BUDDIES START PAGE PERSONAL 100 STOCK QUOTES EMAIL NOT JUNKMAIL ON AOL HERE'S YOUR CHANCE TO GET OUT OF AOL FREE. Switch to EarthLink and get your email, news, stock quotes, sports scores, entertainment, shopping, chat, and an instant messaging program-all the things people like about AOL-without the busy signals, failed connections, junk mail, lost mail, and endless commercial messages you're forced to click NO THANKS to. And we're still just $19.95 per month for unlimited access. Playing the Internet game should be fun! So, what are you waiting for? Call now 1-888-QUIT AOL, ext. 3961 7 8 4 8 2 6 5 FOR JUST $19.95 PER MONTH, YOU GET: Unlimited Internet usage Nationwide access Over 1,300 local dialup #'s Choice of browsers Complete software for Windows and Mac Personal Start Page Email EarthLink Network Free 6MB Web site Free Internet user guide Bi-monthly newsletter Toll-free 24-hour help MAGAZINE EDITORS CHOICE September 9, 1997 Internet Access Provider or visit us at: www.earthlink.net/quitaol/ COKI ting It's your Internet.\" 1998 EarthLink Network, Inc. Trademarks are the property of their February 8, 1998 respective owners. All rights reserved. Internet Service Provider Go to #087 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"VIDER TO BUILD Old Trai. DRIVESIN THEATRE WE ARE FAMILY Not everyone that joins you looks like you. Super-mutants, robo-dogs and ghouls may join your adventure, or why not do-it-yourself by implanting the brain of someone near-and-dear into that shiny new robot body. foes Lue KILL SMARTER, NOT HARDER Improved combat Al for friends and foes alike. Most of Po the people in your own group won't take that burst shot with the Flechette-gun, but a couple are probably just aching for the opportunity. BIGGER & BADDER THAN EVER Bigger, smarter, nastier enemies than you've ever fought before. We've given you a few pals that are just as ugly. You didn't think you were the only Bad-ass in town did you? SHARE THE WEALTH If you want to, you can upgrade any traveling companions with more dangerous weapons, tougher armor, or even teach them new skills and abilities. Of course, you'd better make sure they're on your side. LEARNING IS FUN-DA-MENTAL Over 100 new skills, called perks, available to learn during the course of your travels. Better to learn the Flaming Dragon Punch from the crazed tribal shaman or how to squeeze the trigger on your spiff new Gauss-rifle faster than the next guy? Decisions, decisions... SEX & ROMANCE ATTER THE BOMB Fall in love, get married, and then pimp your spouse for a little extra chump-change. Hey, it's a dark and dangerous world. "


"\" Sequel to the RPG of the Year runden Vitli ECLES RRO Arriving Fall '98 signed for 2012 Fallert 2 BLACK) icrosoft Tindows'95 ISLOT HY GAMERS, FOR GAMERSEM www.interplay.com allout 2 A Post-Nuclear Role Playing Game: 1998 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved, Fallout Interplry, the intentary too. Black Isle Studios, the back Isle Studios logo and By Games For Gamers are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are properties of their respective owners. ATOST KOGLLRIR ROLE PLAITKE CALIT Go to #166 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES ADVENTURE GRIM FANDANGO COVER_STORY LucasArts FANDANGO is noticeably darker (415) 472-3400 than anything the company has www.lucasarts.com Company's ETA:Q3 98 done before, while still retaining CGW's ETA: 04 698 the smart humor that has always rim is the perfect set LucasArts adventure games word to describe the apart. This time around, Schafer state of adventure has combined his interest in gaming these days Mexican folklore with his love of There are lots of bad film noir to tell a bizarre, original games, and a few really great story set in the Land of the Dead. games suffering from poor sales. The protagonist is Manny But grim is also a word to asso Calavera, a long-dead workingciate with the genre's best class stiff who's stuck with the chance for a comeback this year. task of welcoming newcomers to GRIM FANDANGO, LucasArts' their new non-existence, and setupcoming 3D adventure game, isting them on their five-year jouras original and exciting as any ney across the Land of the Dead. game we've seen this season Manny wants out, though, and, regardless of genre. as the game begins, he commits a Designed and conceived by desperate act that soon plunges Tim Schafer (the creative force him into the center of a Double behind DAY OF THE TENTACLE, FULL Indemnity-style plot full of doubleTHROTTLE, and other classic crossing schemers, menacing bad LucasArts adventures), GRIM guys, and femmes fatale. The 3D artwork, based on Mexican folklore and also modeled on Tim Burton's stopmotion animated classic movie The Nightmare Before Christ mas, is a thing of strange beauty. The characters' painted 2D faces over 3D polygonal bodies create a look that is both haunting and cartoony. Gameplaywise, expect LucasArts' alwaysgreat puzzle design and firstrate script. Note, however, that you'll \"drive\" the main character yourself, moving through and interacting directly with the environment, rather than just hunting for hot spots. GRIM FANDANGO exemplifies a bold, challenging, and stylistic new direction for LucasArts. Anyone interested in the future of the adventure game genre should be excited. We sure are. newborn son of a dethroned prince in a small European village. Jensen writes the best stories in the business—deep, intelligent, and atmospheric-and GK III looks as though it will not disappoint. In the diminishing world of adventure gaming, GABRIEL KNIGHT III is one of the year's biggest events. HA REDGUARD puts you in the role of a mercenary redguard who, while investigating the disappearance of his sister, gets caught up in a web of political intrigue. As with Sierra's MASK OF ETERNITY, REDGUARD is a story-based adventure, but will ask you to deal with a certain amount of action gameplay, such as swordfighting. Unlike DAGGERFALL, REDGUARD'S new 3D engine is gorgeous. And with the deep, rich backstory of Tamriel as established in previous games, REDGUARD stands a very good chance of bringing the Elder Scrolls series to a more mainstream gaming crowd. GABRIEL KNIGHT III: BLOOD OF THE SACRED, BLOOD OF THE DAMNED Sierra Studios pinnacle of FMV-based adventure (425) 649-9800 www.sierrastudios.com games, both in terms of artistic Company ETA: Q3 '98 quality and popularity. CGW'S ETA: 04 98 Now Sierra is forsaking video ike LucasArts, Sierra is anothand returning the GABRIEL KNIGHT er company hoping to use 3D series to its animated roots, but graphics as a way to jump with a brand-new 3D engine that start the adventure-game genre will allow gamers to switch and get gamers interested again. between firstand third-person Although Sierra struck gold a coupoints of view. Master storyteller ple years back with GABRIEL KNIGHT Jane Jensen is once again at the 2: THE BEAST WITHIN (which won helm, as she sets Gabriel Knight CGW's 1996 Game of the Year and Grace Nakamura off on anaward, among others), it probably other supernatural mystery cenrepresents-in retrospect-the tered around the kidnapped REDGUARD Bethesda Softworks (301) 926-8300 www.bethsoft.com Company ETA: 04 99 CGWS ETA: 04.99 rom the creators of DAGGERFALL comes another game set in the world of Tamriel. This is no RPG, however (you'll have to wait for MORROWIND for that), but is instead a PRINCE OF PERSIA-style action adventure. (Notice a trend here?) Set 40 years before DAGGERFALL, Year 92 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"U2 RAGE MAGES Rage of Mages is a feast for the eyes 1,000,310 Bay 1,099 Sello 999-212 Aliure Le Characters dynamically display equipment The Ultimate RPG Challenge! Wield powerful magic against deadly foes In stores in October! Strive for mastery of swords and sorcery as you determine the destiny of a magic land marked by a dark secret. Featuring: A slew of weapons and armor (300 varieties!), scrolls, potions, and spells Over 50 kinds of deadly enemies and creatures More than 25 branching missions Real-time strategic combat 16-player multiplayer support 65,000 colors and true-3D terrain engine Be one of the first to play Rage of Mages! Visit http://rageofmages.com and enter to win our Rage of Mages Game Giveaway! Winners will receive a copy of Rage of Mages Call our new Rage of Mages Hint Line: one week before 1-900-CALL-LITH it's available in stores. Available in October Go to #142 @ www.computergaming.com/infolinks MONOLITH PRODUCTIONS NIVI.. www.lith.com www.rageofmages.com Rage of Mages and the \"M\" logo aretrademarks of Monolith Production entertainment Nival Entertainment 1998  Buka Entertainment 1998 "


"It's not the size of your weapon that counts... ... whatever! Toast the competition with multiple missile salvos as you cruise an alien landscape in your ultra-powerful mecha. 2261100 SHOGO brings new meaning to the words 'Fire in the hole!' BUT 00200 In a showdown between a 40 ft. tall heavily armored mecha and a 5'11\" soldier with an assault rifle, who would you vote for? 100 Explore many unique and detailed environments, both on foot and in your mecha. Windows 95 CD-ROM "


"mobile armor division SHOGEL Bigger is Better SHOGER) mobile armor division In stores in October! Be one of the first to wield the biggest weapons in any first-person shooter! Visit http://www.shogo-mad.com and enter to win our Shogo Game Giveaway contest! Winners will receive a copy of Shogo a week before it's available in stores! Call our new Shogo Hint Line: 1-900-CALL-LITH. Available in October. www.lith.com www.shogo-mad.com .com MONOLITH PRODUCTIONS Shogo: Mobile Armor Division and the \"M\" logo are trademarks of Monolith Productions, Inc. Go to #143 @ www.computer amina caminfolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES  ADVENTURE COVER STORY lished franchise and completely revamping it-and, in this case, the changes are even more radical. With the series' longtime designer Roberta Williams again at the helm, MASK OF ETERNITY IS being billed this time as an action/adventure-meaning that manual dexterity and combat will play a factor, in addition to the now-standard adventure game puzzle-solving Those with an open mind will soon discover, however, that this is, in fact, a KING'S QUEST game, faithful to the spirit of the 14-yearold series. Once again, Williams GOOD & EVIL Cavedog Entertainment (425) 486-9258 www.cavedog.com Company ETA: 04 '99 CGW's ETA: 04 '99 SECRET OF VULCAN FURY Interplay Productions (949) 553-6655 www.interplay.com Company ETA: Q3 '99 CGW's ETA: 04 '99 Romulan ambassador on Vulcan, which plunges the crew of the Enterprise into the mystery surrounding the original separation of the Romulan and Vulcan races. We've loved what we've seen of this game so far. The realistic 3D graphics have to be seen to be believed. Now Interplay just has to finish the dang thing. nterplay has pushed this title back to fall 1999, but that's probably a good thing. Rushing SECRET OF VULCAN FURY out half-baked would have done no good, and after the nightmare that was STAR TREK PINBALL, Interplay owes the Trekker audience a good game. And this game has serious potential. SECRET OF VULCAN FURY is a classic Trek tale, penned by D.C. Fontana (one of the series' original writers) and features voiceovers by the entire original cast. The story centers around the murder of a onestly, we don't know much about this one yet, I but the very fact that it exists was reason enough for us to rejoice. Why? Because it's the first adventure game in a long time from Ron Gilbert, the legendary designer behind LucasArts' MONKEY ISLAND 1 and 2 games, and the man also behind Humongous, whose kids' adventure games (the PUTT-PUTT, PAJAMA SAM, and FREDDI FISH series) rank among the best in the businessfor gamers of any age. Gilbert's new game is being billed as an adventure/RPG/ strategy title, with a top-down perspective. What we saw (a pirate town, a clown town, and a medieval setting) was cartoony in the classic LucasArts vein-and that's about all we have to say. Yet, we're still optimistic. After all, Gilbert's record is spotless. has penned a high-fantasy, adventure tale set in the kingdom of Daventry. This time, some kind of destructive magical force has turned the inhabitants to stone, and it's up to Connor-the one person spared to find out what's going on. A beautiful new 3D engine, a strong plot, and Williams' good instincts for what makes a game work should put this one over. It's a gamble, to be sure, but at this point, the genre could certainly use some fresh ideas. KING'S QUEST: MASK OF ETERNITY Sierra Studios (425) 649-9800 www.sierrastudios.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGWS ETA: 04 '98. ING'S QUEST: MASK OF ETERNITY is another foray by Sierra into the brave new world of 3D adventure games. Again, Sierra is taking an estabIN THE WORKS ormally, this space would be reserved for all the other exciting adventure games now in development. The only problem is, there hardly are any in development right now. As was the case with RPGs a few years ago, the adventure game genre is floundering right now, and the prognosisexcept for the games on this list-is not so good. So just exactly why is this once-important genre wheezing along, trying to catch the action, strategy, and even role-playing titles as they leave it in the dust? The answer, as is usually the case, is money. Adventure games are incredibly expensive to make, but publishers are simply not seeing the kind of sales they've now come to expect from the DIABLO-style blockbuster hits in other genres. Even last year's most acclaimed titles-BLADE RUNNER, CURSE OF MONKEY ISLAND, and ZORK GRAND INQUISITOR-didn't begin to approach the sales of a QUAKE, or, for that matter, AGE OF EMPIRES. (We're leaving Myst and RIVEN out of the discussion. Regardless of your opinion of those games, they're really pop-culture anomalies.) Why? Maybe the slow-paced, lengthy nature of these games doesn't appeal to today's quick-fix crowd. Maybe they simply require way too much of a time investment, even for people who like this kind of game. And maybe they're victims of technologyunable to compete with the visceral eye. candy available in almost every other genre. In any event, something had to give-and it did. Adventure game development has dried up in a big way, and those still nobly pursuing the cause are doing what they can to expand the genre's horizons to reach a bigger-and younger-audience. We wish them the best. Next year, we don't want to have to write such a depressing lament. 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"IT'S READY. ARE YOU? INTENETR. "


"THE INTENSOR\" SURVIVAL GUIDE @ (Because we're not always going to be there to hold your trembling, sweaty little hand.) PART ONE Be warned: this is technology with a real \"punch-you-in-thegut-while-you're-not-looking\" brand of sensitivity. There's never been anything like Intensor. So feedback. It's being able to see, hear and feel in order to survive it, you need to understand the game you're playing like never before. All a few things. Like to begin with, you need to you have to do is hook it up to the audio jack know what a Sensory Gaming Experience is. of any system, play any game and hold on It's complete immersion. It's intense tactile You may also want to say a little prayer. 25.47\" 19.359 # ITEM 1 Left 2\" Mid-range Directional 2 Right 2\" Mid-range Directional 3 5.25\" Center Mid-range 4 5.25\" Low Frequency Tactile Driver 5 High-range Tweeter 6 Sound Volume 7 Tactile Intensity 8 Electronics Unit 9 Heavy Duty Single Cord Connector 10 Optional Office Chair Base 11 Optional Subwoofer 12 Headphone Jack 19.72\" Fig. 1. A breakdown of what you're up against. PART TWO Remember, in this chair no one can hear you scream. Not everyone will have what it takes to loud. So for the neighbors sake, you may handle Intensor's patented audio system. want to use the headphone jack, which you After all, we're talking 5 high-performance can do without losing any tactile feedback. built-in speakers with 108dB output. But keep in mind if your ears start bleeding, Technically speaking, that means it's really you should probably turn the thing down. SOUNDSCALE dB Jet Engine 90 dB College Frat Party 101 dB Punk Band 105 dB Intensor 108 dB Fig. 2. At 19 pounds, Intensor is designed for quick evacuation in the event things get ugly. (Shaky hands will appreciate the built-in molded carrying handle:) "


"REE Ducking, dodging, whimpering and other useful gaming skills you might want to perfect. Be advised. With Intensor, you'll not only engine rev, every explosion, every kick will hear your games like never before, you'll seem more real than you may want it to. So also feel them. In your back. In your legs. it's important to note that under this type of You'll feel sensations in places you never extreme duress, screaming in high-pitched even knew you had. Which means every tones for one's mommy is quite common TACTILE SENSATION GRAPH DEFENSIVE PROCEDURES www. Kidney Punch Crushed By Falling Piano Torn Apart By Wild Dogs Intensor Fig. 3a. The Dodge Fig. 3b. The Weave Fig. 3c. The Duck Fig. 4. Artist's conception of Sensory Gaming's effect on the human heart. Those with heart conditions should proceed at their own risk. Fig. 5. Note: Players attempting to negotiate Intensor on anything less than a good, stiff spine may be reduced to a vegetative state. PART FOUR Any game. Any system. Any medium. After this, nothing will ever be the same. From movies and CDs to all your favorite And there's no going back. It's the gaming games, Intensor isn't just compatible with version of the thousand-yard stare. You'll your current system, it actually transforms recognize it in others who've been there\" it. It may also do the same to you. Once Seek them out. Talk to them. This therapeutic you take a seat, there's a new awareness. approach can help preserve your sanity. So, so In the event of nervous breakdown, seek help at www.intensor.com Assuming you've read this carefully. proceed to your favorite gaming retailer. Fig. 6. Intensor has been known to induce shock. In such cases, place victim flat on back, elevate legs 8 to 12 inches and call for help. (If victim begins vomiting, place him or her on one side to allow fluid drainage.) Sensory Gaming Experience LITEELI. A product of (BSC) BSG Labs, Inc. "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES . ROLE-PLAYING GAMES BALDUR'S GATE COVER STORY ESSSia Shan Tol Estated cu Interplay Productions (949) 553-6655 www.interplay.com Company ETA: 03 '98 CGWS ETA: 0498 t's been a long time since there's been a good Advanced Dungeons & Dragons computer RPG-a pretty ridiculous delay given its status as the seminal role-playing experience, or at least the one that many of us cut our teeth on. But now Interplay looks as if it's going to reverse that trend in a big way (and at the same time make up for its last AD&D travesty, DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN). BALDUR'S GATE IS a very ambitious new title set in the AD&D Forgotten Realms world, with so much going for it that it is, without a doubt, the RPG we're most anxious to see this fall. Sprawled out over five CDs, encompassing (according to the company) 10,000 distinct areas, BALDUR'S GATE is a singleand multiplayer role-playing game unlike any we've ever seen. Bioware, the game's developer, has had one big goal in mind while making the game: Keep it as faithful as possible to the spirit of the old AD&D campaigns you played with your friends. And here's where the game gets really cool: Both the singleand multiplayer versions of BALDUR'S GATE tell the exact same story. Whether you play alone or with up to five other people over a LAN UBOD200000 or the Internet, you are going to follow along the same epic, The game's isometric view is reminiscent seven-chapter, save-the-world story, replete of that of both DIABLO and FALLOUT, and comwith about 100 side quests. The multiplayer bat takes place in realtime, though the game experience is neither a persistent ULTIMA le can be paused while you assign actions. ONLINE-style world nor a DIABLO-style bash Everything in the game the combat-, spell-, fest, but instead it lets six people campaign characters, and class systems strictly foltogether cooperatively as the story and the lows the AD&D Player's Handbook rules. action progress. The game is party-based, so, That's great for the purists out there, but when you play alone, the computer takes the even gamers who aren't fans of AD&D NPC slots. In multiplayer mode, each person should be psyched for this one. BALDUR'S GATE is assigned control of one of the NPCs (and is the year's most ambitious and promising can drop in or out as necessary). role-playing game. RMWADU KRONDOR, developed by PyroTechnix and now being published by Sierra, is a brand new 10chapter story, written by Feist and set in his fantasy world of Midkemia about 10 years after the conclusion of his epic Riftwar novels. As in BETRAYAL, the game is party-based, though now all the characters are completely 3D, modeled over beautiful prerendered backgrounds that bring Midkemia to life. Combat is both turn-based and 3D, providing for ample tactical thinking. Don't let this game's eternal delays turn you off. Feist is a consummate storyteller and gamer. RETURN TO KRONDOR, if it actually ships, is a guaranteed winner. experience, fixing what didn't DIABLO II work and adding a lot more. Blizzard Entertainment The story (and Blizzard is (310) 793-0600 www.blizzard.com promising that there will be more Company ETA:Q2 '99 of one this time around) picks up CGW's ETA: Who knows? where DIABLO left off-except L ike it or not, DIABLO was the that, as it turns out, your character game that made RPGs cool is toast and Diablo is back and again, winning over legions stronger than ever. There are five of new gamers and convincing new character classes (paladin, publishers that the genre was not barbarian, amazon, necromancer, only alive, but profitable. Now and sorceress), a new skill system Blizzard's megahit is coming back for more--and what can we say? and indoor settings, a cleaner Blizzard is beefing up every aspect interface, much faster load times, of both the singleand multiplayer and more. Sure, whine about it not being a real role-playing game and about Blizzard always being late. But face it: You're still going to want DIABLO II the day it LLLLLLLL comes out. RETURN TO KRONDOR Sierra Studios (425) 649-9800 www.sierrastudios.com Company ETA:Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: 04 98 -antasy author Raymond E. Feist's attempt to produce a sequel to his classic BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR (now enshrined in CGW's Hall of Fame) is a battle that's been going on for years. Now, finally, it may really be reaching a conclusion. RETURN TO 100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ROLE-PLAYING GAMES 100+ HOT NEW GAMES IN THE WORKS detailed characterdevelopment system for which D.W. Bradley is known. With the potential to attract both the hard-core crowd that followed the WIZARDRY Series, as well as newer gamers intrigued by the bells and whistles, SWORDS AND SORCERY is one to watch. COVER STORY SWORDS AND SORCERY: COME DEVILS, COME DARKNESS Virgin Interactive Entertainment (714) 833-8710 www.vie.com Company ETA: 0498 CGW'S ETA: 04 '98 virgin Interactive's first RPG might not have crossed our radar were it not for one significant fact: It's the new game from acclaimed RPG designer D.W. Bradley, the wizard behind the classic WIZARDRY series. Like that series, SWORDS t's a sign of this genre's remarkable resurgence that there are far more RPGs-good ones-than we could possibly cover in this feature. Two years ago, who would have guessed it? Here are some of the other new titles, which we'll cover more thoroughly in future issues. Sir-Tech's WIZARDRY VIII is the long-awaited new game in one of the oldest (and best) RPG series ever. We should have a lot more on this one next month. Westwood Studios LANDS OF LORE III looks like it will be a major improvement over the previous edition, which disappointed many gamers after much anticipation. The new 3D engine looks awesome, and the gameplay has a much stronger RPG bent than before. Sierra Studios' Eidos' REVENANT is another DIABLO-alike, but cool artwork and a good storyline may help distinguish it from the pack. Also, Tom Hall is holed up somewhere, pounding out his epic ANACHRONOX for lon Storm. A host of \"massively multiplayer\" (a term we loathe) Internet RPGS are on the way though we've learned from past mistakes not to start hyping these before their time. Sony Interactive's EVERQUEST is the most promising of the bunch, with unbelievable graphics and a good, strong character development system. We hope to have a hands-on look at this one soon. Microsoft's ASHERON'S CALL is another promising game--but, again, more on this later. One that we're really, really excited about is Sierra's MIDDLE EARTH, an upcoming Internet game set in the world created by some guy named Tolkien. And, finally, we couldn't get away without mentioning ULTIMA IX, now could we? What can we say? We'll believe it when we see it. LEGEND OF THE FIVE RINGS: RONIN Activision (310) 255-2000 www.activision.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW's ETA: Q4 '98 f the many DIABLO inspired RPGs now in development, LEGEND OF THE FIVE RINGS: RONIN strikes us as the most interesting and promisUN what sets it apart is its totally unique setting. As with FALLOUT, this is an RPG that offers some. thing other than elfs and dwarves for a change. And any game that lets us role-play a samurai (whether that's John Belushi or Toshiro Mifune) is one we can't wait to check out. the more enjoyable role-playing experiences. Set in Northern California 50 years after FALLOUT, the game casts you as \"The Chosen One,\" a descendant of your original character, given the task of rediscovering Vault 13 in hopes of retrieving a holy relic that can end the 10-year drought that has plagued the land. FALLOUT 2 uses the same engine (a good thing), but boasts a much bigger environment, better control over party members, much better NPC Al (our biggest complaint of the first game), and more. If it's half as good as FALLOUT, it'll still be a must-buy. AND SORCERY promises old-schooling. Based on the collectible card fantasy role-playing—but gussied game of the same name, LEGEND up for the late '90s. The party. OF THE FIVE RINGS is fantasy RPG based RPG will feature both sinset in a feudal society inspired by gleand multiplayer modes (with Japanese and Chinese mythology both turn-based and real-time and history. The game is set in combat) and a brand-new 3D the fantasy world of Rokugan, engine. You'll also be able to take where you play a young samurai your character back and forth who is sent by a sorceress to between the singleand multilocate the pieces of a sacred artiplayer game-a nice innovation. fact. With its isometric viewpoint, Along with all the chrome, the action sequences, and multiplay, game will boast the kind of deep, it does resemble DIABLO-but FALLOUT 2 Interplay Productions (949) 553-6655 www.interplay.com Company ETA: 04 '98 COW'S ETA: Q4 '98 uality-starved role-players finally hit the motherlode last year with Interplay's FALLOUT, widely considered the best RPG in years (and undisputed choice for CGW's 1997 RPG of the Year award). Now, not surprisingly, a sequel is in the works, and while it may not break any new ground, it should still prove to be one of www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 101 "


"REAL-TIME STRATEGY WITH ONE MISSION: SAVINI 17TTI MASI VALER RESCUE 1998 Topxvie Interactive "


"LIFE OR DEATH. YOU DECIDE. BECAUSE EVERY SECOND COUNTS. FIGHTERS FOR LIFE Face to face with your worst nightmares. CHEMICAL SPILLS. TORNADOES, EARTHQUAKES, TERRORIST ATTACKS AND PROTESTS GONE AWRY. In Emergency: Fighters for Life rescue units, police cars and fire engines are deployed at your command. Mobilize your units of highly specialized medical and police personnel, controlling the crews in their constant battle to save your fellow human beings. Run to your favorite retailer or call 1-800-229-2714 BERKEZ TOTEMERACTIVE WIZARDWorks, INTERACTIVE AGT INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE COMPANY. PLYMOUTH, MN 55441 Go to #235 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"You play games. Savage 3D\" makes those games better. More realistic. How? With stuff like single pass trilinear WARNING: filtering, S3 texture compression, S3 IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR NAUSEA, SEIZURES, COMPOUND FRACTURES, COLLAPSED LUNGS, DISMEMBERMENT, HAIR LOSS AND/OR FLATULENCE EXPERIENCED AS A RESULT OF USING THE SAVAGE3D CHIP. true color rendering and AGP texturing. All of which means you get more complex and visually compelling 3D environments, more realistic 3D games, and no compromise performance. Now go get it. Just don't hurt yourself. SAVAGE Sight. Sound. Speed. http://www.s3.com 40 8.5 8 8.8000 S Go to #270 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SPORTS 100+ HOT NEW GAMES MADDEN NFL 99 COVER STORY V. GREEN J. FARDIR EA Sports (650) 571-7171 www.easports.com Company ETA: 03 '98 CGW'S ETA: 04 '98 ike the double three peat Chicago Bulls, EA Sports is an utterly dominant organization. Though it's human nature to get cynical—and to want to root for the underdogs—the fact of the matter is that EA is so good at what it does that sometimes you just have to sit back and enjoy the show. EA's NHL, NBA, and FIFA games have all been completely awesome the last couple years— not perfect, not without their flaws, but still state-of-the-art models of entertaining sports gaming. MADDEN NFL, however, has been a weak link for a few seasons now, not remotely up to the level of its siblings. MADDEN NFL 99 may change that. First, the game is finally converting to full 3D-polygonal graphics (as opposed to the \"polygon enhanced sprites\" of MADDEN 98). The result, as shown in the latest FIFA games, is fantastic. Second, the MADDEN team has worked hard to enhance the gameplay for both novice and experienced players. MADDEN Veterans will be very pleased to learn that there is finally a play editor, as well as a franchise mode. We admit to spending no time with either feature-so their worth remains to be seen-but credit EA for being interested enough to try to deepen the game. On the other end of the spectrum, EA is hoping to draw in novice gamers with a new \"one-button\" mode, in which a single \"action\" button on your gamepad or key board will perform all actions in the game (the Al will determine what to do based on what's happening on the field). Simplistic? Yes. But actually a good idea for the gamepad-impaired. Multiplay is there, of course, though Internet play is limited to coachonly mode-a limitation that really must end soon. (Maybe in a patch?) It's going to be a competitive year for PC football games (there are three on this list alone), but, for now, we give the nod to MADDEN—the best chance for the best marriage of brains and chrome. the opponent AI which, we are told, will react realistically to your moves. The first two games in this series were fivestar mini-masterpieces. There's no reason to expect anything less from NASCAR RACING 99. NASCAR RACING 99 Sierra Sports (800) 757-7707 www.sierrasports.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW'S ETA: 01 '99 FOOTBALL PRO '99 Sierra Sports (800) 757-7707 www.sierrasports.com Company ETA: Q4 '98 CGW's ETA:Q4 '98 ierra has officially retired the \"FRONT PAGE SPORTS\" name, but not the games them selves. It was a good call, as that name was losing its luster after a few less-than-great releases. Now called simply FOOTBALL PRO '99, Sierra's pigskin game has been rebuilt from the ground up, and is looking to recapture the fire that made it a three-time winner of CGW's Sports Game of the Year year, including Ubi Soft's excellent F1 RACING SIMULATION and the (we admit it) overrated Microsoft CART PRECISION RACING. But Dave Kaemmer and the team at Papyrus are roaring back this winter with NASCAR RACING 99, and they are looking to up the ante yet again. The new engine, also featured in their upcoming GRAND PRIX LEGENDS, is perhaps the best ever seen in a racing sim, and the 3Daccelerated graphics and brandnew physics model are stunning. Another huge improvement will be award. Like EA's MADDEN, FOOTBALL PRO '99 will finally get a full 3D engine with polygonal players, bringing its arcade play (or at least the look of it) up to par with the competition. On the deeper end of the spectrum, the game's stat model will be as robust as ever, while a new financial model will enhance team management functions such as drafting, free agency, and trades. We like what we've seen so far and hope that, as with MADDEN, this is the year this series finally gets back on track. If so, Sierra's entry will be the choice for serious football wonks. ne of the greatest autoracing franchises (along with MicroProse's GRAND Prix) is coming back for more amidst stiffer competition than in years past. With the rise of 3D graphics, a number of new racing sims have hit the tracks in the last www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"DEMONS FROM THE PAST CAN TORMENT YOU... SANI ARIUM "


"OR SET YOU FREE \"Sanitarium is a triumph. Irresistably compelling. Deeply metaphorical\" Next Generation Online \"Through its deft juggling of mood and story, Sanitarium creates one of the most compelling, involoving adventures to grace a hard drive in a long time\" -Game Spot \"Sanitarium is easily the most disturbing computer game of 1998\" -PC Games \"IF «Jacob's Ladder\" was reality squared, Sanitarium is reality cubed\" -J.C.Herz The New York Times The first adventure game where your emotions play with your intelligence A SHOCKINGLY DISTURBING ADVENTURE... Go to #233 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink SANOLARIUM TEEN BEST OF THE BEST BEST OF THE BEST Windows 95 PC CD-ROM DREAMFORGE AGES 13. GAMES A List GAMES RIUM Download demo at www.ascgames.com nilarium is a trademark of American Softworks Corporation. Bota Soll Games Joint Venturo No. 1 1997 Adolf Woessner, ASC Games\" is a trademark ol American Softworks portion 1998. Sanitarium is developed by DroarnForgo Intertainment, Inc. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive ital Soltware Association. All rights reserved "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES SPORTS COVER STORY hopes are higher. Accompanying NHT's already-proven gameplay is cool ESPN chrome. ESPN SportsCenter anchor Steve Levy and hockey analyst Gary Thorne call the games, while and this we really like-a sports ticker at the bottom of the screen, hooked up to ESPN's Web site, will provide scores of current, real-life games as you play. Now that's cool. TIGER WOODS 99 EA Sports (650) 571-7171 www.easports.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q4 '98 P A Sports scored the licensing coup of the decade when it signed Tiger Woods for its golf franchise. Always overshadowed by Forsiborg NFL GAMEDAY '99 Sony Interactive (619) 824-5500 www.sonyinteractive.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW's ETA: Q3 '98 NATIONAL HOCKEY TONIGHT ESPN Digital Games (415) 229-9100 www.radical-entertainment.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA: Q4 '98 ging, we discovered that ESPN Digital Games is actually in league with gaming veterans Radical Entertainment, designers of the NHL POWERPLAY games. Suddenly we got very interested NATIONAL HOCKEY TONIGHT is the next-generation version of POWERPLAY, a great game that never had the marketing muscle to compete with EA Sports. Now, with the ESPN branding, the Links and JACK NICKLAUS on the PC, the game formerly known as PGA TOUR promises to skyrocket in poplayStation gamers have flocked to NFL GAMEDAY for years, making it easily the most popular football game on that platform. Now it's finally making its way to the PC, and it's looking strong. The game's arcade play is intuitive and fun on the PSX, and it should make the transition to the PC without any problems. A 3D accelerator ever heard of this one? Didn't know that ESPN was in the computer gaming business? Yeah, neither did we. Then, upon doing a little dig and in the game. Play with or against nine real PGA Tour players, including you-know-who, on three courses: Pebble Beach Golf Links, TPC at Sawgrass, and TPC at IN THE WORKS there are plenty of other worthy titles in the works to keep sports fans happy throughout the coming year. EA Sports, of course, has other pearls in its lineup, including NBA LIVE 99 and NHL 99, the latest versions of two perennial favorites. The big wildcard for EA is KNOCKOUT KINGS, a 3D boxing title that lets you fight as (or against) tons of real-life boxers, including Muhammad Ali, Evander Holyfield, and golden-agers such as Joe Louis and Jake LaMotta. The possibilities are awesome--but will it be more than just a glorified arcade fighting game? Sierra Sports also has much more in store, including a fantasy football game, an update to its well-received golf game, and a new basketball title, BASKETBALL PRO '99, which, it's said, will bring FRONT PAGE-style franchise management to the game. (Does this mean we can actually fire Latrell Sprewell?) ESPN Digital Games is pumping out NBA BASKETBALL TONIGHT and X GAMES PRO BOARDER for its initial launch this fall. Again, the folks at Radical Entertainment know what they're doing, so watch these games closely. Fox Sports, not to be outdone by ESPN, is getting into the computer gaming business too, with two initial PC titles just released: Fox SPORTS GOLF '99 and Fox SPORTS SOCCER '99. The emphasis is said to be on the action side. Microsoft with BASEBALL 3D finally out the door, is now hard at work on very-promising basketball and football titles. We've seen these games a couple times now, and so far so good. We hope to cover all of these and more in upcoming issues of CGW. card will be required, which is becoming standard fare for sports games. The biggest news about GAMEDAY is that it will be the first football game to let gamers compete in arcade play (as opposed to just coach mode) over the Internet, through a battle.nettype service. This is a huge first and a big coup over MADDEN. It's a virgin PC title, so we won't do the wave for it yet-but keep your eyes open. Summerlin. The game's easy Internet connectivity, which debuted in the last PGA TOUR game, is back, and the graphics will now offer 3D acceleration. Will TIGER WOODS 99 match Links in terms of gameplay? Only time will tell. But the novelty and flash factor of this title are impossible to ignore. If any golf game has the potential to bring in a younger demographic of gamers, this is it. And that's a good thing. 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"                  8 .    Ever get the urge to dominate intergalactic civilizations? SUL HUS! STARS! really shinês in the multi-player And the more players the merries... Hang onto your Command helmets. boys and girls, because PC GAMER, Strategy based space.conguest with nearly endless options and detail. Create and control fleets of spaceship's equipped with the latest technology Game levels for players of all abilities with an interface that can be customized Research, buy or steal (loaking Devices Terraforming Bombs, Anti-Matter Generators and more STARS! from Empire puts the blood, sweat and tears back into stellar conquest. Multi-Player feature supports modem, e-mail and local area network file transfers Computer Gaming WORLD Go to #092 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink VERYONE (PC GAMER EDITORS COROM SALE empire Ga End GT Interactive CD-ROM WINDOWS** www.webmap.com/stars! www.empire-us.com 1998 ENTERTAINMENT INTERNATIONAL (UK) LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. PUBLISHED DY EMPIRE INTERACTIVE, "


"YOUR OFFICE YOU ES Features 3D accelerated graphics for 3Dfx and Power VR  Choose from 20 action-soaked single missions or the exhilarating desert campaign. Immersive game world with real vehicle graphics and real audio samples. Stellar multiplayer mode allows battling over modem, LAN or the Internet. Competitive gameplay for novice through hard-core players.  Powerful mission editor for endless replayability.  3Dfx Interactive, Inc. The 3Dtx Interactive logo, Voodoo Graphics, Voodoo2 and Voodoo Rush are trademarks of 3Dtx Interactive, Inc. All rights reserved. Spearhead is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc.  Interactive Magic, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"YOUR CO-WORKERS GOTO --WRK SPEARHEAD It's you, your tank, and the U.S. Army going to war in the heat soaked deserts of Tunisia. Spearhead puts you in charge of the Amy's best armored weapon, the M1A2. Immersing you in intense battles with sale-of the-at graphis movatime aurenaline-pumping 98meplay. Stop playlim arouth it's me to 0 10 Hok Go to #086 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink, INTERACTIVE Zombie WWW.imagicgames.com MAK IMAGICO "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES SIMULATIONS WWII FIGHTERS COVER_STORY Jane's Combat Simulations (415) 571-7171 www.janes.ea.com Company ETA:Q4 '98 CGWS ETA: 04 98 f the reaction to the game at the recent Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) show was any indication, WWII FIGHTERS (originally known as FIGHTER LEGENDS) is one of the most hotly anticipated simulations of the year. The reasons are many: Foremost among them, this will be one of the first all new World War Il sims to hit the shelves in years. The buzz was loud, though, because it's by far the most graphically impressive World War Il sim-in fact, one of the best looking flight sims period-slated to be shipped this year. Amazingly detailed aircraft, 3D virtual-cockpits with more detail than you're used to seeing on flat bitmapped panels, and clouds that look as real as those you'd see from Row 18 of a 737 make for a strong visual impression. But there's more here than eye candy. The game is built on feedback from the long-running U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS jet sim series, so you can look forward to a powerful mission editor, realistic mission goals, and multiplayer support for up to eight human pilots on LAN or via Jane's Online Gaming Center WWII FIGHTERS' campaign is set during the Battle of the Bulge. Flyable aircraft include the P-38) Lightning, P-47D Thunderbolt, P-51D Mustang, Messerschmitt Bf-109G-6 and Me-262, Focke-Wulf 190A-8, and the Spitfire Mk.IX. Jane's is promising detailed flight models with authentic performance for each of the planes. The historical campaign is set up with branching missions, so the performance of your squadron can affect the outcome of the war. The game's editor will allow you to create your own missions, complete with random elements to add a level of unpredictability. And as you've come to expect from a Jane's title, there's a complete database of information on each of the sim's aircraft, complete with video interviews of real-life WWII vets such as triple-ace Clarence \"Bud\" Anderson. \"Multiple WARGASM\") is the electronic battlefield realized—you can play everything from a tank driver to an infantryman to a pilot. In the early version we saw, the graphics were dazzling, complete with impressive weather effects and Hollywood-style explosions. WARGASM has the potential to be the real-time strategy game for simulation fans. single-engine Cessnas to a bizjet), as well as a full airport and NAVAID database for the entire U.S. Digital elevation maps are included for the whole country, so even in areas without detailed scenery you'll find realistic mountain ranges and other terrain features. Terminal Reality promises that five cities will feature detailed satellite imagery-not quite as detailed as in FLIGHT UNLIMITED II, but far better than what you've seen in other products with large scenery databases. The sim will include full air-traffic control, as well as voice communications for multiplayer mode. WARGASM Digital Image Design (408) 289-1411 www.did.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW's ETA: Q1 '99 FLY! Terminal Reality (972) 221-2264 www.terminalreality.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q1 '99 In the civilian category, each of the current flight-sims excels in some areas while falling short in others. Terminal Reality's Fly! attempts to include the works in one package. Both real and wannabe pilots should appreciate the full avionics packages for each of the simulated aircraft (from different types of vehicles, ranging from Comanche helicopters to A10 Warthogs to M1A2 tanks. With so many vehicles, simulated, it's only natural that the control systems have been simplified. Despite the simplified interface (which should make the game more accessible to strategy and action players), the performance and capabilities of each vehicle remain accurate. And the game's multiplayer mode (called, of course, he game with the memorable name is a bit of a departure for the UK'S DID. It's as much a real-time strategy game as a simulation. You direct the strategic war, and then jump into the cockpit of one of 20 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Special Advertising Section WALK THROUGH WALLS SYMANTEC. "


"Special Advertising Section No Barriers SYMANTEC. NORTON Uninstall ) Getting the most out of your computer has never been easier — or more important. no The safest remove programs and files complexity — and the importance of the data it contains. These days, your computer runs more applications and supports more members of your household than ever before. And it needs some care and feeding to serve you well. leze TRE SIT ALLES With each passing week your computer takes on more jobs. It's your livelihood, and the place you keep your financial records. It helps the kids do their homework. Your computer preserves a treasure trove of files, inspires creative projects and provides the tools you need so you don't stay too late at the office. It allows you to gather information from the far reaches of the planet and shop in cyberspace malls. You can use your computer to play games by yourself or in a crowd. Thanks to your computer, you write letters again, knowing they'll be delivered in minutes instead of days or weeks. It's even become your family photo album and a darkroom all rolled into one. No question about it. Your computer helps relieve the burdens of work and chores, opens new arenas for the curious of mind and offers welcome comic relief when ever you want it. But as your computer's tasks and assignments grow, so does its Easy as one, two, three Happily, taking care of your computer and the valuable data on it is not hard. The goal is to eliminate external threats to your system, keep it running smoothly and prevent time-wasting and data destroying failures when you're using several applications at once. With just a few simple steps and the right software products, you can keep your data safe and your Windows system in top condition. possible sources of infection, including the Internet, floppy disks, email attachments, shared files, and networks. Backed by Symantec's AntiVirus Research Center (SARC), Norton AntiVirus uses Bloodhound heuristics earning Virus Bulletin's 100 percent rating for detection of in-the-wild viruses, those viruses that pose the greatest threat to consumers. Norton AntiVirus never becomes obsolete because it enables you, with a single mouse-click, to download new virus definitions created by SARC. These updates are easy to install and work automatically in the background. Norton Antivirus also includes Repair Wizard which removes viruses from your computer automatically. No wonder a 1997 Hebert Research Study revealed that Norton AntiVirus is recommended by users more frequently than any product of its kind. Protect your system Unless your computer always runs in complete isolation no email, no downloaded files from the Internet, no floppy disks used on another system then you need to worry about viruses. And though computer viruses can be scary freezing your system, eating your data you can defend yourself. So, while you may not be able to avoid computer viruses, you can protect your system by installing an antivirus utility like Norton AntiVirus' that scans your disk, finds viruses lurking there and gets rid of them. Norton AntiVirus automatically protects your computer against both today's viruses and tomorrow's unknown viruses, covering all WW SYMANTEC NORTON O AntiVirusi Eliminate today's viruses and tomorrow's new ones Clean your machine You can replace just about everything in and around your computer except your data. Lose your data and your only alternative is to recreate it, something that can take entirely too much time. FOR MORE INFORMATION VISIT US ON THE WEB AT "


"Special Advertising Section One of the most effective ways computer. And Norton Uninstall Norton CrashGuard Deluxe to ensure that your data is safe is Deluxe Automatic Backup automatically protects you against to keep your hard disk as free capability offers you an extra safety computer crashes and screen as possible of unwanted files option by automatically saving a freezes — three times more and applications. compressed backup of every effectively than any other software. When it comes to removing removal made. Using award-winning Norton applications you no longer use. technology, Norton CrashGuard however, you'll need more than No more crashes Deluxe detects and solves softyour delete key. That's because the You've probably noticed already ware problems in the background, Windows operating environment that as you put more and more so neither you nor your system scatters application files across applications on your computer and needs to slow down. multiple directories, making start using them at With Norton them tough to trace. What's more, the same time, everyCrashGuard Deluxe, applications share files, so if you thing hangs. Maybe For an enjoyable, your computer gets manually delete a file associated it's just a simple productive, reliable regular maintenance with one application, you might application lockup. Or computing experience, and optimized disk make another one unworkable. maybe there's nothing all it takes are three performance. Thanks The solution? Norton Uninstall you can do but turn easy steps to no-barrier to LiveUpdate Pro. Deluxe, which not only deletes off your computer computing Norton CrashGuard the program files and subordinate and then turn it back Deluxe can log onto files of unwanted applications but on again and lose the Internet to find also removes references to the the stuff you were working on. any software updates or patches application in key system files. Whether they're minor or severe, that your system needs. All you Norton Uninstall Deluxe comes computer crashes cost you time have to do is choose the ones with InstallGuardTM, so you can and hassle, sometimes worse. you want to download and install. remove the last installation and Crashes make using your computer Norton CrashGuard Deluxe certifies return your system to its original difficult and limit its potential. that they're virus-free and checked state. This unique undo capability Your adventures in computing for trouble-free installation before means you can \"test drive\" new need not be overwhelmed by they're downloaded. If you change applications. Meanwhile, Norton increasing system complexity, your mind, it can all be undone Uninstall Deluxe SafetyScan gives however. All you have to do is with just the click of your mouse. you accurate knowledge of your install a crash prevention tool like And Norton CrashGuard system and configuration for a Norton CrashGuard Deluxe, which Deluxe comes with more than 140 safe and complete Remove, Move, monitors the workings of your instructional videos explaining Copy and Store of all applications system and alerts you to potential everything from cleaning a CD-ROM and files. You can remove, move, conflicts and problems before to changing display settings. copy and store by subfolder as well they occur. For an enjoyable, productive, as application group, application reliable computing experience, all or file — so it's easy to remove it takes are these three easy suite components or data files steps to no-barrier computing. stored in a folder within an NORTON No viruses: Norton AntiVirus\", application group. to keep your computer safe from Another exclusive Norton virus infection. Uninstall Deluxe feature No junk: Norton Uninstali Autoclean makes it quick and Automatic problem solving Deluxe, so your system stays easy to automatically free up space lean and mean. on your hard disk by removing the crash No crashes: Norton recycle bin files, temp files, zero CrashGuard Deluxe, to prevent byte files and other unnecessary the crashes that create frustration files each time you boot up your and eat up your valuable time. SYMANTECA TENT CrashGuard all cornehave SATA with 3XL protection WOBEI BERIRE TEE BERES TO PROTECTOR WWW.SYMANTEC.COM/NCI_ADS SYMANTEC. "


"With Norton Products Inside Your Computer There Are No Barriers to Achieving Your Goals. Down go the barriers. Up goes productivity, whether you're at home or at the office. With Norton products you walk through the walls between you and your goals. Norton products eradicate viruses, blow away junk files, and eliminate software problems before they cause crashes. All behind the scenes, automatically. Go ahead, take the first step. SYMANTIC SYMANTEC. NORTON WO SYMANIEC. 9 NORTON SYMANTIC NORTON HER O 02 Uninstall. AntiVirus CrashGuard i MIRA Elimisato today's viruses-1951 tomorrow's now ones. NUME The safest way to remove programs and files Jobs Automatic problem solving with 3X the crash protection 1 Norton AntiVirus\" 4.0 Norton Uninstall Deluxe Norton CrashGuard Deluxe Share data without sharing viruses. Cut through the clutter and be Lead a crash-free life. Automatically Locate and kill known viruses from more productive. Automatically rid your PC of crash-causing softany source so you can safely roam clean up junk files and programs ware problems; check for conflicts the web, get email attachments that drag down your PC's perforand download fixes via the Internet: share floppies and use network mance. Maintain custom settings and optimize your hard drive for files. It works behind the scenes and preferences when copying top performance. No more lost to provide continuous protection, or moving programs. Try new files or screen freezes. You'll enjoy so you can work with confidence, programs without performance more time to do as you please, without the hassles of chewed-up and software conflicts. You'll fly free from irritating crashes and files and programs. through your tasks without old files unproductive downtime. and programs dragging you down. Get what you want from your computer. Feel like you can walk through walls with Norton products. Visit your nearest retailer to buy these Windows 95 products or try them risk-free at www.symantec.com/promos/ncio4.html No Viruses, No Junk, No Crashes, No Barriers. SYMANTEC Symantec, the Symantec logo and Norton AntiVirus are U.S. registered trademarks of Symantec Corporation. Norton Norton Uninstall and Norton CrashGuard are trademarks of Syman Corporation. Windows, and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All other brand names or trademarks are the property of their respective owner 1998 Symantec Corporation. All rights reserved. 09.71.00289 "


"SIMULATIONS  100+ HOT NEW GAMES PANZER ELITE Psygnosis (650) 287-6500 www.psygnosis.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGWS ETA: Q1 '99 eveloped in Germany, Psygnosis' PANZER ELITE has the potential to be the FALCON of tank simulations. Although there's a beginner's mode, which lets you drive your tank from the external view, the realistic mode not only buttons you up inside the tank, but also COVER_STORY gives you realistic view restrictions from the various stations. Detailed terrain, complete with realistic buildings and individual trees (rather than blocky tree lines), makes it that much harder to spot enemy tanks. You'll be able to drive over trees or blow out a structure and use the remaining walls for cover. The damage model isn't tablebased-it actually follows the path of a shell inside a tank and disables the appropriate systems (or crewmembers). The goal of the game is to survive the war, and with all the realism options turned on your chances of survival are slim. As the war progresses, your unit will even suffer from ammo and fuel shortages. F-16 AGGRESSOR Virgin Interactive Entertainment (714) 833-8710 www.vie.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW'ETA: Q1 '99 Developer General Simulations has based the flight modeling on a simulation engine actually used in USAF sims, and the company has also paid careful attention to cockpit systems and weapons modeling. (We hope the realism survives the final cut this time, after what happened to SABRE ACE.) The campaigns-set in Madagascar, the Rift Valley, Morocco, and Ethiopia-may be a bit fanciful, but with FALCON 4.0 actually threatening to ship, it's perhaps good that F-16 AGGRESSOR approached the campaign from a different angle. The scripted camp aigns cast you as a mercenary helping to quell rebel uprisings in these regions. The graphics engine is very impressive, especially on high-end systems that are running at 1024x768 resolution. e really had doubts about F-16 AGGRESSOR. After all, its mercenary campaign storyline seems straight out of Origin's old STRIKE COMMANDER. But after some stick time with the simulation, we're surprisingly impressed with the handling of this simulated F-16. SUPER HORNET Titus (818) 709-3692 www.titusgames.com ETA: Q4 '98 CGW's ETA: Q4 '98 head-to-head missions or four players on cooperative strikes. Carrier ops are very detailed, with crowded decks, crewmembers marshaling aircraft to catapults, and landing sig. nal officers grading your carrier traps. The cockpit features an active EUROPEAN AIR WAR MicroProse (510) 864-4550 www.microprose.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW'S ETA:Q4 98. in development nearly as long as FALCON 4.0, this World War II sim has been shown at all four E3 shows. What we saw this year, though, was a product that finally looks close to shipping and one that no longer looks like an SVGA update of the ancient 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR. The graphics have been reworked with impressive 3D card support and the best flak effects we've ever seen, and T. K. Kawahito and his team have done an impressive job modeling the sim's 20 flyable fighter aircraft. You'll be able to fly in both the Battle of Britain and the battle for Europe in the only dynamic campaign to be found in this year's crop of World War Il sims. the period interface and music set a wonderful mood for one of the most authentic of the upcoming WWII sims. Multiplayer support rounds out the package. igital Integration is going head-tohead with former distributor Interactive Magic by releasing its own F/A-18E simulator. Although the graphics engine is an enhanced, Direct3D version of the one seen in 1F-16, the underlying simulation has undergone dramatic upgrades. Hard-core simulation fans will be happy to know that SUPER HORNET sees the return of a TORNADO-style mission planner. Three dynamic campaigns set in the Barents Sea, Indian Ocean, and Persian Gulfare available for solo play. Multiplayer mode supports 16 players for instrument panel, authentic radar displays, multiple autopilot modes, and both fixed and virtual cockpit views. Although Digital Integration is striving for very realistic flight and instrument models, there are plenty of aids for the beginning sim gamer, including a simulation of the F/A180's autoland mode. "


"Every time someone dies in Quake I, Roquler Wrath of the Fallon, 300, Cyclone Studios, and the 3DO and Cyclono Studios logoa, are trademarks or registered trademarks of Tho UDO Company in the U.S. and/or other countries.  The 3D0 Company. All rights rosen LATING PERSE 3DO Geomet PC CD-RON "


"their soul ends up here. WWW.REQUI EMPC.COM Jakell is a registered trademark of ld Software, Inc. All other trademarks aro properties of their respective owners BEOUJEME Heaven and hell collide. WRATH OF THE FALLET Go to #243 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES SIMULATIONS ULTRA FIGHTERS Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722 www.imagicgames.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW's ETA: 0498 COVER_STORY as well, but the alpha version actually comes across as a good entry-level simulation. An original concept, certainly, but we have to wonder how Interactive Magic could think these wacky future fighters were the best choice when they could have had Eagle resurrect its F-4 Phantom sim? his sim from Interactive Magic takes an updated version of Eagle Interactive's SABRE ACE engine and moves it to the 26th century, when world superpowers are duking it out over the Solomon Islands in subsonic, laser-equipped planes. The planes are launched from aircraft carriers that hover over the ocean. Sound weird enough? The thinking behind this rather odd scenario is to create a simulation that pairs the slower, upclose combat of World War II aircraft with the accessibility afforded by modern radar systems. Think ACES OF THE PACIFIC meets WING COMMMANDER. We know, it sounded hokey to us approaches to play. The Apache features a modern, electronic, glass cockpit; the Havoc, despite being a newer design, has a traditional, \"round dial\" cock pit setup. The terrain features raised forest canopies (although the early versions we saw had polygonal tree lines rather than individual trees), which should make for some interesting uses of line-ofsight tactics. Graphics are quite impressive: The helicopters and other vehicles feature very high polygon counts, and the weather effects are among the most authentic we've seen yet. It's not all that hard-core, but APACHE-HAVOC looks as if it will strike a good balance between realism and gameplay. Torget MALLOR APACHE-HAVOC Empire Interactive (800) 216-9706 www.empire-us.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW's ETA: 04 '98 n azorback Studios' APACHEB HAVOC was designed from the ground up with multiplayer play in mind. Gamers face off in the American AH-64 Apache and the Russian Mi28N Havoc attack helicopters, two very different machines, which should require different OLTRE AERO COMPARISON FIGHTER SQUADRON: SCREAMIN' DEMONS OVER EUROPE Activision (310) 255-2000 www.activision.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGWS ETA: 04 98 his long-delayed sim from Activision and Parsoft had some development snags, but the latest versions we've seen indicate that development is heading into the home stretch. By far the most impressive aspect of NATIONS: FIGHTER COMMAND Psygnosis (800) 438-7794 www.psygnosis.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW's ETA: 02 99 oming from the studio that created the AGP extravaganza G-POLICE, NATIONS: FIGHTER COMMAND should look good and it does. But Psygnosis isn't going for style without substance here. The game's develop ers have pored over wartime records in an attempt to re-create historical missions as accurately as possible. In addition, a mission editor will let you try your hand at creating battles, and Psygnosis promises a variety of multiplayer game styles. You'll be able to fly for the Americans, British, or Germans, in planes ranging from the P-51B Mustang to the De Havilland Mosquito. The graphics engine uses a particle system to create impressive explosion effects and realistic weather. Clouds look particularly impressive, especially during thunderstorms. All this comes at a price, though-at E3, Psygnosis was recommending a Pentium II and a 3D card with 8MB of RAM for optimal performance. this World War II sim is its physics modeling. Dive a plane and pull up too hard and you can literally bend it-if it doesn't come apart from stress. Slam your landing gear down too hard, and the wheel will snap off and bounce down the runway. Saw off the wing of a bomber and it spins down to the ground just like you've seen in old newsreel footage. FIGHTER SQUADRON is also notable as the only single-player WWII sim in the works that lets you fly heavy bombers. The game's 30-plus missions can be played from any side, and from the cockpits of any type of plane in the mission. A comprehensive mission-editor lets you create your own missions, and Parsoft's Open Plane Interface means you're likely to see a variety of add-on aircraft for the sim. 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"WELCOME TO THE FEEDING GROUNDS JAGGERNCE Your mercenaries will climb, swim, jump and crawl their way through blistering firefights. Fight to free an entire nationsector by sector, town by town. Take the blend of strategy, role playing and tactical combat that made Jagged Alliance one of the best games of all time. Ada dozens of new weapons. Over 150 quirky characters. your own custom mercenary. Incredibly realistic combat. Thousands of lines of digitized speech. Face off against an array of hungry predators, from ferocious enemy soldiers to dark secrets lurking underground, The result is the perfect feeding grounds. The only thing missing is YOU. The Best of Strategy Nonlinear gameplay, blistering day and night battles, and advanced tactical combat. Encounter dozens of characters. Treat them well, and they'll support your cause. Treat them badly, and they'll stab you in the back. The Best of Role-Playing Create your own character, improve your team's skills, and explore a huge world. Meet Your Mercs SIRTECH www.jaggedalliance.com Hire more than 50 different mercenaries, each with their own personality. Go to #126 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink *As rated by Computer Gaming World and PC Games "


"ou know the feeling. It sets in around the 5th or 6th pot. It's a bit beyond the traditional adrenaline rush. Well, that's what it feels like when you get to the 5th and 6th cylinders in Dead Reckoning. And with 9 more cylinders left to conquer, each featuring a more challenging alien opponent than the last, you'll be wired for days. So don't put your plans for universal domination on the backburner. Check out the Dead Reckoning web site at www.deadreck.com now and look for this addictive game to hit store shelves near you soon. Dead Reckoning is massive multi-player fun to the last drop Who spiked 15 unique cylindrical battlefields Customize your game by selecting wingmen, ships and opponents Battle other players via internet, modem, IPX or direct connection Designed to take full advantage of 3D card acceleration "


"RE-EKONING. the coffee? Warning: This game is served scorching HOT. PIRANHA STTRAFIYI FIRMA (LDTREE Go to #134 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES SIMULATIONS COVER STORY DAWN OF ACES Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722 www.imagiconline.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 (free beta) CGW'S ETA:Q3 '98 ake the tried-and-true WARBIRDS simulation engine, replace the high-performance planes with fabric-andwood World War I aircraft, and you have l-Magic Online's DAWN OF ACES. Set on the western front, the game will feature a two-sided war instead of the less realistic four-sided WARBIRDS campaign. Among the initial flyable planes will be the Sopwith Camel, Spad S.VII, Bristol F2B, Fokker Dr.I, and Albatros D.Va. As with WARBIRDS, the game will be under constant development, and more planes will be added periodically. In some ways combat will be easier than in WARBIRDS, due to the slower speed of the World War I aircraft, but budding aces will also quickly learn that these early warplanes can be very touchy and must be handled with respect. LE iF/A-18 CARRIER STRIKE FIGHTER Interactive Magic 1919) 461-0722 www.imagicgames.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: 03 '98 anding your plane on an aircraft carrier, hitting that arrester hook on target, and not going off the other side in a belly flop has to be one of the most satisfying things you can do in a flight simulation. And it's one area in which iF-18E CARRIER STRIKE FIGHTER should excel, since former A-6 Intruder pilot Jim Harler is at the helm of the project. The basic flight engine in the game is an enhancement of the one in iF-22 v5.0 and it uses an updated version of Magic's Demon graphics engine, allowing you to fly over real-world satellite-mapped imagery. This engine looks best at considerable altitude. Low-level visuals aren't nearly as impressive. For instance, the sea looks like black-flecked blue velvet. 1F-22 was at its strongest with its dynamic mission structure and campaign feel. The Middle East flashpoint scenarios here-with CAPs, deep strikes, and cooperative missions-offer promising play from a campaign standpoint, even if the engine is struggling to catch up with the current state of the art. IN THE WORKS icroProse has announced that it is developing GUNSHIP III, a at this year's E3. Another delay is in store for FIGHTER DUEL 2.0 from helicopter simulation that will interface with its M1 TANK Infogrames/SPGS, which is now slated for an April 1999 release. PLATOON II product. You'll be able to fly Apaches, Comanches, Some World War II sims are still on track, however. SSI'S LUFTWAFFE and other craft on the same battlefield as M1 players. Look for it in midCOMMANDER and Microsoft's COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR both look as if 1999. Meanwhile, Looking Glass is still keepthey'll make it out before Christmas. ing quiet on the feature sets of FLIGHT MicroProse's long-awaited FALCON 4.0 UNLIMITED III and FLIGHT: COMBAT, both set is finally in the home stretch-We've for 1999 releases, but the company did played a version that's practically announce that the products would be distribfeature-complete. Given the complexity uted through Electronic Arts. of the sim's campaign and multiplayer We recently saw some impressive progress support, though, it could spend a long on SSI's Russian-developed jet sim, Su-27 time in tuning and debugging. We're FLANKER 2.0. Along with one of the most not about to make a prediction on its impressive 3D graphics engines we've seen release date, but we will say that yet and the trademark Su-27 realism, the sim MicroProse's claim of a pre-Christmas will now sport a beginner's mode. Given the release is plausible. amount of integration remaining to be done Due to space limitations we were when we saw the sim in May, however, we forced to omit Jane's ISRAELI AIR think the projected fourth-quarter release date COMBAT (formerly ISRAELI AIR FORCE). is optimistic. Look for it in the first part of '99. DID's F-22 ADF, and Novalogic's F-16 The same release projection goes for Empirel LANDING LATE FIGHTER DUEL 2.0 is getting an VIPER and MIG-29 FULCRUM. You'll Rowan's Korean War sim MIG ALLEY, which infusion of new features, which means it won't find in-depth coverage of those titles was still being shown only in slideshow form be landing on store shelves until Q2 '99. in last month's CGW. 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"POPLILE 500 OC 1 BAD DAY? SO-6C 40-50 30-40 ER DE NY LO ES LATARKISLORIA SES FERRE Take it out on Canada (no hard feelings, eh?) GLOBAL BP Call 1-800-771-3772 for Game Rating Information Go to #268 @ www.computergaming.com/Infolink www.psygnosis.com/globaldomination COMING OCTOBER ROM PSYGNOSIS Global Domination. Payunosis, and the Psyonosis logo areTM orand 1900-B. Psyonais Lid. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. The ratings icon Findemark of the Interactive Dom Software Association "


"EX FILE S GAME ICES\" AND IGATS ATIONS. ALL RIGA NRXFO WHA. FOXINTER "


"SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: 1. 16 MB RAM. 100MB FREE HARD DRIVE SPACE. A HEALTHY DOSE OF 113 PARANOIA. Find out if you have what it takes 3 to enter the world of The X-Files-as field agent 1 Craig Willmore, assigned to assist INTERACTIVE Special Agents Mulder and Scul in their investigation. follow with multiple paths and story linesou bevidence at N THE X FILES. of clues, sift through ev P N crime scenes, a and interview witnesses! But beware, BISA b bjctona, this game contains material that may be Djectionable to some people. ndows 95/Power Macintosh Mainly, the folks at the FBI. "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES COVER STORY WE'RE KINDA WORRIED.. Ten Products We're Afraid Are Going to Miss the Mark ULTIMA: ASCENSION e're worried about Origin's ULTIMA: ASCENSION for the same reason we were worried about ULTIMA: PAGAN-it isn't really a roleplaying game. In the case of ASCENSION, gamers will have a Lara Croft-style view of a male avatar moving through a full-3D environment. Though the code hasn't yet been optimized, the game play action appears chunky to us, even with minimal characters on the screen. We don't see how it is likely to reach a smooth level by the time it ships. No longer will characters advance in statistics and levels. Instead, accomplishing certain levels of competence will open up better skill levels. Yet, characters will only discover the new competence as they actually use it as opposed to the traditional feedback of being told you'd moved up in level or seeing a numerical perspective, Further, in spite of previously announced plans to return the next ULTIMA to a world in which the \"virtues\" could hold sway, the emphasis will be an action. like WING COMMANDER than STAR CONTROL. Sure, the engine does look really good, but it doesn't deserve the name STARCON. ACcolade assures us there will be the trademark humor and story, but it appears they've chosen flash over substance, and sacrificed the personality of the original in an attempt to capitalize on the popularity of the space. sim genre. STARCON his is Accolade's fourth STAR CONTROL game, but the fact that it's missing the \"4\" after the title is the first indication that this isn't the STAR CONTROL We know and love. That STAR CONTROL had funny, weird aliens and a rich, albeit sometimes silly, plot. It had lots of adventure-style gameplay with plenty of dialogue; fast, but simple, space shooting action; and lots of warping back and forth between star systems. This STAR CONTROL, or STARCON, as Accolade wants this franchise renamed, is nothing like that. It's a space sim that looks more PEOPLE'S GENERAL ou might think that SSI's PEOPLE'S GENERAL would center on the epic struggle of the communists versus the nationalist Chinese in the mid 20th century—especially since the PANZER GENERAL game system is at its best covering WWII. You would be wrong. Instead, this game looks at what might happen in 2005, if the Chinese were to take advantage of the collapse of the Soviet Union. It postulates a Russian-U.S. alliance, and nearly_ We also realize that, although we 20 different armies fighting across like them that way, not everyone three dozen scenarios. It also wants to get their A.S. in Virtual seems more realistic and complex Aeronautics before jumping into than typical GENERAL fare. the cockpit. In fact, we'd hate to All of this could be fun if we admit to some of our more hardget enough high-tech toys with core readers how much time which to wreak havoc in the Far we've spent playing simpler sims East. But it's hard to escape the like U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS. But we're feeling that SSI doesn't really afraid TOP GUN: HORNET'S NEST know where to take its signature goes a bit too far. At E3, the line. Let's hope this isn't STAR game's designers weren't sure if GENERAL all over again. the flight model was even going to include stalls. Even the muchmaligned SILENT THUNDER A-10 TOP GUN: simulation had stalls. Beginner HORNETS NEST modes are fine, but we hope kay, we'll be the first to MicroProse includes at least some admit that many flight level of realism for beginners who sims are really hard-core. get intrigued by the genre. 128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES apparent in these speakers: First, if you've got traditional game controllers that connect via your sound card's joystick port, you may not be able to use them once the Microsoft USB sound system is live. Second, wavetable MIDI will use Microsoft's CPUbased DirectX 6.0's synth engine, which will sound pretty good, COVER STORY gameplay enhancements, such as ships your fighter has to escort through the asteroid field. But overall, itwas the old game with 3D rocks. So what's the point? We say port the original games to new platforms, but leave the scenery and gameplay unmauled and unchanged. Who ever played the original ASTEROIDS because of the pretty graphics? TARTAN ARIMIY ur British counterpart, PC Gaming World, called TARTAN ARMY one of the standouts of the E3 shows. Now, they're good blokes over there, and we generally agree with them, but this time there seems to be a culture gap when it comes to this Eidos game. Their take: \"It's a real-time strategy affair set in Braveheart territory-and absolutely breathtaking it looks too. from the top-down C&C-style view, the player can zoom right into the thick of the action, third-person-style, and the power, violence, and authenticity of the skirmish pitched battles prove terrifically exciting and really do take you beyond into the action-more like into mortal danger. Scarily real.\" Our take? \"Hmm. It's MYTH with guys in skirts.\" DAIKATANA on Storm's DAIKATANA isn't as far along as we had hoped, considering that it's slated for CENTIPEDE e like the idea of introducing today's generation to the games of our youth, but we'd rather see it done through packages such as Microsoft's ARCADE packs or the MAME arcade emulator, which present the games in their original glory. Our first glimpse of Hasbro's CENTIPEDE showed a game that was inspired by the original, but didn't play like it. The \"classic\" mode gave an angled overhead view of the gameworld, sort of like a computer pinball game. This actually detracted from gameplay as compared to the classic 2D version—the 3D seemed to be there only as a checkbox item. And as for the new-style play, it puts you down on the ground looking straight at the mushrooms. Sorry, but we're beginning to look at arcade remakes with the same enthusiasm as we do colorized movies.... but will likely eat CPU cycles for lunch. These might be a good idea for office users, but for gamers, they may not be the way to go. NEWMAN-HAAS RACING he formula sounds good. Psygnosis snags the name of the CART team owned by actor/driver Paul Newman for a new racing game. They feature Christian Fittipaldi, Michael Andretti, and 14 other CART drivers. Wrap it all up by licensing the 11 tracks and tossing in commentary from real ABC and ESPN commentators. The problem is, TURN AROUND ASTEROIDS e're worried about CENTIPEDE because it screws up the gameplay of the classic game. So you'd think we'd like Activision's ASTEROIDS, right? After all, the gameplay is little changed from the original. The early version we saw at E3 had an overhead view of your ship, with asteroids floating by rendered in lovely 3D. There were some minor a September ship date. Some of the effects we saw (a demon summoning staff that conjured a transparent monster) were impressive, but we haven't seen enough of the game to judge whether it will meet expectations when it does come out, which we peg at sometime in early 1999. Our recent looks at the engine weren't all that impressive compared to recent fare such as UNREAL. Given the fixation on graphic flash in this genre, DAIKATANA may be relying on its promising single-player play-with-a-plot to stand out. But what if id Software is right in its decision to can QUAKE III, and it turns out plot doesn't matter to fans of 3D-shooters? MICROSOFT USB SPEAKERS ompeting with Microsoft is about as much fun as a root canal. Just ask Apple, Oracle, Sun, Netscape, CH Products, Logitech, ThrustMaster...the list goes on and on. Well, Micro-Borg has another target market in its sites: speakers. Yes, the people who brought you the ill-conceived Windows Sound System have decided it's time to get in the speaker business. Only these speakers have a new twist: They're designed to replace your sound card. There's audio circuitry that receives audio data from your machine via the USB bus. Now part of this is very intriguing on paper, but as to how Microsoft pulls off the implementation is still an open question. There are two technical downsides immediately other than extra cockpit detail and adjustable mirrors, we've seen little here that's not found in the PlayStation version of the game. If we want to play PlayStation games, we'll play them on a PlayStation. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 129 "


"THEY'RE RUDE, THEY'RE CRUDE AND THEY'RE COMING TO SAVE THE WORLD THIS FALL, leet the BioPunx-four funky, feisty, sarcastic critters with minds of their own starring in the spectacular new Artificial Life Sim Game from Fujitsu Interactive. Train your genetic creations by talking to them via the latest in voice recognition technology. Just make sure you have a snappy come-back to their wise-cracking insults! The fate of the world is in your hands. It's A-life with An Attitude! FUJITSU WWW.BIOPUNK.COM 1-888-39-A-LIFE PC CD-ROM Windows'95-98 d e mentioned herein are the property of their respective owners. FUJITSU INTERACTIVE INGA 1998 For Lilled. All Righe Reserved. Fujitsu and Me Faitse ogo are registered trademarks of Fujitsu Limited. BioPunx is a trademark of Fatso Limitet, Allohem Go 19 #210 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"SPACE SIMULATIONS  100+ HOT NEW GAMES HEAVY GEAR II Activision (310) 255-2000 www.activision.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA: 04 98 ERSTORY fter the disappointment of the first HEAVY GEAR title, you might be surprised to see the sequel heading our list of space simulations. We know we were. But this title has finally thrown out the creaky, patchwork MECHWARRIOR II engine and replaced it with a new one built from the ground up. The new engine addresses both the makeup of the HEAVY GEAR universe as well as requests and feedback from thousands of MECHWARRIOR Il and HEAVY GEAR players. Look for a much more \"alive\" world, with water, lava flows, and other terrain features that will make for more interesting battlefields. Terrain will also have a greater effect on battles: Your gear will travel faster on a road than it will over grass; faster on grass than on sand. In addition, scaling is more realistic here-buildings and vehicles are more to scale with the Gears, which are giant robots, after all. You won't be able to take out a building with a barrage of laser fire anymore you'll have to plant an explosive charge on it. The engine is 3D-only (Direct3D and 3Dfx Glide), so look for dazzling effects unhampered by the need to remain compatible with ancient 2D graphics cards. The Gears are more intelligent here as well. Activision has spent much more time working on artif icial intelligence than it did for previous giant robot titles, and you'll find Gear pilots with a variety of personalities ranging from aggressive to chicken. Your teammates are more useful now—you can plot individual waypoints for them and you can direct them to attack targets from different directions independent of your actions. Activision designed the game from the ground up for multiplayer play, and strategic buildings such as ammo dumps and repair bays (no floating power-ups here) should make for some interesting attempts at holding territory. including real salvage of damaged Mech parts, now plays a part in extended campaigns. The environment is now more interactive: You can walk into water to cool your Mech, or knock an enemy Mech off its feet by blowing a crater beneath it. Gamers who like a wide view will appreciate the ability to target from an external view; traditional cockpit views will also be available. Slated for release in early 1999, this promises to be far more than a stopgap until the FASA-developed MECH IV. deathmatch modes. For the single player, the easy-to-use 3D mission editor means that there should be dozens of user-created missions to try after the 45-plus in the game. Also welcome is the ability to record both single-player and deathmatch missions—no more \"Who killed whom arguments. If single-player action is as strong as what we've seen in multiplayer, nobody will be tagging this series as a MECHWARRIOR Wannabe. action should be strong, incorporating feedback from a free pre. view release that's been available for months. Multiplayer mode will include cooperative play and pure STARSIEGE Sierra (425) 649-9800 www.sierra.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW'S ETA: 0498 MECHWARRIOR IN MicroProse (510) 864-4550 www.microprose.com Company ETA: Q1-Q2 '99 CGW'S ETA: Q2 '99 when the news came that FASA's internally developed MECHWARRIOR III title was going to become MECH IV and a new engine from Zipper Interactive was going to power MECH III, many fans worried that the game was going to be a rushjob to capitalize on the license. They're likely to be pleasantly surprised by this game, which takes the basic feature set that made the Activision Mech games so popular and adds tactical elements and a more modern engine. New tactical features let you adjust waypoints before a mission and alter objectives during one. You can now create and save up to five weapon groups, which can be tied to two triggers. Resource management, hile previous games in the EARTHSIEGE series were technically impressive, many gamers complained the universe was not as immersive as that of the MECHWARRIOR games. Dynamix has responded by commissioning known sci-fi writers to Create a thorough story bible for the series. The company's Web site is already packed with fan fiction and user-created skins for the Hercs (giant robots). Multiplayer IN THE WORKS TAR TREK: KLINGON ACADEMY is Interplay's sequel to STARFLEET ACADEMY. Featuring Christopher Plummer as General Chang (from Star Trek VI: The Apology). KLINGON ACADEMY puts you in the shoes of a Klingon cadet. Much of it should be action-oriented and involve plenty of shooting, since you're playing the Klingons. Look for ion storms, asteroid fields, and nebula battles to spice things up. While the first game in this series had wonderful missions with true Trek flavor, the fighterlike combat disappointed us. When we get at the helm we'll report on whether these ships handle like battlecruisers. It's slated to beam onto shelves in October. Sierra Studios is developing a game based on Babylon 5, and we were impressed with the few minutes we got at the stick of a Starfury in multiplayer mode at E3. The game sounds promising: B5 creator Joe Straczynski is supervising the script, and the engine uses polygon-reduced versions of the actual models used in the show. Sierra promises a strong tactical element in addition to the action. Look for it in the first half of 1999. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"RECOIL RATING PENOK ROZ WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM ZIPPER INTERACTIVE CONTENT RATED ET 1998 Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Recoil is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. The ratings Icon Is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association. Windows is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. "


"INTER active FOR THOSE WH THINK GUN CONTROL = HAS SOMETHING TO DO WITH AIM.. Command a rapid motion battle force tank. Morph Yhto four different ARC SABE Vehicle types: land, hover, amphibious and submersible. NAPALM CANNON FREON BIRST CANVOV HIGH EXPLOSIVE MORTAR Tote 18 high-powered weapons of mass destruction, FROXIMITY HIGH EXPLOSIVE MINE PROXIMITY MEXECULAR DISTORTION MINE TETHER-GUIDED EXPLOSIVE MISSILE ENHANCED RAPID-FIRE PULSE ON Battle your way through six treacherous, mission-based worlds. REMOTE HIGH EXELOSIVE MINE LOK-OV EXPLOSIVE MISSILE LOK-ON PRACTICAL NUKE SONIC BURST CANIN Manipulate high-tech, Indoor environments and striking outdoor LASER DESIGNATOR textures, or become one with the earth. LASER SABRE Playable demo avaylable at: www.Vie. com/recoil Go to #205 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES CLASSICS/PUZZLES CREATURES 2 COVER STORY Mindscape (800) 234-3088 www.creatures.co.uk Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: 03 '98 hose lovable little Norns are back in Cyberlife's CREATURES 2, the greatly evolved sequel to last year's life simulation, CREATURES. In this version, the new virtual world is more than twice the size of the old one and the artificial-life technology has been developed even further. The new breed of Norns is more advanced biologically and behaviorally-a new Norn's brain Al is 85 percent more effective at storing neuroconcepts, allowing it to absorb and apply the things it learns. The Norns' complex internal system is made up of eight Copause 2. Un Named .DE Ele World Tertre los Yo Come Tods Name the 12000096 @* GRADA Speech Huter go Placer. The Incubator 2 different organs and there are 15 different chemicals in each Norn's digestive system. Whereas before your Norn could have been on its deathbed before you realized that something was wrong with it, this time you are given some warning. Since each Spero Yem For Heb. Du F1 DEAIHA Healt Norn possesses twice as many genes and organs, it is sons, will affect your Norns' overwhelmed by the complexity also much easier to pinpoint health and actions, and Cyberlife of the first game, CREATURES 2 exactly how and why your poor is even looking into the possibili offers a new, more user-friendly pet died. The gap between user ty of adding natural disasters, interface. The game can be played and creature definitely closes up such as earthquakes and torna on many different levels—you in this new version. does. The new world is filled with can immediately plunge yourself The new Norns have more per animation-each area houses right in and explore all the techsonality, a dramatically expanded countless plants and animals nological enhancements, or you vocabulary, and 120 facial expresand there will be plenty of excit can have fun easing yourself into sions. A complete virtual ecosys ing new toys to keep your Norns the game gradually. tem, including weather and seaamused. For those who were TOEVOER ONI EL FEE hundreds of different skill levels, ensuring that CHALLENGE #3 will appeal to both novices and brainiacs alike. in center QHQ  OFFEE ET OM # ### A GUBBLE 2 Actual Entertainment (408) 654-7950 www.actualentertainment.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: 03 '98 SMART GAMES CHALLENGE #3 Smart Games/Hasbro (800) 683-5847 www.smartgames.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW's ETA: Q4 '98 five worlds Waste Land, Cave Land, Water World, Lava Land, and Quartz Land. While the style of gameplay remains similar to the previous version—you help Gubble to fit screws into screwdrivers and drills into rivets—the puzzles are more intricate. On one level you can turn Gubble into a ball; another requires you to use decoy Gubbles. Some levels feature poisonshooting cannons that will slow you down, shrink you take away your ability to jump, or even change your directional keys, so that when you try to walk forward you'll actually move backward, and so forth. Gamers who like arcade-style puzzle games should find these new challenges engrossing. Mayhem (probably the only asteroids game that relies on brain power, not reflexes); Rock, Paper, Scissors, a logic problem based on the old schoolyard game; Sheep Dog, your chance to uncover those hidden shepherding skills as you guide your flock across a hexagonal grid; and many more. Although Smart Games has always put content ahead of looks in its products, this time the developers are revamping the game's image, so expect improved graphics, better sound, and 3D animation. That's not to say that they will skimp on gameplay: As usual, there will be mart Games will soon be back with another collection of mind-boggling brain teasers, and now, the company has puzzle giant Hasbro backing it up. SMART GAMES CHALLENGE #3 features 20 all-new puzzle types. including word problems, sound puzzles, action games, and traditional puzzles. You have Meteor he cute little alien Gubble D. Gleep is back-and this time he's got legs! Whereas before, Gubble traveled around in his space-pod, now he can run, jump, duck, and fly. GUBBLE 2 includes 104 new levels, plus hidden bonus levels, spread across 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"YOU WANT IT! WE WON'T MAKE YOU WAIT. MULTIROLE FIGHTER YOU WON'T HAVE TO READ A 300 PAGE MANUAL OR FLY 500 MILES BEFORE YOU ENGAGE THE ENEMY. CONTROLS ARE INTUITIVE, MAKING IT A SNAP TO JUMP INTO THE ACTION AND ENJOY THE FOLLOWING FEATURES: V A SUPERB FLIGHT MODEL TESTED AND REFINED BY LOCKHEED MARTIN TEST PILOTS FASTEST 3DFX SUPPORT, UP TO 1024x768 WITH VOODOO 2 (INCREDIBLE WITH SLI) HIGH RESOLUTION VIRTUAL COCKPIT WITH TRACKING MOUSE HOTSPOTS 6 OF FREEDOM GRAPHICS SYSTEM GIVES YOU UNPRECEDENTED VIEWS OF THE ACTION SO DON'T WAIT, GRAB THE STICK & FLY THE F-16 MULTIROLE FIGHTER TODAY, IBS INTEGRATED BATTLE SPACE WHILE F-16 MULTIROLE FIGHTER IS A STAND-ALONE PREMIUM SIMULATION WITH OVER 40 MISSIONS AND A MISSION EDITOR, IT IS ALSO YOUR TICKET TO NOVAWORLD WHERE YOU CAN BATTLE OVER 100 AIRPLANES INCLUDING MIG-29 FULCRUMS\" AND F22 RAPTORS FLOWN BY THE MOST DEVASTATING OPPONENTS-YOUR FRIENDS. ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS MULTIROLE FIGHTER STE IN STORES NOW! Go to #094 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink NUVALUGIC www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 IBS EXPERIENCE IT NOW novaworld.net F22 Raptor owners can receive free upgrades ta IBS over the Internet or an updated for a nominal charge.  Novadojic lic. Novalogic and the Nanalogic lepo registered madenats and Flera, MoWorld, BS, lutegrated Bacle Space, F-22 wel Raptor are trademarks of f lock Ladheed Mars, the ladheed Matiasar logo and F-16 Murunlefter at haunts of the lackheed Martin Corporation a d under lice u linaloje, I. Al dar trademarks are property Searnspectie . "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES CLASSICS/PUZZLES Ove LRT THE D SHOW Disney (800) 900-9234 www.disneyinterative.com Company's ETA: Q3 '98 CGW's ETA: Q3 '98. COVER_STORY 19:3:99992 6348181 OFTE dion of tant le ped to Flores Los Mining 5 ocks puno Threatensis Aw You Event. We E T F 1 Advice Cancel uilding on the huge success  of its YOU DON'T KNOW JACK product line, Berkeley Systems is working on another quiz show game. DON'T TOUCH THAT DIAL allows true couch potatoes to finally put that mine of useless information to use. The game requires that you to dig up from El coach FTINU LAUT CAMERA the annals of memThe Chestnuter test Town to us. ory everything you've ever heard Tripludspoon 3.7 about commercial Print products, testing your knowledge with the tough computer oppo about decades of CHESSMASTER nents based on legendary grand advertising trivia. 6000 masters. Let's hope these enhance Fill in the Brand questions ask Mindscape ments aren't as fleeting as one of you to recall phrases, slogans, and (800) 234-3088 www.mindscape.com Bobby Fischer's comebacks. jingles from the commercials of Company ETA: 03 '98 yesteryear, while Birth of a Notion CGW's ETA: 04 '98 quizzes you on the rise and fall of HESSMASTER has been almost DON'T TOUCH your favorite products. Although as far ahead of its pawnTHAT DIAL the game sounds promising, it's pushing competition as NBA Berkeley Systems worth noting that this is the first (800) 234-3088 Live has been for PC basketball. www.berksys.com trivia product that Berkeley But it's finally being challenged, Company ETA: 04 98 Systems has attempted without which is a good thing: Promised CGW'S ETA: 0498 the cooperation of Jellyvision. features in recent versions failed to Whether Berkeley can maintain materialize or didn't meet the skythe same high expectations of the game's level of many fans. Along with the customPlop, plop, fizz, fizz, oooh style, ary graphical and engine upgrade, humor, CHESSMASTER 6000 will attempt to 1 what a relief it is! and talent accurately rate your performance, that made support PGN (portable game nota2 have it your way! the JACK tion) standards, and try to regain 3) Fizzies are where it is! series a its dominance in chess tutorials. It hit also boasts a bevy of new Al per4 I always use remains Depends! sonalities-ones that normal to be humans can beat-to go along seen. imed not just toward kids but to Disney fans of all ages, this You Don't KNOW JACK-style quiz show tests players' knowledge of all things Disney Questions are based on the animated and live-action films, the television specials, the music, the theme parks, and other general Disney trivia, such as \"What is Donald's middle name?\" Gameplay follows the same format as that of JACK: Up to three players can compete on one keyboard to score D-Bucks. The game features over 1,000 questions, with question types ranging from basic multiple choice to true-or-false 'DFIBulator' statements. THE D SHOW also includes 60 bonus rounds, plus a huge assortment of video clips. The tone of the game is very family-oriented, but the questions, which span the whole Disney history, are far from juvenile. op og IN THE WORKS rivia fans will be happy to hear that a fourth installment of You Don't KNOW JACK is in the works and Berkeley Systems has teamed up again with Jellyvision to produce HEADRUSH, another quiz-show game in the same vein as Jack, but aimed specifically to a teen audience. HEADRUSH incorporates all the attitude and humor of the JACK series, with questions that are more accessible to the youth of today. The star of HEADRUSH is a sarcastic, no-holds-barred host, who is slightly more hip, but no less forgiving than his predecessors. The game host's style is similar to JACK's (but with fewer sexual references and more flatulation). HEADRUSH features plenty of cool animation, including cartoon segments that introduce each question, humorous commercials for imaginary sponsors, and a high-octane soundtrack. Hasbro continues to dominate the puzzle genre with a slew of products set for release before the end of the year. After leading the boardgame-to-computer game movement and cornering the arcade-game conversion market, it seems only natural that the company's next endeavor would be to bring two of television's most popular quiz shows from the tube to our monitors. Hasbro's PC editions of WHEEL OF FORTUNE and JEOPARDY look to be improvements over the previous electronic versions of the games we've seen. Both are due out in the fall. Hasbro is also working on PC versions of OUTBURST, LIFE, and STRATEGO, all of which should be available before the end of the year. 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"THE WAT IS OVER FLY WHAT WE FEARED MIG-29 FULCRUM FLYING AT MORE THAN 2X THE SPEED OF SOUND THE MIG-29 CAME OUT FROM BEHIND THE IRON CURTAIN TO CHALLENGE THE BEST TECHNOLOGY OF THE WEST. SO, EVEN THOUGH THE COLD WAR IS OVER, THE MIG-29 FULCRUM IS ONE HOT PLANE TO FLY. FEATURING: * AUTHENTIC MIG-29 FLIGHT MODEL DEVELOPED WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF YURI PRIKHODKO, MIG-29 TEST PILOT & COSMONAUT * FAST AND FURIOUS 3DFX« SUPPORTED COMBAT WITH HIGH DEFINITION GRAPHICS (1024 x 768 RESOLUTION) FLY AND FIGHT IN OVER 40 EXCITING SINGLE-PLAYER/COOPERATIVE MISSIONS IN CONFLICTS AROUND THE WORLD OR USE THE MISSION DESIGN TOOL TO CREATE & PLAY YOUR OWN MISSIONS IBS INTEGRATED BATTLE SPACE TAKE TO THE SKIES IN YOUR MIG-29 AND FLY HEAD-TO-HEAD AGAINST OTHER PILOTS (OVER 130 PLAYERS PER ARENA!) FLYING MIG-29 FULCRUMS, F-16 MULTIROLE FIGHTERS AND F-22 RAPTORS IN NOVALOGIC'S REVOLUTIONARY INTEGRATED BATTLE SPACE. 5 ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS MIG-29 IMIG-29. FULCRUM M ISTIE IN STORES NOW! Go to #128 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink NOVALOGIC www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 IBS -EXPERIENCE IT NOW novaworld.net f22 Raptor owners can receive free d estal over the Internet or an updated CO futa nominal charge. 1998 Novatopic dic Movil spic and I Novalogic lego we registered trademais and Futro. Nova Wall. S. lntegrated Rande Space. F-22 and Rytas ant badenada Movelock Ladded Martin, the ladded Mat staloge and F-16 Milyar ders te laderd Marta Campoba andare and delicisse blirlag . "


"Look deep, deep inside and you will find a place of anger, vengeance and brutalityO 1998 Broderbund Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Warlords is a trademark of SSG. Reign of Heroes, Darklords Rising and Red Orb Entertainment are trademarks of Broderbund Software, Inc. "


"WARLORDS111 DARKLORDS RISING Ona The sequel to Go there. It is your last hope to conquer the truly wicked. www.warlords3.com A pall of unspeakable evil, merciless slaughter and unbridled destruction has fallen across the Realm of Etheria. The servants of evil, the Darklords, spread like a contagion across the land. Will you be able to stop their unholy juggernaut? Welcome to Darklords Rising, the greatly anticipated sequel to Warlords III: Reign of Heroes, 1997's turn-based strategy game of the year: Discover the bigger, deeper, darker universe of Darklords Rising:  4 entirely new campaigns and 15 new scenarios  31 new army types, for a total of 95  5 new uniquely skilled herocs for a total of 15  9 new multiplayer games including Crusade, North vs. South and Instant Chaos  More challenging, adaptable and aggressive AI  Fully functional map, item and campaign editor  Bonus: Includes original campaign and scenarios from Warlords III: Reign of Heroes In short, more adventure, deeper gameplay and fewer chances for survival. 1997's Turn-Based Strategy Game of the Year. * O SO DARKLORDS D WARLORDS II DARKLORDS RISING REDORB Go to #175 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES STRATEGY HOMEWORLD COVER STORY Sierra Studios (425) 649-9800 www.sierra.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW'S ETA: 01 899 he most promising game of this season is the real-time space strategy extravaganza HOMEWORLD, from the fledgling company Relic. Leave it to a start-up to introduce a breath of fresh air into the strat egy genre. The most significant feature of HOMEWORLD is its true 3D engine. The engine renders everything in real-time 3D, from the ships you control to the nebulae in the background. This allows for an unprecedented level of freedom in both the camera and viewing options, as well as the gameplay. You can rotate the camera 360 degrees to get the best view of the expansive 3D battlefield. You can zoom in to see the markings on a tiny fighter or zoom out to see your mass of fighters and capital ships meld into an amorphous bubble amid the beautiful backdrop of gas clouds and nebulae. There will be resource gathering, as in other real-time strategy games, but the resource nodes will provide more strategic possibilities: You'll even be able to sabotage them to prevent your enemies from using them. The t actical possibilities in the game will be vast. There will be two sides to play, each with its own look and unique ships. Regardless of the side you choose, you'll command gunboats, fighters carriers, battleships, massive floating cannons, research vessels, and many other ship types. The extra bells and whistles in the game are also impressive, including transparent clouds, engine glow, and hundreds of lines of context sensitive voiceovers. The single-player game will be a story-driven campaign with plenty of aliens to encounter. Relic hopes to create a movielike experience to complement and drive the outstanding gameplay. It's an ambitious plan, but all signs point to success. Read more about HOMEWORLD in our full preview on page 62 of this issue. HEROES OF MIGHT & MAGIC IN 3DO (650) 261-3000 www.3do.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGWS ETA: Late 04 '98 bigger, and there will be a wait button for your troops. Artifacts are getting a slight facelift, as well. You have to equip your artifacts on a paper doll, so no more stacking five swords or flails. The map editor will also be improved, with the ability to rename heroes and towns. Lastly, multiplayer is being fixed so you can move the map, fiddle with troops and towns, and not sit idle when it's not your turn. et ready for the third HEROES installment. While the engine and graphics are getting only minor polishing, the gameplay just keeps getting bigger. There will now be eight castle types, 16 heroes, more than 100 different monsters (and each monster has an upgraded version), and hundreds of spells and artifacts. Towns will have a more detailed economic model, including buildings that will add bonuses to your mine production. The tactical display is getting COMMAND & CONQUER: TIBERIAN SUN Westwood (702) 228-4040 www.westwood.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW'S ETA: Q4 '98 round two of world domination. At first glance, TIBERIAN SUN might not look like a huge improvement over C&C, but it is. The terrain is prerendered 3D, like TOTAL ANNIHILATION's, but it's more interactive. You'll be able to blow up bridges, warp terrain, and freeze water in order to cross rivers. Also, because the perspective will be threequarters, instead of top-down, you'll be able to appreciate TIBERIAN SUN's 3D terrain much more than that of TA. The units in TIBERIAN SUN will be voxels (3D pixels), so they'll look more real and move more fluidly. Expect more differentiation between the two sides' units. The NOD will maintain its hitand-run philosophy, while the GDI will get an infusion of muchneeded personality. There will also be night missions, enhanced tech trees, and more improvements that should take the C&C franchise to the next level. IBERIAN SUN, Westwood's true sequel to COMMAND & CONQUER, takes place a few years after the first C&C, and pits the NOD against the GDI for 140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"STRATEGY  100+ HOT NEW GAMES SID MEIER'S ALPHA CENTAURI Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 www.ea.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW's ETA: 04 98 COVER_STORY -iraxis' latest game attempts to be much more than Civ II in space, and not just by employing a 3D rise to the mountains. Now, in addition to mining raw materials, you must harvest energy via solar collectors. Ebony obelisks-shades of 2001: A Space Odysseydot the alien landscape and serve as unwelcome beacons for the native life-forms. In a departure from Civ and MASTER OF ORION, the decidedly hard-core science-fiction tech tree extrapolates from modern scientific knowledge to show us the scarier edge of bioengineering, and it balances that with the Calculus of Ethics—Sir Isaac Newton would be proud. In addition to the pursuit of knowledge, you may try to either live in harmony with the alien environment or introduce Terran flora and fauna in an attempt to make this world over in Earth's image. For more information on the game, check out our full sneak preview on page 54 of this issue. AGE OF EMPIRES II Microsoft (425) 882-8080 www.ensemble.com Company ETA: Q2 '99 CGW's ETA: Q2 '99 and buildings are all new. Teutonic knights will replace heavy cavalry, and crossbowmen will replace archers. Many of the civs-like the British, Franks, and Saracens—are new, although some favorites, such as the Chinese and Japanese, will return. Ensemble will add group formations and facing; a more realistic economic model; and roving, playable barbarians (think Mongols and Celts). The singleplayer game will be much more robust, with historical campaigns (including the Crusades) and more involved missions. The design specs for AGE Il are very ambitious, and we've included only some of the many improve ments. For a great, in-depth preview of AGE II, read our July issue cover story. TOT Man Year 2018 NON ow that AGE OF EMPIRES II has been pushed back to a spring '99 release, Ensemble Studios will have more time to make good on its promised improvements. AGE II will span from the Dark Ages to the Renaissance, with the four ages being: Dark, Feudal, Castle, and Imperial. The artwork, units, tweaks, and 3D graphics should elevate this game above the norm. Unlike those in TOTAL ANNIHILATION, FORCE COMMANDER's graphics will be full real-time 3D, with support for 3D acceleration. This will provide more flexible viewing options and give the game a more realistic look. while you'll acquire troops in  : SOULBLIGHTER Bungie (800) 295-0060 www.bungie.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA:Q4 '98 While this game isn't a huge leap over MYTH, it does contain many tweaks and enhance ments. The engine is definitely being polished There will be 3D flames to scorch the landscape and burn trees, moving shadows, smoother reflections in water, ambient life-forms to add to the realism, and 3D positional sound. The engine will also support Direct3D. Gameplay is being enhanced with a more involved magic system and new units. Extra levels of \"zooming out\" have been added to provide greater field of vision, and unit pathfinding has been improved. Bungie is also determined to add indoor missions, fortifications, and castle sieges. FORCE COMMANDER LucasArts (415) 472-3400 www.lucasarts.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q1 '99 ORCE COMMANDER should succeed where REBELLION failed: pleasing Star Wars fans and strategy gamers. As the Alliance or Empire commander, you command troops through a series of groundbased missions spread throughout familiar Star Wars locales, including Hoth, Yavin 4, and Tatooine. Unlike REBELLION, FORCE COMMANDER'S gameplay is more in line with traditional RTS games like COMMAND & CONQUER and STARCRAFT. However, while gameplay will be the familiar \"explore, gather, build, and destroy\" variety the Star Wars flavor, gameplay YTH blew us away with its innovation and earned our 1997 Strategy Game of the Year award. However, it wasn't perfect. With MYTH II, the company hopes to fix what little was wrong with the original and deliver more of what gamers loved. regular real-time strategy fashion, the arsenal at your disposal will be every Star Wars junkie's dream: stormtroopers, droids, ATATS, snowspeeders, TIE bombers, Y-wings, and AT-ST walkers. Look for a more in-depth preview in an upcoming issue of CGW. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 101 "


"TRUE TERRAIN LANDSCAPES, YES, VIRGINIA, THERE'S A SINFULLY REAL WORLD OUT THERE. EVEN WEATHER! FG7 MULTIPLAYER FOCUS. THE FIRST 3D SHOOTER DESIGNED FROM THE BOTTOM UP TO MAXIMIZE FULL-SQUAD, TOTAL-IMMERSION MULTIWARRIOR GAMING. NO MAN IS 522ato God MAP M   DEDICATED COMMANDER. ONE LEADER PER TRIBE, SCOPING THE NASTIES, DEPLOYING THE TROOPS, CALLING THE SHOTS LIKE A TRUE COMMANDER AND CONQUERER. B LOK COMBAT VEHICLES. WHY TRUDGE WHEN YOU CAN TRANSPORT YOU AND YOUR BUDDIES IN SCOUT FLYERS AND ARMORED PERSONNEL CARRIERS. GET READY FOR THE FREE TECH RELEASE WWW.STARSIEGE.COM 1988 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. O and TM designato trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. "


"MOTION CAPTURE ANIMATION. SKELETAL ANIMATION? NO. FLUID, FULL-MOTION BODY MOVEMENTS? YEP. VAST INTEGRATED WORLDS. \"LEVELS\" BEGONE. PLAYERS DASH INDOORS AND OUTDOORS WITH NO LAG OR LOADTIMES WHATSOEVER. AN ISLAND Coming this fall. A revolutionary first-person shooter designed from scratch to maximize the multiplayer gaming experience for 2 to 32 players. Just enough single-player missions to get your boots wet, then it's all teamwork. Imagine countless independent servers (all FREE) with thousands of independent warrior tribes each with their customized names, symbols, warriors, and colors battling for supremacy over the Dynam ix Internet. It's action. It's heat. It's TRIBES. Join us. A ATERRA COMPANY STRIBES STARSIEGE THE ULTIMATE IN FIRST-PERSON SQUAD WARFARE Go to #187 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"IS HAVING ALLT SOM THE ULTIMATE BAD HARE DAY. 3 with NINIS their respective company. All Rights Rese r Pres. pl 801 other trademarks are prope CAPACE Camera ( 1) JON music available on: ancord Panasonic WWW.SPACEBUNNIES.COM WWW.RIPCORDGAMES.COM TH "


"STRATEGY 100+ HOT NEW GAMES MECHCOMMANDER MicroProse (510) 864-4550 www.microprose.com Company ETA: 0398 CGW'S ETA: 03 '98 dozen mechs), MECHCOMMANDER is able to provide more detailed and realistic gameplay. Mechs will be expertly animated, with frames for limping, jumping, and running. Facing, true lineof-sight, and interactive 3D terrain will play a very large part in combat. While there is no resource gathering in the game's linear campaign, there is resource management. You'll have to scavenge parts and weapons from the battlefield to upgrade and equip your mechs. You'll also have to manage your team of MechWarriors, who have distinct personalities and abilities, and who gain experience with each mission. With a rich universe to draw upon and a narrow focus that enables a more detailed engine, MECHCOMMANDER is shaping up to be an excellent tactical introduction to the BattleTech universe. COVER STORY fantasy plot will drive the four campaigns and tell a story of world destruction and salvation. There will be just as many units as in TA, but these troops will have more fantastic abilities and engage the imagination of fantasy lovers. There will be castle sieges, as well as open-field battles. Magic should also come into play, spicing up the combat. There are additional features that CaveDog is keeping secret, but the team is determined to pour on the gameplay and make KINGDOMS even more engaging than TOTAL ANNIHILATION. TOTAL ANNIHILATION: KINGDOMS CaveDog (425) 486-9258 www.cavedog.com Company's ETA: Q1 '99 CGW'S ETA: Q2 '99 or many gamers, TOTAL ANNIHILATION was the winner of the 1997 real-time wars. With 3D terrain and dozens of units, it captured the attention of many real-time gamers tired of wading through all the bad clones. Although Chris Taylor, the creator of TA, has left CaveDog, the team that remains is hoping to inject more gameplay, creativity, and personality into the TOTAL ANNIHILATION franchise. First, there will be four sides, split among the four elements of Earth, Wind, Water, and Fire. A classic 10 ABT nlike the other strategy titles in this roundup, MicroProse's MECHCOMMANDER, based in the Battle Tech universe, is more tactical in focus. As the commander of Zulu Squadron, you have to take Port Arthur from the technologically superior Smoke Jaguar clan. With its narrow scope (you never command more than a BLACK AND WHITE Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 www.lionhead.co.uk Company's ETA:Q2 '99 CGW's ETA: Q3 '99 f you've ever wanted to be a giant monster like Godzilla, visiting terror upon peaceful villages, this is your game. BLACK AND WHITE will be the first game developed at Peter Molyneux's new Lionhead Studios. COMING. Along with the name change, Bullfrog has added 3D acceleration and a new storyline. Instead of being the sequel to POPULOUS II, this game now serves as the prequel to all the POPULOUS games. You still play a shaman, but the game now assumes that in this POPULOUS prehistory, there are no gods, just dueling shamans fighting to become the god we would play in later POPULOUS games. As a shaman, you must battle through 30 levels in six worlds and eliminate your rivals before you can claim divinity. You'll still convert wildmen into your subjects, order them to construct buildings, train them to become soldiers, and call down spectacular spells to deform the terrain and weaken your enemy's resolve. And the engine is still good-looking and flexible, with multiple planet views and a fully rotatable camera. You play a powerful sorcerer, capable of shaping world events. As you start out, happy villagers scurry about the lush, hilly landscape. But the good times can't last, since you need worshipers to increase your power, and that means disturbing the once-perfect world. To motivate your subjects, you can smack them around or perform \"click & flick\" spellcasting. You can also pick up creatures and breed them in a genetic crucible. Hybrid creatures can grow to gigantic proportions; you can then loose them on the members of competing cultures. You'll be able to switch views and witness the destruction firsthand. We can't wait to see how much fun stomping villagers will be POPULOUS III: THE BEGINNING Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 www.bullfrog.ea.com Company ETA: 04 '98 CGWS ETA: Q1 '99 Ithough we can criticize Bullfrog for dragging its feet with POPULOUS III, we can't denounce the gameplay. It's still looking as good as it did when it was called THE THIRD www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 145 "


"IT'S TIME YOU 1998's BIGGEST GAME! PC Gamer RATING PENDING RP Vst wstawu Cutron CONTENT RATED BY Command & Conquer is a registered trademark of, and Command & Conquer Tiberian Sun and Westwood Studios are trademarks of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1998 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserve "


"SAW THE FUTURE COMMAND CONUER. TIBERIAN SLD COMMAND CONGUER TIBERIAN SUID COMIYLAND CONCURR IGERIAI SUTA COMING FALL 1998 Westwood WWW.westwood.com Go to #252 @ www.computergaming.com/intoink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES STRATEGY COVER_STORY TURO OPTIONS (22.121 VISUAL TACTICAL CAMERA RAILROAD TYCOON 2 Pop Top Software www.poptopsoftware.com Company ETA: 03 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q4 '98 YES AUTO RESET STATUS FLEETS ENEMY Marines and their even stranger foes in an X-COM style turn-based format. Not only do the missions seem exotic and varied, there are also definite RPG elements as your squad develops during the scripted campaign. More than three dozen Warhammer 40,000 weapons make an appearance, some as \"prize elements\" à la FANTASY GENERAL, and there are more than 20 Psyker spells featured as well. All of the Games Workshop touches, from the steampunk vehicles to Terminator Squads and even battlefield chaplains, are perfectly sculpted amid a haunting gothic sci-fi backdrop. It's the next best thing to having hundreds of Warhammer miniatures on your desktop—without having to paint them all. TASK FORCE INFO: AMESE DATE CLASSIFICATIOE FRST SRPS: 8. GORDERS:20 133R0LT quirks. The Vulcans are logical, the Klingons militaristic, the Ferengi aggressively economic. Diplomacy, Wonders of the Galaxy, multiplayer action-it's all here. The turn-based combat system even supports 3D cards. For more on this game, check out our sneak preview in CGW #166. BIRTH OF THE FEDERATION MicroProse (800) 695-4263 www.microprose.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA: Q4 '98 issolve a little Civ base in MOO, dust with STARS, simmer in a big Picard pot, and you have MicroProse's recipe for success. BIRTH OF THE FEDERATIONwhich chronicles the rise of all the various Next Generation civilizations from the early, halting beginnings of warp drive-should go down as the best Trek game ever, regardless of genre. It's certainly the most playable product from MicroProse in years. Like the famed TV series, everything works despite the obvious hil Steinmeyer is a lot like the author Peter David: He does his best work in other creators' worlds. Now, the man who helped show the industry there was still plenty of life in t urn-based games with HEROES OF MIGHT & MAGIC goes cerebral realtime with RAILROAD TYCOON II. The design retains most of what made Sid Meier's original design great, but Steinmeyer has added stronger Al robber barons, more strategic variety, and 16-player multiplayer support. The 3D graphics don't require an accelerator, but they still look good. You can micromanage your business, immerse yourself in stock trading, or hire managers to do the dirty work-leaving you to play with your virtual train set. Deeper and more accessible than the original, this is one of the true sleepers of 1998. CHAOS GATE SSI (415) 895-2000 www.ssionline.com Company ETA: Q3 98 CGW'S ETA: Q3 '98 espite some decent attempts, the definitive PC Warhammer game has yet to arrive. That should change with CHAOS GATE, which vividly recreates the bizarre world of Space 2129 IN THE WORKS ARK REIGN II is also in development, but it won't ship until the fall of 1999 at the earliest. It is getting a complete overhaul, including a true, real-time 3D engine. The enhanced engine will retain DARK REIGN's Al (with improvements, of course), but add true line of sight interactive terrain, and more realistic gameplay. All units will be 3D, including the infantry. Expect near unlimited zoom and a fully rotatable camera. CAESAR III is set to release later this year, and continues the city simulation gameplay of CAESAR II, while abstracting the combat sig. nificantly. This is more a SIMCITY, urban-planning game than an empire simulation, although there will be citizens to manage and barbarians to repel. CAESAR III should ship by the end of this year. Westwood's classic, DUNE II, will resurface this summer as DUNE 2000, an update with SVGA graphics and movie-quality cut-scenes with professional actors, including John Rhys Davies. The campaigns and gameplay are pretty much the same, except for the addition of one or two new units. Dune Il fans will want to play this for the multiplayer support! STARCRAFT: BROOD WARS, the expansion set to the phenomenal STARCRAFT, will come out sometime this fall. Blizzard says it will be September, but we're not holding our breath. It will include two new units per side, three new tile sets, and three new campaigns. See our minipreview in this month's News Section 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"MURE PRIZE MUNL IN SEASON 3! SEE BACK PAGE AMD BACK PGL NEWS UPDATE PROFESSIONAL SAMERS' LEAGUE OVER $250,000 IN CASH AND PRIZES! To Sign Up or For More Info, Go To: www.pgl.com The First Pro Sports League for the Computer Gaming Crowd CONGRATULATIONS! Har Hawk3 JUOS000 To Danny \"Rosco\" Alires and Sean \"Hawk3\" throngs of Ez attendees and press Flanagan on their triumphs at the from all over the world looking on, Advent Championships of the Rosco took the Quake II title and AMD PGL! The Season 2 live Hawk3 came out on top in the Total finals event showcased the Annihilation competition. Season 3 talents of 16 of North ROP promises to be even more exciting. America's top gamers. With Visit the PGL web site for details! ? ROSCO STARTRAFT\"Lands in the PGL IT'S OFFICIAL! in PGL Season 3. The STARTRAFT IT'S NEE hottest real-time strategy game of the season gives RTS fans Blizzard Entertainment has teamed up with the PGL to offer gamers an intergalactic challenge with real fame and fortune as the rewards. Hosted by Battle.net the richest strategy game RIZIN ENTERT competition yet. The PGL Gor the online qualification and regular season phases) and sanctioned by the PGL, Starcraft soars into the realm of professional gaming will award $20,000 in cash and more than $15,000 in prizes to the top Starcraft players! carries a PGL highlight segment twice per month. TV.com airs on over 120 brogdcast Watch TV.com TV for championship .COM event highlights! TV.com, the nation's highest-rated show dedicated to computers and the Internet, television stations throughout the U.S. Check out the PGL Web Site at: www.pgl.com for station and show time specifics. "


"VADVENT PGL AMD2 | ESATLANTATO www.pgl.com PROFESSIONAL GAMERS LEAGUE CHAMPIONSHIPS The Advent Championships of the AMD PGL provided the greatest spectacle at this year's E3. Here's a photo-journal of the Season 2 Finals. 88 PGL SEASON 2 FINALISTS GATHER for a group photo following the Championships. (Pictured left to right; Standing: Boogieman, Freak, Makeveli, Ikill4lafs, unowned, Roscoe, Rasta the announcer, JetLink, CViper, Aling, Butcher7, Nodrules, Hawk3; Sitting: Kuin, Slicksoul, Ren, Icewolf) QUAKEN ANCE vos federer CROWDS GAZE IN WONDER as the action unfolds during the Advent Championships of the AMD PGL at E3. PGL FINALISTS PREPARE for their next match by warming up in the official practice area. GTE Computer AMDA VADVENT INTERNETWORK POWERED www.amd.com www.interact-acc.com www.computergaming.com www.gamespot.com www.bbn.ca "


"PETITE Paras THE CUSTOM-BUILT STAGE in Interact's E3 booth provided an ideal showcase for official finals matches. DANNY \"Rosco\" ALIRES accepts the $7,500 first-place prize in the action category from PGL Commissioner Nolan Bushnell, as id Software's Todd Hollenshead and a Fortune magazine reporter look on. QUAKE Wanies the 1992 SEAN \"Hawk3\" FLANAGAN (second from left) receives the $7,500 first-place prize from PGL Commissioner Nolan Bushnell for winning the strategy category, as CaveDog and InterAct officials look on. THIOST down YOUTH AND REFLEXES OVERCOME EXPERIENCE as Thresh beats PGL Commissioner Nolan Bushnell in a no-holds barred \"Celebrity Pong DeathMatch.\" MGV Memory Ten usRobotics Logitech www.logitech.com rendition www.mgvgroup.com www.rendition.com www.ten.net www.zcom.com/x2 "


"PGL UPS THE ANTE FOR SEASON 3 As if $65,000 in cash and prizes for each of the first two seasons wasn't enough! The PGL, the league where it pays to play, will award more than $110,000 in its 3rd Season!! The cash prizes for each of the Action and Strategy 1-on-1 categories are being increased from $15,000 to $20,000, and another $30,000 in cash will be divided among the top four clans in the Action Teamplay category. And now, all 256 regular season qualifiers will receive an official PGL shirt just for \"making the cut!» Registration is open now, with the qualification phase running through September 6. THERE'S STILL TIME TO SIGN UP NOW! www.pal.com The PGL Web Site: CYBER \"SPORTS CENTRAL\" PGL Are You a Control Freak? AMDG PROFESSIONA MERS LEAGUE Features GXQuickScores About the PGL Registration P uerto Scoreboard AMO PGL Who says power has to come with price. AMDA KO Whether you're among the elite players competing in the PGL or just a casual gamer, or only want to watch, the one web site you oughtta bookmark is www.pgl.com, home base for the Professional Gamers' League. Stats, standings, schedules, profiles, box scores, game summaries, downloadable demos, high-light reels it's all here. PGL News AMD PROFES TONAL GAMERS LEAGUE Scoreboard Real Team Standings About the PGL Registration Wostorn Conference Eastern Conference Schedule Scercbeard Preu Center WWW.PGL.COM AMD PGL Sign Up Now!www.pgl.com PROFESSIONAL GAMERS LEAGUE AMD, the AMD logo, and the combination thereof, are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc PGL, Professional Gamers' League, and the PGL logo are trademarks of Professional Gamers Learut. TEN. Total Entertainment Network Play It Online, and the TV loco are trademarks of TE Network, Inc. QUAKE Is a registered trademark of id Software, Inc. The id Software name and the le logo are trademarks of id Software, Inc. Command & Conquer is a registered trademark and Red Alert is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. US Robotics and the US Robotics logo are registered trademarks and xa and the xa logo are trademarks of 3COM Corporation or its subaldiaries. Dockers and the Dockers logo desien are registered trademarks of Levi Strauss & Co. Creative Labs and the Creativo Labs logo are registered trademarks of Creative Technology Lid. AT&T WorlNet is a registered trademark of ATAT. All other logos, trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. The Professional Gamers' Lease will be subject to all applicable federal and state laws. The Professional Gamers' League reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to modily this contest in any manner whatsoever Oncluding, but not limited to rules, prizes, and start date) as well as the night to cancel this contest for any reason. Go to #088 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"WARGAMES 100+ HOT NEW GAMES AXIS & ALLIES COMBAT MOVE COVER STORY V Hasbro Interactive (508) 921-3700 www.hasbro.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q3 '98 asbro is more upand-down than the stock market these days: For every Risk! or SCRABBLE on the PC, there's a PICTIONARY to make you long for the days when games shipped on floppies (at least they could be reformatted). All this should change with the advent of Axis & ALLIES, from Meyer-Glass Interactive. This is easily Hasbro's best Windows design since MONOPOLY, and it's potentially one of the big hits regardless of genre-of '98. AXIS & ALLIES is the quintessential beer-and-pretzels wargame, offering a grander scope (and even more fun) than do PANZER GENERAL and CLASH OF STEEL. Despite its abstractions, AXIS & Allies quaintly illustrates the major themes of WWII. The game begins in early 1942, at the peak of Axis success, where Germany and Japan must press hard for a strategic victory before the industrial might of the U.S. swings the tide in the Allies' favor. Along the way, you defend Karelia and China, try to bomb Britain out of the war, coordinate amphibious assaults, and research high-tech weapons like jet fighters and V-2 rockets. One of the secrets to Axis & Allies' boardgame success has been that it easily accommodates optional rules. The computer version not only updates the map (ending those arguments about how many moves it takes to get through Panama) it also lets you toggle everything from factory output to the number of hits battleships take before they sink. Despite the rumors you may have heard, Axis & Allies is not in realtime; it doesn't need to be. Whether you contest for the world's dominance alone or in multiplayer mode, the pace is brisk, and Hasbro plans to support every kind of multiplayer option from Internet and LAN to email, with optional time limits for each turn. If the development team retains its focus, look for this to be well worth the 14-year wait. As one would expect from a TalonSoft game, every fighter, recon, bomber, pilot, and historical target from the battle is included. Extras include modeling of leaders and an optional 1941 campaign plus, it's fun to watch Grigsby being pulled kicking and screaming into Windows 95 gaming. out of arrows, MEDIEVAL models just about every obscure polearm or bladed weapon; you can even hurl rocks. The 10 to 12 scenarios planned for the final release include such famous battles as Bannockburnfor all of you Braveheart fans out there-Stanford Bridge, and Hastings. And if your favorite obscure battle from the Wars of the Roses doesn't make the cut, just build your own with the campaign editor. By combining the improved interface from ZULU WAR! with the tactical richness of Incredible Simulations' earlier games, MEDIEVAL should be the company's biggest hit yet. MEDIEVAL HPS/Incredible Simulations (408) 554-8381 www.hpssims.com Company ETA: Q2 '98 CGW's ETA: Q3 '98 BATTLE OF BRITAIN TalonSoft (800) 211-6504 www.talonsoft.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA: 04 98 does Avalon Hill's ACHTUNG! SPITFIRE, but it gives you much more control over how to fight the campaign. As the Germans, you can launch up to 100 Luftwaffe raids each day, choosing your time, altitude, escorts, and pathways to the more than 300 targets. Defending as the British is challenging, because you never have enough of those terrific aircraft, your best pilots are always fatigued, and.... Well, you get the picture. ncredible Simulations, the REMEMBER THE ALAMO! folks, are at it again, this time with MEDIEVAL, a comprehensive, tactical look at field warfare in the Dark Ages. It features knights on horseback, shield walls, and stout yeoman with deadly yew bows. And if you happen to run he core of BATTLE OF BRITAIN is essentially Gary Grigsby's venerable USAAF from the old Apple 11/C-64 days, with the advantage of a more dynamic site uation. The gameplay gives you less detailed tactical combat than owolone bw les 99.99 19:09 D www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 153 "


"RATING PENDING RP mu CONTENT RATED BY ESRB Westwood www.westwood com "


"Engage in the most powerful Lands of Lore experience yet. TW Immerse yourself in a 3D role-playing world populated with savage beasts and a huge cast of cunning characters. LANDS COLECU COMING FALL 1998 Explore vast new worlds including the Ruloi Homeworld, the Shattered Desert, and for the first time, the entire city of Gladstone. TR  Westwood Studios, Inc. Lands of Lore is a registered trademark and Westwood Studios is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 3Dix and the 3Dfx logo are registered trademarks of 3Dfx Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. Choose one of four familiars who can accompany you as a scout, spy, fighter, gatherer, healer or thief. Go to #255 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES WARGAMES TUDOREX COVER_STORY missile destroyer simulation to complement its 6881 submarine simulation. During development, that rumored sim evolved into FLEET COMMAND, which gives you command of an entire carrier battle group. You can direct each of the battle group's assets using a simple point-and-click interface imagine the naval weapons systems for HARPOON controlled by an interface that's only a little more complex than that of COMMAND AND CONQUER. You can set ship actions, and even command individual aircraft to patrol or gamers consider this series a little dated now, it's still the best for simulating 19th-century combat. In this edition, the Confederacy is against the wall as it launches the last great Rebel offensive, backed by Longstreet's veterans from Lee's Army of Northern Virginia. Unlike in SID MEIER'S GETTYSBURG, the BATTLEGROUND system does let you fight an entire Civil War battle at once, in addition to numerous small engagementsof which there are plenty to be had near Chickamauga, also known as the \"river of blood.\" Your ship being at Your Shipling Enemy fing Enemy being hit OUTH COURSES CRITTSTHE COURSES 11000 1007015 1000M IN SIAMUSINAVIGATION IN WEAPUNSO OVITUN ORARISPEEP FIGHTING STEEL SSI (800) 245-4525 www.ssionline.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW'S ETA: Q4 98 a hot 3D accelerator card for this one) and micromanage to your heart's content The four campaigns (both Axis and Allied) show the usual deft SSI touch, but it's likely that the multiplay options will spark the most interest. Scenarios run from 30 minutes to an hour-perfect for sinking the Graf Spee during a lunch break. Oro O OLO F/A-18 Hornet TRACK 0030 COURSE: 094 SPEED: 510 KTSM 1.5 ALTITUDE 0.1 KFT DAMAGE: 0 Oo IGHTING STEEL lets you relive famous naval surface engagements of WWII-10 aircraft carriers here in a game that sails far beyond GREAT NAVAL BATTLES. The wide variety of destructive hardware from the more than 90 ship classes includes everything from 18-inch guns to \"Long Lance\" torpedoes. While FIGHTING STEEL is a real-time wargame (you play primarily from a command perspective), it also allows you to get intimate with your gorgeous vessels (you'll want CURRENT ORDER: Patrol FLEET COMMAND Jane's Combat Simulations (415) 571-7171 www.janes.ea.com Company ETA: Q1 '99 CGW's ETA: Q1 '99 pou may have heard the rumor that Jane's was working on an Aegis guidedintercept targets. Naval vessels for a wide variety of countries are modeled, so you can set up a conflict around India as easily as one on the Black Sea. Although it's a strategic simulation, it uses the graphics engine from FIGHTER LEGENDS, so you'll be able to view the consequences of your orders on an impressive 3D display. IN THE WORKS Chickamauga isn't the most famous battle of the Civil War, but the Confederate and Union forces are very evenly matched, which makes this a great situation for a wargame. As usual, the emphasis is on morale and command control, and you may toggle the latter to help you learn the system. In addition to the full-motion video of Civil War reenactments, CHICKAMAUGA sports a spiffy new 32-bit engine. So, if this is a modest hit, you have to wonder: Could there be a BATTLEGROUND 10? ith all its other highprofile projects, it would be easy to miss TalonSoft's WEST FRONT. But we saw several improvements, not the least of which was the much faster speed of the game's engine from that of EAST FRONT. The big gun on the horizon is HARPOON 4 from SSI, which boasts full cooperation from Larry Bond, the bestselling author and designer of the paper Harpoon game. There's no way this will ship before the summer of 1999, however, and it could possibly be as late as fall '99. Strategy First's MAN OF War II proceeds apace with a simpler interface. It looks to be a lot more fun in multiplayer mode than was the original, though it still lacks D3D support. Interactive Magic is working on another GREAT BATTLES title, this one by S. Craig Taylor, on the Civil War. It will not use the engine from AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. The rumored GREAT BATTLES game on samurai in Japan was simp ly that--a rumor, evidently begun by fans of the period. BATTLEGROUND 9: CHICKAMAUGA TalonSoft (800) 211-6504 www.talonsoft.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGWS ETA: 0498 he most successful wargame series comes back for a limited PC engage ment, which is only available direct from TalonSoft. Although many 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"It's unlike anything you'd expect from a sound card. It's everything you'd expect from us. et ready for an unprecedented PC audio experience. CREATIVE WwW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM "


"PCI 250 CREATIVE BLASTER Creative introduces Sound Blaster Live!\", a revolution in digital audio. It is the finest audio product we have ever developed. Experience special effects and audio performance that rivals Hollywood sound studio quality. This powerful PCl-based audio accelerator will let you experience unsurpassed acoustical realism in your favorite games. Hear sound effects so real you will feel like you're in the game.  Includes the world's most powerful audio-processing engine, the EMU1OK 1 Enhances audio in games, CD's, and other audio applications  Experience surround audio with built-in support for two to four speakers 1990 Creative Technology Ltd. All other hand or product names listed are tracomuks ut registered trademarks and to property of their respective holders. If you're not on the net, call 1.800.998,5227 for more information, "


"AINTRODUCING Sound BLASTER PC Audio Has Changed Forever. Combine this with the ability to playback and enhance music CD's or any other audio source with true digital processing, and it may just leave your existing sound system behind. Sound Blaster Live!\" is the first sound card to support Environmental Audio, Creative's revolutionary new audio technology that recreates Environmental real-world multidimensional audio experiences on your PC. Audio Experience Sound Blaster Live! — see your local retailer by CREATIVE or visit us at www.soundblaster.com/sblivel today, CREATIVE WWW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM Go to #154 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"You may have the talent, but do you have the TALON ? iMagic's TALON Campaign System gives you a brand new mission each and every time you play! iF A-18E HIHJA MUIS H11 Multiplayer options let you play solo or battle your friends via modem or network. Active Cockpit provides the most intuitive control system found in a light sim. Experience the thrill of catapult takeoffs and landings on an aircraft carrier flight deck. iF/A-18E GABRIER STRINE FIGHT iMAGIC P.O.Box 13491. Research Triangle Park NC 27709 Visit your local retailer, call toll free 1-800-789-1534 or visit www.imagicgames.com for more information Go to #084 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink if-18, TALON, and DEMON are trademarks and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. All other trademarks are property of their respective owners. Copyright 1998 Interactive Magic, Inc. All rights reserved. MAGICO "


"HARDWARE  100+ HOT NEW GAMES LOGITECH WINGMAN FORCE Wingman Force Logitech (510) 795-8500 www.logitech.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW's ETA: 04 98 HOVERSITORY he Wingman Force is leading the wave of third-generation force feedback devices. Make no mistake, this is a big stick: It takes up more desk space than the year-old Sidewinder Force Feedback Pro from Microsoft. However, the placement of buttons and throttle slider on the unit makes for a natural twohanded stance-one hand on the stick, the other resting on the base with throttle and programmable buttons in easy reach. The Wingman Force is fully DirectInput compatible and uses Immersion's I-Force 2.0 technology, which is widely supported. The stick supports frequencies up to 250Hz, allowing for much more subtle effects: Gone are the sledgehammer machine gun recoils-unless the game developer intends it. The Wingman Force can connect to your system via either serial cable or USB. Looh KENWOOD Z40X CD-ROM DRIVE Zen Research (408) 863-2767 www.zenresearch.com Company ETA: Q3 '98 CGW's ETA: Q3 '98 The Z40x marks Kenwood's entry into the crowded field for data CD-ROM drives. If they can deliver on the promised performance at a reasonable price, then this drive could be a real winner. ometimes less is more; such is definitely the case with the Kenwood 42x CD-ROM drive. The drive incorporates Zen Research's \"True\" technology. The drive really spins at a constant 10x speed (constant linear velocity). The 42x read speed is realized by splitting the laser into seven beams that read seven tracks simultaneously. The net MICROSOFT USB SPEAKERS Microsoft (425) 882-8080 www.microsoft.com Company ETA: Q4 '98 CGW's ETA: 04 '98 he folks in the hardware group at Microsoft looked carefully at the highly competitive market for powered speakers. Then they threw caution to the winds and dived in. The result is a uniquely Microsoft spin on speakers. They have a fairly solid power amp80 watts RMS total. The compact bass unit has a 6-inch, downward-firing driver coupled to a 6inch passive radiator, so the level of mid-bass and bass is beefier than the driver size might indicate. There are a couple of small, highly sculpted satellite units. The unique feature of the Microsoft speakers is the USB connection. If you like, you can connect these puppies to your USB port and rip that sound card out. Imagine that: no more IRO, DMA, or other headaches. The DIA converter is in the bass unit itself; digital data is sent out over USB to the speakers. All is not completely rosy, however. If the game has significant music content, you need to have a software MIDI renderer (which ships with DirectX 6.0). However, that's a CPU hit that's more significant with slower systems. The sound quality, though decent, tends to be heavy in midrange and mid-bass. That's fine for most games, but it sounds overdone with acoustic music. However, there's a software graphic equalizer that ships with the speakers, so you can probably tweak to your heart's content. KENWOOD 2001 result is read performance that's close to that of a hard-drive, with no annoying vibration and very fast spin-up. In the early days of CD-ROM drives, there was a promise that games would be run directly from the CD. In this era of games that take up 400MB of hard-drive space, we can only chuckle at our naiveté. Maybe Kenwood and Zen Research have broken the code. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 161 "


"Welcome to the GAMERS LINE 1998 Best Game, PC Best Action Game MATURE 1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved.  1997 Valve LLC. All rights reserved Valve and the Valve logo are trademarks of Valve L.L.C. This product contains software technology licensed from Id Software, Inc. (\"Id Technology\"). Id Technology  1996 Id Software Inc. Direct3D is a trademark and Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. OpenGL is a trademark of Silicon Graphics Computer Systems. CONTENT RATED BY ESRB "


"Great Outdoors! SPF 15 RECOMMENDED LE RUN. THINK SHOOT. LIVE. DEVELOPED BY CHECK OUT HALF-LIFE VIDEOS AT WWW.SIERRASTUDIOS.COM Go to #166 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink ATERRA VALVE "


"100+ HOT NEW GAMES HARDWARE STB 00++ VELOCITY 4400 KOVANOU S. RIVA TNT 128-Bit Twin-Texel Processor 16MB AMD K6-2 AMD (800) 538-8450 www.amd.com Company ETA: 03 '98 CGW'S ETA: Q3 '98 STB (972) 234-8750 www.stb.com Company ETA: 03 '98 CGWS ETA: Q3 '98 AGP 2X BUS COVER STORY FLOCITY 4 AMACI NO BAR WINAMINEN MD is breathing life back into the old Socket 7 motherboard standard with the K6-2. In addition to higher clock speeds than its predecessor, the K6-2 incorporates AMD's 3DNow instructions-27 floating point instructions well suited to handle the math needed to speed up 3D games. The K6-2 uses a 0.25-micron process, which will make for AMD T his is the first card announced that will use the powerful new RIVA TNT (Twin Texturing) 2D/3D accelerator. Some of the demos we've seen on this card have been quite impressive. Imagine QUAKE II at 1600x1200 at over 30fps. Imagine DeathMatch QUAKE Il at 1600x1200—you can see the other guy before he sees you. The TNT will likely be the hot ticket in AGP cards in the near future. STB's retail version will arrive with a hefty 16MB of 125MHz SDRAM-no wimpy 8MB packages need apply. The Velocity 4400 supports TV out and OpenGL, and is fully tuned for Direct3D 6.0. The TNT chip sports dual rendering engines on a single 7-million transistor chip. This card is a fully 32-bit rendering engine, and offers per-pixel MIP mapping and effects throughout. It even does anisotropic filtering. If you've had reservations about the image quality of the original RIVA 128, you won't believe that you're looking at a RIVA. The 2D performance is likely to be quite speedy as well, and of course, it will have good VGA. Prices had not been set when we went to press, but you can safely assume that STB will price this card fairly aggressively. won't slide on either carpet or smooth floors. And the desktop unit is short, so it should fit easily on crowded desktops. Like many such wheels, the Microsoft version is fairly small, sized more like a Formula 1 wheel. (Aside: When, oh when will we see a NASCAR-sized wheel?) Also like many force feedback wheels we've seen, the forces are somewhat coarse-but it somehow seems more appropriate for a wheel. In an interesting move, Microsoft is eschewing a USB connection for this controller. Good force-feedback requires a highspeed (12Mbps) connection, and there were some technical reasons they couldn't go with that. So for the time being, you'll still need the same sound card connection, with supported MIDI data pin, as the Microsoft Sidewinder Force Feedback Pro joystick. At a bit over $200 (MSRP), it won't be cheap, but having the added pizzazz of force feedback plus the compact size may, uh, force many of us to fit our desktops with this wheel when we need our racing fix. ROC-E SOR 3DNow! MICROSOFT FORCE FEEDBACK WHEEL Microsoft (425) 882-8080 www.microsoft.com Company ETA: 04 98 CGW'S ETA: 0498 he members of the controller team at Microsoft have spent a lot of time on the industrial design of this wheel, and it shows. It clamps to the table with a single clamp that you need to adjust only once. The floor pedals are designed so they higher clock speeds while it generates less heat. To ensure that you get optimum performance, you do need to install a new motherboard (a.k.a. a \"Super 7\" board) that supports the 100Mhz memory bus and AGP graphics. AMD has been shipping 266, 300, and 333MHz K6-2's since early this summer. To make sure that the K62's performance potential is reached, AMD has developed enhanced hardware drivers for DirectX 6.0, OpenGL 1.2, and Glide (3Dfx's proprietary API). DirectX 6 applications need to use the Direct3D geometry pipeline for best performance, At prices that are roughly 25 percent lower than the equivalent Pentium II and with 3D performance that is potentially much higher, the K6-2 from AMD may bring high performance 3D games to the sub$1,000 PC. CGW 164 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"drunswick GGGGG You're in the 10th frame, there's a bucket of sweat dripping off your brow and this shot is worth way too much money Brun PUTTY Easter Muti IS IT REAL OR IS IT... \"Amazingly Fun!\" NG Brunswick  Brand new Brunswick Skins Game format Brunswick  Multi-player up to 32 players FIR PU Intelligent bowler and crowd reactions State-of-the-art physics engine for unbelievably real pin action  Cosmic Bowling 13 Brunswick ProStaff Bowlers Coming in September www.thq.com www.brunswickbowling.com THOB WINDOWS \"95 PlayStation Go to #152 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Brunswick is a registered trademark of Brunswick Corporation. Cosmic Bowing and ProSalt are trademarks of Brunswick Bowling and Ballands Corporation. Brunswick Circut Pro Bouting is a trademark c THQ Inc.  THO Inc. PlayStation and the PlayStation pour toitured trademarks d Sory Computer Entertamente "


"Civilization; Call to Power 01998 Activision, Inc. Activision is a registered trademark and Call to Power is a tradematk of Activision, Inc. CIVILIZATION computer games (1991-1998 MicroProse Software, Inc. CIVILIZATION IS a trademark or registerer trademark of MicroProse, Inc. or its affiliated companies. This product is made and sold under license from MicroProse. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. (c. 600 BC) Pittacus is what he does with power. The measure of man "


"ACTIVISION CIVILIZATION CALL TO POWER www.calltopower.com Go to #232 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Windows 08The Gamer's View * Windows 98 Setup Is Win 98 Worth the Upgrade for Game Players? 3 Prepang to run Woona 98 SI Contrg normation about you costat copying Wrows 98 ties to yout corputer Resting you correr 9 Setting up we and 105: stog Windows 98 Setup by Denny Atkin coming out that require Win 98 instead of Win 95. So the only reason to upgrade would be to get the relatively minor updates in the OS. Welcome to Window S8 Setup Cong sudion on choosing Wndows 98, the tollware that makes you computer more powelu, reliable manageable and erletaining Win Windows 98, you can correct to the Internet gicky and sly And Windows 98 is even sier to use than Wrdow. 95 Estimated time lemany 30.60 minuten Setup wal tako kom 30 to 60 minuter. depending on the speed of your computer Setup wd now check your system to proceed click Continue Forum Ey Setup Watchtrere torson 662 Vindows 98 Setu. hen it comes to Windows 98, the best news for most gamers will be that Microsoft's controversial new operating system does very little to change the PC gaming landscape. Win 98 is more or less \"Windows 95.1,\" a fine-tuned version of the older operating system with updates to support newer hardware. Because the two operating systems share the same basic architecture, you shouldn't see any games Microsoft EASIER SETUP Windows 98 includes more drivers on its CD than does Win 95, and it can use your old drivers if you're updating from Win 95, so most users should find the upgrade painless. COMPUTER GAMING *** ** WORLD The Hard Decision The most immediately noticeable upgrade in Windows 98 is the controversial (at least to the U.S. Department of Justice) integration of Internet Explorer 4.0 with the operating system. (Netscape Communicator still works fine with Win 98 if you choose to install it, by the way.) This actually does have benefits: The integration of HTML with the Windows Explorer gives you significant power to customize your desktop, even if you disable the memoryhogging Active Desktop feature. You configure the desktop to act like a Web browser, so the mouse-dexterity-challenged can open files with a single click. But there's actually little here that Windows 95 users can't get with a free download of IE 4.0 from Microsoft's Web site. More significant for some users is Windows 98's support for new hardware technologies. Of prime interest for gamers is support for the Universal Serial Bus (USB). PROS: Much better hardware support than Windows 95; good Web inte gration; nice suite of built-in utilities. CONS: Large Windows 98 memory footprint; not enough new features to justify the upgrade price for most Win 95 users. Price: $90 (street price, upgrade from Win 3.1 or 95), S190 (street price, full version) Publisher: Microsoft Redmond, WA (425) 882-8080 which allows you to attach multiple peripherals—such as USB game controllers-without having to deal with interrupts and other installation hassles. Win 98 also includes support for the IEEE 1394 FireWire standard, a new high-speed interface that may eventually replace IDE and SCSI, but which isn't likely to proliferate until 1999. Finally, there's support for DVD drives and television cards-not a big deal since those devices generally include more powerful viewer software than the built-in Win 98 stuff. One enhancement of interest to flight simulator fans is that Win 98 allows you to add a additional 2D/3D graphics card and drive multiple monitors. FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 already supports this graphics capability, enabling you, for instance, to use one monitor to display your instruments, a second to show the forward view, and a third to show an external view. Note: Driver support for this feature is very limited, and it works currently with only a few video cards. Given the growing size of today's games, Win 98's support for the FAT32 disk format should appeal to many gamers. Available in later service releases of Win 95, FAT32 uses smaller clusters so that small files take up much less space on your hard disk. Using the built-in FAT32 converter can increase your hard-disk storage by 20 percent or more, depending on the size and number of files on your drive. Win 98 has been hyped as more stable than Win 95 due www.microsoft.com www.computergaming.com 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"Whave w are? De Pie WINDOWS 98 Code Gordo Dick Bulag SARAS where The Dive Commenter i opress you drive by converting to FAT32 Hatem Alter the conversion wou h ond dick pace and your progestartlaste Demon Forrormation about converting. ckck. Desh th what that lets you modify system that while this does speed couple of new SIMMs with startup and INI files using a program loading, it makes the your Win 98 purchase. The OS simple point-and-click inter files appear fragmented to has a bigger memory footprint face. Also, if your registry gets third-party utilities, and that than does Win 95, so systems scrambled and Win 98 can't running programs such as with 16MB of RAM (and even start up, the system will auto Norton SpeedDisk will undo systems with 32MB with matically load a backup copy the optimizations. some recent games) will see from the last time you success As for program performuch more swapping of D eterg fully booted. The new Windows memory to Update feature can check Diive Converter (FATRI the hard disk. Microsoft's Web site for new This can make drivers and other updates and for jerky perinstall them automaticallyformance in but it functions only if you've games. Given electronically registered your the recent copy of Win 98 with Microsoft. dramatic drop FASTER FILES The new ver Finally, DirectX 5.0 is now built in price for sion of Disk Defragmenter into the operating system, so memory, we Next> Cancel can actually arrange files in you won't have to worry about recommend the order in which they're DirectX hosing your computer's THINNER FAT The FAT32 converter will modify that you budaccessed by the game or drivers--at least until DirectX your hard disk's file system to use smaller get an application, thus shortening 6 ships this summer. clusters, which means that the tiny files asso upgrade to at load times. ciated with many games will take up less least 64MB of Performance room on your hard disk. RAM if you to the maturity of its code, but, Anxiety decide to as the saying goes, actual Win 98 features a number upgrade to Windows 98. results may vary. It's no worse of performance enhancemance, testing with ZD's than Win 95, but I've had the ments designed to speed WinBench 98, 3D WinBench Happy With usual share of weird Explorer performance in those areas 98, and a number of frame What Ya Got? crashes when shutting down where people experience counter-equipped games Of the PCs I updated to the system or opening disk most delays: loading pro(UNREAL, QUAKE II, FLIGHT Win 98 for this article, only windows. Win 98 does include grams, and starting up and SIMULATOR 98, JANE'S F-15, one machine received signifia superb System Information shutting down the system. and FLYING CORPS GOLD) cantly added capability: a tool, which contains a module The Disk Defragmenter utility showed no appreciable perfor Pentium II system with a that can determine if a proanalyzes programs and deter mance differences on systems DVD-ROM drive, an ATI All-ingram has overwritten system mines the order in which they equipped with 32MB or more Wonder Pro TV/video card, files with older versions; a load accessory files and DLLs; of memory. If you have less and USB. Owners of less Registry repair tool; and a it then reorders the files on RAM than that, however, bleeding-edge systems will system configuration module disk for faster loading. Note you'll want to bring home a likely find that the minor feature updates and new utility software isn't worth Win 98's steep $90 upgrade price. If you have a fairly new PC and you're interested in using the most welcome news about the Windows 98 upgrade is that it should be painless for the vast technologies such as USB, you majority of users. While Win 95 included major architectural changes from Win 3.1, Windows 98 uses may find Win 98 a worthwhile the same core technology. This means you can utilize your old hardware drivers, and you shouldn't update. Otherwise, Win 95 need to replace your old software. In our testing, every game and productivity application designed for Win users would do well to take a 95 ran fine on Win 98. The only exceptions were old versions of disk-optimization utilities, such as Norton quick trip to Microsoft's Web Utilities you'll need to get an update that's compatible with Windows 98's FAT32 disk structure, page: Download Internet I installed the release version of Win 98 on five Win 95 systems ranging from a 16MB P133 notebook run Explorer 4.0 and the Win 95 ning the original release of Windows 95 to a 128MB P11/400 system running Win 95 Service Release 2.1. In OSR2 utility updates (www. each case, the upgrade process was flawless, with none of the headaches I encountered upgrading systems microsoft.com from Win 3.1 to Win 95. That said, there's always a risk when upgrading any PC to a new operating system, windows/downloads/ especially if you're running on older hardware or just getting around to upgrading from Win 3.1, so back up contents/Updates! all data before performing the upgrade. In fact, we suggest backing up your data files, reformatting your W950SR2/Features.asp) hard disk, and installing the OS and your applications from scratch. This may be overkill, but we recommend and you'll get most of Winan operating system-reinstall at least once a year for performance and reliability reasons. Performing a dows 98's functionality at no fresh install of Win 98 is generally easier than installing Win 95, since Microsoft has included many more cost. CGW device drivers on the Windows 98 CD. Easy Upgrade? Www.computergarning.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"THE BUBA FACTOR CGW's Resident Hunter Locks His Sights on the Hottest-and Most Unexpected New Genre Joe Vallina he DEER HUNTER phenomenon, as it has been called, has been pontificated upon at great length for the past few months. How, people have wondered, could a small potatoes developing company like WizardWorks produce a game on a mere $100,000 and manage to have that game shoot to number one on the PC Data best-seller list—and stay in the top five for more than six months so far-towering over games such as QUAKE II, DIABLO, and even the granddaddy of all commercially successful computer games, MYST. I don't claim to fathom all the factors that played a role in this Cinderella story, but several of my peers here at Computer Gaming World call it \"the Bubba factor.\" Now, I don't subscribe to the notion that all hunters are \"Bubbas\"; just as I don't believe that all Northern Californians are BMW-driving, ex-hippie burnout yuppies who have to consult their cosmic counselor before they go to the john. But I digress. My point is this: Whether the \"hard-core\" gaming community likes it or not, hunters spend a lot of money on their sport, and now they're going digital. It's not surprising, then, to see a landslide of clones overflowing the shelves of the various (fill in the blank)-Mart stores in an attempt to take advantage of this-until nowuntapped market. In this roundup, I'll sort through the top seven contenders to the DEER HUNTER crown and let you know which are worth your money. So without further ado, let's break out our digital shotguns and rifles, don our silicon blaze-orange vests and camouflage ballcaps, and load up our .357-caliber miceit's time to go kill us some virtual critters. 10 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"THE BUBBA FACTOR DEER HUNTER'S EXTENDED SEASON ***** Unfortunately, that's about where the game's realism ends. Although the game does take into account the distance from you to the target (which means you have to aim higher the farther it is from you) any reasonable shot results in a DEER HUNTERS EXTENDED SEASON WINTER WONDERLAND It's white, but it's not too different from before. kill, even rump and gut shots. In the real world, as any real hunter knows, agut shot usually results in a long, arduous day of tracking a EER HUNTER'S EXTENDED SEASON is really just a glorified DEER HUNTER with a few new hunting areas and the addition of a black powder rifle. To be fair, the game doesn't claim to be much more than that in the first place, so at least WizardWorks is being honest. As with the original DEER HUNTER, EXTENDED SEASON lets you choose between a variety of prehunt options, including where to hunt, which weapon to use, and whether or not you want to use a tree stand and/or scents. After you make your initial gameplay choices, you are taken to the map screen for the hunting grounds you've picked, where you will blindly click around in a more or less random pattern, looking for signs of deer activity. These signs include rubs, scrapes, bedding areas, and droppings. When you finally find a sign of life (the signs in EXTENDED SEASON seem to be fewer and farther between than those in the original), you click on the Hunt icon and you're magically transported to that spot to begin your hunt. Once in your hunting spot, you click on the appropriate icons at the bottom of the screen to use cover scent and/or attractant, a deer call, binoculars, and rattling antlers. To the game's credit, the deer Al is actually tweaked so that if you start calling or rattling in an unrealistic manner, no buck will come within a mile of your position. The direction of the wind also has a lot to do with how close a deer will come to where you are waiting. To bag a trophy, you must take these aspects of the game into consideration. When you do finally raise your weapon to take a shot at Bambi, your aim will grow increasingly unsteady the longer you hold the weapon to aim it, as if your arms were growing weary. wounded, yet surprisingly ener getic animal through the woods until it finally succumbs to its wounds. So why not just take a fleeting potshot at the animal? In EXTENDED SEASON, you might as well. Of course, after the kill, just as in DEER HUNTER, the deer's head is instantly sent to the trophy room-let's see some gutting and skinning sims! While some may think this last request unreasonable, they surely couldn't object to some post-1994 looking 3D graphics. The deer animations are decent, if primitive, but this game, like DEER HUNTER, is a side-scroller and nothing more. Your inability to move around the environment is frustrating, to say the least, although WizardWorks promises this feature in the upcoming DEER 2 (which should be out this fall). On an up note, the game's relaxing sounds almost make up for your lack of mobility. DEER HUNTER'S EXTENDED SEASON is a decent add-on to a mediocre game. If you liked DEER HUNTER, you'll like this--and for a modest diversion, it's not all that bad. For the money, you could do worse. Publisher: WizardWorks; $14.99; www.wizworks.com OLD-TIMEY Use the black powder rifle for that Lewis and Clark feel. DEER HUNTER COMPANION ** * COMPANION BE nless you absolutely, positively, must own Outdoor Life. Even the five THER HOUSE everything with the DEER HUNTER name on new maps are inconseit, THE DEER HUNTER COMPANION is a waste of quential when you think of your hard-earned dollars. Basically, all it the hundreds of user-creatincludes is a strategy guide, but that guide con ed maps now available on tains no new or helpful inforthe Net. mation. In fact, everything covThe ered here regarding actual only other gameplay has already appeared feature in this lame package is in the booklets included with an .AVI video file called A Season DEER HUNTER and EXTENDED to Remember. Yawn. A portion SEASON—with the exception of of DEER HUNTER COMPANION'S the cheat codes, which can be profits go to Wildlife Forever (1 found on the Web or in our July think it was the only way the big00 02:30 and August CG Tips articles. wigs at WizardWorks could sleep The remainder of the booklet at night after releasing this ripBFD This lame AVI movie is consists of Outdoor Life-style off.) Save your money for tags the only thing included in \"Real-Life\" hunting stories and DEER HUNTER COMPANION that and licenses. real-world hunting tips—you'd you can't get elsewhere. Publisher: WizardWorks; be better off buying that copy of $9.99; www.wizworks.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 in "


"ZDNet. All the computing information you need, packed into one dynamic Web site. World-famous software library. Get ready to download! ZDNet has thousands of the highest-rated share ware programs, all virustested and reviewed and the latest commercial demos, too! The latest news 24 hours a day. From breaking technology news to your own FREE customized news feed, ZDNet delivers the in-depth coverage you need, from the sources you can trust. Enroll in ZDNet University. Be one of the first to join our online university and take courses in Java, C++, HTML, and more! Learn from expert instructors in the comfort of your own home or office. Powerful search engine. No time to browse? Use ZDNet Find It to quickly locate the specific computing information you need.  HTML THE YEAR 000006 000000 OOQ000 ZDNet Community Center. Join in! With 500+ journalists and more than 3 million users, ZDNet is an active community with unmatched computing expertise. AVA & Industry-standard product reviews. Which products are best for you? Turn to ZDNet for expert product reviews of everything from the latest tools for power users to the best software for kids. ACTIVES Explore ZDNet today at www.zdnet.com! No matter what you use your computer for, you need a source of comprehensive computing information you can count on. When you log on to ZDNet, you'll find the latest news, product reviews, top-rated shareware, lively discussions and more. It's all brought to you by Ziff-Davis, the world's leading provider of computing and Internet information. Visit ZDNet today at www.zdnet.com and explore the world's most trusted computing site! www.zdnet.com The world's most trusted computing site. ZD ZIFF-DAVIS All companies, products and services are registered trademarks of their respective companies "


"THE BUBBA FACTOR (SPORTING CLAYS ***** TROPHY HUNTE or my money, when it To call for the clays' release, you recover quickly in order to comes to pure, simple right-click once. After the clay is hit the second clay. gaming fun, out of all released, you right-click The animations for the the games in again to raise your gun. clays' release are very realthis roundup. CORTING Finally, you left-click to istic, with the exception of CHECK YOUR PATTERN SPORTING CLAYS SPORTING CLAYS shoot (two shots per the fur-and-feather clays, has many user-defined options. gets my vote. release cycle). This which look like bouncing The reason? It doesn't process works very beach balls from Hell. A Field Info little repetitive after a long sestry to do too much, and well. However, it takes status bar at the top of the screen sion, this game is perfect for the what it does, it does a while to get the tells you which kind of clays are casual gamer who wants a fun, damn well. The game, hang of leading the forthcoming and where they will quick diversion between meetings developed by Diversions clays enough to stay on target, and originate. The smart shooter will or appointments. Software for WizardWorks, bills the shotgun realistically \"kicks\" heed these hints. Publisher: WizardWorks, itself as an \"Interactive Shooting after each shot, so you have to While SPORTING CLAYS can get a $24.99; www.wizworks.com Simulation,\" and, indeed, it feels as if you are shooting a real shotgun at real clay targets. You parhowever. Since you still can't ticipate in a five-stand tournament ROCKY MOUNTAIN TROPHY move around within the enviin which you shoot at either 50 or ronment, you have to go to the 100 clay pigeons (there are five HUNTER * * map screen and (ugh) guesstypes from which to choose). and-click to find the series For such a simple little game, OCKY MOUNTAIN TROPHY handy feature. The of blood trails. this guy is packed with userHUNTER tries to take the spotting scope lets You can hunt elk, moose, defined options. You can personalDEER HUNTER engine a you see any animals bear, and ram in TROPHY ize these options for up to four step beyond its humble within a short disHUNTER, which is a pretty shooters. Options include the type origins; but while it does tance from your locagood representation of of clays you want to shoot, your have some enhanced tion on the map North American big-game match location, the choke pattern features and new game screen, giving you a hunting. There is only one size of your shotgun (at the small play options, its gameplay is really much better idea of large hunting area. est choke pattern, this game gets just glorified DEER HUNTER action. which way to go to Once the actual hunt begins, the extremely difficult), and the ability You begin the hunt by naming find game. game plays almost exactly like to play with an inverted mouse. your player and deciding which Another improvement is the DEER HUNTER. You use your calls You can also toggle various dis weapon and accessories to use addition of wounded animal track and scents while waiting, watchplay options that help you stay on (the game's token new weapon is ing. In my DEER HUNTER review ing, and listening for the animals' target while shooting. Among oth a .357 revolver). A new twist in (CGW #168), I lamented the fact approach. When an animal comes ers, these options include Pat TROPHY HUNTER, however, is that that it didn't matter which part of into range, you raise your weapon terning, which shows where your you have a set number of invento the deer's body you shot, all hits and shoot it. That's about it. shots hit; Tracking, which shows ry items that you can bring along resulted in a kill-gut shots be One \"feature,\" for me, makes the path of your aim and the clays on your hunt. This means you must damned. In TROPHY HUNTER, how this game incredibly more fun. trajectory, and Show Traps, which plan ahead regarding which ani ever, a gut or rump shot realistical Specifically, a cheat code that I shows from where the clays will be mals you want to hunt. ly results in the animal running had been dreaming of since I first thrown. You even choose what you There are four inventory item away, leaving a blood trail for you laid eyes on the original DEER want your shooter to yell when slots available in the game, but the to follow. The news isn't all good, HUNTER: a rocket launcher (called commanding the clays' release fourth is always taken the \"Atomic Disemboweler (\"Ready,\" \"Go,\" or the traditional up on my hunts by 3000\"). Go to the hunt screen \"Pull!\") and if your shooter will the spotting scope. and type in BGBarbecue, and you have a male or female voice. Prompted no doubt too can know the joy of demolishOnce you enter a tournament or by the endless wailing a 300-pound moose with a choose a station from which to ing and gnashing of high-explosive projectile! practice, you will go to a shooting teeth by reviewers ROCKY MOUNTAIN TROPHY HUNTER stand. You will see your shotgun and gamers with is a decent game, but it suffers barrel graphic (unfortunately the regard to DEER from many of the problems inheritmost unrealistic and primitive part HUNTER's horrible ed from its predecessor, DEER of the game), and a beautiful 2D guess-and-click map HUNTER. It's an improvement, but scene of the stand and its environs. interface, the folks at SHOT DOWN IN FLAMES That used to be the series still has a way to go. There is a three-step process WizardWorks have an elk on the wrong end of my Atomic Publisher: WizardWorks, involved in shooting at the targets. wisely added this Disemboweler 3000. $24.99; www.wizworks.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 173 "


"00 OD "


"The most anticipated RPG of the year. In the FORGOTTEN REALMS we've lived through foul pestilence, vicious battles, exorbitant taxes, and even the occasional dragon. But when HE showed up, things really started getting ugly. Prepare to be immersed into a world of intrigue and mystery on a perilous quest to rescue a storied land from impending war. Even your own soul is at stake as you and a party of adventurers become entangled in a dangerous riddle of betrayed alliances, dark prophecies and murder. Will you become the unlikely hero of the story, or merely another of its unfortunate casualties? Before you answer, the big guy here might have something to say about it. Explore an immense, intricate game world from cloud-covered mountains & rain drenched plains to dark catacombs & abandoned temples all meticulously rendered in lush, 16-bit SVGA graphics. Invoke more than 100 spells Freeze enemies with an icy blast from a Cone of Cold, or incinerate them with a searing stream of magical flame. Push your leadership skills to the limit as you guide a party of up to six characters, each with a personality that affects gameplay. Don't let your stubborn fighter pummel the arrogant thief you may need their teamwork in your next battle. Create your character from six AD&D races and 26 different classes and subclasses. You control every attribute, down to skin and hair color, weapons, and armor all accurately depicted on-screen FORGOT GIN REALING Baldur's Gate Coming Soon BIOWARE BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. Dungeons & Dragons www.interplay.com C1998 BioWare Corp. All rights reserved. BALDUR'S GATE, FORGOTTEN REALMS, the FORGOTTEN REALMS logo, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D to AD&D logo and the TSR logo are trademarks of TSR, Inc., a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc., and are used by Interplay under license. Interplay, the Interplay logo and \"By Gamers. For Gamers are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. The BioWare logo is the trademark of BioWare Corp. All rights reserved. Exclusively licensed and distributed by Interplay Productions. All other copyrights and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Go to #163 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"THE BUBBA FACTOR CABELA'S BIG GAME HUNTER A **** ABELA'S BIG GAME HUNTER suf the Yukon, and Montana. The game fers from a split personality: features animals as diverse as 50 percent of the game is bighorn sheep, coyote, mule deer, decent: 50 percent of it is and bison (there are 12 other utter crap. Let me explain. species as well). You even have to This is the only game in our sight in your weapons before the roundup that makes an effort to rehunt! The \"3D\" graphics here are create one of the most important nothing to write home about, but aspects of any hunt: the prepara they do the job. tions that take place before you It's when you actually take all ever actually set foot in the field. of your accumulated stuff out into Before the hunt, you get a set the woods that things go downhill amount of money to use. With it fast. The in-hunt graphics are terriyou purchase the appropriate tagsble. They resemble nothing even and licenses, as well as supplies. remotely close to the real wilderBIG GAME HUNTER has a multiness. To make matters worse, the tude of gameplay options. You can ambient sounds cut out and sound choose from 9 weapons and more unrealistic. The only time the than 65 hunting accessories, which sound is consistent is when your include specialized clothing and guide pipes up to tell you where safety gear-all conveniently to look for your game. You won't found in the Cabela catalog. You see it, of course, as no animals are can hunt in Virginia, South Dakota, actually modeled into the scenery. Instead, when you drag your prey will bound cursor around the part of the TALIN away. If you do screen the guide directs you to, get off a shot, your cursor turns into a be prepared to crosshair and an FMV video miss-again showing the animal begins. and again. Once, I sighted in an elk Any semblance of realism is with a 338 centerfire rifle at about immediately out the window as 75 yards. When I missed, the guide you see your static weapon and said, \"The wind out here is tricky, it targeting reticle hover over the tarblew the bullet off course.\" A.338 get animal. You have a precious at 75 yards? Are you kidding me? few seconds to aim at the video If you do manage to get a kill, animal and fire, or your intended you'll be rewarded with prize money to finance another hunt. But who would want to repeat this lousy process? If Head Games could find a workable hunt engine to pair with the pre-hunt preparations, they'd improve the game all the way to mediocre. As it stands, it's not worth your money. IS IT LIVE... Or is it a crappy Publisher: Head Games; $19.99; full-motion video? Ugh. www.headgames.com WILD WILD TURKEY HUNT **** TURKEYHUN ou can think of WILD TURKEY HUNTER (WTH) as a pareddown DEER HUNTER with even more primitive visuals. One thing that WILD TURKEY HUNTER really gets right is its sound. When you hear a tom gobbling at you onscreen, you'll swear there's a real bird in your house. The ambient sounds and the two types of calls (a scratch call and a box call) also sound very realistic. However, that's about as far as this game's realism goes. There are five hunting areas in the game, and each setting has the appropriate species of turkey. Sadly, though, the environments don't look very realistic, and the different turkeys all act the same: stupid. Domestic turkeys have a reputation for stupidity; but as any turkey hunter knows, wild turkey species are very shrewd. However, in this game, a turkey will just meander right up to you when you use either call, whether you use it realistically or not. It's then a simple matter to blast him onto your logbook screen, which keeps track of all your kills. Also, one shot will usually do it in WTH, although in the real world, a turkey's many tough layers of feathers can keep a single, long shotgun blast from being a killing shot. In this game, a 200-yard blast is as good as one at point-blank range. Also, you can't move around the chosen hunting area, and there is no map screen-you're stuck in one place the whole time. If you're dead-set on going for toms this virtual hunting season, you might like this game. Those not so limited, however, should probably find another stretch of woods. Publisher: ValuSoft/Sunstorm; $14.99; www.wizworks.com SO EARLY THANKSGIVING This tom is pretty far away from me, but one good blast should easily take him down. SPORTSMAN'S PARADISE ** ** PORTSMAN'S PARADISE is a collection of arcade games released in 1996. The graphics are dated and terrible, the gameplay is erratic, and the sound is very bad. So why do I keep playing Pigeon Hunt? Because it's the only game I know of that lets me live out my fantasy of going into my neighborhood park and blasting all those flying rats that swarm me when I'm trying to eat my lunch. At $19.99, this game isn't a bargain, but between its six games (Trap Shooting Pro, Duck Hunt II, Pigeon Hunt, Prairie Dog Hunt Pro, Pheasant Hunt, and Fly Fishing) you should find something you like. Just keep in mind that this game does not approach the level of quality of the other games in this roundup. By the way, for an updated version of Prairie Dog Hunt Pro, go to www. divsoft.com/pdhpro.html. Publisher: WizardWorks; $19.99; www.wizworks.com EAT IT, PIGEON Notice the exquisite pile of gore I'm leaving in my wake. 176 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"This isn't a Dating Service This is where you SCORE! \"NovaLogic's programmers did a superb job with the multiplayer codeeven in games with over 30 players, there was no perceptible lag in close-in combat.\" HIT'S A BLAST.\" -Computer Gaming World novaworld. The 1st [and ONLY] Large-Scale Gaming Service that DELIVERS: FAST, FURIOUS, SMOOTH GAMEPLAY MODERN COMBAT GAMES COMPETING IN ONE ARENA FREE* LARGE-SCALE MULTIPLAYER GAMING Most gaming services offer just matchmaking to players and charge a hefty fee. NovaWorld's Integrated Battle Space\" servers keep you connected with over 100 other opponents per arena and it's FREE. MO P MiG-29 VLC UU www.novalogic.com 800.858.1322 IBS— EXPERIENCE IT NOW novaworld.net O 1998 NovaLogic, Inc. NovaLogic and the Novaloglo logo are registered trademarks and NovaWorld, F-22, Raptor, Fulcrum, Delta Force, Integrated Battle Space are trademarks of NavaLogic, Inc. F-16 Multirole Fighter, Lockheed Martin and the Lockheed Martin star logo are trademarks of the Lockheed Martin Corporation and are used under license to Novalogla, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respec Live owners. U.S. Patent #s 5,625,759 and 5,550,959. With purchase of any Novalogic product. Novalogic reserves the right to change the terms of service at any time. Go to #129 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"HIGH PERFORMANCE 3D/2DI VIDEO GRAPHICS BOARDS SOMEDAY EVERYONE WILL HAVE PENTIUM II AGP SYSTEMS. UNTIL THEN, THERE'S THE STARFIGHTER\" PCI. The only Intel 740Mbased PCI board on the planet gives you virtual AGP performance on the PC you already have. You don't have to be a psychic to know AGP is the future of PC graphics. But if you're not ready to take the leap (not to mention shelling out $2500), you can still get industry-leading graphics performance on your PC. With the StarFighter\" PCI from REAL 3D In fact, it not only gives you the best image quality, StarFighter also takes up only one slot in your PC, delivering 2D, 3D and video all on a single card. Of course, that's exactly the kind of stuff you'd expect from the company that practically invented 3D graphics. So don't wait for AGP prices to come down to earth. Take off with StarFighter today. 1-800-393-7730 www.real3d.com/cgw Go to #108 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink \"Estimated street price for 12MB version Starfighter is a trademark of Lockheed Martin Corporation, REAL 3D and the Real 3D logo are registered trademarks of Real 3D, Inc. Intel and Pentium are registered trademarks, and Inte1740 is a trademark of Intel Corporation. 1998 Real 3D. New StarFighter PCI board, starting around $175* D Tech Data COMPRA Keylink « FOREFRON 3D SHOP Postingan compet kestik The COMPUTER SPORT PARALLAX SOLUTIONS, Inc. 3Da n www.techdata.com 1-800-237-8931 www.compusa.com 1-888-226-6772 www.graphicstech.com 1-800-999-9382 www.kaylink pios.com Users: 1-800-397-7587 Resellers: 1-800-832-4322 CA ORAZ 1-800-227-4712 www.the3dshop.com 1-888-368-3268 www.acomp.com 1-800-775-1953 www.vogue 3d.com 972-881-1579 www.forefront.com Canada: 1-800-667-11 "


"That 983 TAT 001 Voodoof. COMES 112 TURILE sous by Loyd Case Photography by Michael Falconer od OZ 2400 Silicon Loomis SOMS Silica C 75 :: MAGIC ASEN Silicon Silicant 100m SALICOR 100ks 100 MAGIC Silicon The Skinny ons Who's Got the \"Best Voodoo Board Out There computer gaming.com GAMINRUDE SEPTEMBER 1999 179 "


"& Tancu G atal master MUSIK www.3dfx.com Copyright 1998 3Dtx Interactive. Inc. The 3Dfx Interactive logo and Voodoo Graphics. Voodoo and Voodoo Rush are trademarks of 3Dix Interactive, Inc. Pyros Image from Ultima: Ascension and Vampire Image from Wing Comman Prophecy courtesy of ORIGIN Systems. 1998 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. ORIGIN Is an Electronic Arts company. F-15 Image from F-15 is courtesy of Jane's Combat Simulations. Jane's is registered trademark of Jane's Information Gro Ltd. Images from FIFA Road to World Cup \"98 and World Cup Soccer \"98 are courtesy of Electronic Arts. 1998 Electronic Arts. FIFA Official licensed product of the FIFA World Cup France 98. All rights reserved. All other trademarks 1997, 1998 Square Co., Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Final Fantasy and Square Soft are reg the trade names are the properties of their respective owners. Cloud Image from Final Fantasy VII is courtesy of Eidos Interactive and Square Soft tered trademarks of Square Co., Ltd. HIRO MIYAMOTO image from Dalkatana is courtesy of Eldos Interactive and ION Storm. HIRO MIYAMOTO name and character are trademarks of ION Storm, LP. Copyright  1998 TON Storm, L.P. 1998 Eldos interactive. Elexis image from SIN Is courtesy of Ritual Entertainmg rights reserved. Lara imago from Tomb Raider is courtesy of Eldos Interactive. Tomb Raldor. Lara Croft and her likeness are trademarks of Eldos interactive. "


"Take a Ride. Power. Software. Visuals. Quality. Wicked Fast. Go to #120 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Ritual and SiN are trademarks of Ritual Entertainment. SIN Images are copyright Ritual Entertainment. Activision registered trademark of Serra-On-Line. Inc. StarSiege image is courtesy of Dynamics and Sierra-On-Line, Inc. StarSlope is a registered trademark of Sierra-On-Line, Inc. is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Half-Life Image is courtesy of Valve, llc. and Sierra-On-Line, Inc, Half-Life is Entertainment and Probe Entertainment. Forsaken is a registered trademark of Acclaim Entertainment Ietworks, Inc. 1998 Sierra-On-Line, Inc. Forsaken image is courtesy of Acclaim 1998 Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. Skies image is courtesy of SegaSoft Networks, Inc. Skles is registered trademark of SegaSoft 1998 SegaSoft Networks, Inc. Messiah image is courtesy of Shiny Entertainment and Interplay Productions, Messiah images are trademarks of Shiny Entertainment. nage from Monster Truck Madness Il is courtesy of Terminal Reality and Microsoft Games. Microsoft and Monster Truck Madness Il are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Copyright Shiny Entertainment 1998. Monster Truck nage courtesy of Rage Software, plc. Incoming is a registered trademark of Rage Software, plc.  1998 Copyright Rage Software, plo. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved, Copyright Microsoft Corporation 1998. Incoming "


"THAT VOODOO2 MAGIC o canopus The Pure 3D II is an interesting card, but sports an oddly placed SLI connector. Dam TURL 12 MB GER GADIE ACCELERATOR de Designed for the Serre Gamer! der performance Vedio Viken output far and O Currealand IY & C Lancharzaves as Apican 3D Glossary Glide 3Dfx's proprietary lowlevel API that allows game developers to squeeze more performance out of the Voodoo? chipset Pass-Through A VGA cable that takes 2D card's output, and routes it into the Voodoo board. When boards based on 3Dfx's firstgeneration Voodoo chipset came on the scene, there were only two companies making boards: Orchid and Diamond. Others followed, but for a while those were the only two boards available. Not so with Voodoo?. There are at get is not only Glide, but very solid least eight different companies performance on Direct3D and making Voodoo-based boards, OpenGL. and with that many players all delivering what seems to be very A Look at the Numbers similar, if not identical, products, We tested the cards on a thumbs waiting for completely one has to ask, \"Aren't they all 400MHz Pentium Il system (CGW's pegged CPU to generate more pretty much the same?\" I recently No Holds Barred System, see pagepolygons. The reason for the minor took a look at 10 different 196) and a 200MHz Pentium difference at 800x600 is that most Voodoocards in one huge orgy of MMX system-something that's a of these games probably didn't up benchmark testing. What I found bit more representative of what the polygon count much at higher may surprise you. many gamers have. If the Voodoo? resolutions. Why Voodoo?? Well, as of this card had a built-in performance The spread on the 400MHZ writing, Voodoo is still the fastest slider in the control panel, we Pentium II was a bit wider-about and most versatile 3D chipset on jacked it to the maximum stable 10 percent from top to bottom. the market for PC gaming, deliversetting. This actually varied--the Note that 10 percent over the ing very fast Direct3D, OpenGL, Monster3D II, for example, could entire 3D GameGauge test isn't all and Glide performance. It is per n't run faster than 93MHz on our that big a difference. Also, there haps this last area of performance systems, though that certainly did are some mitigating issues: First, that really makes the 3Dfx story son't seem to hurt its performance. there were driver differences, interesting. Glide is 3Dfx's own Most surprising were the results some of the vendors were more low-level API that many game on the 200MHz Pentium MMX aggressive about incorporating developers embraced owing to system, though in retrospect, driver updates from 3Dfx into their Direct3D's shaky beginnings. And probably shouldn't have been surreleases. Some cards also had perwhile Direct3D has made huge prised. Note that the difference formance sliders, pushing these improvements, as have other between slowest and fastest card probably affected the results by a accelerators, some game develop is roughly 1 percent-statistically few percentage points. ers are still writing to Glide first, insignificant. Also interesting was As an aside, users who underand Direct3D when they get how little the performance dipped stand how SST commands work around to it. And even if this trend at 800x600. There are several poscan up the clock rate of cards that reverses itself, Voodoo is still a sible reasons: First, on a 200MHz don't have performance slidersvery solid Direct3D accelerator. So, Pentium MMX system, a Voodoo but that lack means that higher in Voodooz you won't get any 2D board is host-bound, meaning that clock rates may not be supported functionality, but what you will the Voodoo card is twiddling its by the maker. The bottom line is that the actual performance differential is REALTIME Sina SUSU pretty small. Hence, performance played a G PRODE ACGELERATOR surprisingly minor role in our scoring. TWICE THE Then there's the issue of $14 VOODOOR PERFORMANCE how much memory to get About the only 3D GameGauge score that was signifanc icantly affected by the presence of only 4MB of texture MASTER memory was F22 The FH ADF. It uses 8.3MB of texOn our 400MHz Pentium Il system, tures when runthe 24MB X-24 slightly outperformed ning, which was two 12MB Voodoo?'s in SLI mode. Continued on 189 SLI (Scan-Line Interleave) 3Dfx's proprietary technology for running two Voodoo boards that deliver nearly twice the fill rate of a single board. Each board draws every other scan line, or half the picture. SST Command Commands issued at boot-up in the AUTOEXEC.BAT that define performance parameters. In Voodoo, this can usually be tweaked in Display Properties sheet. 12AALID TMU (Texture Mapping Unit) This chip, as the name suggests, handles all texture mapping operations. Voodoo actually has two TMUs to achieve better performance. Sidian SP SHADOW Trilinear MIP-Mapping An advanced filtering technique in which the renderer takes a pixel, its four neighboring pixels, and the four neighboring pixels from the nearest MIP-map, and calculates a weighted average, and then draws that color value. This is the next level of filtering beyond bilnear filtering. QUANTUM3D COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Recreated for the new millennium the classic Dune Il returns L. ALL THE FAVORITE UNITS FROM THE ORIGINAL. NEW STRATEGIES, SPECIAL EFFECTS AND MUSIC. OVER 40 MISSIONS AND FULL MOTION VIDEO BRIEFINGS. DUNE 2000 DUNE 2000 LONG LIVE THE CICHTERS DUNE 2000 New HIGH COLOR GRAPHICS IN 8 AND 16 BIT. CHALLENGE YOUR FRIENDS TO MULTIPLAY. Available At Retailers Everywhere Or Call 1-800-874-4607 Westwood DUNE and 01998 Dino De Laurentiis Corporation Licensed by Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.  Wostwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Go to #249 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.westwood.com "


"UN PRIN RP MONOLITH Blood II: The Closen Blood, LithTech and the M logo are trademarks of Monolith Productions, Ino. Kirkland. W. This game uses the LithTech engine and tools developed and licensed by Monolith Productions in Blood II: The Chosen is published and distributed by GT Interactive Soltware Corp. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corp. GT is a trademark and the G7 tanes logo and GT logo are registered trademarks of GT Interactive Software . Alher trademarks are the property of their respective companies WINDOW GT Interactive Software www.muractiv.com V PRODUCTIONS www.tho-chosen.com www.gtgahus.com Available Halloween at your local retailer. Order direct at store.gtinteractive.com or call 1-800-610-GTIS. Take bloodshed to the next level with new 3D engine and fully modeled 3D characters. 30+ screaming fast, totally immersive and completely bloodsoaked levels. Run a savage gauntlet of multiplayer mayhem from Teamplay to Level Racing. "


"... and the seas became as BLOOD. THE blood Il CHOSEN the second cut is the deepest Explore vast, vivid, environmentsand destroy everything in sight. Four customizable, playable characters: Caleb, Ophelia, Gabriella and Ishmael. Flame Throwers, Tesla Cannons, Voodoo Dolls and Humiliation Animations. Go to #176 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"THAT VOODOOP MAGIC Features Comparison Product CGW Rating Software Bundle Price (12MB unless stated) ***** THE RECKONING $329; $279 for XL version (no TV out) Canopus Pure3D II (2) (95 MHz) (888) 868-2533 www.canopuscorp.com Creative Labs Voodoo2 (90 MHz) (408) 428-6600 www.soundblaster.com * * * * * ULTIMATE RACE PRO, INCOMING, G-POLICE $299 $299: $249 for 8MB Diamond Monster 3D II (94MHz) (800) 468-5846 www.diamondmm.com BATTLEZONE (large texture version), MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2, INCOMING CD of playable demos Guillemot Gamer3D 2 [12MB] (90 MHz) * * * * * $299, $229 for 8MB INCOMING, F1 RACING (full), PLANE CRAZY, HEXEN II, SUBCULTURE, RREDLINE RACER (playable demos) Guillemot Gamer3D 2 (8MB) (90 MHz) (800) 967-0863 www.guillemot.com ***** ***** None Metabyte Wicked 3D Voodoo(95MHz) (510) 494-9700 www.wicked3d.com $299 ***** 24 Playable demos $699 (24MB) Quantum3D X24 (93MHz) (888) 747-1020 www.quantum3d.com ***** $299; $229 for 8MB Orchid Righteous 3D II (93MHz) (800) 577-0977 www.orchid.com BATTLEZONE, G-POLICE (A3D enhanced), INCOMING (full versions). JEDI KNIGHT (limited vers.) * * * * * INCOMING, BATTLEZONE $279 STB Black Magic 3D (90 MHz) (972) 234-8750 www.stb.com Performance Data Pentium II 400MHz Test Resolution: 800x600 736 3D WinBench 98 GameGauge Canopus Pure 3D II (2) (95MH2) 1017 59.8 55. 6 59. 6 123A Creative Labs Voodoo? (90MHz) 945 53. 6 49.9 574 1695 Diamond Monster 3D II (94MHz) 8 102. 6 0. 1 56. 2 60. 3 744 Guillemot Gamer3D 2 (90 MHz) 98.8 56252353. 5 694 Guillemot Gamer3D 2 8MB (90MHz) 983 574 53. 8 5727 1728 Metabyte Wicked 3D Voodoo? (95MHz) 5 100. 5 8.0 54. 2 58.1 .172.0 Quantum 3D X24 (93MHz) 81774 175. 9 77. 2 Orchid Righteous 3D II (93MHz) 100.5 58.5 53. 3 61. 6 1745 STB Black Magic 3D (90MHz) 98.8 57354457. 8 1713 Voodoo Reference (SLI) 65.4 87. 0 46.1 47.6 45.9 23.5 414 423 91.0 GameGauge Total Score 396.2 372.5 399.7 373.7 380.4 385.1 598.4 398.5 386.1 592.5 890 50.1 46.5 89.4 1774 Pentium MMX 200MHz Test Resolution: 800x600 17,5 3D WinBench 98 GameGauge Canopus Pure 3D 11 (2) (95MHz) 721 26.0 35.5 35,6 120.2 350 Creative Labs Voodoo (90MHz) 24.8 34.1 35.8 68.7 Diamond Monster 3D II (94MHz) 25.8 35.1 35. 7 702 351 Guillemot Gamer3D 2 (90MHz) 60.0 25.8 353355 68.5 Guillemot Gamer3D 2 8MB (90MHz) 26.0 35.4 35.6 1684 364 Metabyte Wicked 3D Voodoo(95MHz) 25.8 355 359 715 352 Quantum 3D X24 (93MHz) 744 272 355 353 70.1 352 Orchid Righteous 3D II (93MHz) 24.8 342 35.7 121.6 STB Black Magic 3D (90MHz) 26.9 352 35. 8684 Voodoo Reference (SLI) 26.8 36.8 36.0 87.6 340 GameGauge Total Score 255.4 249.2 257.8 259.2 253.1 256.9 258.4 252.0 256.5 284.6 13.5 15.9 353 747 Forsaken Incoming Turok Qunke Ouake? F2ADF How We Test Totest products, we use the relevant WinBench 98 tests to measure the CPU's 3D performance. Then to see how well a system performs running 3D games, we run our own 3D GameGauge a collection of sex games-four Direct3D, two OpenGL. The 3D GameGauge score is the sum of the six games' frame rates COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"enemy ma Intelligence Instinct only one will survive. For orderling Information call 1-888-797-5867, Pre-order at your local retaler today www.ripcordgames.com @ 1996 Ripod Games. Gel 1998 Miro Fore w Limited. All Righs Reserved. Enemy Infestation is a trademark of Panasonic Interactive Media Company Clockworks and Micro Forte are trademarks of Micro Forte Partners Limited, All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. RATING PENDING CLOCKWORKS ENTERTAINMENT AWSON OF ABO FOR Panasonic Tipcord GAMES CONTENT RATED BY ESRB "


"Immersive Gameplay! WK SA Calien 160 Herbeeld Golden Teo -GOLF Golden Tee GO You'll Be Hooked! Now available at a store near you! INCREDIBLE TECIINOLOGIES FILIATE PARTNERS817 Award Winning, Arcade Style Game Play A Wide Selection of \"Three 18 Hole Courses in Multiplayer Options a Variety of Environments Go to #114 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink TrackSwing Technology: Natural Mouse Swing "


"THAT VOODOOP MAGIC To SLI or Not to SLI 3Dfx's you really want to run all your games at 1024x768, then you'd need a second board. One design gap in the Voodoo? is that, for all its horsepower, you can't run a single board at 1024x768 if you're double-buffering and have a Z-buffer. 1. SLI technology and the s potential performance boost it promises is enough to leave most gamers drooling. But like all things droolworthy in this business, the price tag will most likely give you pause. So this begs the question: Do you really need SLI? The answer, in most cases, is no. Here's why: Voodoo2 is quite often host-bound, and sits waiting for the CPU to hand it more triangles to draw. So if a single Voodoo board is twiddling its thumbs, then the only thing doubled by adding a second board is thumb-twiddling. No huge performance increase. And you're talking about laying down another 5300 for the second board. If you're ready to get a Voodoo? board, then the way to go is to buy a single board, get it up and running, and see how it feels. If it feels sluggish (not likely), or you find that you're really pining for 1024x768, then make the second trip to the computer store. As DirectX 6.0 games begin to arrive that use multitexturing, these may necessitate a second board, but the thing to do here is play the game first, and if it feels sluggish, considera second board. Otherwise, enjoy the single board, and consider a second when you find that new games are bogging down your single board, But, appreciate that as new games come out, it may not be Voodoo that's your bottleneck, but your CPU. Dave Salvator Are there instances where you'd want that second board? Yes. If you absolutely, positively have to have the biggest, baddest, hellaciously fast setup, and you already have a super-fast CPU (at least a 300MHz Pentium II), then twin Voodoo's will take you there. Or if WRONG! Go back to Double A and learn some fundamentals! Even as your teammate crosses Continued from page 182 probably the root cause of the slightly slower scores. The 3D WinBench score was slightly lower due to several scenes that have big texture sets. Most games didn't seem to stress an 8MB card much, and they are certainly less expensive. Of course, texture sets in games are growing, not shrinking, so having that extra 4MB of texture memory on 12MB boards will mean less frame-rate stutter as newer titles come out that exceed the 8MB cards' onboard texture memory. SLI can significantly boost performance on a fast system, but it was interesting to note that the performance at 1024x768 dropped off quite a bit. Still, an Sll-equipped system is about as fast as you can get today—but it ain't cheap. the plate, the third strike ends the game. If you're gonna play a minor role, but was really a small consideration. I also looked at software bundles, price, design issues, and ease of installation. For example, the STB card is pretty bare bones, with no real difference in price. In addition, the driver installer CD launched an Active Movie video on startup-something that actually crashed several 2D cards we tried. The Metabyte card used a substitute Direct3D geometry pipeline. The net result was a hugely boosted 3D WinBench 98 score. At first, an enhanced D3D pipeline sounds good, but only a handful of games use it. So the only real benefit at this point is a boosted 3D WinBench score-something we tend to frown upon. Of all the cards, the Monster 3D ll is the most polished, is slightly faster than the rest, and has a very solid bundle. So our top nod goes to that card. The Pure3D Il looks interesting, except for the weird placement of the SLI connector. The Righteous 3D II has a good bundle and seems to be slightly cheaper than the other 12 MB cards, at least at the time of the review. CGW VR Baseball 2000 you gotta have game, your Judgement Day I used several different criteria for assigning scores. Performance did play in the big leagues now. Righteous 3D II 12MB FOR THE CORRECT Bc Righteour RE ANSWER, ray 50 GO TO PAGE 271 The Righteous 3D II has just about the best bundle, and is a bit cheaper than most other boards. V BASEBALL NEXT GENERATION BASEBALL www.computeaming COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 Go to #164 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"ATI XPERT@Play 98 8MB The new breed of speed OVO NON FREE IVD Software Offer do YOU WANT how got dy? Designed for POWERED BY  ATI's XPERT 8MB graphics boards are the only way to experience incredible gaming in Windows 98 and Windows 95. Microsoft Windows 98  Get 8MB of power, the best 3D, DVD picture quality video and TV-Out starting from just $98' (ask your favorite retailer for more details).  Save even more money with ATI's cool Windows 98 rebates. Up to  ATI's XPERT graphics boards are available in PCI or full AGP 2X versions. AGP 2X includes free Software DVD offer. 41 XPERT 98 8=  Get TV on your PC with ATI-TV.  Check out www.atitech.com for more details on ATI's Windows 98 products and rebates. Dyp Quality PLAN XPERT@Play 98 82 3D PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ZD 3D WINBENCH 98 Features ATI XPERT PLAY 98 609 ATI-TV TON DIAMOND STEALTH 11 5220 396 enerali BE CREATIVE LABS GRAPHICS BLASTER EXXTREME 377 Copyright 1998, ATI Technolopes Inc. ATLXPERT @Play 98. XPERT 98, ATITV and RAGE PRO TURBO are trademarks and or registered trademarks of ATI Technologies Inc. Al other company andor product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers. Features, performance, and specifications may vary by operating environment and are subject to change without notice. Products may not be exactly as shown Suggested retail price. Check store for further details on exact rebate amount Tested on Pentium II MMX-300MHz/64MB/512 cache/Windows 95.OSR 2.1/Test Mode: 640x480x16bppp@75Hz. Tested using Driver Version: ATI XPERT Play 98 8MB SGRAM AGP version 5.20 / Diamond Stealth Il 52204 MB SGRAM PCI 4.10.01.0101 / Creative Labs Graphics Blaster Exxtreme 8MB SGRAM PCI 403.00 2104.30219. Mail-in rebate for XPERT Play 98. Sve store for details. All products used in this testare shipping versions available to the public. Tests performed wlo independent verification by ZD and ZD makes no representations or warranties as to results. Not valid for all ATI products. Please refer to www.atitech.com for further information on ATI's Software DVD offer. $IO shipping and handling charge may be applicable. Offer subject to change and/or cancellation at any time without any notice Now You See It. A JUI www.atitech.com/cgw Go to #106 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"HARDWA IN SEARCH OF THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE New 3DNow! Technology May Give AMD an Edge Over Intel TechWatch MD and the other non-Intel CPU makers have figured out how to compete with Intel when it comes to running business applications, but when running 3D games, AMD has often fal tered. Why? Because business applications primarily use a CPU's integer units (the part of the chip that handles whole numbers) whereas a 3D game needs fast floating-point performance (numbers with decimal points, A M 3.14, for example). AMD wanted to pursue business desktops first, and, to the company's credit, its K6 processor delivers very solid and competitive integer numbers. Now, AMD's K6-2 is poised to deliver a floating point advantage over a similarly-clocked Pentium Il using AMD's own 3DNow! technology, AMD's approach does have several potential pitfalls. First and foremost, games don't get the 3DNow!'s performance boost \"for free.\" A game must either be written using Direct3D transform and lighting (T/L) engine, something few game developers have opted to use, or be written using custom assembly code. Ironically, in wooing game developers to use Direct3D's T/L engine, AMD may actually have a friend in Intel. Intel's next processor, code-named Katmai, K6 3Dfx Banshee: 3Dfx's first integrated 2D/3D accelerator. Banshee will be 3Dfx's first large-scale entry into the lucrative OEM/system-makers side of the graphics business, where about two-thirds of all graphics chips are sold. Performance numbers on the as-yetunannounced part are very sketchy, but we've heard rumors that its 2D performance will be very competitive, which was a weakness in their Voodoo Rush chip-set. ETA: Q3 '98 will have its own set of instructions for accelerating Direct3D transforms and lighting (if D3D's T/L engine is used). So, given that both Intel and its competitors (includi ng AMD) will have ways of accelerating the CPU portion of Direct3D's pipeline, game developers may find D3D's TIL engine more enticing. Additionally, the DirectX 6.0 version of the D3D T/L engine has undergone a substanD tial rewrite, and should be a much better per former than its predecessor. A downside for AMD is that, aside from the important) addition of 3DNow!, AMD made no other enhancements to K6-2's floating-point unit, so games that aren't 3DNow!-aware will still lag on AMD versus Intel. One of AMD's chief advantages has always been price. At press time, AMD's 300MHz K6-2 was selling for under $200, versus Intel's 333MHz Pentium II, which goes for $460. However, Intel was gearing up for price cuts that will substantially cut into AMD's price advantage. Intel will also be bringing out 450MHz chips later this year, and AMD is still a ways away from matching that clock speed. We'll do a full review of this chip next month, but until then, here are some numbers to chew on.-Dave Salvator 2... 3DNO to PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS Though the K6-2 trails a Pentium II 300MHz in many cases, AMD nonetheless turns in respectable numbers across the board, and, in several instances, squarely beats the Pentium il. S3 Savage3D: Rumors of S3's demise have been somewhat exaggerated. While their VIRGE part's 3D performance underwhelmed and limped along, 53 regrouped, realized that they had to produce a competitive 3D part, and has come back with Savage3D. This part is spec'd to have a fill rate of around 125Mpixels/sec drawing trilinear filtered pixels, which should have $3 competitive with nVidia's RIVA 128zx, Matrox's G200 and Intel's i740 this fall. ETA: Q3 '98 WinBench 98 BGWM 1024x768x16 WinBench 98 WinBench 98 CPU32 (Integer Test) AMD K6-2 233MHz 271 Pentium II 300MHz 718 WinBench 98 FPUMark 1150 1540 3D WinBench 98 640x480x16 995 668 147 GameGauge [800x600] FORSAKEN AMD K6-2 233MHz 134.6 Pentium II 300MHz 142.6 INCOMING TUROK QUAKE QUAKE II 44.3 57.5 28.8 873 62. 3 67. 7 32.4 1073 F22ADF 74.5 Score 427.4 479.3 How We Test To test products we use the relevant WinBench 98 tests to measure the CPU'S 3D performance. Then, to see how well a system performs running 3D games we run out own 3D GameGauge, a collection of six games--four Direct3D, twa OpenGL. The 30 GameGauge score is the sum of the six games frame rates TNT to Explode Onto the Scene y the time you read this, the first RIVA TNT boards may be hitting store shelves near you. I recently had the chance to play with an early version of the STB Velocity 4400, STB's own RIVA TNT board. STB was the first graphicscard company with a TNT announce ment. In a bold move, the retail ver sion of the 4400 will come in one flavor: 16MB of SDRAM with TV out. I popped this alpha part into CGW's No Holds Barred sys tem (see page 196). don't want to quote numbers here, but perIRONWORKS formance was better than any 2D/3D combo card I've seen. On top of that, games like QUAKE II and FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 looked spectacular at 1024x768 and 1280x1024 (respectively). More importantly, the image quali ty was impressive. There was none of the dithering artifacts that were present with the original RIVA 128. The only polygon cracking I saw was inherent to the games' engines. The RIVA TNT chip on the 4400 has dual rendering engines, and is designed to work with DirectX 6.0. My testing was on DirectX 5.0, but performance was still pretty solid. Some of the frame-rates approached single Voodoo--like performancenot bad for alpha hardware and drivers. And, unlike a single Voodoo board, I could run z-buffered games at resolutions higher than 800x600. Overall, this board shows great promise, though I'll reserve judgement until I see final product. Loyd Case Intel Katmai: Intel's next round of CPUs, with anticipated clock speeds of 450-500MHz. In addition to the higher clock speed, Katmai CPUs will also feature what Intel has clumsily dubbed \"Katmai New Instructions,\" a name given to avoid calling these new instruction-set extensions MMX2. Among the other things these instructions will speed up will be Direct3D's geometry engine (in DX6), allowing these CPUs to crank more polygons per second. ETA: Q4 '98 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 191 "


"CAN YOUR PC SPEAKERS DO THIS? MnTM JUMMER n1 PHILIPS OOOOO The aftereffects of the Philips Digital USB Speakers. Not your average PC speakers. Whether it's the DSS350 or DSS370, immerse yourself in the experience of high intensity sound. Featuring «Incredible Surround\"--3D digital sound quality and \"Hot Plug & Play\" for easy installation. Philips Digital USB speakers. It's not only sound you can hear, it's sound you can feel. For more info, call 1-800-835-3506 or visit us at www.usbaudio.philips.com 1998 Philips Electronics North America Corporation  PHILIPS Let's make things better. Go to #140 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Weird, Wacky, and Wonderful Pipe-dreams and Reality on the Trade Show Circuit HARDW It's a full 6-degrees-of-freedom controller. You grab the handle with both hands; it has pitch, yaw, and roll axes. You hold down a button to move, and move the handle to point in any direction. It was amazingly intuitive when I tried it—just like aiming a .50 cal. machine gun. a moment. The folks at Hercules have teamed up with Rendition and Fujitsu to offer the Thriller Conspiracy. This is a PCI board with a Rendition V2200 controller and a Fujitsu Pinolite Blocales in the merry month of May. plunged into two different trade shows: Computer Game Developer's Conference (CGDC) and the Electronics Entertainment Expo (E3). I met with a lot of people and saw a lot of interesting and cool stuff. What I didn't see was any new trends, in hardware or in games. On the contrary, everything looked pretty evolutionary. However, this month I want to write about some of the offbeat hardware I've seen. It would be a mistake to pass judgement on any of these-it's too early to tell but all of them definitely march to a different drummer. Some of these will likely be reviewed in the future. For now, let's dive in and take a preliminary look. attached to anything. That's right it's a wheel that you hold in the air. (Okay, there was a cable to connect it to the computer.) It uses an accelerometer to detect the motion of your hands, rather like Microsoft's more conventionallooking Freestyle gamepad. A throttle slider is mounted on the body of the steering wheel. The whole affair seemed to work well, but since it had zero feedback, it was hard to tell how far to rotate the wheel. Still, it looked like a promising alternative to clamping a massive steering wheel to your desktop. THRILLER Conspiracy geometry accelerator. It's aimed squarely at people with Pentium 200 systems and slower who can't afford the cost of upgrading their systems. The downside is that the geometry accelerator only kicks in with OpenGL or Rendition RRedline games. It does nothing Not a Wheel Then there was the Interact wheel...er...not a wheel...er... LOYD CASE I didn't see any new trends in hardware [at E3]. On the contrary, everything looked evolutionary. Thrustmaster was showing an ThrustMaster may just be onto something here. Machine Gunnery Thrustmaster was showing an early prototype of something it's tentatively calling the Fist Fighter. If you've ever seen the handle on the U.S. Army .50 cal. machine gun, the Fist Fighter looks vague ly like an ergonomically sculpted version of that handle. It's designed to be used with action games like UNREAL or QUAKE II. Air Wheel showing a wheel called the Air Racer. What's different about this wheel, however, is that it isn't CHTER ABFIE maybe a wheel. It looks a lot like a controller SC&T did for the Nintendo 64. It vaguely resembles a high-tech version of a wheel-lock pistol. You can hold the device with one hand (by a pistol grip, which has the trigger buttons). The body of the controller has a small wheel that vibrates if the game supports force feedback. Again, the idea is to have a driving controller that does not take up a lot of desk space. This one leaves me scratching my head, but then I may just be conservative. STEA for Direct3D, because Direct3D doesn't yet support hardware acceleration for lighting and transform operations. If you're on a tight budget, but want to play OpenGL games like QUAKE II fully accelerated, then this is an interesting board. On a system with a Pentium 133, QUAKE II can run consistently in excess of 20fps. At $149 for an 8MB board, it's a good solution for gamers who haven't yet bitten the bullet on a 3Dfx card (possibly because they have no free PCI slots). We'll definitely review this one when it's out, so watch for it in upcoming issues. Continued on page 200 It's a Conspiracy Let's take a break from game controllers and look at graphics for SC&T Air Racer www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 193 "


"LICK FOR JOU OURS Cones With ReSen DTTTON "


"Tn Los FACER FINALLY, A REMOTE CONTROL CAR NOT EVEN YOUR BROTHER CAN BREAK. COMPLETE WITH 16 REMOTE CONTROL CARS AND 15 PULSE POUNDING TRACKS. THIS GAME LETS YOU DODGE, WEAVE, AND SOAR THOUGH RICH TROPICAL JUNGLES, SUN-DRENCHED BEACHES, AND MURKY SWAMPS. EVEN IF YOU DON'T FEEL LIKE RACING, THERE ARE DOZENS OF HIDDEN PATHS AND SECRET FEATURES FOR YOU TO EXPLORE. ALONE. WITH A FRIEND, OR AGAINST THE COMPUTER. THIS GAME WILL SEND YOU THROUGH DOZENS OF COURSES NOT BATTERIES. AVAILABLE ON WINDOWS CD-ROM AND PLAYSTATION GAME CONSOLE EVERYONE 01998 Gremlin Interactive Ltd. Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive Ltd. All Rights Reserved. 01998 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation, Inc. All Rights Reserved. \"Twentieth Century Fox,\" \"Fox and their associated logos are the property of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. PlayStation and PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc, E 9 9 PUTSAD Gremlin PlayStation INTERACTIVE "


"TWO RECIPES FOR THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE HARDWARE These are our top picks for each component. Use this list to build your dream system, or to upgrade select components. All products tested using Ziff-Davis benchmarks and/or a variety of games. NO HOLDS BARRED COMPONENT Motherboard CPU Memory Disk Controller Primary Graphics Secondary Graphics Hard Drive CD-ROM/DVD Monitor Primary Audio Speakers Modem Networking Case Power Supply Keyboard Mouse/Pointing Device Action Game Controller Flight Joystick Throttle Rudder Pedals Driving Controls PRODUCT Asus P2B-LS Pentium 11/400 128MB Corsair ECC PC100 SDRAM Built-in Ultra2 SCSI Canopus Total3D/128V AGP Quantum 3D Obsidian X24 Seagate Cheetah 9LP Plextor Ultraplex Sony 500PS Diamond Monster Sound MX200 LFT-11 3Com Impact Built-in Intel 10/100 ethernet chip In-Win 10500 Turbocool 300 MS Natural Keyboard Logitech Mouseman Plus Rage 3D Thrust Master F22 Pro Thrust Master TQS Thrust Master RCS TSW PRICE $350 5805 $350 50 $199 $699 5950 $225 $1,395 $149 $600 $200 WEB ADDRESS www.asus.com www.intel.com www.corsairmicro.com NIA www.canopuscorp.com www.quantum3d.com www.seagate.com www.plextor.com www.sony.com www.diamondmm.com www.eminent-tech.com www.3com.com NIA www.in-win.com www.pcpowercooling.com www.microsoft.com/hardware www.logitech.com www.thrustmaster.com www.thrustmaster.com www.thrustmaster.com www.thrustmaster.com http://soli.inav.net/thomas/ 50 $115 $129 569 $59 $29 5129 5149 5129 $360 TOTAL: $7,090.00 LEAN & MEAN COMPONENT Motherboard CPU Memory Disk Controller Primary Graphics Secondary Graphics Hard Drive CD-ROM/DVD Monitor Primary Audio Secondary Audio Speakers Modem Networking Case Power Supply Keyboard Mouse/Pointing Device Action Game Controller Flight Controls PRODUCT ABIT BX6 Pentium 11/300 64MB PC100 SDRAM Built-in UDMA/33 Real3D Starfighter Diamond Monster 3D II 8MB Seagate Medalist Pro 9.1 Pioneer DR504s 32x slot load CD drive Optiquest Q71 Turtle Beach Montego N/A Boston Acoustics BA635 US Robotics V.90 NIA Elan Vital T10AB Built-in, 230W MS Natural Logitech Mouseman Plus Thrust Master Rage3D CH F16 Combat Stick PRICE $149 $375 $160 $0 $140 $220 $350 $80 $300 $129 50 599 $150 WEB ADDRESS www.abit.com.tw www.intel.com www.corsairmicro.com N/A www.real3d.com www.diamondmm.com www.seagate.com www.pioneerusa.com www.optiquest.com www.voyetra.com NIA www.bostonacoustics.com www.3com.com N/A www.elanvital.com.tw 50 $90 N/A $69 $59 $29 $49 www.microsoft.com/hardware www.logitech.com www.thrustmaster.com www.chproducts.com TOTAL: $2,448.00 \"We have made every effort to ensure this information would be timely and accurate. However, new hardware is constantly being released, and magazine production and distribution involves an 8-10 week delay. In cases where new products were close to release at presstime, we have kept our current top choice so that we only recommend finished products we have tested. Lists compiled by Dave Salvator and Loyd Case. 196 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Soo To Incoming Screenshot Courtesy of Rage. The future of gaming, is no longer just in front of you. INTRODUCING 360 DEGREES OF TOTALLY IMMERSIVE MONSTER SOUND. DIAMOND \"IF YOU CAN AFFORD JUST ONE GAME-RELATED UPGRADE FOR YOU PC THIS YEAR, MAKE IT MONSTER SOUND! Family PC, Sept. 97 . Positional 3D Audio With 2 Or 4 Speakers  64-Voice Hardware Wavetable (Roland Authorized Sample Set)  Drastically Outperforms ISA Sound Cards  Accelerates DirectSound, DirectSound3D, and A3D Includes Hot 3D Games Like Incoming, Jedi Knight,\" and Outlaws Ground fire blasting on your right. Laser Monster bursts whizzing overhead. You can even hear the roar of an enemy fighter behind you. Because with Diamond Monster Sound MX 200 PCI audio card, you're surrounded with amazingly real, true positional 3D sound. Plug in either 2 or 4 speakers, strap on your headphones, and experience the incredible 3D positional audio for the ultimate gaming experience. Monster Sound MX 200 brings 64 voice hardware wavetable synthesizer, with Roland authorized sample set, and 23 independent audio streams, creating the entire spectrum of realistic sound. Plus, you get Aureal's award-winning A3D technology and Microsoft's DirectSound and DirectSound3D to unlock the latest effects in your Windows 95/98 system. Better yet, it comes with killer 3D games like Jedi Knight, DIAMOND Outlaws, and Incoming. Get Monster Sound today and MULTIMEDIA make the world revolve around you for a change. Accelerate your world. Go to #145 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PCComputing Enter the Monster Sound MX200 Sweepstakes by visiting our website at http://www.diamondmm.com/monstersound200 O 1998 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. All rights reserved. Diamond and the Diamond logo are registered trademarks of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Monster Sound is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems Incorporated 2880 Junction Avenue San Jose, CA 951211 All other trademarkaharana bir marocin "


"ADVENT...IT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CRUNCH?! AND... AMD21 PGL Official Speaker of the PGL. CHECK OUT THE MAD SCIENTIST AT WORK... WWW.POWEREDPARTNERS.COM 1998 InterAct Accessories, Inc. A RECOTON COMPANY. All rights reserved. Advent and Powered Partners are trademarks of Recoton Corporation. The AV390PL is manufactured und license from Dolby Laboratories. Dolby and the double-D symbol are trademarks of Dolby Laboratories. EA SPORTS, the EA SPORTS logo, John Madden Football, and if it's in the game, in the game are trademarks or registered trademarks of Electronic Arts in the U.S. and/or other countries. All rights reserved. Officially Licensed Product of the National Football League Player 1998 Players Inc. The Players Inc. logo is a registered trademark of the NFL Players. NFL Materials  NFLP. Team names and logos are trademarks of the teams indicated. All oth (NFL-related marks) are trademarks of the National Football League. "


"1. KKRUUN With Powered Partners' 5 channels of Dolby Virtual Surround Sound and jaw-breaking bass, you'll feel that 270-pound linebacker breathing down your neck. So don't just get your head in the game, get your whole body in it. With the AV390PL from Advent. 3-speakers and 70 watts of rich sound that makes gaming better. -LKIN MADDEN NFL99 PLAYS BIGGER, LOUDER SPACE-SAVING, DOWN-FIRING SUBWOOFER MOUNTS ON THE WALL OR UNDER YOUR DESK! AND BETTER ON POWERED PARTNERS! SPORTS  WADVENT P Powered Partners Available through COMP THE COMPUTER SUPERSTORE and other fine retailers. "


"LOYD CASE Tech Tips HARDW Continued from page 193 AGP on PCI There's a lot of buzz over AGP, as well as some disagreements as to its true merits. However, as games with huge texture sets begin showing up, it's likely that true AGP accelerators will have some benefit. But, this leaves those gamers with PCI-only systems in the lurch. Along come our friends at Real3D, the makers of the Starfighter. The Starfighter is an AGP board that uses the Intel 740 accelerator. Now, the i740 is an AGP-only part. However, the engineers at Real3D feel your pain, and have come up with a PCI version of the Starfighter. This card has a special AGP-to-PCI bridge chip. It has 8or 16MB of texture memory (in addition to 4or 8MB of frame buffer) that looks like AGP memory to the i740 chip. It's Intense Then there's the Intensor. It's an office chair with embedded speakers-up to five speakers, as a matter of fact. One speakerthe bass driver-is embedded in a compartment underneath the seat. The net result is a rather immersive experience, though I'm not sure I want that much immersion. The sensation underneath your tailbone is, uh, difficult to describe. Additionally, although BSG, the folks who make the Intensor, claim that it's ergonomic, it's not all that comfortable but then, I was tired and had been walking my feet off all day by the time! got to it. This could be an opportunity for yet another DirectX API—DirectButt. Diamond Monster 3D ll and the Compaq Presario If you have a Compaq Presario with matching multimedia monitor, you may run into problems with a Monster 3D II. The symptoms are simple: no audio when the Monster 3D Il is attached. In fact, you may even witness that nifty volume control knob slowly turn itself down to zero. The cause is obscure. As it turns out, Compaq uses an unused VGA pin (pin 11) to add volume control via the Presario monitor. The Monster 3D Il uses only the standard VGA pins. Hence, there's no communication between the computer and the volume control on the monitor. If you're one of these users, you can contact Diamond directly for a fix at (800) 468-5846. Note that other Voodoo2 users may encounter similar problems; contact your card vendor for assistance, Get a Grip The good people at AbramsGentile Entertainment who Ethernet Problems: Pauses in the Action I mentioned this one before, but I get so much email on it that it deserves a second mention. Many users are trying to install small home networks. In the process, you may install an ethernet card and the TCP/IP protocol. All of a sudden, your games pause about every four minutes, for several seconds at a time. There may be several pauses in quick succession. You are the victim of the Windows 95 TCP/IP address hunt. The TCP/IP software in Windows 95 installs without an IP address. Instead, it will periodically go out about every four minutes) and look for a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server on the network. (A DHCP server assigns dynamic IP addresses to client systems.) There are several possible fixes. First, you can hard-code IP, addresses using 192.168.0.xxx where xxx can be any three digits. Set the sub-net mask for 255.255.255.0. This set of addresses is reserved for internal-only networks. Second, you can download updated Winsock software from Microsoft. Third, if you don't need to use TCP/IP on the local network, you can go into the Network applet in Control Panel and remove the TCP/IP protocol stack that's bound to your Ethernet card. The Intensor in the slow march toward virtual reality. brought you the Nintendo Power Glove are bringing an updated, higher resolution version of the Power Glove to the PC. In fact, they will be doing right-handed and left-handed versions. Imagine being able to make gestures with your hands to cast a spell in a fantasy role-playing game. Or being able to \"manipulate\" objects in a game with your fingers. Unfortunately, proto types weren't ready by E3, so I have no idea what it will look like or how well it will work, but it's certainly another step Dream On Of such stuff are dreams made. An idea comes to someone in a moment of reflection or while driving through the city at night. It becomes solid, reaches toward fruition. One in a hundred become products, one in a thousand become good products. I don't know if any of these will become great products, but all of them were insights into the creative mind. CGW www.computergaming.com "


"DELL DIMENSION XPS R400  REVIEW The Next Dimension Dell Delivers a Solid and Well-priced 440BX-based Pentium II Box HARDWARE by Dave Salvator ell is very good at delivering a basic box. For a gamer, that means few extras such as game controllers or accelerat ed game cards. But the basics that Dell supplies prove to be terrific fundamental components (you can add bells and whistles to taste). New to its latest Dimension R series offering is a case that allows you to gain entry to the system's innards without tools. Other big changes include some components of a different stripe in the audio subsystem. Gone is any Creative Labs part, replaced by Turtle Beach's Montego PCI sound card, based on Aureal Semiconductor's Vortex 8820 audio processor. In addition to handling Windows 95 audio chores and SoundBlaster legacy compatibility, the Montego is also DirectSound 3D and A3D-compliant, meaning that game titles which use 3D positional-audio should play well. In addition, there are Altec-Lansing's AC495 speakers, which have USB controls and support Stereo, ProLogic, and AC-3 imaging modes. When running in the last two modes, these speakers create \"phantom\" rear speakers using COMPUTER GAMING WORLD side-firing drivers to try to get sounds behind you. Set up is painless, with color-coded cabling and a big honkin' poster that gives stepby-step instructions. The unit uses a Phoenix BIOS, which provides basic adjustments for system-level settings but does not offer the granularity found in, say, an Award BIOS. It's a snap to get into the case, and the interior layout makes getting at things pretty easy. I did hit one snag, however: I added a Plug-and-Play Ethernet adapter to take this guy for a spin through some multiplayer games, but when I brought the system up, the Ethernet card grabbed the DVD decoder's IRQ. and the DVD decoder in turn grabbed IRQ9, which was in use by the sound card. The result was a dysfunctional audio subsystem and an unstable system. After I went into the BIOS to reset default values and disable PnP on the Ethernet card, all was well. What's in the Box 400MHz Pentium II w/512KB integrated L2 cache; Intel motherboard with 440BX chipset: 64MB SDRAM (running at 100MHz); STB Velocity 128 4MB AGP (uses RIVA 128); Dell 1000HS 17-inch monitor (with Trinitron tube); DVD Decoder Card; 16.8GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive: 2X DVD-ROM; Turtle Beach Montego PCI sound card; Altec Lansing AC495 USB-controlled speakers; 56K US Robotics X2 WinModem This driver does have a more involved read-ahead algorithm, meaning that it tries to speculate what piece of data an application will need, and it preloads that data into the disk cache ahead of time. Thus, when that piece of data is needed by the application, it will be read from memory. What is somewhat dicey here is the fact that this driver locks down as much system memory as it can to make the disk cache as big as possible, and when it's running in WinBench 98, that turns out to be an unusually high amount. So while this isn't cheating per se, it may not necessarily reflect the kind of disk 1/0 performance you'll see when you run games or business applications. CPU usage when accessing the CD-ROM was another disappointment: The Dell came in at a very high 73.1 percent. N Run, Joey Run stacked this Dimension up against our high-end, 400MHz No Holds Barred (NHB) machine (built from some of the best components available), and the Dell was consistently nipping at its heels. Both machines use RIVA 128-based AGP graphics cards, so similar numbers on WinBench and 3D WinBench, as well as on 3D GameGauge, aren't surprising. The CPU scores were fairly close, though the edge here goes to CGW's NHB system. There was one notable surprise from the Dell: its Business Disk WinMark score, which came in at a whopping 3,250 versus the HB's 2,270. This number is even odder considering that Dell uses EIDE components and the CGW NHB rig uses Ultra-Wide SCSI-2 components. Turns out that Dell has devised a \"disk performance driver,\" which the company claims has an enhanced caching algorithm; that's true to a point. Bottom Line Dell has again delivered a stout system, and what it may lack in extras it makes up for in generally solid performance. If you've already got game controllers that you're fond of, aren't interested in building your own rig, and are ready to make the move to a high-end Pentium II system, then Dell's latest will serve you well. CGW PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS * * * *  3D WinBench 98 [800x600] WinBench CGW No Holds Barred Dell XPS-R400 Business Graphics Business Disk WinMark Win Mark 195 2270 159 3250 CPUZZ 17030 FPUMark WinMark 2060 2010 CD-ROM Win Mark 1760 977 679 955 APPEAL: Gamers looking for a fast, though somewhat plain, Pentium Il rig. PROS: Solid performance; competitive price, easy-opening case. CONS: Controllers not included; rudimentary BIOS doesn't allow for much tweaking: small Plug-and-Play headaches. Price: $3,189 Manufacturer: Dell Computer Round Rock, Texas www.dell.com 3D GameGauge (800x600) FORSAKEN CGW No Holds Barred\" (55.86 Dell XPS-R400 56.21 INCOMING TUROK (24.64 37:22 22.4 33.87 QUARE 39.40 37.20 QUAXE 33. 7 32.3 FZZADF 43.73 Score 234.55 220.78 38.8 CGWS High-end Ultimate Game Machine 1-1024x765 resolution with 65,000 colors How We Tested To test a gaming system, we put it through a wide array of tests, starting with WinBench 98 which tests each sub-system's performance: 2D graphics CPU Integer and floating point), hard disk, and CD-ROM. We then run 3D WinBench 98 to test the system's 3D performance and see how well rendering features are implemented. Finally, to see how wella system performs running 3D games, we run our own 3D GameGauge a collection of six games--four Direct3D two OpenGL. The GameGauge score is the sum of the six games frame rates. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 202 "


"Barnes syairHUS TUNE DOU LUNER: ARMANIAN PLANETA minum and mesum mouen Golong FRULATION: 4044 4046 UREDITS B009000  GRRANI BODD HERE OTHER STRATEGY GAMES LEFT OFF... CONQUER THE LARGEST GAME ENVIRONMENT EVER 0.00 METAL RADIATIVES 2000 00 CONTROL THE UNIVERSE, THE SIZE OF THE GALAXY. THE NUMBER AND SIZE OF THE PLANETS, TERRAIN TYPES, LIFEFORMS AND WEATHER CONDITIONS .You ARE HERE .. BEGINS. INDIGENOUS LIFEFORMS THAT PESTER AND ROB RESOURCES MOTHER SHIPS CARRY COLOHISTS, RESOURCES BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" www.interplay.com 1-800-INTERPLAY SIMULTANEOUS LAND AND SPACE COMBAT A FIRST IN ANY STRATEGY GAME A Division of Interplay Productions EVERYONE Developed By FLARINE "


"LERENTE PIRAS RESEARCH A VAST TECHNOLOGY MATRIX RESEARCH GO LUSIK KRESLIGA Q10 MULTIPLE HULL STRUCTURES WITH A VAST ARRAY OF CAPABILITIES \"MASTER OF ORION« MEETS STARCRAFT PC GAMER ONLINE \"A.T. LOOKS TO OFFER SUPERIOR GAMEPLAY IN AN EPIC BEAL-TIME SETTING THAT COULD CATCH A LOT OF GAMERS OFF GUARD AND PLEASANTLY SURPRISED.\" ADRENALINE VAULT YOU ARE THE COMMANDER OF YOUR COLONY WITH ORDERS TO EXPAND YOUR RACE. YOUR OBJECTIVE IS SIMPLE: EXPLORE, COLONIZE AND CONQUER THE PLANETS AND TAKE CONTROL OF THE UNIVERSE. THINK YOU'RE UP TO IT? CAN YOU REPOPULATE YOUR ANNIHILATED RACE, RESEARCH THE TECHNOLOGIES, EXPLORE MULTIPLE UNIVERSES, AND DEFEND YOUR SPACE COLONY FROM MARAUDING ALIEN RACES ON LAND AND SPACE SIMULTANEOUSLY? A.I. ALIENINTELLIGENCE WILL CHALLENGE YOU IN THE LARGEST IN-DEPTH STRATEGY GAME THE UNIVERSE HAS EVER SEEN. BEGIN YOUR CONQUEST TODAY. \"A.L. HAS ALL THE TOOLS TO BE THE EPIC SPACE CONQUEST GAME THAT HARD CORE FANS OF THE GENRE HAVE BEEN LOOKING FOR GAMING NEXUS ALIEN OTELLIGENCE RULLE ALIEN I NIGENCE Go to #190 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 01998 Flatline Studios, LLC. All Rights Reserved. [Portions 01998 Interplay Entertainment Corp. All Rights Reserved.) A.I. Alien Intelligence, Interplay the Interplay logo, Flatcat, the Flatcat logo, and \"By Gamers. For Gamors.\" aro trademarks of Interplay Entertainment Corp. Flatline Studios and the Flalline Studios logo are trademarks of Flatline Studios, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Licensed and distributed exclusively by Interplay Productions. All other trademarks are property of their respective owners. "


"REVIEW  METABYTE WICKED3D Not So Wicked After All HARDWARE WICKENZIE MOOD by Loyd Case hen I first read the press release on Metabyte's new \"enhanced geometry engine\" included in the Wicked3D, I was intrigued. But sadly, it turned out to be something of a smoke screen. What the software mavens at Metabyte have done is replaced Direct3D's geometry pipeline (in DirectX 5) with one of their own design. At first, this sounds like a great idea, given that the Voodoo2 chipset is often waiting for the CPU to give it more triangles to draw. But when you realize that there are currently only about six games in the world that use the DirectX 5 geometry pipeline, it's easy to get cynical. suppose that running LEGO ISLAND faster is a good thing. Curiously. one app that does use the DirectX METABYTE The twice we've ever seen: 1,150 on a 400MHz Pentium II. Gamesat least, the games most of us play-get no boost at all. In fact, the Wicked3D is in every way a 3Dfx reference board clone. I was able to compare the 3D Game Gauge perfor mance of the Wicked3D to a number of other Voodoo2 boards. While its performance put Wicked3D in the top half the board was not the fastest by any measure. Since Metabyte's marketing pushes the 3D WinBench number quite hard, I can only conclude that the \"geometry acceleration\" is just a benchmark tweak of the worst kind. At the time we tested the board, the bundle was not yet determined. Since Metabyte charges pretty much full price for the board, it's really no bargain. For your $300, you get the illusion of enhanced performance, but your games see just another reference board design. CGW 5 geometry pipeline is 3D WinBench 98. Suddenly it all became clear. The Wicked 3D posted the single highest 3D WinBench 98 score QUAKE F22ADF 3DGAMEGAUGE 113.5 44.78 562 72 42.25 385.1 TEST SYSTEM CGW's No-Holds-Barred Machine (Pentium II 400MHz) 3DWB98 FORSAKEN INCOMING TUROK QUAKE 11 640x480 1150 1 59.547 9.33 79.25 85.6 800x600 789 100.53 57.98 54.24 58. 1 GET IT EVERY MONTH COMPUTER WORLD World * **** Visit our special Web site at http://subscribe.computergamingworld.com/save APPEAL: WICKED3 People who want to run 3D WinBench 98 really fast. PROS: Solid reference board design. CONS: \"Geometry acceleration\" is pretty much marketing hype for now; price. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: One free PCI slot. Price: $299 Manufacturer: Metabyte Fremont, CA (510) 494-9700 www.wicked3d.com www.computergaming.com "


"ASUS CD-5340  REVIEW Racing to a Crawl HARDWAR Long Spin-up Times Turn Speedy Drive Into Gaming Slug after about two minutes. The S340 seems to take longer to spin up than mostmax by Loyd Case hen I first installed the ASUS CDS340 drive, was blown away by its initial benchmark scores and by how quietly this drive runs. It turned out to be a perfect case of an imperfect first impression. On WinBench 98's CD WinMark, the drive consistently got scores in the high 1,700s with an access time of under 90msec-no slouch, to be sure. But as I used the drive more and more, I felt as if I was in one of those whirlwind courtships that suddenly go sour as you find out that the other person adores country music when you want to go see Pirates of Penzance. The system I used for testing originally had a relatively sedate 20x CD-ROM drive, so stepping up to a 34x drive seemed like a breath of fresh air. Huge game installs went quickly—or so it seemed. Then some truths began to reveal themselves, like one of those X-Files episodes in which you discover that the likable young cop is really an ancient demon. 34x fine on ASUS motherboards, but several other motherboards often locked up when accessing the CD after enabling DMA mode in the Windows control panel. Disabling the DMA mode solved the problem, but it also lowered performance. The 5340 also lacks clips to hold the CD in place, so you can't mount the drive sideways. The ASUS has some things going for it. The company built in some serious vibration damping, so there's none of that annoying buzz. ing you get with some CD-ROMs. But that's hardly enough. The S340 may be a fine drive for a business user who might install software occasionally and play audio CDs. Serious gamers, however, ought to give this one a bye. CGW 3-4 seconds in some cases. This delay was mildly annoying in the midst of a turn-based game, but downright aggravating in some action games. Then there's the much-vaunted Ultra ATA support. Certainly it seemed to work in Ultra ATA mode The first wart was the dreaded spin-delay. Some ATA CD-ROM drives have a slight delay when they spin up. This can happen often, as most drives spin down IHUNDERSEA www.thunderseat.net 1-800-8-Thunder Be practical COMPUTER WORLD ** APPEAL: People looking to install software fairly quickly PROS: Great benchmark scores: Ultra ATA support competitive price. CONS: Spin-up delays make this a frustrating drive for gamers; lock-ups on non-ASUS motherboards. Price: $80 (street) Manufacturer: ASUS (510) 739-3777 www.asus.com ... or take a ride on the wild side! www.computergaming.com Go to #185 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"creat. you get better accuracy but that are you going to do 59 programmable functions. 2 directional pads-one for smooth, joystick-like control, one for megafast, mega-deadly digital action. Proportional flippers let you \"feel\" how hard or soft to hit, swing, "


"sed sustasi with a: the extra bediego XTERMINATOR 1998 Aduanerd Gratis Computer Technology Lid. 698 Grauis is a trademark of Advanced Gratis Computer Technology Ltd. All other registered and unregistered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. 9 turn or kick. The new Xterminator game controller. Be the first on your block to make your neighbors say, \"What's that smell?\" Check out www.morekills.com. Go to #138 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW DIAMOND MONSTER SOUND MX200 GAMING EDITORS' Diamond's Sound Investment CHOICE HARDWARE Monster MX200 by Loyd Case ne of the holy grails of wavetable MIDI synthesizers in sound cards (for me, anyway) has been the samples used in Roland wavetable audio. But the availability of those samples for the PC game player has been scarce because Roland has pulled back COMPUTER Advanced Sound for Hoart Pounding 3D Gaming DIAMOND GAMING from the multimedia market. The 4MB hardware wavetable on the MX200, created by Dream, Inc. for Diamond, uses samples licensed from Roland. The result is some of the best native wavetable patches I've heard in a sound card in a long time. Since Microsoft is creating DirectMusicand API for creating dynamic music scores for games through MIDIit's likely that good MIDI may be undergoing a renaissance, The digital audio on the Diamond card is no slouch either. This card handles audio chores with aplomb, whether the audio source is CD music or low resolution .WAV files. When I cranked up the volume without playing any sound, the result was sweet silence-no annoying hash, crackles, or other artifacts. WORLD OUTLAWS and the FC AUDIO now-familiar INCOMING. In its latest driver release, Dia mond has fixed many of the problems with digital game controllers. We were able to successfully get the Microsoft Freestyle and ThrustDiamond uses an Analog Master Rage 3D gameDevices DSP (digital signal procespads working with the MX200 (but sor) to handle the audio processing be sure to read the READ.ME file in chores. Analog Devices licensed the updated driver set). Aureal's A3D technology, and it The MX200 is a polished card works pretty well. In addition to 3D with a terrific hardware synth positional audio using two speakengine, a clean digital-audio secers, the MX200 supports two addi tion, and better support for game tional speakers. We'll probably see controllers. About the only thing more four-speaker support in future missing is support for the new DLS games, since DirectSound 3D has (downloadable sample) standard, four-speaker capability. but the jury's still out on whether There's the usual software that standard will take hold in the bundle, including full versions of gaming world. CGW APPEAL: Gamers who have been waiting for that Roland magic to return. PROS: Great wavetable MIDI; low noise; AD positional audio. CONS: No native DOS or Windows 3.X support. Price: $149 (MSRP) Manufacturer: Diamond Multimedia (408) 325-7000 www.diamondmm.com REVIEW  ABIT BX6 Look Ma, No Jumpers -2317 by Loyd Case flate, we've seen a flurry of 440BX motherboards come to market. And while most deliver comparable performance, there's often very little to COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ***** set one apart from the crowd. That's not the case with Abit's new BX6; it's very different from the plethora of 440BX motherboards with its jumper-free design and the ability to tweak the BIOS, right down to the CPU voltage. The Abit BX6 is a little larger than the ASUS P2B we looked at last month, so it's a tighter fit in smaller cases. It has one AGP slot, four PCI slots, and three ISA slots (one ISA/PCI pair is shared). Once you install your CPU, RAM, and expansion cards, the system boots into the BIOS the first time. You set the clock speed in the system BIOS. Now, I don't advocate overclocking your system, but if you're into that sort of thing, this BIOS is terrific. You can adjust the CPU core voltage in 0.05 volt increments, which allows you to crank the voltage down a tad if you boost APPEAL: Gamers who like to tweak their systems. PROS: Jumperless feature makes system setup very easy: tremendous granu. larity for system tweaking: good documentation CONS: It's easy to get into trouble if you're not careful; a bit on the large side. Price: $170 Manufacturer: Abit (510) 623-0500 www.abit.com.tw/ the clock rate. But you must know what you're doing. Some PCI cards do not like it if your system is overclocked. Even some games don't like it; there have been reports that UNREAL runs slower on systems with overclocked CPUs or overclocked 3Dfx cards. The general rule with overclocking is this: When in doubt, don't. However, this board will revert to a default 2.0v, 233MHz if the CPU isn't running properly. Even if you don't overclock it, the jumperless feature is nice, because upgrades become a snap. At a minimum, the BX6 will support up to a 450MHz Pentium II. In other respects, it's not quite as polished as the ASUS board, but it's still a good pick for those into doit-yourself systems. CGW 208 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"DEMONSTRATION: 1 Tear out this page. 2 Crumple into ball. 3 Toss over your shoulder. The sound this ad will make when it hits the ground behind you is the power of A3DM from Aureal, the only audio that works the way your ears do. No wonder game makers like Interplay and GT Interactive are featuring A3D in their newest titles. Experience it for yourself at www.A3D.com 3D BELIEVE YOUR EARS Go to #271 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 1998 Aureal Semiconductor. Inc. A3D and Aureal are trademarks of Aureal Semiconductor Inc. Other trademarks are properties of their respective owners. "


"MILLENNIA 266 MILLENNIA 333  Intel Pentium II processor 266MHz 32MB SDRAM 4.3GB Ultra ATA hard drive  17\" Micron 700FGX, .26dp monitor (16\" display)  82440LX chip set  512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS  3.5\" floppy drive  32X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive  128-bit AGP Diamond Viper V330 (nVidia), 4MB EDO SGRAM & MPEG Integrated 32-voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound  Advent AV009 stereo speakers  56K x2 data/fax modem*  104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98**  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition 5-year/3-year Micron Power\" limited warranty  Intel Pentium II processor 333MHz  64MB SDRAM . 6.4GB Ultra ATA hard drive  17\" Micron 700FGx, .26dp monitor (16\" display) 82440LX chip set 512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS  3.5\" floppy drive 32X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 128-bit AGP Diamond Viper V330 (nVidia), 4MB EDO SGRAM & MPEG  Integrated 32-voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound  Advent AVO09 stereo speakers  56K x2 data/fax modem* . 104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98**  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition  5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty $1,649 | $66/mo Consumer Lease $1,999 $80/mot Consumer Lease of maarcon Costa HARDCORE SYSTEM inside pentium II Add Microsoft SideWinder Precision Pro Joystick for $59 0122 Micron ElectronicsInc. Altid merved Micron Electronics and Manable for omissions or erros laboratly or shogay. Al purchases are subject to availability. Prions and sportation may be changed without for pron do not include shipping and handling and any applicables. 39-4ty money back policy does not cludo turn right and sichanding cha r ly Micron Brand products and begira from date o p et l e Menn Electronies curt terme and conditions of sale. Anastomory payments for Business housing are based on 30th lase, and amount of morty pay for consumer leasing are based on 30-northease. The Legend tered trademarks and a batademar Coronation Mest Wadows Windows NT and the Windows o p erado d e comentar Practares of Micro Products are trademarks or registered trademarks of Micron Electronics, Inc. Other produd rored led in this publication are for duration purposes only and may be b ene de compone ntramassed of a S andrading diband 336 din Medal tornare a descontrasedon and t cry before the moun poterfall Windows . The co-ROM r oved upon the purchased IN DVD ROOM "


"MILLENNIA 350 MILLENNIA 400  Intel Pentium II processor 350MHz  64MB PC100 SDRAM 8.4GB Ultra ATA hard drive 17\" Micron 700 FGx, .26dp monitor (16\" display)  82440BX chip set 512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS  3.5\" floppy drive 32X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 8MB Real3D Starfighter 1740 AGP . Integrated 64-voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound Advent AVOO9 stereo speakers  56K x2 data/fax modem* 104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98**  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition  5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty  Intel Pentium II processor 400MHz  128MB PC100 SDRAM . 10GB Ultra ATA hard drive  19\" multiscan monitor (18\" display)  82440BX chip set  512KB internal cache, 2MB flash BIOS 100MB lomega Zip drive  DVD-ROM drive and PCI decoder card***  8MB Real3D Starfighter 1740 AGP  AWE64 Wavetable sound card  Advent AV390PL 3 piece stereo speakers  56K x2 data/fax modem*  104-key enhanced keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  Microsoft Windows 98**  Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition  5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty $2.197 I care $88/mo Consumer Lease $3,297 $131/mo Consumer Lease 6523/melse FOR HARDCORE GAMERS. MICRON ELECTRONICS boot PC WORLD Call 888-669-0969 or www.micronpc.com/cgw Windows 8 Millennia 400 JUL 98 Millennia xos Sort 97 Millennia Xxu MAR 98 Mog Millennia Xw Duc 97 \"Monthly payment amounts for consumer leases are based on a 30-month house. Consulter leasing is arranged by an independent third-party leasing company to qualified customers. All monthly consumer lease payments listed above exclude taxes which may vary, but do include colicable shipping costs: adation, a security deposit equivalent to one or two monthly payments and a documentation fee of $50 is required, and al consumer leases are subject to credit approval and availability. At consumer lease end, equioment can be purchased for an amount equal to 15% of the original amount financed. plus applicable sales tax Lease terms subject to change without notice Go to #100 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"IN OUR DISTINGUISHED 111 YEAR HISTORY, YAMAHA HAS CRAFTED THE FINEST MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND MOST ACCURATE AUDIO COMPONENTS IN THE WORLD. NOW IT'S TIME TO... Kjo Butt! os WAVEFORE @o69 YAMA 2398 WAVEFORCE\"192XG YAMAHA XG Lightning Fast PCI Bus Unlimited Sounds via DLS 3D Positional Audio Incredible Sound Effects 676 Sounds21 Drum Kits Physical Modeling SynthesizerWavetable Synthesizer Outstanding Digital Effects Full Duplex Record & Playback Powerful Software Bundle SHOULD SOUND. L_YAMAHA For free brochure please call (800) 823-6414 ext. 403A. www.yamaha.com O1998 Yamaha Corporation of America. P.O. Box 6600. Buena Park, CA 90622-6600 Yamaha and Waveforce are registered trademarks of Yamaha Corporation Studio Quality Sound that he kicks butt! FREE 192X D GENERAL THI XG MIDI HIi Go to #101 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Microsat Windows "


"THE MOST TRUSTED REVIEWS FOR 16 YEARS X-FILES GONCOURSE B Pop Culture Icon Goes FMV, With Mixed Results UNREAL This Month CGW Editors' Choice games are indicated in red. GAME RATING PAGE 747 Precision Simulator * * * * * 247 Army Men * * * * * 229 Comanche Gold ** *** 247 Extreme Tactics *** ** 262 F22 ADF Red Sea Operations * * * * * 247 Game, Net & Match ** *** 264 Industry Giant ***** 261 Monster Truck Madness 2 **** * 228 OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR **** * Quake II: The Reckoning ** *** 224 SANITARIUM ***** Sorry **** * Spec Ops: Rangers Lead the Way **** * 225 Starship Titanic * * * * * 236 Team Apache * * * * * 240 Ultimate 3D Puzzle ***** Ultimate IQ Test * * * * * 267 267 Unreal ** *** World Cup Monopoly ***** The X-Files * ** ** 250 Cut Through the Hype for Our In-depth Look 238 267 OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR 267 The Deepest Operational Wargame Ever? 266 Quote of the Month The Game Genres Our reviews are Classics/Puzzle Classics are old categorized by genre. standbys such as Chess and MONOPOLY. Puzzle games emphaNot every game fits size problem-solving without neatly into a single requiring gamers to follow a story. Role-Playing A subset of genre, but here's how adventure games, these stress we define the catecharacter development through attributes. The gameworld tends gories in general: to be large; the plot less linear. Action Games that emphasize Simulations Highly realistic fast gameplay over story or games from a first-person perstrategy spective, including flight sims and Adventure Games that require space simulations you to solve puzzles to move Sports A broad genre encomthrough a story line passing action sports games such \"The flawed logic and limited playability aside, this still would have been a decent game if it weren't for the terrible interface and the bugs.\" -Lance Larka reviewing EXTREME TACTICS as NBA LIVE, strategic sports games such as FPS FOOTBALL, and even driving games such as CART PRECISION RACING. Strategy Problem-solving and planning are the keys here. These games emphasize resource and risk-management. Includes conflict-based sci-fi and fantasy games as well as construction programs like SIMCITY. Wargames A subset of strategy games, these re-create historical conflicts from a command perspective. They may be tactical, operational, or strategic. How Do We Rate? We review only finished products, not prerelease versions. The ratings are as follows: * * * * * Outstanding The rare game that gets it all right. A must-play experience. * * * * * Very Good Worthy of your time and money, but there are drawbacks. * * * * * Average Either an ambitious design with major flaws, or simply vanilla. * * * * * Weak Seriously lacking in play value, poorly conceived, or just another clone. * * * * * Abysmal The rare game that gets it all wrong. Pathetic. Coaster material. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 213 "


"2A 22:23 CENTURION This fruit basket looks absolutely delicious! It's awfully nice of you to have me deliver it to your arch rival. I thought you hated cach other? I wonder if anyone would notice an apple missing...? PIG FARMER Gotta wash the stench of horse manure out of my clothes in time for church! There will be a lot of single ladies at Venus' temple tonight. Rumor has it the priest is going to denounce birth control! M ITTE I'm being trar slums for riot ca tipped me a gc some fresh mea PRIEST Dedicating the temple to Venus was a smart move. Church attendance hasn't been this high in years! Then again, neither has the city's population. "


"TEN TO YOUR PEOPLE! i  LION TAMER  Build, rule and battle on one screen-no more switching between city, province and battle screens! Tipping the vigil off to arrest plebs for loitering was ingenious! It's much, cheaper to feed my lions prisoners than the meat from that farmer. We'll see how long those gladiators last against my boys now!  Visual feedback: The real-time effects of the player's actions are immediately visible on screen. mintoihin Mini  Various terrain sets include deserts, forests, mountains and multiple elevations.  Construct temples to various gods of the Roman Pantheon and witness the effects on your city. VIGIL crred back to the rol the Lion Tamer piece to round up or his pets.  More progressive career structure and intuitive interface mean more exciting, longer lasting gameplay. . CAESAR Build a Better Rome TAX COLLECTOR If you are planning to build a new Colosseum as i suspect, you'll need a lot more money, and a lot more guys like me to gather it. People who think taking candy from a baby is wrong just haven't bothered to try it. www.sicrrastudios.com EVERYONE ATERRA E 298 Sierra On-Line Inc. Ustand/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to, Sierra Onstine, The Ballerie, WA 98007. All Rights Reserved Impressions. "


"THINGS TO DO TODAY I. ROUND UP PRISONERS FOR THE LION PITS. II. VISIT FORUM TO ASSESS CITY'S FINANCES. III. PRACTICE WAVING TO THE PEOPLE (IN ADORING FASHION). IV. HIRE VOICE COACH TO HELP PRACTICE EVIL LAUGHTER. V. MEET WITH CHIEF ARCHITECT/ ARTISANS TO DISCUSS NEW CALOSSEUM, VI. SEND RIVAL A BASKET OF POISONED FRUTT. VII. INSPECT GLADIATORS FOR THIS THURSDAY'S BLOODFEST AT THE COLOSSEUM. VIII. RAISE TAXES TO FUND MORE TAX COLLECTORS. IX. LECTURE PUBLIC ON BENEFITS OF PROCREATING. X. HIRE MORE VIGILS TO PATROL THE SLUMS. XI. Meet CLEOPATRA FOR DINNER (THIS MIGHT BE THE NIGHT!) XII. STAGE A FUNNY THING TO HAPPEN ON THE WAY TO THE FORUM. XIII. ABSOLUTELY DON'T FORGET TO... "


"CGW Reviews Index These Are the Games We Have Reviewed in the Last Three Months Month CGW Rating June June August August June Page 184 196 174 178 189 Game Battlezone Deathmatch Maker 2 Die by the Sword Forsaken Interstate '76: Arsenal Grand Theft Auto Hexen Il: Portal of Praevus Juggernaut Outwars Shadow Master Touring Car Championship Ultimate Race Pro Publisher Activision Virtus Interplay Acclaim Activision ASC Games Activision Canopy Games Microsoft Psygnosis Sega MicroProse July ACTION 152 * * ** 176 July June August July June July 146 194 144 ADVENTURE Black Dahlia Might & Magic VI Of Light & Darkness Tex Murphy: Overseer Interplay 3DO Interplay Access Software July August June June 154 180 202 197 August 224 CLASSICS/PUZ. Bridge Deluxe II with Omar Sharif Creatures Life Kit #1 Kuba Mastermind Pharaoh's Ascent Star Trek Pinball Interplay Mindscape Patch Hasbro Ambertech Interplay June August August June June 224 260 188 * * * * SIMS F-15 iF-22 Persian Gulf v5.0 M-1 Tank Platoon II Panzer Commander Search and Rescue Jane's/EA Interactive Magic MicroProse SSI Intense Entertainment July July August August June Ilunsatsstelle sale sulla bassasllaulaa 160 162 185 194 204 July 166 Deer Hunter F1 Racing Simulation FIFA Road to World Cup 98 Front Page Sports Ski Racing HardBall 6 High Heat The Golf Pro Triple Play 99 World Cup 98 SPORTS WizardWorks/GT Ubi Soft EA Sports Sierra Accolade 3DO Empire EA Sports EA Sports 164 208 214 208 July June August August August August August August 204 211 202 201 STRATEGY/WARGAMES Armor Command Chronx Dark Reign Expansion... Shadowhand Deadlock 11 Dragoon East Front Campaign CD 1 Great Battles of Julius Caesar Liberation Day Semper Fi Soldiers at War StarCraft Star Wars Rebellion Storm in the West Total Annihilation: Core Contingency WarBreeds Warhammer: Dark Omen Ronin Entertainment Genetic Anomalies Activision Accolade Art of War Talon Soft Interactive Magic Interactive Magic Interactive Magic SSI Blizzard LucasArts Schwerpunkt Cave Dog Red Orb June August July June July July July August June August July * * * * July 216 168 172 258 217 189 June August July EA July 178 * * * * * www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 217 "


"SPECIAL OPS STEALTH-SQUAD COMBAT IN WEEPER 40 INDOOR/OUTDOOR MISSIONS. GRITTIER ATTACKS DATTACKS ON TANKS, TURRETS, GROUND TROOPS AND OTHER WAR MACHINES. ideas and trade sames are opelties al het respective owners O M W 1998 Activision, Inc. All rights unletib created and owned by Dream Pod 9, Inc. Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. det OFFICIAL HEAVY GEAR UNIVERSE . c. and are at 1993 Dream P DREAM PODS HARSHER CD BATTLES IN HOSTILE SCI-FI CONDITIONS LIL FROM ZERO-G TO VOLCANIC ZONES. COMBAT ACTION WITH THE COMPLETELY LI RE-BUILT, ALL-NEW DARK SIDE ENGINE, "


"AGINSON BER HEAR REBUILT FROM THE BATTLEGROUND UP. WWW.ACTIVISION.COM Go to #234 @ www.computergaming.commolink: "


"REVIEW UNREAL ACT LOAN Real Close UNREAL Packs a Major Wallop, But Misses on Some Basics by Dan Fitzpatrick he first thing you notice about UNREAL is the stunningly realistic effects generated by Epic's proprietary \"Fire Engine.\" You may find yourself stopping repeatedly to gape, open-mouthed, at lava. You may accidentally drown while mesmerized beneath the beautifully undulating surface of a pond. The game has fog and mist, realistic halos around lights, awesome textures could go on and on, but what's the point? Let's just say that everything you've heard about the engine is true. Of course, you'd better be packing a 3Dfx card. Without one, while the software rendering and frame-rates are impressive, you'll be missing a lot of what makes this game exciting. COMPUTER GAMING **** But even discounting the engine, UNREAL rocks. From a gameplay standpoint, UNREAL is as good or better than QUAKE II or JEDI KNIGHT. But it has enough problems to keep it from achieving the greatness of which it was capable. The level design is great-awesome in places—but it suffers from unevenness. The weapons have serious problems. Plus, the pace is pretty slow for the first few levels, so stay in tourist mode and enjoy the scenery. RUN AWAY! A vital UNREAL skill is the ability to shoot while running backward in panic. Unlike the monsters in QUAKE II, Color Me Busy these guys are just as fast as you are. The textures are expertly done and realistic—due in part to the navigate, and there were four or fact that many began as photo five instances in which I actually graphs of the real thing. But the had to get a pencil and paper to often unrestrained use of color map the level in order to find my detracts from the textures. It's as if way out. That might add to the fun the UNREAL team looked at the id if you're expecting it, but I wasn't games and said, \"Why is everyand since I would map only after thing brown and gray?\" and then becoming completely frustrated, I went too far in the other direction. didn't feel it was a positive aspect COLOR MY WORLD Lots of Admittedly, QUAKE II is a little colof gameplay. Cleverly concealed color is pretty, but it's here orless, but it seems more realistic exits were part of the problem, but where UNREAL unintentionin the end, because UNREAL'S it was also because of intentional ally lives up to its name. bright, oversaturated colors continmazelike design, which I despise. ually remind you that you're in a On balance, however, many of churches just about any environgame. Also, many times, the game the levels are extremely well done, ment we've seen in a shooter is uses too many different textures in and the game got much better as represented here, and the transia given building or area, which creit went along. In my estimation, tions are handled amazingly well. ates a jumbled-looking environ the highs of level design combined ment that doesn't jibe with reality. with the superior engine definitely Just Shoot Me Some of the levels were hard to exceed those of QUAKE II. Another The weapons array is problempositive aspect atic. UNREAL has more interesting W92 Z of UNREAL'S weapons than QUAKE II, but there is apparent \"more too much variety (yes, that's a negais better\" philostive), and it's hard to tell which ophy is the weapons are the most effective, refreshing even after playing for hours. Is the amount of vari upgraded Dispersion Pistol more ety in level deadly than the Stinger? Which is locale, which more lethal: the Jelly Gun (the keeps the game \"GESBioRifle\") grenades or the 8interesting. You Ball grenades? Dunno. This lack of 2002. travel through clear hierarchy in weapons capabilimines, ancient ties is a serious weakness. It's okay MMM... LAVA... The liquid effects generated temples, space to have a multitude of different by Epic's \"Fire Engine\" are stunning, even ships, military weapons as long as there's a clear viewed in still pictures, bases, villages, reason to choose one over the other WORLD APPEAL: 3Dshooter fans looking for the next big thing. PROS: Killer engine; tough monsters, great variety. CONS: Lackluster weapons; uneven level design; ho-hum multiplayer play. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 166 (233MMX recommended), 16MB RAM, 100MB hard drive space, 4x CD-ROM, SVGA graphics. 3Dfx Voodoo or Voodoo recommended. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx Voodoo and Voodoo2 (Voodoo Rush not supported). PowerVR. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN and Internet (2-16 players); 1 CD per player. Price: $54.95 Publisher: GT Interactive New York, NY (212) 726-6500 www.gtinteractive.com 220 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"UNREAL REVIEW ACTILON L: 100 150 GIVE US A KISS The ASMD is a nice instantaneous-fire weapon, but does it pack more punch than the Razorjack? in a given situation; this is what at an attacking Skaarj, even when makes tactical weapons choices a it would save my life. To make matbig part of the fun in a shooter. ters worse, the monsters don't react One huge miscalculation regard audibly or visibly when hit by this ing weapons balancing is the weapon until they suddenly die. Amplifier. Basically, it's a super quad On a more positive note, all damage that you can turn on and weapons have a secondary attack off. Judicious use (it runs out) lets feature, which greatly enriches the you easily dispatch almost all of the tactical possibilities of battle. The bosses in the game. Like the Invulrocket launcher (the nicely named nerability power-up in QUAKE II, this \"8-Ball Launcher\" ) doubles as a basically ruins the game unless you grenade launcher in secondary choose not to use it, which requires mode, and the shrapnel gun turns uncommon discipline. into a shrapnel grenade gun, which is good when the enemy is farther Eat My Peashooter! away. An excellent feature, used By far the worst problem with well in N64's GOLDENEYE and also the weapons, however, is their a popular QUAKE Il mod, is the secsound. Weapon sounds gotta be ondary fire of the Assault Rifle: It's loud, much louder than the ambienta variable-magnification scope sounds in the game. That's part of view, excellent for picking off the fun of a gun: It goes Bang! The patrolling Krall from a distance. guns of UNREAL don't go BangSome of the dissatisfaction with they whimper. Also, many of the UNREAL's weapons fades after a effects could have been much more few hours of gameplay and, sound dangerous-sounding. The worst is notwithstanding, there are some the Minigun. I assume it's supposed gratifying weapons here. I learned to be powerful since it took me 10to love the RazorJack, which makes plus hours of gameplay to get it, a very nice shredding sound as it but it sounds and inflicts damage as lops off a monster's head, leaving if it's shooting little packets of air. the monster groping comically for The GESBioRifle sounds like it's its lost noggin before expiring. passing gas. Speaking of the GESBioRifle, A Little Too Smart which is (apparently) one of the It was hoped that UNREAL'S AL most powerful weapons, I used it would do new tricks (Steven Polge, only as a last resort because I sim creator of the Reaperbot QUAKE ply hated it. Accustomed to the mod, is on the team), and to some manly heft of rocket launchers and extent it does. Mostly, though, the rail guns, I just couldn't see any fun Al improvement consists of making in spitting little blobs of mint jelly the monsters faster. This is a big ENDURANCE TEST Fighting a Titan is a matter of unloading your ammunition while staying out of its way. improvement over the pitifully slow beasts of QUAKE II, whom you could circle around and decapitate from behind. Not only can't you run in UNREAL, you also can't hide, and this is where the game baldly cheats: The monsters always turn to face you even when they can't see you, so when you reappear from behind a crate, they already have a rocket on the way. Some monsters are smarter than others, and Mercenaries, in particular, seem to exhibit botlike tacticseven teamwork. In one battle with a pair of Mercs, which seemed to go on for minutes, one kept me pinned down with rocket fire while the other circled for a better angle, using an elevator in the process. It was a convincing and thoroughly involving fight, one I wanted to experience again immediately. The monsters have also learned to counter the common tactic of using the doorway to one's advantage. Usually you can just pick off monsters one by one as they come through, but these guys get in the room quickly and step to the side in order to let their buddies get through. Monsters also effectively used cover in some instances and retreated when near death. Although the Al is improved over that of QUAKE II, it's still inconsistent. Monsters often don't patrol, they just stay \"frozen\" until triggered, usually by being shot. Monsters who have taken cover often don't recognize that they are being pummeled from around the corner by grenades or razor blades, and are easily killed. some things that should not be intelligent, are. Time after time could not go through a door until I had killed a certain monster. Whatever happened to having a monster drop a key? Doors that magically unlock when a monster dies destroy the realism that designers are presumably working to create Despite these criticisms, UNREAL's single-player game is as good as anything I've seen so far, and is arguably better. In the end, it's a matter of taste. But it had potential to be so much more. In addition to the single-player problems, the hefty system requirements (in the READ.ME file, Epic admits you'd be happiest with a Pentium II), lingering complaints of laggy Internet play, and lessthan-thrilling multiplayer action even on a LAN) drag this game back to reality. CGW ARCHITECTURAL DIGEST Although inconsistent, some of the level design, like that of the Nali castle, is outstanding. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 ZZI "


"You've witnessed some of the greatest moments in NASCAR'S 50-year history. Now create your own. WWW NASCAR VINASNAR SPECIAL TITLE Powered by DEPRUUWWW.sierrasports.com 1988 Sierra On-Un, Inc. and designato trademark of, or licenced to Sierra On-Un, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. Papyrus and the Papyrus logs are trademarks of Design , MACAR Racks NASCAR Brad Baar Sam Pack are officially licensed by NASCAR NASCAR\" Grand Nationar and the both Anniversary logo are registered trademarks of the National Association for Stock Car Auta Racing, mac. All other trademarks are the property of the meets w rd "


"VLERRA Play the sport WINTER Some people will call it a collector's item. The best selling, most realistic stock car sim ever -NASCAR Racing 2and the NASCARGrand National Series Expansion Pack. Together in a special commemorative 50th Anniversary package from Sierra Sports. But to call it a collector's item would be to miss the point. Racing. So peel those stickers. You know you want to. Go to #110 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  QUAKE II MISSION PACK: THE RECKONING ACTION Reckon We've Seen This Before The Latest QUAKE II Add-on Is No SCOURGE OF ARMAGON by Thierry Nguyen laying this first official Mission Pack for QUAKE It is like watching a movie about unsung heroes in war. Sure, the original QUAKE II marine may have wasted most of the Strogg army and assassinated their leader and hopped away, but he wasn't the only marine doing his job. QUAKE II: THE RECKONING shows you the story of another marine (who was knocked off course during the drop) and his hefty contribution to the cause. Colonial Marines Are the Baddest RECKONING puts you through four hubs, with a grand total of 18 ing the COMPUTER GAMING levels. These hubs cover goals such as securing your position, coordinating an air strike, stowing away on a freighter, and destroying a hidden moon base. Seven new DeathMatch levels offer variety, and you can even play through the game cooperatively. The level designs flow a little better than those in the original game--so it's harder to get lost or sidetracked-and the designers have played around with the architecture by LEAN, MEAN, AND GREEN You need the hefty Phalanx Cannon in order using collapsing beams, to take on the now-shielded Super Tank. falling stalactites, and an exploding refinery. Outdoor envi two new enemies. Of the two QUAKE II. It has the added beneronments feature decent-looking new weapons, one is a bit disap fits of acidic blood, and it can canyons and caves, pushing the pointing, while the other is very heal itself if needed. Having a limits of the QUAKE II engine. cool. The phalanx cannon is little Gekk jump on you in the dark Overall, RECKONING offers more more than a glorified rocket brings back the \"Oh, crap!\" faclevels with some nice additions launcher; it will, however, satisfy tor, and they also have a nice evident in the later levels: I found those gamers annoyed with the swimming animation. the Moonbase level with its cavstandard rocket's slow speed and The Repairbot, though, proved ernous interior and lower gravity reload rate. The ion ripper, on the to be a huge disappointment. to be particularly fun. other hand, has ricocheting proEvery one I saw just floated there. jectiles that work excellently in I did see one heal a dead enemy Double Your Fun multiplayer games (and in smaller or two, but overall, in my experiMaybe rooms in the single-player game). ence, their presence was minRECKONING gives you two new The two new items are pretty imal—and forgettable. weapons, two new items, and good. The Trap is a wonderful item. The rest of the enemies are as it converts enemies buffed-up in terms of new into health cubes; sadly, weaponry or new shielding. The Traps are rare to come Super Tank now has shields, the by. The Quadfire item is gladiator has shield and a phaalso useful, because it lanx cannon, the Iron Maiden has quadruples your firing seeking rockets, and even the rate, making the rail gun grunt uses hyperblasters and easier to use and turning accurate laser rifles. The enemies the chain gun and hyper populated the levels, and at blaster into true room times, their sheer numbers and clearers. accuracy were a bit much. Only one of the new QUAKE II diehards should enjoy enemies is done well; this Mission Pack. The rest of us the other could stand have been there before, and the GOING STROGG HUNTING Lay the Trap much improvement. The lure of one cool new weapon or on the floor like a mine and let it turn Gekk, inspired by enemy may not be enough to your foes into food. Aliens, is the Fiend of entice us back. CGW WORLD **** good elements of h e APPEAL: QUAKE Il junkies. PROS: Nice level design; one nice weapon addition; good elements of changing architec ture; one cool new De enemy. CONS: More of the same; the other new enemy and weapon aren't so hot: the improved QUAKE Il enemies are a bit too plentiful in some levels. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90 or better, Windows 95, 16 MB RAM (24 MB for GLQUAKE II), 100MB hard drive space, 4x CD-ROM, Windows 95-compatible sound and video cards, original QUAKE II. 3D SUPPORT: OpenGL. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: TCP/IP and LAN (2-16 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $29.95 Publisher: id Software Dallas, TX (800) idgames www.idsoftware.com 224 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"SPEC OPS: RANGERS LEAD THE WAY REVIEW Rangers in the Rough Zombie's Ranger Game Isn't Quite So Special ACTION by Thierry Nguyen pecial operations groups within the military have been the subject of numerous novels, films, and even games: Remember EA's SEAL TEAM? SPEC OPS: RANGERS LEAD THE WAY is the first of a planned series by Zombie Studios focusing on various special operations forces throughout the world, such as the Green Berets, the SAS, and even the SEALs. Problem is, the game does not live up to the standards of the forces it depicts—at least until you download the patch. Your Mission, Should You Choose to Accept It SPEC OPS takes place in various locations around the world, and the game is broken down into couldn't there be more than two Rangers, perhaps with you controlling the team leader? The Al needs some work. Both the Rangers and the enemy forces attempt to use terrain to their advantage, but often end up out of position. The computer opponent also likes to fire weapons in the general direction of its foe, disregarding any obstacles (like walls) that make such actions useless. The timer is a bit on the DON'T EAT THE YELLOW SNOW Unlike the coloring effects in aggravating side as well; it dismost shooters, those in SPEC OPS aren't there just for show: courages exploration, and it's the Rangers are even appropriately outfitted. sometimes unfair. Also, those of us without a 3Dfx card (other 3D five phases, each having an overteams of four, yet you control only support is planned for a later all goal. A phase is then divided two Rangers at a time. Supposedly patch) will be treated to a horreninto three or four missions, which this is a control issue, but I usually dously slow software engine. range from hostage rescue to the found my Ranger buddy to be like After SPEC OPS' release, a demolition of strategic targets. a wingman in a flight sim. So, series of patches fixed technical Before each phase, you get a issues and featured vastvideo briefing and a list of objecly improved gameplay: tives; you then pick two Rangers randomized enemies, a for the mission. more-forgiving timer, SPEC OPS models outdoor terand better stealth rain quite well in daylight and at modeling. I hope Zombie night. Both Rangers and enemies and Ripcord have are suitably outfitted for the envilearned their lesson, 50 ronment in question, and the that the initial release enemies even speak the correct for their upcoming Green language. The weapons sound NIGHT MOVES SPEC OPS allows you Beret game will be ready authentic, and the small touches, to use a variety of cool equipment, to play in its initial such as a variety of sniper scopes, such as this night-vision sniper scope. release. CGW add to the overall immersion. The third-person perspective isn't anything new-and there are some DOOM-like aspects (such as picking up ammunition and medikits)—but SPEC OPS does require more strategy than is the norm for this genre. You can run around with guns blazing if you desire, but you'll soon find that it's better to exercise caution and stealth. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ***** APPEAL: 3rdperson action gamers SPEC OPS: into movies like Navy Cogers for the WWW SEALS or The Rock PROS: Well done, immersive environment realistic weapons and tools; has more gameplay than your average shooter. CONS: Bad software engine; annoying timer, you can control only two Rangers, no mapping: mediocre Al; needs patch. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 166, 16MB RAM, Windows 95, 60MB harddrive space, 8x CD-ROM, DirectX 5compatible soundand video cards, DirectX 5. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx Glide. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None Price: $49.95 Publisher: Ripcord Games San Diego, CA (888) 797-5867 Fire in the Hole It's disappointing, then, that several flaws creep in to prevent SPEC OPS from rising above the crowd. Rangers generally work in FIRE & RAIN From booby traps to weather effects, SPEC OPS has visuals to spare. www.ripcordgames.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 ZS "


"In 1968, they changed the rules of Grand Prix racing to cut down on driver fatalities. GRANDPRIX LE GE N D Powered by PAPYRUS 01998 Sierra On Lino, Inc. and designate trademarks of, or licensed to, Sierra On-Line, Ine. Belevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. Papyrus and tho Papyrus logo are trademarks of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners and are used under permission W W W.Sierrasnon s.com "


"MERRA Matthil sport Welcome to 1967. Pulling out of a power slide. The g-forces throwing you around the cockpit. You realize, you're sitting behind the truest 3D engine ever built. Racing the likes of Jack Brabham and Jim Clark. At Monza, Spa and Nurburgring. 1967 was a historic turning point in Formula One racing. Welcome to Grand Prix Legends Racing sims will never be the same. WANAON Go to #135 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2 ACTIONS Off-road Obstacles MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2 Improves on the Original—But the Lack of Tournaments is a Real Drag Place a/a Lap: 1/2 by Scott May hen you first fire up your engine, Microsoft's MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2 (MTM2) seems like more fun than a new set of mud flaps. It's a definite improvement over the original MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS, though it can't match the sophistication of CART PRECISION RACING, Terminal Reality's other title for Microsoft. MFM2 includes 14 tracks: 11 single-player rally and circuit races, and 3 multiplayer arena tracks. Direct3D, or 3Dfx hardware acceleration. On a Pentium 233 MMX with Monster 3D and all graphic amenities turned on, MTM2 ran extremely smooth, with tight, responsive controls and high frame-rates. Nine new variable weather conditions from blue skies to pitch black night, and everything in-between--not only spice up the visuals, but add more challenges, depending on the track. THIS AIN'T THE FIRESTONE 500 MTM2 hits pay dirt when it comes to raucous, in-your-face fun but I miss having tournaments COMPUTER GAMING  WORLD **** TRUCK APPEAL: Racing fans MONSTER who enjoy get ADNESS ting down and dirty. PROS: Improved 3D graphics, sound, and performance; nice variety of tracks and trucks; excellent controls; multiplayer arena duels. CONS: Repetitive action; limited vehide setup; no track editor, no tournament or drag race mode DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133 (supports Pentium II MMX with AGP). Windows 95/98/NT, 16MB RAM (32MB recommended), 30MB hard drive space, 4x CD-ROM drive (6x recommended), SVGA graphics, mouse; supports racing wheels/pedals, force-feedback devices, and Windows 95-compatible sound cards and joysticks. 3D SUPPORT: Direct3D. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem (2 players), IPX or TCPAP (2-8 players): 1 CD per player Price: $54.95 Publisher: Microsoft Redmond, WA (206) 882-8080 www.microsoft.com Rallies tend to include more offeight gamers compete in thumbroad obstacles, such as water, blistering action. Measured in minrocks, and mud; circuit tracks, more utes (up to 20) instead of laps, the flat-out racing. Both circuit and emphasis here isn't on beating the rally races can be set up to 20 laps track, but rather beating up on in length. The solo tracks range your opponents to become King of from the mundane Farm Road 29 the Hill. It's rowdy and fun, but to the maniacal Breakneck Ridge, ultimately less satisfying and infiwith the occasional touch of fan nitely more claustrophobic-than tasy (The Graveyard and Voodoo the outdoor venues. Island). Regardless of the setting. Unfortunately, the designers left each course is reasonably long and out two exciting racing options heavy on variety. In other words from the original game: drag races even the most jaded off-roader will and tournaments. Okay, drag racfind long-term challenges here. ing in monster trucks is no great loss, but tournament play—the King of the Hill ability to create a custom mix of New to the series are multi drag, rally, and circuit races-IS player courses, which feature an sorely missed here. However, with arena-style setting in which up to the exception of drag races, you can use any of the original game's courses in MTM2, with a slight degradation in graphic quality. Graphics in MTM2 are much more polished than those of the origiSO TRANSFER GEAR SUSPENSION D nal, which suffered from MORE SPEED MORE ACCELERATION polygon clipping, horrif's Rates Motopo ic terrain pop-ups, and BIG TRUCK, TINY TOOLS Even in an perfunctory 3D effects. arcade racer, monster truck fans This time out, gamers deserve more than MTM2's limited have a choice of softvehicle setup options. ware-only rendering. Road Wrassling Player controls are also much improved this time around, supporting force-feedback joysticks for the ultimate off-road kick. I also found InterAct's UltraRacer PC, a joystick-mounted mini-steering wheel, to be especially responsive. On the other hand, truck setups are limited to transfer gear ratios, tread depth, and suspension strength. So, if you're looking to tweak your vehicle in NASCARstyle detail, it's likely you'll be very disappointed. MTM2 does feature nine new truck designs—including some based on WCW and NWO wrestling characters (along with 11 trucks from the original). Unlike vehicles from the first game, these nitro-fueled mutations now show damage (especially in multiplayer arena competition), which eventually impedes performance. There are a lot of things to like about this sequel, but leaving out several of the best features from the original puts you behind the wheel of a mediocre racer. In particular, a promised track editor that would have added considerable legs to this game failed to make the final release. In the end, MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2 won't quite get you to hog heaven, but it's the best rough-and-tumble racing game thus far. CGW GARAGE 228 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ARMY MEN REVIEW Plastic Explosives SANSACTALON ARMY MEN Has Great Appeal, Lousy Controls be taking the physics of burning plastic too seriously, but it put me in the mood for miniature combat, and after getting out my bucket helmet and BB gun, I was ready for action. Move 'Em Out, Boys ARMY MEN starts out with a good tutorial—which you'll badly need. As you take over Sarge (the by Terry Coleman hen I was growing up, every kid had little plastic soldiers that with stood the rigors of total war. Season after season, we fought epic battles in sand lots, leaf piles, and freshly tilled soil. We lined up our sunscorched heroes and shot them with BB guns, bombarded them with dirt clods, and blew them sky high with fireworks. So when I saw that 3DO was working on ARMY MEN-a game aimed squarely at my nostalgia bone couldn't wait to play it. I soon discovered that ARMY MEN lets you do things that we could only dream of as kids: torch enemy soldiers with flamethrowers, blow off their limbs with mortars, and call in air strikes. thought the design team might game's main character) and attempt to navigate the obstacle training course and turkey shoot setup, you'll likely consider returning the game to the store in frustration. ARMY MEN has one of the worst interfaces of any action game, a bizarre mouse/key combo that, in comparison, makes some flight-sim controls seem easy to use. The best way to get around this is to use a joystick, but even then, be prepared to have your control buttons suddenly reset in the middle of a mission. Once you get the controls down, the game is enjoyable, as you guide your loyal greenies against tan, blue, and gray enemies, all of whom have different styles of attack and defense. There are power-ups in the form of flamethrowers, grenades, air support, and more scattered throughout the clever missions, which take place over a variety of terrain types. It's tough, for example, to dig enemies out of the alpine region and it's downright creepy to slog through the swamp. Even the bland desert terrain is appropriately reminiscent of a sandbox. Often, however, the game is tougher than it should be. Enemy soldiers are often placed where you must kneel or otherwise contort your soldier in order to shoot them. Even then you suffer through a random factor determining whether you hit your targets—while they rarely miss you. And call me a lame PC action gamer if you must, but why can't save whenever I want? COMPUTER GAMING *** WORLD ARMY WHO NEEDS CAMOUFLAGE? Your trusty green army men defend bridges over rivulets, make the desert even less hospitable, and firefight at close range in a train station. APPEAL: Brings back the joy of toy soldiers, with cool explosions. PROS: Great con cept: clever missions; flamethrowers and tanks are a hoot: good A1 CONS: Terrible interface; lame save routine; no 3D support. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 115MB hard-drive space, 4x CD-ROM, Direct Draw SVGA graphics, Direct Sound-compatible sound card; supports Directinput peripherals. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: TCP/IP and IPX (1—4 players); direct modem, serial port (1-2). Price: $39.95 Publisher: 3DO Redwood City (650) 261-3000 www.armymen.com If We Had a General, We'd Win This War Neat as the little plastic toys are, you can't help but wonder why 3DO didn't use fully 3D models and support the major 3D accelerators. Plus, we've seen a lot of this before. Origin's CRUSADER had smoother controls (and better rolling moves) two years ago, and even mediocre fighting games make better use of the PC keypad. All of which makes you wonder what the 3D0 folks were thinking when they devised such a lame interface. You can't change the mouse control, and it's amazing that there's no gamepad support, since 3D0 was founded as a console company. It, like me, you find yourself entranced by the subject matter, ARMY MEN will make a fun diversion. Otherwise, wait for a patch, and hope that 3D0 buys a clue before the inevitable sequel. CGW www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 229 "


"REVIEW THE X-FILES GAME X Almost Hits the Spot ADVENTURE RPG X-Philes Will Appreciate This Decent Game More Than Most CONCOUNSERE (Scully) Agent Willmore, 's Dana Scully. Where are you? by Thierry Nguyen ell, we wanted to believe. But though THE XFILES GAME looked at first to be a quality title with a good usage of its show license, it turns out, ultimately, to be just an average game with a high level of atmosphere for the X-phile. As a multimedia version of The X-Files, it does a decent job, picking up the pace near the end. As an actual adventure game, it screams \"newbie\"-yet there are enough problems to annoy even veterans of the adventure genre. THE X-FILES GAME casts you as Special Agent Craig Willmore, a more or less by-the-book agent. As the game opens, you're simply minding your own business, doing your usual antiterrorism case, when your SAIC (Special Agent in Charge—the local boss) calls you in, and introduces Assistant Director Skinner. Skinner tells you that two important agents of his, Fox Mulder and Dana Scully, have been missing for three days, and were last seen in Seattle. Your task is to find them. Hard-core fans of the TV series may be able to guess what happened to our favorite duo based on the intro, and they will most likely be right when all is revealed in the end. The more casual fan will be given a plot filled with conspiracies, Russian mafia dealings, and government cover-ups that make up a good mythology episode (see the sidebar for how the game fits in the show's chronology). 124 , E = 931 / REACH OUT AND TOUCH What's an X-Files episode without Scully asking \"Where are you?\" on the cell phone? COMPUTER puzzles are inventory and dialogue-based, in that you pick up the right items lying around and you either use them correctly or talk to others about them in order to progress in the game. Unfortunately, these puzzles are what drag the game down. There are, thankfully, no contrived clocktower or water-machine-gear puzzles, but alas, there is a huge emphasis on hotspots. A lot hinges on collecting evidence and examining it. It's finding the evidence that constitutes the bulk of the game, and, at times, it boils down to searching large locales for a few WORLD *** . images are crisp while maintaining a decent frame-rate. The acting itself is generally solid, with the non-series actors doing a decent job overall. The actors from the TV show have quite minor roles, though. Mitch Pileggi (Skinner) is there only for the first few locations near the beginning of the game before flying away, and he seemed a bit too standoffish; perhaps being in a game was too new for him. Gillian Anderson has quite a bit of onscreen time; both she and David Duchovny are seen near the end of the game, and they do surprisingly well. They bring a lot of the X-Files feel and humor to the game. The Lone Gunman (Tom Braidwood, Bruce Harwood, and Dean Haglund) and X (Steven Williams) have short but functional scenes. Fans of The Cancer Man (William B. Davis) will be disappointed to hear that he appears in only one brief scene, if you die in a certain way. FILES DOES IT HAVE RED-EYE REDUCTION? The camera needs to be used only once, and even at that time, it's not a requirement. SEOULOG Ir H Reporter . IP ette ve , GIVE it a jeho it, k to wat F Dresse 1 L APPEAL: Adventure newbies and The XFiles groupies. PROS: Very XFiles in atmosphere: puzzles are well integrated into plot; excellent FMV segments; Duchovny and Anderson seem to fit in; excellent auto-note taker. CONS: Easy, annoying timed/action sequences; not enough save game slots short; not as much screen time for X-Files stars as desired. DIFFICULTY: Easy. REQUIREMENTS: Windows 95, Pentium 120, 16MB RAM, 250MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM, DirectX 5.0-compatible sound and video cards. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None Price: $49.95 Publisher: Fox Interactive Beverly Hills, CA (310) 369-7000 www.foxinteractive.com 10 Ti Cold St. This not weled pluto .IS ISOLAY. Wy The Bluescreen Where I Acted Before delving into the negative aspects of the game, I might as well comment on the acting, since it's obviously more important in this game than in most. The FMV in this game is first-rate. After installing QuickTime 3.0, you can play the cut-scenes in high-quality, 24-bit video in letterbox format. These scenes actually look a lot cleaner and more professional than those of other games that feature FMV. The sets look real, and the Mota Padme OSD O sa on Ennui A Deux The actual game is essentially a MYST-y FMV adventure. The navigation is like MYST in that you use the pointer to click around a series of screens, but the gameplay is a bit more traditional. Many of the NEWTON WOULD BE PROUD Your PDA takes down excellent field notes for your reference, eliminating the need for manual note-taking. 230 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ADVENTUREZRPG The other various gadgets, like flashlights, night-vision goggles, and the camera, were used once each for fun. Unlike SPYCRAFT, which had great puzzles that made excellent use of the toys at hand, THE X-FILES has EE toys mostly for show. IT'S DA BOMB This bomb is one of a few annoying timed action sequences. At least you're not fiddling The Saved and with wires, à la MYST. The Loaded Another problem measly hotspots. What comes to mind is involves action sequences that will annoy searching the warehouse on disc 2 for some adventurers. The difficulty can be four pieces of evidence, or the large tweaked, and you can set the sequence to freighter, the Tarakan, for three items and reload after every botched attempt, but one location in particular. I clicked and still, I was often annoyed as I tried to figsearched for a hotspot on every screen ure out what I was doing wrong or how until I struck gold. This was a case in could shoot my weapon faster. which I knew exactly what to do, but The game's sequencing is another doing it was what aggravated me. bummer. While the game allows you to Also, there are a few inventory-based travel anywhere in the course of the puzzles, but not enough. You hardly use investigation, sometimes you have to do the computer station on your desk, as things in the right order in order to proonly a few crucial puzzles are solved ceed. I spent the longest amount of time there. Most of it is just pure filler to round in the game on disc 2, simply because I out the atmosphere. Your PDA is only overlooked one small item. good for two things: traveling and taking The game provides you with only 3 really good auto-notes (I found myself save slots, which are simply not enough looking at these to get a hint as to what for an adventure game. I was hoping for to do next). The email is minimal (it was a 10 slots, and I was cramped with 3. As for bit fun to forward random mail around branching, the most it amounts to is how and see what kind of reply I'd get), and you die, and whether or not you get the address book had no use whatsoever. Astadourian (the female lead) in the end. THE EARTH IS MY MOTHER. ONLY THE EMPIRE STANDS BETWEEN HER AND THE CYBRID DARKNESS. THOSE WHO UNDERMINE THE EMPIRE BETRAY HUMANITY. MY BROTHER HAS BROKEN HIS PHOTO VIEWER HOLY OATH AND LEADS Enlargement ING MEDIA THE REBELLION. I WILL Capture Concel Vio Click on a thumbnail for an enlarged image PHOTO E-MAIL STRIKE HIM DOWN IN HUMANITY'S APB QUIT NAME. FOR I AM THE SWORD FAMILY PICTURE ALBUM While this computer stuff is pretty cool, most of it is in the game for atmosphere only. OF RETRIBUTION. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 231 1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"Today's Show Topic: «She Got Medieval With My Man!\" Windows 95 CD-ROM lieval.com SHOW UPRA PARA Awesome Networking .40 Kick Ass Levels 4 Humorous Characters o3D Rendered Graphics Gassy To Play Hard TO Masters Call our new Get Medieval hint line 1-900-CALL-LITH* *Available when Get Medieval ships PET MEDIEVAL DE GELEWEKALI MEDIEVAL A Fast, Furious and Funny Dungeon Romp! Go to #141 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink In stores in September! Be one of the first to play Get Medieval! Visit http://www.getmedieval.com and enter to win our Get Medieval Game Giveaway! Winners will receive a copy of Get Medieval one week before it's available in stores! A FANT, FuriouS AND FUNNY DUNGEON ROMPI MOSEL MONOLITH www.lith.com www.getmedieval.com Get Medieval and the \"M\" logo are trademarks of Monolith Productions Inc "


"THE X-FILES GAME REVIEW ADVENTUREZRPG KANGAR 4 SAND POINT SAVAS THE X-FILES GAME is ultimately a novice level adventure game with a healthy dose of X-Files atmosphere. From the superimposed date, location, and time in the corner to the fact that you are playing a malefemale duo—everything has an X-Files feel to it. A competent adventure gamer is looking at ALOM about 15 to 20 hours of NOT QUITE AREA 51 The letterbox format, the camgameplay, depending on era angles, the words in the corner-they all help how stuck you are lookgive the game that X-Files feel. ing for a hotspot, and how long you decide to fiddle with the manages to pull the game up enough to gadgets to enhance the atmosphere. earn an average rating. The ending hints THE X-FILES was too short and too at a sequel, and I hope for a more chaleasy, with the exception of some of the lenging and less annoying game the next action sequences, but the atmosphere time around. CGW HONOR IS A SHAM WHEN IT STANDS ON A PLATFORM OF Fight the Timeline SLAVERY. HERE ON MARS, WELL NEVER BOW OUR HEADS FOR THE IMPERIAL CHAIN NEVER! IN THE END, FREEDOM'S THE ONLY TRUE LIGHT AGAINST DARKNESS. THE EMPIRE'S GOING TO HAVE TO LEARN THE HARD WAY: f course, some fans are wondering where the game fits in the X-Files mythology. Considering that X is still alive, and that the game involves the black oil but not the bees, the game's setting is definitely within the third season, taking place after the two-parter Piper Maru/Apocrypha and before Herrenvolk (when X dies). There is no grand insight into the workings of the black oil, but there is a nice twist involving the oil in the story. Also, the game has references both obvious and obscure for hardcore X-Files fans everywhere. I immediately recognized Jose Chung's novel, From Outer Space, but didn't notice how \"Craig Willmore\" was also the name of the boy mentioned in the \"Hate him; wouldn't want to date him\" scene from Syzygy. WITH BLOOD AND STEEL. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 233 1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"IN 2829, HUMANITY HAS SPREAD THROUGH THE SOLAR SYSTEM. WHEN CIVIL WAR BREAKS OUT, IT BURNS ACROSS WORLDS. STAR NOW THAT THE HUMANS ARE DIVIDED, THE REAL WAR IS ABOUT TO BEGIN... IN A WHOLE NEW UNIVERSE OF 3D COMBAT SIM. "


"ON VENUS, MERCURY ANDA HOST OF MOONS, BROTHER IS LOCKED WITH BROTHER IN DESPERATE BATTLE, SIEGE CAL_1231 Azai A314):131. 3  JEIN US WWW.STARSIEGE.COM Dynamix IEDIFAST 1999 Seria On-Life Inc. Alivita uaerved.  and T. designie Finaimarks at of cons tu 14 Seria On-Life,MINE, Go to #150 @ www.computergaming.comInfollnk, "


"REVIEW  STARSHIP TITANIC DVENTURE RPG Lost in Space Diagnosing a Mad Spaceship Isn't the Fun Ride It Should Be ently empty cube by Charles Ardai with a colorful here's a great bit early on Mondrian paintin Douglas Adams' new ing on the back game, STARSHIP TITANIC. wall. When you You've just been shangstart clicking on haied onto a derelict a control panel, spaceship that is manned the various by a crew of eccentric squares and recrobots who have asked tangles of the for your help in fixing the ship's Mondrian paintcentral artificial intelligence. ing slide out into Unfortunately, they have declared the room. The big most of the ship off-limits to you red square is a because they've decided that you comfy chair, the are a third-class passenger. In order narrow white to get upgraded to second class rectangle is a (and thereafter to first class), you \"floral enhanceNO TIP FOR YOU The Bellbot is so inane that you'll be tempted to take his offer have to go to your third-class statem ent\" (a vase of of listening to Bobby Headcase and the Laid-back Loafers, just to get away. room deep in the bowels of the flowers); and so ship and collect an in-flight magaon. Your room is so small that only entire surreal world with a few zine awarding you a free upgrade. certain combinations of its modular sentences the way Douglas Adams When you get to your room (no furnishings can be in use at any can, or can write laugh-out-loud easy task), it's a minuscule, appar time. Your goal is to find and turn satire like Douglas Adams, or use on the TV set (which will then language in such marvelously out COMPUTER announce your award), but it's way of kilter ways that you find yourself up at the top of the \"painting.\" To quoting them back to friends years get to it, you have to climb on the WHAT'LL YOU HAVE, SIR? later. (\"The ships hung in the sky in bed, but the bed can't support your Well, how about a bar with much the same way that bricks weight unless you first open the some nonplayer characters don't\" is a personal favorite.) dresser under it and you can't to talk to? But words are passé in current APPEAL: S ADAMS HITCHHIKER'S open the dresser if you have the society, nowhere more so than in GUIDE fans willing bed open, but you can't fully close A game full of such bits could computer games. Text-only games to put up with a frustrating interthe bed if the TV is out.... I've be quite a lot of fun to play. Alas, have been out of fashion for face to play in a changed some of the details so as there is a reason I've spent so roughly as long as mummification, Douglas Adams  not to give away the solution, but much time talking about this one: but in the current post-MYST enviuniverse. PROS: you get the idea. Most of what comes after this ronment it's not even enough for Impressive visuals by Oscar-winning set While the puzzle here is pretty scene (and everything that comes adventure games to contain graphdesigners; occasionally funny bits. simple, the conceit is clever, the before it) falls short of this mark. ics; they have to contain abundant, CONS: Poorly designed, confusing visuals are fun, and the interface opulent, gorgeous, soaring graphinterface; weak conversations with robots; too often, it's not really funny. doesn't get in the way. It's neither Go Ahead and Panic ics, almost to the exclusion of any. DIFFICULTY: Easy a brilliant puzzle, as was getting Once upon a time, Douglas thing else. So what did Douglas REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 100, the babel fish in Douglas Adams' Adams made his living (and his Adams do to give STARSHIP TITANIC Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 16MB hard1984 game THE HITCHHIKER'S reputation) with words: first his the best chance it could have for drive space, 4x CD-ROM, Windows-compatible SGVA graphics, 16-bit sound GUIDE TO THE GALAXY, nor a bril radio script for Hitchhiker's, then success? He hired a pair of card. liant bit of mind-bending comedy, the novels themselves, and finally Academy Award-winning set 3D SUPPORT: None. as was the biscuit gag in Adams' his two text-only computer games designers and had them fill the MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None. fourth Hitchhiker's novel-but it is for Infocom in the '80s. This was a game with opulent, gorgeous, Price: $49.95 a cute sci-fi riff on the classic state good thing, because Adams, like soaring graphics: rotundas and Publisher: Simon and Schuster New York, NY room scene in the Marx Brothers' Lewis Carroll before him, has a gift canals, entryways and exits, muse(888) 793-9972 A Night at the Opera, and it did for making words do what he um-sized exhibition rooms, and www.starshiptitanic.com bring a smile to my face. wants. Few people can create an (once you get upgraded) huge GAMING GA WORLD *** 230 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"STARSHIP TITANIC REVIEW staterooms that look like some thing out of a 1930s movie. Heaps of art-deco decorations, even on the robots. It's a joy to look at. When being poled down the canal in a robot gondola, you'll go oooh. But \"gorgeous\" and \"funny\" are two very different things, and so are \"gorgeous\" and \"playable.\" Too much of STARSHIP TITANIC IS gorgeous, but it's neither funny nor playable. To begin with, it's hard just to find your way around. You move in discrete steps in the fashion of ZORK NEMESIS rather than, say, DOOM), but the environment gives you too few visual clues to feel comfortable that you know what you're looking at from step to step. A disorienting blurring effect used between every two steps doesn't help either. ADVENTUREZRPG Tesco Your assigned hom: Ird das Floor 34 Esvater , Robe 15 central well hunting for the right elevator. The problem? The fact that there are two elevators on each side of the well rather than just one becomes apparent only if you walk past the elevators and then turn back twice. Otherwise you can see only one of the elevators at a time (and since they look identical, you conclude that only one exists). This isn't clever puzzle design; it's just a pain in the ass. Later, when you get to your floor, you have to pick out the right room from a stacked set of cabins, but the way they're stacked will leave you bumping into walls and turning around and around in place. For a long time, I couldn't figure out how to get out of the elevator, simply because the door is drawn in a way that doesn't look like a door. Elsewhere in the game you use a \"pellerator\" for horizontal travel through the ship, but it's hard to figure out how to leave the pellerator, because the side with the exit looks exactly like the side that holds the control panel. \"This is very confusing. I know,\" says a robot voice. It sure is. Once you figure out how to find your way around, you have to wrestle with the main interface, which has separate sections for: your inventory; BURIED IN THE HOLD The premise that you must get upgraded from thirdto first-class passage has a lot of comic potential, but the gameplay rarely delivers. No Room Service Too much of the time a move leaves you staring into a wall from what feels like three inches away. You can't really get started in the game until you go to your room, which should be a simple matter of riding an elevator to the correct floor, but because of the threeinches-away graphic style, I spent hours wandering around the ship's the controls of external objects, Random Bits of Comedy such as the pellerator, and talking Then there are the puzzles, to the robots. The conversation sys. which are a tolerable lot: The distem, hyped on the game's packagmembered waiterbot in the restauing as a \"cutting-edge natural-lanrant wants different music playing guage text parser, enabling com and elsewhere you find a robot plex and entertaining conversa orchestra and a recording device; tions,\" is the biggest disappoint the bartender needs to make a ment. While it is true that you can cocktail containing a \"pureed flock type in plain English sentences and of starlings,\" and elsewhere you see get some response from the birds flying around a fan; and so on. robots, the robots seem to under Some are easy, some hard, but none stand very little of what you say to is especially funny. Meanwhile, ranthem, judging by how often they dom bits of comedy go on around dodge your questions, interject non you, as the ship's computer makes sequiturs, and generally carry on silly announcements, and a delike first cousins to the venerable ranged parrot squawks \"I don't like the roof of my mouth!\" Douglas Adams himself crops up here and there, as the voice of this and the face of that. But for all the effort, the game's just not very funny. Where STARSHIP TITANIC excels is in beautiful visuals, and those are a dime a dozen in adventure games these days. The puzzles are a little better than average, but just a little. It's unlikely that anyone will enjoy STARSHIP TITANIC natural-language hoax \"Eliza.\" You half as much as Legend's uglier, but end up trying to think of some much funnier, CALLAHAN'S CROSSthing to say that the robots might TIME SALOON. possibly understand, but you usual. It's a shame, because Douglas ly fail. And, anyway, how much is Adams is such an enormous talent there that you might conceivably (not to mention a passionate and want to discuss with the robots? knowledgeable gamer), but it seems After, \"What's going on?\" and highly likely that this TITANIC'S Suc\"Can you help me with X?\" it's notcess will resemble that of its nautilike you're going to start chatting cal, rather than that of its cinematic, about Sartre. namesake. CGW MYST OPPORTUNITY All the stately columns, antique musical instruments, and gorgeous lobby decor in the galaxy can't hide the barren emptiness of STARSHIP TITANIC. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 237 "


"COMPUTER REVIEW SANITARIUM GAMING WORLD EDITORS CHOICE ADVENTURE RPG Crazy, Man SANITARIUM Isn't Exactly a \"Good Time,\" But It's an Awesome Adventure TRATIU by Jeff Green ow this is a case of good timing. At exactly the moment when I was beginning to completely despair for adventure games, along comes a title that renews my faith in the genre. SANITARIUM, designed by DreamForge Intertainment (makers of ANVIL OF DAWN and CHRONOMASTER) is a compelling, original, and affecting story, one that reminds you that adventure games-at their best-can pull at your heart and brain as solidly as any motion picture. And, for me, this one does it better than any adventure game since GABRIEL KNIGHT II. The opening cut-scene sets the story. A man, sitting at his computer, makes a phone call excitedly form of every adventure gaming puzzle you've ever tackled: object manipulation, code deciphering, logic, tone puzzles-even a few lightweight action sequences. Like the plot, the puzzles aren't particularly original or ground-breaking, but they are extremely well integrated into the structure and mood of the game. Even when! had to fix a broken piece of machinery (something I loathe), it was within a logical context in the gameworld. Nothing ever feels like dumb, gratuitous puzzlesolving. Well, I take that back. The action sequences did feel dumb and gratuitous, and I'm not exactly sure what the designers were trying to accomplish. Mercifully, they're brief and not too tough. INSANE IN THE BRAIN SANITARIUM starts out with you regaining consciousness in an insane asylum, covered in bandages, unable to remember who you are. Then it gets weird. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The game is linear in the extreme: You cannot advance to the next chapter without completing the current one, and in each chapter most puzzles need to be completed in a particular order. So if you're stuck, you're stuck. That's the bad news. The good news is that the game is relatively easy (actually, very easy for experienced adventure gamers), so nothing should hold you up for very long, assuming your synapses are firing The puzzles themselves take the reporting that he has made a breakthrough on a problem he has been researching. He heads off in his car—but it's been sabotaged, and he careens off a cliff. When he awakes, he finds himself covered in bandages and apparently the resident of a horridly nightmarish insane asylum-with no memory of who he is or how he got there. This is the situation in which the game puts you, as you assume his identity and try to cope with the circumstances. Who are you? Where are you? How much of this is really happening and how much is merely in your mind? Now, it might not sound like the most original idea for a game, but where the story goes, and how it gets there, is unexpected and cool-all of which compels you to keep playing. Toys in the Attic To match its subject matter, To match its subject matter, SANITARIUM features an appropriately grim and disturbing graphic look. The isometric views are detailed and atmospheric, effectively conveying the main character's often outrageous, altered states. And while the backgrounds remain static, the numerous small touches-an empty can rolling down a street, for example--help to bring the scenes to life. ***** APPEAL: Adventure gamers hungering for a serious, deep story. PROS: Outstanding plot and design good integration of puzzles into gameworld; striking graphics and music that realize the game's disturbed vision CONS: Some navigational annoyances: bad game-stopping bug (now patched); weak voice acting, a few action sequences may frustrate some gamers. DIFFICULTY: Easy. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 30MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, 1MB PCI video card, mouse. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None. Publisher: ASC Games Stamford, CT (203) 327-3366 www.ascgames.com Walk This Way SANITARIUM, a three-CD game that plays faster than most singleCD games, is divided into nine chapters, with each chapter taking place in a different setting. Some locales are in \"reality\"; some are not-and it's not always clear which is which MONTEZUMA'S REVENGE This surreal Aztec setting later in the game isn't as effective as some of the gritty, earlier sequences. 230 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"adults. Images such as impaled bodies, deformed children, and the like abound-and some of the puzzles themselves (like dig. ging up the body of a dead child) put you into the main character's private psychological hell. For those who can take it, though, the payoff is immense. The chapter set in \"the Mansion,\" in which a young girl explores a house full of ghosts, is actually sad; and by the end it achieves a moment of emotional resonance that I've never before encountered in a computer game. main character by holding down the right mouse button, but it's sometimes difficult to get where you want to go, or to know where you're even supposed to go or how to get there. Worse, if you accidentally click on a staircase, you trigger a \"walk up/down staircase\" script that you can't interrupt. There are also some pixel-hunting puzzles that could have benefited from larger, or easier to see, hotspots. The one time I got really stuck in the game wasn't because didn't know the puzzle answer-it was because I never discovered the dang pixel that would let me do what I knew was the right answer. Some bad voice-acting also mars the game--unfortunately, most is from the main character, whose overacting and bad timing almost wrecks it. I say almost because the story is strong enough to carry you through. Finally, while the game maintains a creepy tone and is excellently paced, I couldn't help ADVENTURER PAGE THAT'S GOTTA HURT Impaled bodies are among the gruesome visuals found throughout the game. This one is definitely not for kids. As you solve puzzles, the game rewards you with a steady stream of cut-scenes-most are either flashbacks or pieces of remembrance--that flesh out the unpredictable story without ever giving too much away. The cut-scenes, which play out in 3D graphics in letterbox form, are noirish, moody, and eminently satisfying, \"Disturbing\" actually just begins to describe SANITARIUM. Though the game has a \"Teen\" (13 and up) rating on the box, be forewarned that the subject mat ter and imagery are not for the squeamish. Like Harlan Ellison's I HAVE NO MOUTH, AND I MUST SCREAM, this is most definitely for Rocks SANITARIUM is not, however, without its problems. The biggest bummer is a horrendous bug that stops many people's game (including mine) dead in Chapter 2. You must download the patch from ASC Games' Web site before you start playing (the company reports that the patch is being included in newer boxed copies), or you'll have to start your game over. Navigation can be a bit annoying. You manipulate the Well, mother won't let me talk to strangers so you'd LIGHTHEARTED, IT'S NOT What would a fun adventure game be without the chance to talk to deformed children? feeling that it petered out a little toward the end, especially in the Aztec section, which was far closer to MYST-clone blather than anything I would've expected in a game this good. Dream On In the final analysis, it's just too hard to seriously come down on a game that does so much right, and which in terms of both subject matter and presentation-soars headand-shoulders above everything else in the adventure genre. If you can deal with the often horrific subject matter and imagery and can get past the minor annoyances, then SANITARIUM is well worth the money, especially for anyone who has been longing for a serious, adult game. Flaws aside, SANITARIUM is the best adventure game released so far this year. CGW BAD REFLEX To finish SANITARIUM, you'll have to get through a few action sequences, such as the maze shown here. They're not hard, but the reflex-impaired should be forewarned. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 239 "


"REVIEW  TEAM APACHE LATLON SPACE Copter Command Leadership is the key to Success in This Helicopter Sim flyable again, and you haven't recovered from the previous flight before a new mission is handed down from above. by Robin G. Kim ampaigns in most combat flight sims are purely episodic affairs. You get briefed, fly a sortie, get debriefed, then repeat the cycle. There is nothing wrong with this formula-many classic titles have employed it to excellent effect-but original it is not. Enter TEAM APACHE, a sim that subtly transcends this shopworn convention by bridging the gaps between missions with seamlessly integrated gameplay rather than with mood-breaking intermissions. As the commander of a U.S. Army AH-64A Apache attack helicopter WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREE Although various kinds of trees dot the terrain, they serve more as navigational hazards than as cover. Hot Spots TEAM APACHE's two campaigns consist of sequences of scripted missions. The first pits your company team against drug cartels and Marxist guerrillas in Colombia. The second (which can be played only after completing the first) deploys you in support of a NATO effort to repulse a Russian assault through Latvia. Although the campaigns are essentially linear, damage and casualties do carry forward across flights, and search-and-rescue missions are called after any Apaches are shot down. The second campaign is longer and considerably more difficult than the first. Not only are the Russians better equipped than the Colombians (the Russians have got mobile SAM and AAA vehicles while the guerrillas are toting rifles), but your men also don't seem to get any rest between campaigns--they arrive in Latvia dead tired, and go downhill from there. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ***** company, your job isn't over when the aircraft land: It's just beginning. Unless you choose to deactivate the game's crew-management option, you have a huge responsibility even before you start either of TEAM APACHE's two campaigns—you have to pick your flight crew: 8 pilots and 8 copilot gunners (CP/Gs) from a pool of 32 candidates. As you flip through the dossiers, each of your potential crew members introduces himself in a unique voice. Their temperaments range from enthusiastic to coolly professional to downright grouchy (\"My call sign's 'Pluto. That's after the god of the Underworld...not the damn dog.\"). While the deliveries are definitely \"Holly wood,\" the exaggerated accents and mannerisms give each crew member a distinct character. Once the campaign is under way, you carry out command duties on the ground in realtime. These include ongoing personnel management, allocating repair tasks to maintenance crew chiefs (this can be automated), tracking spare parts, and planning missions. Being the boss in this sim is no picnic. The burden of command weighs heavily indeed when your entire air crew is exhausted and half are physically ill from combat stress, your maintenance team is spent from working through the night trying to make your damaged birds APPEAL: Flightsim gamers who are willing to sacrifice hard-core realism for a novel and atmospheric sim that mixes leadership respon sibilities with missions that are action-oriented. PROS: Interesting campaign storylines: well-crafted missions; involving interactions with crew members, excellent sound effects and 3D-accelerated graphics, good use of digitized speech throughout: powerful mission builder. CONS: Somewhat jerky flight-model feel; no mission recorder, lackluster frame rate without a 3D card; campaigns rather short.. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, 16MB RAM, 250MB hard drive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, 2MB graphics card, sound card. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx, ATI Rage Pro, Rendition Verite 2100/2200, Direct3D. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial cable, LAN, Mplayer (2-8 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $49.95 Publisher: Mindscape Novato, CA (415) 895-2000 www.mindscape.com Mantance Chat Apache 2 HURTIN' PUPPY To your maintenance crew chiefs, the detailed damage model just means more systems for them to have to repair. PAN AND SCAN The freepanning virtual-cockpit view in TEAM APACHE features a fully functional instrument panel. Construction Zone EAM APACHE comes with a mission builder utility capable of producing stand-alone scenarios that are as elaborate as the ones cing included in the game. Each group of friendly and enemy units placed on the map can be issued several types of orders. Basic orders are a sequence of commands that are followed by a default. Each command can call for a unit to remain in place, advance, implement a mobile defense, trigger another unit to do something, conduct an artillery Continued on pg 242 240 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"SOUTHPEAK INTERACTIYE e YOU WERE SUDDENLY ON THE WRONG SIDE OF THE LAW? www.southpeak.com "


"REVIEW  TEAM APACHE Construction Zone Continued from pg 240 SIMULATION SPACE found in LONGBOW 2. Spotting ranges are relatively short, particularly with enemy infantry, making frantic firefights a common occurrence. Even against vehicles, slow, stealthy bob-up tactics rarely come into play. Combat in TEAM APACHE is clearly action-oriented. NIGHT LIFE The only practical cockpit view option at night is the full-screen PNVS (Pilot's Night Vision Sensor) display, forc ing you to switch views when you want to check your instruments. The PNVS image dims realistically after bright flashes from rockets or explosions. barrage, and so on. Four types of contingency orders can also be given. These specify what command sequences should be executed when the unit other using guns and antitank guided missiles. Their shots are not very accurate, but the fireworks make an exciting backdrop for a gamer's flight. For added spice, enemy attack helicopters or artillery support for the gamer can also be thrown in. The interface is easy to use, enabling you to whip up a custom mission in just a few minutes, and the group copy and paste feature facilitates the creation of larger scenarios. For those who enjoy tinkering, this utility can significantly extend the life of the game. mies, takes fire, suffers casualties, or receives a trigger event from another unit. With these tools, you can stage a variety of land battles, with opposing ground forces merrily blasting away at each them, and they will report in when they spot targets-now if only you could get them to tell you where those targets are! TEAM APACHE's flight model is simplified, with a kind of \"super ground effect\" helping you avoid high-speed ground contact, but overall aircraft performance seems believable. The feeling of flight would be good if not for a strange jerkiness that makes it difficult to execute smooth, gentle turns. Avionics modeling is fairly accurate functionally, though it does lack the painstaking attention to detail Al Is My Copilot The CP/G position in the AH-64A Apache's front seat is reserved for the Alyou can fly only from the pilot's seat in back. Consequently, you rarely get to see the targets that you attack as anything more than a designation symbol on the screen unless you're right on top of them. Your CP/G will call out the type of target he has in his sights, but because all voice messages are queued sequentially, other radio chatter can cause his message to come late or not at all. Activating the target ID display option alleviates this problem. Unfortunately, no similar work-around exists for delayed or canceled missile launch warnings—which has predictably dire consequences. The sim boasts gorgeous graphics with a 3D accelerator card; 2D graphics are pixelated and slow by comparison. Especially impressive is the broad array of weather types, including varying cloud cover, rain, fog, snow, and thunderstorms with lightning. The game's PELETE CURRENT ACP Apart from the campaigns, the game features an instant-action mode, interactive training missions, and 16 single missions, as well as a flexible mission builder to let you ROCKET MAN Your available create more. Multiplayer options weapon types include two include deathmatch, capture the types of unguided rockets, laser-guided Hellfire misflag, convoy attack/defense, and siles, Stinger air-to-air miscooperative single missions (but siles, and the integral 30mm not campaigns). chain gun. There Is No \"T\" in Team The commander himself doesn't fly any combat sorties, so during a mission you will assume the persona of whichever pilot was assigned to the lead gunship, Barring shortages of air crew or flyable helicopters, you can choose to FLIGHT PLAN The mission allocate two, four, or six aircraft for planner gives you considerany particular flight. You get to able flexibility in customiz select weapon loadouts only as ing your route and default you ready for campaign missions, rules of engagement. The and all of your Apaches must be only major shortcoming is configured identically. that you're not able to split The list of wingman commands your team among multiple is extensive, allowing you to direct flight paths. your wingmen collectively or in You receive scenario back groups. Maintaining enough situagrounds, text briefings, detailed sittional awareness to exploit this uation reports, and occasional tactical freedom can be difficult, newspaper clippings, and all are however. Though part of the probexceptionally well done. Less linearlem is true to life (the \"A\" model than the missions themselves, this Apache simulated here lacks intelligence varies according to radar), much of the blame rests on how your team is doing while communication limitations in the imparting a sense that you are only sim. Wingmen cheerfully state their one part of a larger war machine. relative positions when you ask Pilot 90: CW2 Simpson. O Callsign Hawk Age: 32 Time in service: 7 yrs Time in AH 64 3 yrs Marital Status: Married Simpson appears very strung out. probably as a result of combat Morale and performance have suffered noticably, causing concern. Unless things improve soon their right status could do in jeopardy Siimpson's is seriously fatigued and needs sortie rest HAVE A EXIT TALK 10221638 CHECKING IN It's important to visit with all the pilots and CP/Gs occasionally. They will tell you (using digitized speech) how they're doing, which, combined with detailed textual status reports, allows you to monitor their fatigue and morale levels. Pep talks can be given as necessary. 242 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computer gaming.com "


"SOUTHPEAKT INTERACTIVE WT THE FATE OF AN ENTIRE RACE RESTED IN YOUR HANDS? www.southpeak.com "


"REVIEW TEAM APACHE TILONI SPACE The Human Factor he differences among your crew members in TEAM APACHE go much deeper than just their voices and personalities. Each person is rated in the following categories: tracking ability, reaction speed, navigational ability, day-flying skill, nightflying skill, rocket accuracy, situational awareness, composure, stamina, and compatibility with others. These ratings directly determine how a crew member will perform in the air. For example, a broadly skilled CP/G in the front seat of your AH-64 will find targets faster and track them more accurately than a mediocre (or very tired) one. Since these are prerequisites to putting your weapons on target, the quality of the guy in front obviously bears directly on your combat effectiveness. The way the sim represents this is particularly well done. You can actually see your CP/G scanning his sensors in a search for targets, then slewing the targeting cursor over to one he finds, and trying to keep it there with a speed and precision consistent with his skill level. Dealing with the imperfections of your air crew may get frustrating at times, but it is also realistic. Real human beings are fallible, unlike the totally efficient automatons you get to work with in some sims. We Need More Trees n 1872, J. Sterling They create quiet places Morton gave the world a to enjoy, give wildlife a great idea. He created a home, and increase properholiday unlike any other, ty values. Arbor Day. This year, plant Trees This is the 125th Annifor America. For your versary of Arbor Day, the free brochure, write: Trees for America, The National tree planters' holiday. Arbor Day Foundation, This year The National Nebraska City, NE 68410. Arbor Day Foundation asks you to plant Trees for America, and provide for their care. ARE TRDAY 1872-1997 audio effects are also excellent, especially the roar of the engines and rotors on your Apache gunship. With its emphasis on audiovisual splendor and its toned-down realism in both flight and systems modeling, TEAM APACHE should prove to be an attractive combat flight package for casual sim gamers. But when you add to that the two engrossing-though unfortunately somewhat short-campaign plotlines and the atmosphere-enhancing air crew interactions in and out of the cockpit, even serious sim fans may want to give this title a closer look. CGW Suomi Arbor Trees Make a World of Difference. Trees make our cities and neighborhoods more liveable. A The National Arbor Day Foundation\" www.arborday.org 1244 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"SOUTHPEAK INTERACTIVE Dark Side of the Moon, SouthPeak and the South Poak logo are trademarks of SouthPeak Intoractivo LLC. Video ROOMY And UHAVideo Postly loop arr In HAVU FOUND YOURSELF IE DARK SIDE DE HE MOON? k SAS Inn Isal inrer lirons A sci-fi adventure that will immerse you in 360° of completely seamless, incredibly realistic, motion picture. quality gaming. A VIDEO REALITY SICE OF THE Moon LITAEFARE www.southpeak.com "


"Where Technology Meets Technique THE FUTURE OF DOGFIGHTING ULTRA JELEHTERS INTERACTIVE MAGIC OPTIMIZED FOR 30 ACCELERATOR CAROS Interactive Magic P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 www.imagicgames.com Ultrafiolters is a trademark and interactive Magic is a registered trademark on Interactive Magic Inc Copyright 1998 Eagle Interactive. All Rights Reserved. Go to #188 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEWS Passengers, Rotors, and Missiles, Oh My! On-Time Landings, Air Superiority, and Tank Busting SIMULATION SPACE 747-400 Precision Simulator Publisher: Aerowinx Price: $219 www.chsdist.com/hiflight/storel engine controls to the passenger seat-belt light switch. A full database of the world's airports is included, and weather and wind shear are simulated with frightening authenticity. What's missing? Besides the outside view, very little. The biggest improvement would be air traffic control (ATC) while en-route. In the current version, ATC guides you only during takeoff and approach. Also, the documentation explains all the instrument systems, but includes almost no information on actual flying procedures. 747-400 PRECISION SIMULATOR is a pro-quality sim, and it comes at a pro-quality price. But real pilots who want to know what it's like to fly the big iron, or sim pilots who are looking for a truly realistic experience (and who don't mind a little outside reading to get up to speed), will find lots of value for the money. ---Denny Atkin of duty also include AWACS missions Each of the campaigns is set in the early 21st century, in the same geographic region as ADF. Alas, you won't find any new terrain or aircraft here. More annoying is the fact that the disc includes versions of the missions for both preand post-patch versions of ADF. Why not just include the patch on the CD, since it has 500MB of free space? Is RED SEA OPS really worth it when F22 TOTAL AIR WAR, which will include a dynamic campaign, is just around the corner? While it As a kid, did you dream of being A a pilot? Big money, world travel, dates with flight attendants, managing one of the most complex vehicles in existence? Well, 747400 PRECISION SIMULATOR from Aerowinx won't help you with the first three, but it'll bring you as close as you can get to the last without renting time in an airline's full-cockpit sim. Don't buy this sim if you're looking for the chance to sightsee. The program is designed to be a fully realistic simulation of the cockpit of a 747, and while the systems are simulated in great detail, there's little in the way of graphical flash. The program uses the same visual trick used in older full-cockpit simulations: It sets your flights either at night or in inclement weather, during which simple city and runway lights actually create a fairly realistic experience. The level of detail in the instrument systems is nothing short of astounding. With the autopilot and flight-director functionality, you can Red Sea Operations doesn't add as much to the game as most expansion discs, there's plenty of play value here for $20, especially if you enjoy the strategic AWACS mode. Denny Atkin of the new campaigns is designed by a helicopter pilot and former U.S. Army liaison to Boeing/Sikorsky. Along with the 40-odd new missions, COMANCHE GOLD now includes a full-featured editor, which lets you create your own. Other improvements include support for 800x600 resolution (you'll need a fast Pentium II for this), weather effects (such as rain and snow), and new vehicles (such as the AC130 gunship). There's better wingman control, and his Al has been improved. He's still not that swift, but at least he now looks to see if you're in the way before firing off a missile. You'll now be able to find partners for COMANCHE's superb cooperative missions on Novalogic's free Novaworld server. Unfortunately, I didn't experience the silky smooth play afforded by F-22 RAPTOR when playing COMANCHE GOLD. Novalogic, however, seems to be committed to continuously improving its online support. With new missions, a fullfeatured editor, and numerous sim improvements, there's more here than you'll find in the typical \"gold\" package. It's worth checking out for COMANCHE owners as well as for other action-sim fans. -Denny Atkin Publisher: Infogrames/DID Price: $20 www.did.com DED SEA OPERATIONS is an add-on disc for DID's F22 AIR DOMINANCE FIGHTER (ADF). The package adds three new campaigns as well as an AWACS tour of duty to the sim. Created by Sim-Tech, which developed ADF's built-in missions, RED SEA OPS is targeted at the serious sim fan. All missions start on the runway, rather than en-route to the Comanche Gold * * * * * Publisher: Novalogic Price: $44.95 www.novalogic.com COMANCHE GOLD supercharges Clast year's COMANCHE 3, more than doubling the number of missions available to you in this actionoriented helicopter sim. New environments are added, including Cambodia and Indonesia. In keeping with Novalogic's new trend of consulting real military experts, one sit back and let the plane fly itself. But when you do want to take control, nearly every switch you'd find in a real 747-400 is here from the navigational displays and with interesting tasks such as escorting U-2s or hunting SCUD missiles. The real meat here, though, is for fans of ADF's AWACS mode. Not only is there an entire AWACS campaign, but the other three tours www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 247 "


"MISSION COMPLETE per 02 o uco "


"MICROPROSE WWW.MacRoPRosEcoM FALCON 4.0 IS NOW CLEARED FOR FINAL APPROACH APPROACH COMING SOON 1 15 ur lammi e Go to #157 @ www.computergamlng.com/infolink  "


"REVIEW THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR GAMING EDITORS CHOICE Art for War's Sake STRATEGY WAR A Reward for Armchair Generals Who Can Think on Their Feet Pen kor a level 10) Yalo Ever (G.16) Valor 25 Erdalduned by United states post by Jim Cobb he Germans call it Fingerspitzengefuehl: the instinctive ability to commit the right mix of forces at just the right time and place to completely confound the enemy and leave your side master of the battlefield. This feel for combat distinguishes operational decisions from the coolness of strategy and the immediate, hot-blooded responses to tactical situations. This ability cannot be taught-if it could, every war academy class would produce a Robert E. Lee or Erwin Rommel nor has it yet been fully simulated by any strategy game. Regardless of the amount of unknowns tossed into each combat algorithm, players have been able to calculate with a good degree of certainty Scenario OPISI UM, WHERE ARE WE? If you forget the mission objectives, you can access the briefing at any time. And if you're allergic to hexagons, you can turn them off. Thus, a battle that was to open a hole for armor may use up that armor's capacity to exploit the enemy's weaknesses. Conversely, moving units before resolving attacks eliminates opportunities to plunge through gaps. Players must judge which point is critical, how much force is economical to do the job, when to attack, and what movement can be saved. ART demands that you understand the capabilities of the forces engaged and the flow of battle; gamers who obsess over how to achieve that 6:1 odds ratio may find themselves quickly lost. Not that understanding a force's capability is easy; it's more of an art than a science. Sure, the various units sport the usual movement, attack, and defense factors. But what isn't evident is that these factors merely scratch the surface: They are derived from more than a dozen different other factors that include supply, morale, equipment, and formation. An undersupplied armor division, for example, may roll through a garrison but be held up by a battalion of well-trained and well-positioned antitank guns. To be successful, you must compare the 93 different unit types COMPUTER GAMING WORLD when and where a particular move would work. All this is about to change, however. Veteran designer Norm Koger (AGE OF RIFLES, TANKS!), given a free hand by TalonSoft, has developed a system that forces gamers to develop their instincts as well as their arithmetic. THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR (ART) covers campaigns from 1939-1955 (roughly WWII through Korea). It has the level of detail and realism that we've come to expect from both Koger and TalonSoft. What sets this game apart from all other turnbased strategy/wargames is its innovative combination of time, movement, and action. estimate of the percent of the turn used, but this may be based on faulty intelligence. Thus, a bat. tle that you might expect to use 10 percent of a turn might actual ly use 30 percent when the defender throws in unexpected reserves—this tends to keep you on your toes much more than does the typical turn-based game. The crucial effect of long battles is that the movement points of the attacker's other units are reduced by the percentage used. APPEAL: Anyone remotely interested in an inART OF WAR depth operational wargame. PROS: Innovative approach to time and movement: comprehensive weapon system and organizational features, smooth interface for such a complex game CONS: Steep learning curve; no LAN or Internet play. DIFFICULTY: Advanced. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, SMB harddrive space, 2x CD-ROM, SVGA graphics. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Email, hotseat (1-2 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $49.95 Publisher: TalonSoft Forest Hill, MD (800) 211-6504 www.talonsoft.com 0 Turn, Turn, Turn Turns are divided into 10 tactical rounds, but the passage of these rounds is not marked, so that you cannot predict exactly when the turn will end. A battle will use a percentage of these rounds based upon the number of units involved, the distance attacking forces move to engage, and the intensity of combat. One informational screen gives an 30 131 0 Tavronitis 0 PAPER WARS If you really need to look at cardboard counters, these look as good as you'll find this side of a board wargame. 250 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Tom Clancy's RAINBOW SIX Play as if 5.7 Billion Lives Depended on it. The most revolutionary action/strategygameofitskind. Nothing comes close to offering such an exciting combination of strategy, team-building, realistic, three-dimensional graphics and true-to-life special forces action. ONE SHOT KILLS. The ultimate goal is to save yourself and the world from deadly terrorists. You must successfully complete 17 unique missions, and if you die, the game isn't over: THE WORLD IS. SACREMTIE 7051 PLAN THE ATTACK 1998 Red Star Entertainment Inc. Photo courtesy Steven Galloway, Heckler & Koch. EXECUTE THE MISSION CERNET REE IN amplay SAVE THE WORLD INTERNET GAMING ZONE Now Available! PLAY IT ON ZONE.COM Go to #229 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR WWII What-if Scenario TRATEGY WAR including its present condition article for advice on creating your and any special abilities. own maps). While the sheer amount of The computer opponent is one information can be intimidating, of the best I've seen in any strategy the mechanics themselves are game. Because of the constantly pretty simple. Movement is a changing nature of each turn, the matter of right-clicking on the Al must formulate a long-range objective. To enter combat, you plan, as opposed to the usual numright-click on an enemy, and the ber-crunching employed by most pop-up menu then allows you to computer opponents. After a while, set single-or group attacks, as well as the intensity of conflict. The convenient \"Plan an attack\" option In addition to historical battles, the game also examines shows the six plausible hypothetical conflicts, such as this Soviet attack on hexes adjacent Patton's troops in Czechoslovakia, 1945. to the defender and all avail with the terrain and troops to be help you sort through the compli a ble support attacked, while also considering cated decision-making process. units. Left-clickthe supply, transport, support, and The Map Panel takes up three ing on a unit CLOSE QUARTERS This inset view gives you a air superiority conditions. To attack quarters of the screen and shows commits it to an good look at the 3D unit icons, comparable to without considering these factors the details of the scenario map, attack; but if an those of PANZER GENERAL II. is to throw away the economy of located in a smaller window. You u nit's organizatime and force necessary for victocan get info on terrain features attion prohibits it from full cooperahowever, you will probably want to ry. And if all this isn't complex a glance simply by moving the tion, the attack will be penalized battle against a human general, enough for you, let me add that cursor over the area in question. (shown by a black pennant). and this is one of the few areas in ART employs a multitude of scales. Left-clicking on a unit brings it Depending on what is known of which ART fails. TalonSoft did a nice Units can represent anything from up in the Unit Panel, showing the defender, this screen will esti job with play-by-email for this squads to corps, and they have the both its 2D NATO symbol and 3D mate results and time expended. game, as your PBEM files are comcapacity to break down and icon (as well as the three base Battles are resolved at any time pressed nicely when sent; the recombine into different forma combat values referred to earlier) during a turn with an after-action game plays okay via hotseat as tions. Likewise, movement scales Right-clicking on a unit brings up report that shows the flow of well. But this is one of the rare vary from battle to battle. all the action options-changes combat, the number of casualties, turn-based games that cries out for in formation, embarking on and the battle's end result. The Internet and LAN play because of It's All Right planes, and so forth-and also effects of battles on each force the constantly changing flow of The nice thing is that ART'S gives you vital information on the are calculated automatically each play. Even though Internet play is interface and graphic approach unit and its parent formation, turn, and, in keeping with the suradvertised on the box, it isn't in the prise nature of each battle, some game-shame, shame. results will trigger events such as Other than this flaw, however, poison gas and nukes. To put it it's hard to find fault with ART. The mildly, this game is never boring. game's depth and range is breathtaking: Every element of operaRoll With It tional combat is fully represented, ART is certainly comprehensive and the elements that make up It comes with 18 scenarios that fighting units' characteristics are employ every type of combat wonderfully simulated. The abstract unit-from famous WWII armored concepts of air superiority and formations to guerrillas to ski n aval support are handled so 52ZN troops. And while the graphics are cleanly that they are almost invishardly as sexy as those in the latible. THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR est 3D shooters, they do a good is one of those rare games that enough job of highlighting the combines many common elements ORDERS OF INTIMIDATION The control panel (here showing troops and terrain-especially with sparks of insight and innovaunit info) has a frightening 24 buttons. But only the first given how easy it is to create tion, transcending all predecessors eight actually affect play; the others modify displays and your own scenarios with the map and creating a new standard for present reports. editor (see this month's CG Tips operational wargames. CGW ODGE 313 taar BRZA2 Ral ZIZ COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"PROFILE AND INTERVIEW ON  COMMANDOS ADVERTORIAL BEHIND EN E MY NES Eidos Interactive explodes on the real-time tactical combat scene with the refreshingly spunky Commandos. \"Okey Dokey Boss finally sum action!\" Sid Perkins as he commandeers Panzer tank for Allied \"use\" yro Studios of Madrid, Spain has created an intriguing departure from the glut of real time clones. With the publishing muscle of Eidos Interactive behind them, Pyro has unleashed the \"Dirty h Dozen\". \"Commandos: Behind Enemy Lines\" is a real-time tactical wargame masterpiece that confidently encompasses the RPG, Strategy, and Puzzle game genres. Gamers can finally enter a world that tempers the reality of stealth combat with the bravado and fun of the big screen war epics. SYSTEMS SPEC  ESRB Rating \"E\" Everyone  Windows 95/98  DirectX 5.2  P120 or greater . 16MB Ram  4x CD Rom  1MB Fast SVGA card . 16bit Soundcard Commandos is all about gripping, non-linear gameplay with strong, lovable characters that you lead in and out of lethal danger. Your goal is to keep your team alive while they stick it to the formidable German War Machine of WWII. They are your boys.... your \"A-team\". Ignacio Perez, lead Game Designer, has lovingly crafted missions from the actual history of the WWII Commando forces. Each mission briefing is presented in the authentic movie-reel style of the era. Historical missions, troops, locations, vehicles, armaments it's all painstakingly recreated for your battleground. Couple this with several missions based on hit war films such as \"the Dirty Dozen, the Great Escape, Force Ten from Navarone\", and you have a recipe for hours of entertaining adventure,  US Release: August 98' "


"PROFILE AND INTERVIEW ON  COMMANDOS Detonating this summer ADVERTORIAL ommandos takes place in the early days of WWII, when the Allied War effort was unable to stop the Germans from overtaking Europe. In the British Military, Lieutenant over the Germans. Their mission was to sneak in, kick ass, and get out. The results are legend. We now give you the chance to re-fight their battles and create your own history. complete the primary objective. However, once you successfully complete your mission, you must still get your team out alive amid the chaos. The game is played in real time. There are over twenty compelling missions that take place over four geographical theatres of war: Norway, North Africa, France, and Germany. Your combat team of six commandos will respond to you via voice and gestures. Each Commando has certain combat skills and weapons while possessing a \"unique\" temperament. Since you are behind enemy lines, you are always outmanned and outgunned but you are not outclassed. Use your combat stealth and ingenuity to complete your goals. You are in charge. Colonel Dudley Clark was not going to let them trample freedom, and to counter the axis, he formed the Commando Regiment. The Commandos ranks were formed from exceptionally skilled combat men. Some were misfits and outcasts, some company men, who shared a common vision-victory Every mission has several secondary objectives that need to be achieved to Commandos offers the complete gameplay package:  Luscious 16bit graphics in a high resolution 3D world with a realistic, interactive environment  Real-time scalable camera capable of multiple camera windows with resolutions up to 1024x768 Over 1000 world animations of 450 authentic WWII vehicles, weapons, soldiers, and buildings based on 3D renders Realistic WWII video scenes and music complete the immersion into the Commando world Six Commandos with unique voices and personalities as well as weapon and combat skills  Tenacious German unit Al stalks your boys with sight, sound, and even smell Career Mode tracks your mission to mission performance and rewards you for tactical genius  Secret 20th mission that can only be unlocked by good career performance Co-operative multiplayer for 2-6 users with the ability to save your score for the record Multiplayer voice communication and competition trees on the Mplayer gaming service CONTDENTIAL  Complete training camp allows you to hone your skills before facing the enemy FOR THE EYES OF gl Jack O'Hara Competitors can offer some of our l'eatures, but they cannot give you the \"total gaming package\" hun Archery that Commandos: Behind Enemy Lines delivers. Eric Adams US Producer SUBJECT PROTECT THS INFORMATION WITH YOUR OWN LIFE BETROF WISELY CALL OF THE Go to #276 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"PROFILE AND INTERVIEW ON  COMMANDOS Press TOP SECRET Buzz Z A focus on three killer Commandos features that make this game a classic. ADVERTORIAL Games Domain Review \"Commandos, from these earliest glimpses, looks to be one of the more innovative titles on the horizon. It offers gameplay that should entice both action and strategy fans, and blends features from games of both genres into a combination that really hasn't been seen beiore\". Jeff Kang Games Domain Review Enemy AI there are seven unique German soldier units in Commandos. Add to this mechanized and marine units, and you have a challenging mix of opponents. The enemy actually uses sight, sound, and even smell senses to detect your men. The Germans actually see your footprints, hear your actions, and call for backup. Each unit has a unique combat disposition; some will shoot you on sight, while others will take you captive. Co-op Multiplayer-in Commandos, you can join up to five of your friends and take on the Germans together. You have access to all 20 missions. As always, the game will monitor your performance and rate you at completion. You and your team can play via TCP/IP, IPX, or on the MPlayer service. Voice communication is offered only on MPlayer. Career Mode in Commandos, you start as a Lance Corporal and earn promotions through your skillful completion of each mission. The game actually tracks your performance. If you reach a certain rank, you will be given the honor of completing the infamous 20th mission. Fear not, we have created an extensive training camp to hone your skills. Computer Gaming World \"...the mission design, WWII setting, and basic Gameplay get this game apart. Overall, the game is incredibly promising . It could become a real-time strategy Sleeper hit.\" Elliot Chin CGW Up to six fully functional camera views Combat Simulations Online \"Commandos is the Best Strategy game at E3. Maurice Fitzgerald Combat Sim. Producer Questions and Answers e were able to pry the US Producer, Eric Adams, away from an intense Commandos Multiplayer game to ask some tough questions. We are holding the North American version to allow time for more promotion, and more importantly, to implement several user requested features. a game that plays at your pace, whether you are a hard core gamer or new to games Q: What is your role in this project? Why is Commandos shipping in North America in August, while the European version is out now? A: I have multiple roles. Foremost, work with Pyro Studios to enhance game elements for the North American market. This work also entails quality assurance, Mplayer implementation, gameplay balancing, and market research. In addition, I assist our terrific Sales and Marketing team in getting the good word out about this revelation to the public and press Q: What do you mean by \"revelation\"? A: Commandos is a revelation of gaming ingenuity and innovation. Pyro Studios has done an amazing job on their first title. This game literally offers several layers of intense gameplay. We supply real-time action and intrigue for the RTS crowd. We promote the use of tactics and strategy in an ultra realistic WWII environment for the hard core wargamers. Commandos also features unique puzzle elements and RPG like characters. Finally, we have created Q: Commandos came out of nowhere to become a sleeper hit. What is its future? A: There is a lot of great user buzz about this game. The gaming community has embraced both the content and presentation of Commandos. The Commandos demo is one of the hottest downloads on the Internet. I get an incredible amount of user email asking where to find it or begging for more missions. Be assured Commandos is coming your way in August. \"Its sequel future looks bright!\" Online Gaming Review MI!, like me, you're a big lan of movies like the Guns of Navarone and the Dirty Dozen, Commandos: Behind Enemy Lines, is sure to appeal to you. Blending subtle elements of Syndicate, Jagged Alliance, Castle Wolfenstein (the original), and Escape from Castle Colditz, Commandos easily stands out as one of the more original RTS games to be released this year.\" Chris Jensen OGR Go to #276 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"YOUR BO ADVERTORIAL Biograph Jerry \"Tiny\" McHale Bio: Tiny McHale is one tough Irishman irom Chicago. Always in trouble with authority, he loves the freedom or the Commandos. He can climb any building or mountain. Tiny is rumored to be the strongest man in the command. He also is a master of close combat wariare. Tiny is a man who prides himself in efficiency Inferno actually likes playing with fire Thomas \"Inferno\" Hancock Bio: Thomas burned his thumb at a young age and actually liked it. Since then, he has devoted his life to the taming of fire and flash. Inferno is your demolition man. If he cannot break a lock, he will gladly apply a little TNT to open it. He seems to also have a fascination with booby traps. ENLIST www.eidosinteractive.co This French Chameleon packs a nasty cyanide bite! Rene \"Spooky\" Dechamp Bio: Rene is brains of the Commandos. He is a skillful French linguist of many passions. Foremost, he loves tricking German soldiers and leading them to their deaths. He is your spy — your access into German strongholds. He also is very handy at the \"silent\" kill. "


"ies: ADVERTORIAL When it's not tea time, Duke loves to hunt for relaxation Sir Francis \"Duke\" Woolridge Bio: Duke stays true to his British Aristocratic roots in most cases, but he is a rascal with the ladies and a sucker for high stakes snooker. He is simply the best man in the Commandos ranks with the sniper rille. A nice chap with a quiet and lethal demeanor. Sid loves both test driving and firing at German equipment Sid \"Tread\" Perkins Bio: Sid is a tough guy from New York. expert on anything mechanical. Ii it uses gasoline He is your he can drive it. When not teasing Tiny, Sid is often seen practicing on the liring range with all varieties 01 machine guns. TODAY commandos/commandos.html Fins loves sinking ships James \"Fins\" Blackwood Bio: Fins is literally from down under underwater that is. When on land he is often in loul temper, but get him in water and he is a periect gentlemen. Some say he is part fish, but to the Commandos he is the ultimate marine specialist. Make sure he keeps the Harpoon gun pointed away from the rest of the team. Go to #276 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"PROFILE AND INTERVIEW ON  THIEF THE DARK PROJECT ADVERTORIAL The Dark Project Thief: The Dark Project Infiltrates Your PC Before Death came, the liars were made to feast upon the hands of the thieves and the thieves were made to ingest the tongues of their liar brothers. And we praised the Master for his judgments. This passage from the Hammer Book of Tenets sets the stage for EIDOS Interactive and Looking Glass Studio's Thief: The Dark Project. Prepare to enter a mythical world of swords and mystery, with a touch of steam-age technology thrown in for good measure. This interesting mix makes for a dark and volatile environment in which to set this incredible new game. You play Garrett, a tough thief in a tough city. Garrett makes his living by stealing pricey baubles from decaying royalty. He has also been known to do contract jobs for the right price, and that is just how things in Thief start out. As Garrett, you are hired by your good friend, and fence, Cutty, to steal a sword from the Bafford mansion. As early as this first mission, the complexity and detail of this new dark world is apparent. The graphics are simply stunning, and Looking Glass has worked closely with 3Dfx and FEATURES other 3D card manufacturers to enhance these effects in accelerated  First Person Stealth-Action modes. The lighting is excellent, game. which is important for an  Direct 3D environment where hiding in the Sneak your way through 14 shadows is the only way to survive. Levels. In addition, the level design Advanced Al has guards encourages exploration in all call for help and sound alarms. directions like a real city and less Explore and realize a like a typical linear game. When detailed techno-medieval breaking into a building, for world from the rooftops example, there may be multiple above to the sewers below. points of entry. Go to #116 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"PROFILE AND INTERVIEW ON  THIEF THE DARK PROJECT Thief: The Dark Project 3DFX Biography ADVERTORIAL behind. This sense of anticipation and suspense would not be possible without 3D sound and cannot be matched in any other game available today. Without a great storyline, it would be difficult to fully realize the potential of all this great technology. Thankfully Looking Glass has taken care of that aspect too. Some may be more difficult to stealthy enough, it only takes enter, but less tightly guarded, one strategically shot arrow to while other, more obvious relieve the guard of his duties entrances will have more guard forever! presence. One would think that all the Unlike most of today's 1st dead guards Garrett leaves in person shooter games, in Thief, his wake might arouse you are not a one-man arsenal. suspicion from the others Your primary weapons here are making their rounds. For the your stealth and cunning, first time ever in a first person paired with your sword and game, this is actually true! bow. Throughout Thief you will Other guards will come across find different types of arrows to dead bodies and run off to aid you in your missions: Use a sound alarms, just as they Water Arrow to extinguish would in real life. Of course, torches burning on the wall, there is a way around this creating instant shadows to potentially incriminating sneak through! Or switch to the predicament. Garrett can pick explosive Fire Arrow when up guards' bodies and stash being subtle is no longer an them in dark corners, or option, or when you need to submerge them underwater light up dark corridors. Other so he can go about his silent weapons include the business undisturbed. Noisemaker Arrow, which generates the The use of sounds of footsteps \"The graphics sound in games wherever it lands. This are simply has always helped to create arrow is perfect for stunning, distracting a a mood and solo especially guard, giving you a warn of on a 3D chance to come up upcoming from behind and slide accelerator dangers, but the revolutionary your sword through use of sound in his fifth and sixth ribs. Thief brings the Although these special arrows stealth and sneaking aspects of are helpful, it's not always a the game to a new level. Using simple feat to get past the the new Aureal A3D sound guards. An advanced sighting technology. Looking Glass promises an and hearing Al enables the immersive guards to see you if you don't experience never before take care to stick to the achieved on the PC. shadows; they can also hear The A3D technology enables you walking on certain specially equipped soundcards surfaces. However, if you're to broadcast sound in 3D, SO when action is occurring behind Garrett, the player will actually hear it behind him. In-game sound provides a sense of realism that cannot be matched in any other way, and getting the sound to occur in 3D heightens the experience and brings the game to life. Imagine sneaking down a hallway and hearing a whistling guard approaching from Looking Glass Studio and 3Dfx have been working closely during the development of Thief: The Dark Project to bring a heightened sense of realism to the game through incredible graphics. Because of the stealthy style of gameplay, there are many graphic effects that transcend simply making the game look better and actually make the game PLAY better. In addition to the standard antialiasing and speed increases that players enjoy when employing a 3D card, 3Dfx and Looking Glass are developing enhanced lighting effects to bring out subtleties of light and shadow, very helpful when trying to sneak past a guarded entry. Enhanced special effects for magic and explosive weapons as well as fire, smoke and transparent water effects bring alive the dark underbelly of this sinister city. Transparent \"ghostlike\" monsters add to the surreal atmosphere. \"Looking Glass Studios is upping the ante in accelerated gaming by creating a game that both looks and PLAYS better when taking advantage of 3Dfx technology.\" Scott Sellers, CTO Software, 3Dfx Interactive, 3Dfx. As a thief for hire, Garrett has his share of enemies, and not many friends. The only person Garrett can trust is Cutty, his fence. Cutty gets Garrett jobs and buys goods off him that are too hot to sell on the open market. As the game begins, Garrett has a good thing going. After Cutty gets him the Bafford job (Garrett's first mission in Thief) things become more difficult and complex as an intricate story begins to unfold. card\" Garrett crosses paths over the course of the game with the SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS Windows 95/98 Pentium 166 or better 3D accelerator recommended 16 Megs of RAM Direct X 5.0 or better Uses Aureal A3D Sound Technology Developer: Looking Glass Publisher: Eidos Interactive www.eidosinteractive.com Go to #116 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"PROFILE AND INTERVIEW ON THIEF THE DARK PROJECT The Thief Interview First Person Shooter does not? Gee, where to begin ... the biggest d ence is that we're building a world th complex and detailed enough so that player can really make plans and think cally, and wherein the Als are smart tough enough so that you can get som satisfaction from outwitting them. Bo line: it's more fun to be Batman than it be Superman. ADVERTORIAL could design an entire game around just that concept. First, can you tell me a little bit about Looking Glass? What games have you guys Thief is pretty different than the standard done in the past? First Person Shooter, how were you sure We did Ultima Underworld 1 & 2, which that the Steal-Action was the way to go? were among the first 1st person 3D games Here at LG, we don't really view Thief as a to be released, and are considered by many \"shooter\" any more than we did our prior to be classics. We did a science-fiction games. We think that the 1st person 3D action/RPG title called System Shock, and genre has lots more to offer players than we've done a couple of groundbreaking Shooters alone, and we'd like to do our part flight simulators; Flight Unlimited 1 and 2 in turning players on to some other possibilities of the medium. We make the sorts What gave you the idea for Thief? of games that we're interested in playing. We've also been reassured about the Thief is a logical extension of the things we liked the most about System Shock; specifisoundness of our design now that other cally, sneaking around and ambushing the stealth-based games like GoldenEye and enemy. We discovered that we Commandos have hit the market and are got more of an adrenaline doing well. rush from tense, stealthy gameplay At various parts of the game it's advantageous not to kill the next person you come than from straightup butchery, and across, but to silently hide in the shadows and evesdrop. Was this a design considerawe realized tion or just something that you were able to that we do with the engine? 'It was intended from the beginning to be a key part of the design, because it's a cool, immersive way to provide clues to players, and pull them into the story at the same time. Do you think that Thief will help revolu ize the first-person gaming market? We'd like to open peoples' eyes to som ferent possibilities of the genre: we that Thief will provide some incredible riences to players who are tired of the old thing and ready for something When all is said and done, what matte that it's fun. We're having a blast ma Thief, and we can't wait to play it! How complex is the storyline? It's pretty involved. One unique asper the story is that you get pieces of it fron ferent sources and have to put them tog er yourself. You read books and sci view occasional cut scenes, overhear versations, and piece together various clues. As a player, you can decide deeply you want to immerse yourself in story. What exactly is your role on the project? I'm the Project Leader. I try to keep everyone else on track, and I also do lot of interviews. How many different weapons are there Sorry, that's classified. I will say that w got some that you've never before seer PC game. What features does Thief have that your standard Does Garrett have any other tricks u sleeve? He might, but he's not saying. Thief: The Dark Project Infiltrates Your PC (continued) Hammerites. These religious fanatics have no tolerance for Garrett or his profession. As the game progresses, Garrett has multiple encounters with the Hammerites and their trademark warhammers. There is nothing worse than fighting a fanatic; they have no sense of reason. You can't bribe them and they don't take to being conned. Life in a Hammerite prison is nothing to look forward to designed so that they can be accomplished entirely by sticking to the shadows and pick-pocketing guards that hold items vital to completing an area (keys for example) Tends another layer of realism to the atmosphere of this Looking Glass story Garrett also has run-ins with city and palace guards, as well as creatures from a dark and mysterious underworld. In Looking Glass's attempt to center the game around stealth aspects, some levels are Between each mission is a cutscene, setting up the details of the next mission. Some of these are simple, objective describing animations, whereas many others advance the plot of the game. The style of these is that of a hand painted image, sprinkled with computer animations. The effect is as striking as the game itself, and All in all, Thief is top-notch. From the solid controls and a fantastic lighting system to the artificial intelligence and gripping storyline, Thief is poised to put a new spin on the first-person action game genre. Thief: The Dark Project is looking to carve out its own niche and strike silently in the night, like a thief in the dark. Go to #116 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"INDUSTRY GIANT REVIEW Industrial Disease INDUSTRY GIANT Comes Up Short Across the Board STRATEGIYAWA Mora El by Tim Carter ike so many other games, INDUSTRY GIANT is an incomplete product that should never have left the warehouse. What's worse, the design and programming flaws here are compounded, as usual, by insultingly bad documentation. I know that it's possible to write a decent manual for a computer game; it still happens occasionally. Why I-Magic seems incapable of it, I have no idea. The Clock Is Running As the title suggests, INDUSTRY GIANT is a game of corporate development and market dominance. It offers a multitude of scenarios and campaigns covering a time period roughly from the 1960s through the 21st century. You must borrow money to build a manufacturing and retailing empire While I can see the logic behind the retail aspect, is there any major Mei corporation today that actually depends on a wholly owned, effiISPORTS TO FACTORY cient railway network for its success? You don't see the Justice Department chasing after Bill Gates because his trains refuse to SPORTS EQUIP.TACTORY carry Netscape, do you? Even more unrealistically, you can't research new products-they just come on the market according to a preset schedule. Thus, you GIANT have no fights over patent rights, no competition for technological APPLIANCE PARK The layout of INDUSTRY GIANT looks a lot like advantages, no pacing the market. SIMCITY 2000, but without the number of options. Check out the Moreover, while it's possible to wasted space on the interface, too. advertise, I found it almost never made financial sense to do so. supported by your own transportacomputer won't notify you of the Instead, you are left juggling tion system. Winning is generally problem or identify the bottleneck train schedules and creating a prodetermined by profit and your abil. Sometimes the bottleneck is invisiduction system that can efficiently ity to drive your competitors out of ble: I once had trains stopped out supply a retail empire with a range business (or take them over). side completely empty stations for of goods. There's nothing wrong The game is played in realtime, no apparent reason. This can be with a game that simulates this, as but for some unfathomable reason, extremely frustrating, particularly if long as it doesn't claim to be replithe designers couldn't see their your empire is vast, with complex cating or even pretending to repliway clear to add variable speeds or and overlapping routes and inter cate contemporary business. a decent pause function. The clock dependent supply systems. Beating your competitors in runs the whole time you are makINDUSTRY GIANT has little or nothing decisions or researching your Bill Who? ing to do with the quality of your options. Since you need to select The technical hiccups in products. The game assumes that and purchase retail and manufac INDUSTRY GIANT are bad enough, all are equal, and that demand is turing outlets and build your own yet they pale beside the conceptual constant. Thus, there are no transportation system, it can take flaws. Winning in INDUSTRY GIANT rewards for researching or producyou a year or more of game time is all about transportation net ing better widgets (or software). I just to get your first product to works and competitive retailing. can't help thinking that this is a market. Once you're well into the reflection of the way game and your empire is functionRetail Stores INDUSTRY GIANT'S Spray ing smoothly, you're left sitting producers view their around waiting for time to pass. own market. Clearly While the game ran smoothly they don't see the for the most part, at times the lack value in developing of information seemed like a bug. Filter complete, quality For instance, if you plan a trucking products, or investing system badly, say, by putting too in ancillary goods many trucks on the same road, like, say, documentayour trucks will stack up outside tion. I can only hope your depot, and the ensuing traffic that the real-life marjam may halt your entire distribuBUILD THOSE BIKES But don't worry ket is just a tad more tion network. Unfortunately, you about making the best bike. Just make discriminating than have no way of knowing why sure your product ships more efficiently the one simulated some trucks refuse to move; the than your competitor's. here. CGW COMPUTER GAMING ***  WORLD last La APPEAL: For chronic RAILROAD TYCOON addicts who need a methadone-like substitute. PROS: Looks nice at times. CONS: Bad docs; no variation in game speed; unexplained glitches in transportation system; weak premise. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 2MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM, DirectXcompatible sound and graphics. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None. Price: $29.95 Publisher: Interactive Magic Research Triangle Park, NC (800) 789.1534 www.imagicgames.com Sostegno www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 261 "


"REVIEW  EXTREME TACTICS Extreme Tedium TRATEGYZWAR Some Nice Touches Are Lost in a Sea of Bugs and Clichés by Lance Larka he story is a familiar one: a dying world, scarce resources, two competing clans with different ideologies, only one will survive... (yawn). What's the point? Why would anyone wish to play this severely overused strategy plot line? Well, having the ability to customize your units (including their Al tendencies) is a good place to start. Unfortunately, despite the integration of these long overdue features to the genre, EXTREME TACTICS still failed to pique my interest. A Pinch Too Little, a Year Too Late In this flimsy imitation of better strategy games, you play either the altruistic Hammerhead or the baneful Bloodfox clans in the dual 11-mission linear campaigns, 11 COMPUTER one-player skirmish misChris Coolat sions, or head-to-head against up to three other players over the Net. In terms of actual play, you are forced to use the ancient stratagem of harvest, build, and overwhelm to withstand the enemy's initial wave attacks and complete the rather bland missions. The main innovation of EXTREME TACTICS is the design-unit screen, in which you match up standard body types, movement methods, shielding, scanners, and, of usha FORMATION | Gueko, KETURA, course, weapons to make SAND IN MY POCKET When zoomed-in, the impressive detail doesn't the perfect vehicle for whathelp much, since units that are firing at you are off-screen. ever tactical situation you're in. The other innovation is being doesn't it make more sense for the detail that you often can't even able to modify your units' Al controllers inside the MCC to gain tell the difference between friendly behavior, from pursuit ranges to experience and keep the increased and enemy forces with it. There is automatic repair triggers. to-hit percentage from unit to unit a set of buttons on the bottom of instead of losing it? the main screen that is quite useignores your settings. ful. Included are such things as All your units are built and Error: Operating Repair, Center on MCC, and Reremotely controlled from your System Not Found treat to MCC. These buttons are comfy Mobile Command Center This game still would have been nice, but they block a section of (MCC). Logically, if your MCC is decent if it weren't for the terrible the main screen (and the items sitdestroyed, you lose the mission. interface and the bugs. The interting there, making it difficult to It's too bad that the logic ends face is your standard sidebar but see or select those items). here. All units in the game have a ton array with menu functions, I found too many bugs to list starting to hit percentage that mini-map, and main map. Both the here, but I'll pass on a choice few. grows in relation to their battle main map and mini-map can be After loading a saved game, many experience. The more they fight, zoomed, but doing so removes so of my units' Al settings had been the higher the percentage gets. much area from the main map reset to the factory defaults, and And if the unit dies, the experience that you can't even see to the areas of the map that I had is lost, but why? If the units are extent of your units' visual range, explored before the save were controlled remotely from the MCC, and it makes moving your units a covered up. What's most annoying, definite chore. speeding up the game only affects But when the the movement rate of units...not view is zoomed the amount of time it take to build out, the units them or repair them, which makes are so small that the already slow build-up process I had trouble exceedingly tedious. telling which applaud Piranha and developer was which, and Media Station for attempting to selecting indi add some long overdue features to vidual units in a the strategy genre, but I give them pack was next poor marks for focusing only on to impossible. that and skimping on what in the ROBOSHOP The only really well-implemented The mini-map is end is the most important feature area in this game is the design screen. so skimpy on there is: enjoyment. CGW WORLD ** APPEAL: SMG WHEEL Collectors who need every sci-fi strategy game. PROS: Vehicle design, customiz. able Al, and unit experience are welcome additions. CONS: Incredible number of bugs: bad interface; a story so canned it's tin. DIFFICULTY: Easy REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 120, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 30MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM, SVGA graphics, supports Windows-compatible sound cards. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: TCP/IP, (1 CD per player). Price: $49.95 Publisher: Piranha Interactive Publishing Inc. Tempe, Arizona (602) 491-0500 www.extreme-tactics.com 262 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"When Solar Systems Collide... Let the Battles Begin Exploration Expansion Exploitation Extermination POLENOOT Manage Resources:  Acquire and hold asteroids  Mine asteroids for minerals  Generate and transfer power Buy/Sell resources, ships, and votes to the guild for credits ANUNC Michelle MALKARI Dynamic 3D solar system with all asteroids in constant orbital motion creates unique challenges as resources and territory move over time. SIMULTANEOUS TURN-BASED STRATEGY GAME MAGIC Multiplayer capabilities for up to 40 players via LAN, Internet, and play-by email, featuring cooperative and competitive play. SZENT INTERACTIVE MAGIC Interactive Magic P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 www.imagicgames.com Design and construct modular ships. Options allow for specialization: offensive, defensive, construction, maintenance, tracking and surveying. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-789-1534 for additional information Go to #085 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  GAME, NET & MATCH! SPORTS Not Pong Finally—A Game That Gets Tennis Right by Tasos Kaiafas ennis, like track or horse racing, doesn't always translate well to a computer game. It's difficult not to view it as little more than an advanced game of PONG, which is absurd-PONG doesn't even have a net. But seriously, many computer tennis games in the past have admittedly conveyed an experience similar to that of PONG: Hit the ball back and forth until some one misses. They lacked the complexity of real-life tennis, mostly because all the players were similar in ability. Fortunately for tennis fans, GAME, NET & MATCH is different. If you overlook the cheesy title and '70s-style box art, what you'll find inside is a well-thoughtout tennis game with a lot of COMPUTER great features, but one on your style of play. For that might get a bit too example, if you like to play easy after a while. a serve-and-volley style, your serve and volley levTENNIS RPG? els will increase after each The first place to go in competition. If you don't the game is, obviously, score many backhand the training area. There, points, your backhand you can learn the conability won't improve. So, trols and get a feel for as the season progresses, the game. A ball machine your player continually at the other end of the gets better with experiPRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Turn on the ball court fires the kind of machine to fine-tune your game. ence-as in an RPG. shot you want to practice against: deep or short FORTY LOVE ground strokes, lobs, and GAME, NET & MATCH cross-court ground has a lot that will please strokes, random ground tennis fans. However, smart strokes and lobs; or comtennis players will find cerpletely random shots. You tain strategies that a comcan also practice serves, puter Al will repeatedly fall but because of the way for. It also seems that your you serve in the game, racket hits balls that there's not much need for should be too far away, practice-once you get making the game a bit too the timing down, you forgiving. Another oddity is HOLDING COURT Play matches in a variety of won't miss the first serve that computer players can arenas and on different court surfaces. much during a match, dive for balls, although I've unless you try something extreme. a nice variety of arena graphics), never seen my guy do it—and On the court, you can play a court type, and prize money for there are times when I wished he single match against the computer each tournament, and the more would have. or against another person (on a the prize money the tougher the More advanced players will be LAN or over the Internet) by opponents. Enter an upper-echelon harder to beat no matter what choosing from a few male or competition before your player is you throw at them, and it even female characters with different ready and you might not make it seems that computer opponents ability levels, then selecting the past the first round, losing valuable get better and worse at different court surface (clay, concrete, grass, time and ranking points in the times during the match, adding a or carpet) and the number of sets. process. You have to be smart to dynamic element to their game. The real fun in GAME, NET & make it to the big time. But once you get your player up MATCH comes from creating your The best part is that your play to top-caliber status, you'll be own player for season play and er's abilities increase, depending hard to beat by a computer oppoentering him or her in various nent, which really points to a tournaments and competitions for glaring omission: difficulty levels. prize money and ranking points. To Not only can you get good create a player, you first choose a enough to beat computer oppocharacter, then you distribute 30 nents regularly, but it's also a bit points among six characteristics too easy to simply hit the ball no (with a maximum of 10 points matter how new your player is. As each): forehand, backhand, volley, with serves, you'll make an service, speed, and strength. PLAYER DIMENSION The 3Dunforced error only if you try Throughout the season you can rendered players look best something extreme. But then choose from a list of competitions. through a 3D card, though the that's what it usually takes to game doesn't require one. The game lists date, location (with beat the best. CGW GAMING WORLD ***** APPEAL: MAMENIT Anyone who's been waiting for a decent tennis game. PROS: RPG-like character creation, thoughtful design; good control; Internet play. CONS: No difficulty levels; easy first serves, mediocre AI. DIFFICULTY: Easy REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 100MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, 2MB graphics card (DirectX compatible). DirectX 5.0 3D SUPPORT: Direct3D-compatible cards, 3Dfx. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN, Internet (2 players); 1 CD per player. Price: $39.99 Publisher: BlueByte Software Schaumburg, IL (847) 995-9981 www.bluebyte.com 264 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"The Best Selling Football Game Hits the PC NFL GAMEDAY 99 GAMEDAY 383 989 Sports 9 8 E 30 SL EUR PC CD L 1 989 Sports Available for the season opener EVERYONE Elu CD ACCELERATOR ROM ESRO PLAYERS NFL and GameDay are registered trademarks of the National Football League. Officially licensed product of the NFL Players and NFL. Properties. The NFL shield design is a registered trademark of the National Football League, Team names, nicknames, logos and other indicia are trademarks of the teams Indicated. TM/O 1998 NFLP. Players Inc logo is an official trademark of the NFL Players. 1998 Players Inc, Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 3Dix Interactive logo is a trademark of 3Dfx Interactive, Inc. Game developed by 989 Studios. 989 Sports is a trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment America Inc.  1998 Sony Computer Entertainment America Inc. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association Go to #080 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  MONOPOLY WORLD CUP '98 Do Not Pass GOOOOOAL! SSICS PUZZ Buy and Sell Soccer Franchises in MONOPOLY WORLD CUP '98 by Charles Ardai hen they were called upon to dress MONOPOLY in Star Wars trap pings last year, the folks at Hasbro Interactive threw themselves into the assignment with obvious passion, and adapted every element of the game that could be adapted. They've done likewise with the WORLD CUP '98 edition. You've got FIFA's 22 top-ranked soccer teams in place of the traditional properties; France's four largest stadiums instead of railroads; stadium lighting and soda concessions in place of utilities; \"Home\" and \"Away\" cards in place of \"Chance\" and \"Community Chest\"; soccer-ball shaped dice; TRUSOU-D interneto ry o the COMPUTER GAMING * * * * * with the one directly behind it. In The current bli is 100 to Kevin other words, if you happen to own the most expensive property when you lose a match play, you suddenly find yourself owning a lessexpensive property. It's not that you trade teams with the other player-it's that the value of your property changes, as if Vermont Avenue moved uptown to become a purple property while St. Charles Place became a light blue \"bargain\" district These \"World Cup rules\" add not just extra soccer flavor but new strategic dimensions as well—50 LOADSA MONEY Instead of bidding for property, MONOPOLY much, in fact, that people who care WORLD CUP '98 has you wheeling and dealing over soccer teams. nothing about soccer will enjoy playing the game. The only shortand beautifully animated human Furthermore, once you got past comings are that the new elements players in place of the familiar the surface changes in the STAR don't come into play often enough shoe, iron, and top hat game WARS edition, all you found under and they are based largely on rantokens. neath was ordinary MONOPOLY. dom results rather than on gamers' When you land on a property, Here, you have two new game ele decisions. Still, they are the first you'll hear that team's national ments, one of which comes into new MONOPOLY gameplay rules anthem play while an animation play each time a player passes since Parker Brothers agreed to shows the players in their native \"Go\": Either the player has to face canonize the \"Free Parking rule.\" landscape. End your turn and your off against Uncle Pennybags for MONOPOLY WORLD CUP '98 will player kicks a soccer ball gracefully two penalty shots or two randomly find its natural market among socacross the board to the next player. selected teams face each other in c er fans, who'll enjoy it as a keepLand on \"Go to Jail\" and Uncle a n automated \"match play.\" If you sake or a novelty. But others will Pennybags benches you while the score a goal on both penalty shots, enjoy it, too, for bringing a welcrowd boos. The two major differ you win the use of a third die in come breath of fresh air into the ences between the WORLD CUP subsequent tums—you get to roll somewhat musty traditions of edition and the STAR WARS edition all three dice and choose which MONOPOLY. And everyone will (other than the use of Scotland two you want to use. Scoring on enjoy watching Pennybags dive to rather than Dagobah for Baltic only one penalty shot has no make a save. It's a treat to see the Avenue) are that the WORLD CUP effect; and if you miss both penalty old gent get some exercise. CGW edition doesn't limit its customiza kicks, you lose a tion to mere cosmetic changes, and turn. that the WORLD CUP edition is In the autoactually playable. mated match play, the team World Cup Rules! that wins (which STAR WARS MONOPOLY boasted the computer tons of animation and clips from decides randomthe films, but the game ran slowly ly) changes as a result. This edition has just as places with the much animation, but it's blessedly team directly Domol free from delays. The clever openahead of it on ing and closing sequences stutter a the board; the little, but the game itself runs losing team IT'S A GOAL Get the ball past Uncle Pennybags smoothly and swiftly. changes place and you have could win an extra die. WORLD APPEAL: Soccer fans, MONOPOLY gamers who want to try MONOPOLY with a twist. PROS: Plenty of customization; great animation; two new game features provide real soccer flavor. CONS: The new gameplay elements are random rather than skill-based; repeated animation soon becomes familiar. DIFFICULTY: Easy REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 100, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 4x CD-ROM, SVGA graphics, Windows-compatible sound card, DirectX 5.0. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN, Internet Gaming Zone (up to six players): 1 CD per player. Price: $29.95 Publisher: Hasbro Interactive Beverly, MA (508) 921-3700 www.hasbrointeractive.com 266 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


" REVIEWS Brain Drain An IQ Test, a Tile-matching Puzzle, and Board Games for Bored Gamers CLASSICS PUZZLES The Ultimate IQ Test * * * * Publisher: Virtual Entertainment Price: $24.95 www.virtualentertainment.com alling a game THE ULTIMATE IQ TEST is begging people to ignore it. Most of us got our fill of 10 tests back in grade school and would not voluntarily submit to more. If you choose to ignore this one, though, you'll be missing out on something considerably more entertaining than its name suggests. As I remember them, IQ tests contained hundreds of tedious questions and took hours to complete. This one contains only 30 questions and has a 60-minute time limit; more importantly, the questions are not just tough, they're tantalizing. What two different three-letter words can you insert between \"CON\" and \"ENT\" got wrong, or get yourself in the mood for your next test with five classic brain-teasers. The brain teasers are overly familiar and not presented with the panache of SMART GAMES, and some of the supporting material for the test itself is trite (\"Most people, by definition, are of average intelligence,\" intones a host), but, otherwise, THE ULTIMATE IQ TEST does a good job of living up to its name. the answers, incidentally, are \"TIN,\" \"DIM,\" and \"4.\" And if you can figure out why \"4\" is right in five minutes or less, this test is for you. --Charles Ardai Tiles: B4 sitting across the board from you see the game pieces flashing when you do the dastardly deed, before your eyes after you've left the glee factor is somewhat the computer. One of the first comwatered down. puter games to have this effect on The object of the game is to get me was Activision's SHANGHAI, a your four pawns out, around the game in which you must remove board, and safely back to their pairs of sufficiently exposed tiles home base before your opponents until you clear the board, or can no get to theirs. In the classic game, you pick up a card from the center prior to each turn, which gives you instructions on how to move. In the CD-ROM version there's also a strategy Gonus es 4R tiles200 option, whereby Score: 0 Time Bonus: 1100 your cards are dealt before the game begins. It's longer move. While NAHAN'S up to you to play your hand as gameplay is similar, the game strategically as possible. Other than sadly lacks that mesmerizing qualithat, the gameplay is the same as ty of SHANGHAI. that of the original game. The tiles in NAHAN are rectanSORRY is clearly intended for gular rather than hexagonal (you kids. The cute animation allows can also play a three-dimensional your pawns to morph into different version using cubes). Players can shapes as they move around the select from various tile sets and board. If you're about to kick layouts and can listen to a variety someone back to the start, your of uninspired (but unobtrusive) pawn might turn into a spade and mood music. Points are awarded bash your opponent into the for each pair of tiles removed, for ground; if your pawn makes it removing a significant number of home, he might curl up in bed and tiles, and for completing a game go to sleep. While younger gamers quickly. If you lose a game, you will enjoy this upbeat adaptation of can replay it or watch the comthe board game, adults should stickputer play it. Hints are also availwith classics like SCRABBLE or able. You can also use an editor MONOPOLY.-Charlotte Panther with some nifty controls to generate new layouts. The biggest challenge in playing Nahan: The Ultimate NAHAN is not the gameplay itself, 3D Puzzle Game but dealing with the visual assaults of riotous colors, clashing backgrounds, and tiles that are often Publisher: Global Star Software hard to distinguish from one Price: $19.99 another. The added factor of having www.globalstar.on.ca to rotate layouts to see all playable Vou know you're really hooked pieces makes this game even more on a game when you can still \"challenging.\" -Petra Schlunk Sorry * * * * Publisher: Hasbro Interactive Price: $19.95 www.hasbrointeractive.com if you've ever played the board game Sorry, you'll remember how great it felt to land on top of your opponent and send him back to the start, or even better, to draw the much sought after Sorry card that allowed you to bring a new pawn out of the your home base and send another player back. Sure, Hasbro's new computer boardgame edition allows you to do all that. But even when you're playing in multiplayer mode, if you don't have a friend CRUCERETSTORESCUELELSE Kisten Beano Age:26. Tested on: 3/27/97 WESQUERRESTR SCAREX.26 100 O S : ESTILA to produce nine-letter words? What number should replace \"X\" in the sequence \"25, 22, 15, X, 10, 19, 24\"? Finish the test and the game scores your performance in each category (math, verbal, spatial, knowledge) and displays your IQ. You can go back over the test for explanations of the questions you * * * * www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 207 "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY. CHEATS  WALKTHROUGHS Jane's F-15 Moving Mud Is the key to Success in JANE'S F-15 by Tom \"KC\" Basham ere's the problem: The Iraqis are up in arms again, preparing to launch a full-scale invasion into a neighboring country. The United Nations peacekeeping force has to persuade Saddam to stay at home instead. The President has given the word and your F-15E squadron takes off on a series of preemptive strikes. You're going to war, and everyone expects you to hit your targets when you get there. what equipment you're carrying. You can use a Maverick's seeker head to find and acquire a target, use the infrared camera, create a highresolution map (HRM), or simply click on an object inside the HUD field. Each method is best suited for specific scenarios. You don't need to be familiar with all targeting methods to enjoy JANE'S F-15; but the more types you're comfortDAMAGE ASSESSMENT As exciting as it is to be near ground zero when your able with, the bombs go off, it generally puts you into a very vulnerable position. more options you'll have during combat and click on specific pixels, and it in the case of a building, I usually find that I generally rely on isn't a reliable method under most aim for the top of the building, HRMs, occasionally clicking a tar circumstances. Also, I tend to click which actually signifies a point on get of opportunity that suddenly just a bit beyond the desired tarthe ground just past the building. appears in the HUD. Using the get, since I've found that free-fall This isn't very realistic (in real life, HUD, however, requires that you weapons in F-15 have a tendency i'd aim for the base of the buildbe able to maneuver the mouse to fall short of a targeted location. ing), but it substantially improves Ground-Pounding Many of us have more fun dueling at 20,000 feet than moving mud, but the F-15E Strike Eagle exists primarily to blow up things on the ground (for tips on F-15 air-to-air combat, see last month's Gamer's Edge strategy piece). While it inherited reasonable airto-air capability from the original F-15 design, it's very unlikely it will ever be used in that role. The U.S. Air Force has only four or five dozen E-model airframes in its inventory, and it's not going to waste them on air-to-air missions when it has F-15Cs and F-16s to carry out the job. Consequently, if you're going to have any fun in JANE'S F-15, you'd better be good at making ground targets explode. Basically, executing air strikes has two major steps: Designating a target and delivering ordnance. Of the two, designating the target is usually the most labor-intensive. There are several ways to designate targets, depending upon See the Review JULY ISSUE. 4.5 STARS KILL FROM AFAR The F-15 has released its bombs, but it's still a mile from the target thanks to loft bombing TILT! Rolling the wings slightly during the pitch-up causes this bomb to miss. 268 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"GAMER'S ED stopped, zoom second time around. Antiaircraft the HRM or guns, shoulder-launched SAMS, tweak the IR and even small arms fire will likely camera to the greet your return. Sometimes, appropriate though, you have no choice. You location. may have missed the primary tarYou may get, gotten only some of the specthink, \"That's ified structures, or encountered a cheating!\" system failure of some sort. Lives Given the prod may depend on your making uct's emphasis another pass. That's why I like loft on realism, how bombing. can anyone posWith loft bombing (described sibly suggest on page 4.62 of the manual), you such a brazen lob free-fall bombs by executing a cheat as actual well-timed pitch-up maneuver. The ly stopping the result looks much like an undergame? Well, hand softball throw. The maneuver remember that has its flaws: You can attack only the F-15 sports one structure per pass (an airfield, a crew of two. for example, may have numerous SWEET RELEASE It's always beneficial to be as far as reasonably possible from The USAF isn't buildings that you need to enemy air defenses when you release your payload. really big on destroy), and it's more susceptible giving joyrides to alignment problems. Still, it my hit ratio in the game. One The Pause That in multimillion-dollar jets, so keeps you farther away from the caveat: If you plan to ripple Refreshes before they install a back seat in a target and any surface-to-air release multiple bombs, set the F-15 includes an outstanding fighter they have a good reason. weapons. Since this delivery target point slightly ahead of the feature: The MPDs (Multipurpose The guy in back (GIB) isn't there method leaves me in a climb, 1 roll target. The trailing bombs will fall Displays) continue to work even to sightsee; he's busy managing 135 degrees immediately after past the first one. The distance when you pause the game. The weapons and targets. The pilot, release, pull hard on the stick, and between impacts depends on the best way to locate and designate meanwhile, is busy flying the airslice the nose back down. Once interval between releases. If you targets is to select the desired craft, trying not get the airaim directly at (or just beyond the radar mode, let it paint the area a to get shot or fly craft back target, your later bombs will probcouple of times, then press the into a mountain. on the deck, ably sail harmlessly past. Pause key. While the action is While F-15 isn't I level out, as detailed as extend away real life, there's from the still a lot of target, circle arrying the right mix of ordnance is crucial to the success of work to do, and around, and every mission. During Operation Desert Storm, F-15 Es initially it's hardly \"realattack it carried a mix of two AIM-7 missiles and six Rockeye cluster bombs istic\" to expect again from (CBUS). When the air-to-air threat proved to be nonexistent, crews a single person another moved to 12 CBUs or 12 Mk 82s (occasionally carrying Mk 84s). to complete the direction. Toward the end of the war, F-15Es finally received a significant work of two I learned number of laser targeting pods, which allowed the widespread use people in real GET A FIX Start the process of another of GBU-12 laser-guided bombs. time. Using the designating your target by maktrick while As with the various avionics modes, it's not really necessary to pause function ing an HRM (high-resolution map) using loft use every type of weapon. Try to find a few weapons that you can during strike of the target area. bombing reliably deliver on target. A mix of Mavericks and LGBs is an excel missions lets several lent, all-purpose loadout, when available, although such powerful you better simulate two distinct years ago flying TORNADO. I rouweapons may be overkill against soft targets. CBUs are great for crew members with one player. tinely lobbed bombs over hills, wide-area attacks and generally don't require the same precision never climbing high enough to delivery as an iron bomb. CBUS, though, don't pack as much punch Here's the Pitch expose myself to return fire. To and may be unsuitable against hard targets. Once you designate the target, use this trick in F-15 you will have Don't waste a lot of weapon pylons carrying air-to-air weapons it's time to move in and kill it. to acquire the target somehow. Try unless the mission specifically calls for antiair activities. You'll gen Now, we all know that it's gener popping up 40 or more miles erally have dedicated air-to-air fighters handling CAP, sweep, and ally a very bad idea to make mul away from the target and isolatescort duties. Every air-to-air missile carried means fewer bombs tiple passes over the same target. ing it in an HRM. Quickly dive and therefore less damage to the enemy. Anyone you didn't kill on the first back to the dirt, proceed to the pass will be waiting for you the nearest hill, and toss a bomb Combat Loadout www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"JANE'S F-15 EDES WW2 STAY ON TARGET A good lineup with 19 seconds before the pitch-up maneuver. GET THE HELL OUT! Roll and pull off the target after releasing your bombs-don't continue straight into the air defenses. much the way a coworker tosses a paper wad over a cubicle wall at work. Loft bombing requires more practice than AUTO or CDIP modes. First, you have to initiate the attack from an appropriate distance. If you try to start a loft attack too close in, you won't get the proper HUD symbology (specifically, you won't get the TPULL counter). You must be careful not to roll the aircraft-even slightly—when you initiate the pull-up. The slightest roll will pull the nose off the target and sling the bombs off to the side. As with all bomb runs, align your heading with the Azimuth Steering Line (ASL) and fly straight and level for several seconds before initiating the climb. If you can't achieve proper lineup before the climb, or if you let the aircraft roll as the nose comes up, pull off and prepare for a new attack run. Granted, you are exposed during the sudden pitch-up, but I generally find that my total exposure time is less than in a direct attack, and I can turn away from the target sooner. Loft bombing is not a \"magic bullet,\" though, and should be one of many attack techniques at your disposal. Every technique you master increases your chances of successfully executing and surviving each new attack. CGW <13.1 T599 TGT 0.911 1.0 9.0G 6 8.2 00:10 TPULL AUTO LOFT DON'T DELAY Start the attack early enough so that you have time to line up before the TPULL counter expires. Inside the Maverick AGNES Maverick JANES VIEWER The AGM-65 Maverick comes in several variants. The AGM-65A/B/D AGM-65A reaching operational capability in 1972. Final delivery of models use a 125-pound shaped-charge warhead designed for some 5,000 missiles to the U.S. Navy occurred in 1994. The first combat antitank warfare. These models dive on the target in an effort to penusage was in Vietnam during January and February of 1973, scoring 13 etrate a tank's more vulnerable top armor. hits out of 18 launches. Israeli aircraft The AGM-65E/F/G variants, meanwhile, carry fired 50 Mavericks during the 1973 a larger, 300-pound warhead designed for Yom Kippur War, claiming 47 successes better penetration. The E/F/G versions are (42 hits and five near misses intended used primarily against fixed structures and to disable, not destroy, targets). In ships, with the F version aiming for the 1975, Iranian aircraft scored 12 hits out waterline of a ship. The different models of 12 launches against Iraqi tanks. use a variety of guidance methods. The More than 5,100 Mavericks were fired AGM-65A/B models are television-guided; in Operation Desert Storm, with offithe AGM-65C is laser-guided; the AGM-65D/F cial reports claiming approximately a models use IR guidance; and the AGM-65E 90 percent success rate for TVand IRuses an improved laser guidance system. guided variants and approximately a The Maverick has a long history. First test 60 percent success rate for the flights were conducted in 1969, with the AGM-65 MAVERICK Maverick's laser-guided variants. 270 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"TM V BASEBALL) NEXT GENERATION BASEBALL CORRECT! Congratulations, the answer is False. You obviously know your baseball and are exactly the kind of fan we made VR Baseball 2000 for. Complete In-game experience with heckling fans, PA announcer and players talking smack to one another. Here's the game baseball fans always wanted.  Powered by Shiny Entertainments exclusive \"MessiahTM\" technology.  Near photo-realistic detail. See muscles flex and jersey's stretch using player models with up to 3,000 polygons. The most current rosters and statistics for the 1999 season and the ability to download new stats so that you have the most current baseball game.  First game out for the 1999 season. RETRIES Check it out at: www.vrsports.com LIEL Available Summer of 1998 Loaded with stats and simulation features. Everything a baseball purist wants. Designed for   1 RP SPORTS 1998 Interplay Productions. VR Sports, VR Sports logo, VR Baseball and You Gotta Have Game are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Major League Baseball trademarks and copyrights are used with permission of Major League Baseball Properties, Inc. O MLBPA Official Licensee Major League Baseball Players Association Windows and the Windows 95 logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation Microsoft Windows 95 www.vrsports.com www.majorleaguebaseball.com www.bigloaguers.com SAD Go to #164 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"StarCraft Master the Terrans GAMER'S EDGE Marine Strengths: Marines, which are cheap and quick to produce, are great cannon fodder and antiair units. Put them in bunkers for excellent defense. If you use them on the offensive, always research the stimpack ability and the range upgrade. Without the range upgrade, they are at a terrible disadvantage against hydralisks and upgraded dragoons (when in bunkers, marines won't be able to fire back since those two units have better range). Also, since they deal normal damage to all targets and have a very fast rate of fire, they remain useful versus enemy infantry and heavy units. Marines, when paired with goliaths, make excellent air deterrents. They are good against mutalisks, but only if you research at least one armor upgrade and stim packs. Marines are also good as siege tank support. Terran Gege Tank Master Serge 46973666190/20 by Elliott Chin n our previous 3650 051130 two strategy articles, we discussed general tips. Here, we begin the racial breakdowns for STARCRAFT. This month, we start with the Terrans. The Terrans have perhaps the most versatile lot of units, COMBINED ARMS Terran units are designed to complement one with some quick and another. While marines might fall before heavier troops, a cheap infantry and a marine/tank/firebat combo is tough to beat. fair share of durable heavy hitters. Terran players must also always remember to make use of the SCV's ability to repair units. Terran mechanized units aren't as cheap as Zerg units, nor as durable as Protoss units, so the equalizer is their abil2 ity to be repaired. Terran players also need to remember to employ combined arms. Whereas Zerg players can get by with just hydralisks or mutalisks, and Protoss players can wipe out the opposition with just a few zealots, Terran players really need to build a force of complementary units. While it is certainly harder to coordinate, the Terran attack force, when composed of a proper mix of combined arms, can be devilishly hard to defeat. Now we'll break down each unit and its natural roles. When you're reading up on a particular unit's usefulness, make sure you take into account the type of damage it inflicts and the kind of target it is classified as. Read the \"Hints, tips, and other information\" folder in the STARCRAFT README.HLP See the Review file for a detailed list of the damage and JULY ISSUE. 5 STARS size type of each unit. e o Weaknesses: Marines are zealot fodder. Because they die easily, don't expect them to bail you out when hydralisks and zealots overrun your defenses. Marines are toast versus siege tanks, especially because they willingly stand in neat little clusters-easy siege tank targets. Marines have the following ability: Stim Pack: Using a stim pack costs 10 hit points to the unit, but doubles the unit's attack rate and speed for approximately 15 sec. onds. Use it on the offensive to make marines and firebats especially nasty. Since they die easily, you might as well give them a stim shot so they go down blazing. 212 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"STARCRAFT Firebat Strengths: Firebats are good for one purpose: burning through infantry. They are the Terrans' answer to zerglings and zealots. Their splash damage adds to their effectiveness. Employ them to stop zealot rushes. Research the stim pack ability and use that just before firebats meet the enemy so they can close the distance quickly. The firebats' attack is not canceled by a Dark Swarm. Also because they are melee units, they can attack tanks without being hit by the targeted tank. In addition to dismantling zergling and zealot attacks, firebats provide good ground support for siege tanks. Weaknesses: Firebats are ineffective against hard targets such as ultralisks and goliaths. They can't attack air units. You shouldn't use them for much besides taking down zealots, zerglings, Terran infantry, and hydralisks. AMER 'S EDGE Ghost GAMEPLAYOUT Strengths: Ghosts are best as support versus enemy Terrans or Protoss. They can neutralize all Terran and Protoss mechanized units, call down devastating nuclear strikes, and cloak themselves. Faced with the durability and overwhelming power of scouts, battlecruisers, and carriers, ghosts are the Terrans' best answer. Weaknesses: Ghosts are nearly useless versus the Zerg, since lockdown does not affect any Zerg unit. Also, ghosts deal plasma damage, which means they are do only quarter damage (2.5 damage per hit) to hard targets like tanks, ultralisks, and wraiths. Don't use them for much besides nuke calling and metal target lockdowns. energy can neutralize two enemy units. In many cases, the ghost's lockdown is the only thing that can negate a massive carrier or scout attack. Six ghosts, which cost a total of 600 resources, can effectively castrate an army of 12 carriers, which costs at least 7,800 resources. Cloak: Upgrade the ghost's energy so that a fully charged ghost can be cloaked and still fire off two lockdowns. Always cloak a ghost before it calls in a nuke. Call Nuclear Strike: Ghosts can also call down nuclear strikes. When you want to put this ability into play, make sure you first research cloaking and the sight-range upgrade. The ghost must sit for approximately 15 seconds before the nuclear missile strikes. During that time, he is vulnerable to attack. If the ghost is spotted while he is cloaked, place a defensive matrix on him with a science vessel to ensure that he lives long enough to call down the nuke. Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! GODZILLA ONLINE 60 96430 43166 www.godzillaonline.com Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Ghosts have the following special abilities: Lockdown: Lockdown freezes any mechanized unit and cancels any of its special abilities. Arbiters decloak all their surrounding units, carriers recall all interceptors into their bays, science vessels can't initiate abilities or even detect cloaked units. The duration of lockdown is approximately one minute. Lockeddown units can be attacked and cannot fight back. A ghost that has full GAMESTORM OF Gamestornu is a trademark of and Resorai is a registered trademark of Kesmal Corporation.GODZILLA and the GOOZILLA character and design are marks of TOHOCO,LID. The GODZILLA harcter and design are copyrighted works of The Co. Ltd. All are used with permission. 1998 Toho Co.Itd. 1998 Tristar Pictures, Luc. 1998 Centropolis Interactive, Inc. All Rights Reserved www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 LISA KESMAL MYTHIC\" INTERACTIVE STUDIOS INTERIAINMENT "


"REVIEWS FEATURES. PREVIEWS. READ.ME HARDWARE  GAMER'S EDGE The #1 Computer Game Magazine computer Gaming World GAME D 32 Reviews! Meal Puppet, IF-22, Dungeon Keeper, a The #1 Computer Game Magazine DON'T BUY A 3D CARD UNTIL YOU READ THIS! The #1 Computer Game Magazine Computer camin World The #1 Spa Sim Return 106 cm 27 REVIEWS JEDI KNIGHT, DARK REIGN, XCAR, STARFLEET ACADEMY The #1 Computer Game Magazine World 1801 Grab the rock-bottom rate other gamers would virtually DIE for! computer Gaming MONSTER Save 42% $27.94 One yearl 12 issues Like getting 5 issues free! HOLIDAY ISSUE 600 Packed Pages! TUGE Buyer's Guidel won, and More! Save 48% $49.97 Call 1-800-827-4450 Two years/ 24 issues Like getting 11 issues free! Powerpacked PCS et the Best From Dell, Micron, Gateway, Falcon we Test the B ZD "


"STARCRAFT small infantry and peon units. They cannot attack air units. GAMERSEDIGT Vulture Strengths: Vultures are excellent scouts. The good thing about them is they are only slightly more expensive than marines and can be repaired. Don't use them unless you research spider mines and the speed upgrade. With the speed upgrade, they are the fastest unit in STARCRAFT. A group of vultures can be a quick-response team in allied games to help bail out your buddy. Because of their superior speed, Terran players can engage in hit-and-run attacks versus zealots, firing and then running away, and almost never getting hit in return. However, this tactic takes considerable baby-sitting of the vultures. Definitely use vultures to lay down mines at choke points and near extra resource nodes. The mines won't be trig. gered by enemy peon units, but they will Feel nthe Lerror Siege Tank Strengths: Tanks are mediocre weapons in tank mode, but in siege mode, they are hands-down the most devastating ground attack. You must research siege mode if you intend to use tanks. Set them up out of the range of towers and bunkers and you can just raze enemy defenses with impunity. Remember that the siege tanks' splash damage in siege mode will harm enemy units in a Dark Swarm. Siege tanks in siege mode also make excellent defenses when you pair them with bunkers and missile turrets. Siege mode makes the tank immobile, but increases its range and bumps base damage from 30 to 70. While in siege mode, the tank also does splash damage. Unlike the firebat's splash damage, the siege tank's splash damage will hurt friendly units as well. Keep this in mind when you select targets. To make up for its increased range, a siege tank in siege mode can't hit targets right next to it. Weaknesses: Tanks can't attack air units, nor can they attack close-range targets when in siege mode. Thus, you must always provide them with escorts. Have firebats handy to take down zerglings and zealots (both of which destroy tanks with surprising ease) and also have either goliaths or plenty of marines for ground-to-air support. This sort of formation (tanks in siege mode with firebat support up front and marine/goliath support at the sides) is one of the game's most powerful combinations. Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! ATTENS LIENTIEND www.aliensonline.com act as nice spy units. Placing the mines at town entrances will not only alert you to attacks, but also take down some invaders as well. Each vulture gets three mines. Once they are deployed, the mines stay cloaked until they are triggered by a nearby target. Each mine does 125 normal damage. It affects ground targets only, but it injures all units in its area of effect. All ground units except peon units, archons, and other vultures will trigger a mine. Weaknesses: Vultures, like firebats and ghosts, deal plasma damage which is best against small infantry. Their otherwise impressive 20 base damage is reduced to 10 versus medium targets like hydralisks and 5 against hard targets like ultralisks. Use them only against GAMESTORM Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and kesmal is a registered trademark of Kesmal Corporation. Allenstand 1986, 1997 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. All righis reserved. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 275 KESMAL STUDIOS MYTHI ENTERTAINMENT "


"The #1 Computer Game Magazine Computer virtually DIE for! World Gaming other gamers would rock-bottom rate Grab the Knowledge Power 5 Free Issues! Save 42% $27.94-One year/12 issues. Like getting 5 issues FREE! (mine Gaming Packed Pages Save 48% $49.97—Two years/24 issues. A Like getting 11 issues FREE! AIR COMBAT Y EL-F-15! Call 1-800-827-4450 "


"STARCRAFT explosive damage, their effectiveness against mutalisks and scourges is diminished (half damage only). Don't rely on goliaths against Zerg air units. If you're facing scourges and mutalisks, use more marines. AMER'S EDGE Goliath Strengths: Goliaths are excellent antiair weapons. They are good against scouts, guardians, wraiths, transports, and other hard air targets. They also have a ground attack, which helps when they are defending islands. In those cases, they provide as much antiair support as a missile turret, but they can also field a good ground attack when shuttles manage to drop off ground attackers. Their range is good, being the same as that of a fully upgraded marine or a hydralisk. They provide excellent air support for siege tanks. Weaknesses: They are too expensive to use as ground fodder, so support them with marines or firebats if you expect zealots or zerglings to accompany an air attack. Because they deal out Dropship Strengths: Can carry up to eight slots of units. Terran infantry each take one slot, vultures and goliaths take two slots, and tanks take four slots. Weaknesses: They are slower than other transports once the other transports acquire speed upgrades. The Ultimate 0 Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! Wraith Strengths: Wraiths are good against hard air targets such as scouts, battlecruisers, carriers, and guardians. If you use them, you must research their cloaking ability, which makes them very useful. Without it, they are a waste of money. A team of cloaked wraiths can be hell against expansion towns. Send a group of them to patrol the map and strike down any new bases the enemy is erecting Destroy any cloak detectors first and then start attacking units and buildings. Weaknesses: These guys are pretty expensive for such weak units. They have few hit points and fall easily to scourges, scouts, and mutalisks. Moreover, their explosive air attack operates at half strength against mutalisks and scourges, Don't rely on them to combat those two units. Their ground attack is also pretty weak, so don't use them unless your purpose is cloaked harassment. TARSHIP TITILO SPICE www.troopersonline.com Terra Scene Vessel Datestor GAMESTORM. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm' is a trademark of and Kesmai is a registered trademark of Kesina Corporation Starship TroopersBanospace, Traderriak and Cooviglit 1908. Tri Pictures Inc and used under license by Resmi ARIES Ed. All ts reserved www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 217 Sony Online Entertainment KESMAL MYTHIC INTERTAINMENT "


"LinksLS 1999 Access Software adds to the LINKS legacy with St Andrews and more than 25 new features! #15 PARA OG Arnold Poliner New Features include: . Immersive tournament environment with on-screen galleries  New Courses: St Andrews Old Course, Arnold Palmer's Bay Hill, Entrada at Snow Canyon, and Latrobe Country Club in fall colors  3D objects on the terrain  Real-time internet voice chat  2 click, 3 click and «Powerstroke\" mouse swing options  Compatible with other available Championship Courses Over 25 new play modes  Create & Share your own play modes  Many more new features Swing Actual screen capture of St Andrews Old Course/Links LS 1999 Edition For more information, call 1-800-800-4880. Or visit us on the web at www.AccessSoftware.com Go to #079 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink TE St Andrews Actual screen captures of Bay Hill using Links LS 1999 Edition showing tournament environment SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ACCESS COMING FALL '98! Links 1990) 1999 "


"STARCRAFT MERISED G Science Vessel Strengths: Science vessels can initiate three special abilities. In addition, they can automatically detect cloaked units. Especially when fighting other Terrans it is crucial to have science vessels accompanying your air forces in order to detect cloaked enemy wraiths. Their special abilities are essential for victory versus Protoss and Zerg forces, so don't neglect the research and production of science vessels. Weaknesses: Since science vessels have no attack, you need to provide them with escorts. Plus, because of the short range of their abilities and their low hit points, they can be downed quite easily. Irradiate harms organic units only, so all Terran and Protoss mechanized units are immune, as is the archon. Use irradiate to eliminate clusters of hydralisks, mutalisks, guardians, and marines, all of which bunch up when they attack. You can also use this spell defensively by casting it on a mechanical unit that is under attack by melee attackers. Cast a defensive matrix to extend the mechanical unit's life, and then an irradiate on it so that it hurts all eligible, nearby units that are attacking it. EMP Shockwave: This ability completely drains all shields and energy in an area of effect. It's most effective when used against Protoss units (it effectively halves their hit points), but it's also useful for depleting the energy of queens and defilers before they can get off a broodling or dark swarm. Because dragoons, scouts, and carriers tend to bunch together when they attack, one EMP shockwave can affect an entire group of units. EMP fired into a suspected area of cloaked wraiths will also decloak the wraiths by robbing them of their energy (provided you strike the right place). EMP affects both units and buildings. If you are nuking a Protoss camp, EMP the target area just before the nuke hits. The EMP will rob the buildings of shields, and the nuke will then be able to destroy the targeted buildings. Join TOUR... Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! The science vessel has the following special abilities: Defensive Matrix: This ability bestows 200 bonus hit points on a single unit. Like Protoss shields, these bonus hit points take full damage from any attack, regardless of the type of damage dealt. The defensive matrix will run out after 90 seconds or until the 200 hit points are lost. Science vessels come equipped with this ability Irradiate: This ability poisons a single target and damages any units next to the afflicted unit. Irradiate drains 199 hit points at a rate of 6-7 hit points per second. Multiple irradiates will not accelerate the drain. Jackpocktaus 09236 037130 ONLINE GOLF TOUR www.jacknickonlinetour.com GAMESTORM Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark oland Kesmai is a registered trademark of Kesmu Corporation. Jack Nicklaus Isategistered trademark of Golden Bearintemational and used under license to Accolade Inc. 127997. All rights reserved www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 279 "


"The #1 Computer Game Magazine, Computer Gaming World POWER UP! Sometika PLAY TO WIN. SUBSCRIBE TO SAVE. HERE'S THE MOVE THAT'LL BLOWEM AWAY: CALL 1-800-827-4450 AND GRAB THE ROCK-BOTTOM la RATE OTHER GAMERS WOULD VIRTUALLY DIE FOR! 275+ BOTTOM Computers 38, SCOOP! World SPECIAL ISSUE! ter AIR COMBAT F-15! AUTO LOOK Jana & Amazon SED STATOS E PER PREMIER GRADINOSITON uyuintments "


"STARCRAFT Battlecruiser Strengths: Battlecruisers serve a highly specialized role. Always research their yamato cannon and energy upgrades and then use them to destroy towers and large ships like carriers and arbiters. On island maps, they are especially good, since siege tanks can't take down towers on islands. Battlecruisers are actually good deterrents to carriers, since the cruisers can go toe-to-toe against them. If you provide it with the proper escorts, a battlecruiser fleet can be a very formidable force. Weaknesses: With their slow rate of fire, they are especially vulnerable to multiple scourges and hydralisks. Escort cruisers with wraiths or have marines underneath. Also, don't rely too heavily on them for your main force. They are too expensive and too easy to destroy. Psionic storm, plague, and ensnare are especially vexing for battlecruiser owners. Thus, target high templars and defilers as soon as you spot them. GAIMERSEDAG The cruiser has the following ability: Yamato Cannon: The yamato cannon takes approximately 5 seconds to power up, after which it can deal 250 damage to a single target. REAL DOGFIGHTS, REAL BATTLES, IN 3D! Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! s you can see, the Terrans have some formidable units, but many require support to fully achieve their potential. While Terrans are the first race you are likely to play, they will probably be the last for you to master. But when you do, you will find them to be the most versatile race to play. Just remember to always think ahead, because the Terrans are at their worst when reacting. Whereas a Zerg player can crank out three hydralisks if they get surprised, or a Protoss player can muster some resistance with just two zealots, Terrans are really at a disadvantage if caught off guard. So make sure you master the art of combined arms and take the fight to your enemies. CGW The Perfect Counter AIR WARRIOR.III www.airwarrior.com hen playing the Terrans, you'll undoubtedly get trounced at least once by a horde of each unit type. Here are the best counters for all the units that could potentially end your reign. Problem Solution Zergling L.Firebats or bunkered marines Hydralisk Siege (mode) tanks, spider mines; irradiate Ultralisk -Restart the game Mutalisk Stim-packed marines and goliaths; irradiate Guardian ...Wraiths, goliaths, and/or irradiate Zealot. Firebats Dragoons. ..Lockdown and/or siege tanks Reaver ..Lockdown, air units High Templars Irradiate and/or siege (mode) tanks Scouts. Lockdown and/or cloaked wraiths Carriers ...Lockdown Archon EMP shockwave Siege (mode) tanks Wraiths and/or lockdown Battlecruisers... ...Lockdown Cloaked wraiths.. Scanner sweep, science vessels, lockdown GAMESTORM. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kesmai and Air Warrior are registered tradenarks of Kesmal Corporation. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 281 KESMAL "


"GAMER'S EDGE ips tips Tips Tops Tips Tips T TIPS CHEAT CODES HINTS WALKTHROUGHS Action Spec Ops aving trouble taking out the scuds in Korea or blowing up that news van in Honduras? Here's a cheat for you not quite-Rangers: First, press Alt-Shift-V. You should hear a clicking noise. Check your inventory, and you'll find a new item: the viewmaster. When you use the viewmaster the screen should flash blue and your Ranger will jump. The viewmaster not only makes your Ranger invulnerable, it also resets the timer every time you use it. Note that if you switch Rangers, you need to press the key combination again in order to obtain the viewmaster, -Thierry Nguyen Sansdi UNLERY Dot Strategy/Wargames The Operational Art of War yhen you try to create a new scenario, the good news is that you have a really powerful editor at your disposal. The bad news, however, is that you have a really powerful editor at your disposal...and it's easy to get overwhelmed by all the options. So, here are some brief tips to help you out:  If you've ever tried to create levels for most games (especially most 3D shooters), you'll be pleasantly surprised at how much the fill, draw, and blob functions simplify map making. I was able to create one map in less than 20 minutes, after a little practice. To create terrain features for your map, click on one of the 41 hexagon types, then click-anddrag. Don't worry about scale at first, because you can adjust the scale later by merely resizing the borders of the map.  Keep your first battle design simple. a Consider using 2D unit icons, especially if you've played boardgames before.  If you decide to use 3D symbols (yes, we know, the tanks are way cool), keep in mind that the 3D icons look like 2D on some scenarioeditor screens.  If you feel really cocky, you can use a bitmap editor to create your own icons. Just don't forget to distribute the modified files for your symbols to your friends, or they won't be able to play your scenario.  Creating forces is equally simple: You just pick a unit type and add squads, individual vehicles and guns, setting unit characteristics with a couple of clicks. You can create entire forma tions with the copy function, almost as if you were using a word processor. For your first few attempts at creating a scenario, don't mess with the climate or the triggers for theater-wide events. It's too easy to screw up a scenario until you have a feel for balance. Remember, the flow is very different from your average turn-based wargame.  The devil is in the details. This \"ground-up\" approach of creating a historical scenario from scratch requires extremely accurate Orders of Battle and Tables of Organization and Equipment. A little insight into troop quality and morale wouldn't hurt, either. For those of us without hundreds of battle books in our home collection, a valid library card is always a good idea. Good luck! Jim Cobb and Terry Coleman Monster Truck Madness 2 ere's a goofy trick to try: When driving past rivers or lakes, detour for a quick dip. You'll find that your truck continues to work even though it's completely underwater. The track announcer's voice will also be garbled, as if your sound card is submerged. --Scott May Army Men y advice when using the flamethrower is to stand still: you are, after all, made of plastic. But if you are invulnerable (see the cheat codes below), you can run while using the flamethrower by tapping the fire key and moving the joystick (or keypad, if you insist) in the direction you wish to go. To invoke the following cheats, hit Esc, then type the following codes: Kahuna ......You get Explosions, the Omniscient view, and Invulnerability Telekinetic........Lets you teleport Sarge anywhere in the gameworld using the scroll mode Note that these codes should work with the ARMY MEN cheats from last month's hints and tips article. -Terry Coleman COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"Forget the box. Forget limits. Forget small. The future of games is online. Massive. Random. Forever changing, Populated by thousands. Real people. Real battles. Real adventures. This is GameStorm. GAMESTORM. WWW.gamestorm.com The best massively multiplayer games. Virtually any networkable CD-ROM game. Award-winning editorial content. Thriving player communities. All in one package, for one price. Unlimited play. $9.95 monthly. First month FREE! KESMAI ENGAGE HEAT.NET entre este caso GAMESPOT games online su Warrior III. Aliens Online, Warcraft 119, Diablo, ClawTM, Virtual Featured games include: All the latest news, reviews, dzilla Online, Jack Nicklause Pool DescentTM, Splatterbally, QUAKETM I&II, NetFighter features, tips, downloads Dnline Golf Tour, Multiplayer Rolemasterim: Magestorm, Darkness Falls Hexen ||TM, Battlezonel, Total and more from the tle Tech\", Legends of Kesmai», RolemasterTM: The BladelandsTM Annihilation, Mech Warrior 2, Internet site named arship TroopersTM, casino, card, Caesar's Palace, Billboard Live WarCraft II. Postal ... and virtually \"Best Gaming Site\" nd board games...and more! Trivia... and more! any networkable CD-ROM game! by EntertainmentWeekly. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kesmai is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation, ENGAGE games online is a service mark of Games On Line, Inc. All rights reserved. SegaSoft HEAT and HEAL.NET are trademarks of SegaSoft Networks, Inc. GameSpor misa "


"Adventure RPG Black Dahlia Type in these codes when engaged in the appropriate puzzle: GAMER'S EDGE Simulation Leadhead ..........Solves stained-glass puzzle at museum Loghouse.........Opens cabin-shaped lockbox from Louie's loft Turnkey. Opens Louie's dresser Masterlock.. ....Opens Winslow's safe Ringding. Reveals the correct seal on the scepter at the museum Arthur Solves the table puzzle in the Raven's backroom Cancan. ........ ..Opens the door in the trance sequence Triangle Opens door to the Raven's backroom Pressure..............Opens the secret door near pressure gauges in sewers Barbell ...Opens second door in sewers Nimble Solves the candlestick puzzle in Raven's backroom Sunspot............Opens the planet-door at beginning of second act Tank Commander Speed kills!  At high speeds, there's no way you can quickly come to an absolute stop. This means that you'll lose the first shot advantage.  Often, you won't see enemy positions until they bang on your rear.  At high speed, the motor in your tank kicks out at the worst possible time.  Go too fast and you'll either outrun your support or collide with them while maneuvering.  Throttle speed five is the highest reasonable battle speed. Go faster only when evading barrages or air strikes and when trying to make the time limit. Rsk about his case. Ask about the forso killings. Ask about the Haven Room. Sports FIFA: Road to World Cup 98 hile in the player edit screen, change any player's name to one of the codes below to activate the following cheats: DOHDOHDOH URLOFUS XPLAY ... ..Crazy ball Invisible walls Hot potato Use Your Platoon! Your other tanks will do a lot of work for you if you let them. If you're up against a time limit, use the S and Shift-1, Shift-2 keys to have somebody else deal with harmless things like trucks or MG nests. Your job is to take out those killer antitank positions and, of course, to make it to the designated objective To make this work, choose the right formation. If there's high ground or cover to one flank, echelon toward it. In constricted terrain, form a wedge. Use a line only when you zero in on the last target.-Jim Cobb While we didn't experience any problems using these cheats, as always, we recommend that you back up your save game files (especially any FIFA RTWC 98 campaign) before trying these out. -Terry Coleman GO 1284 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 "


"Order Free Product Information @ www.computergaming.com/infolink computergaming.com/infolink ADVERTISER INDEX INFO# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE PAGE 279 180-181 118-119 265 279 277 8-9 86-87 210-211 248-249 248-249 278 2-3 29 120 120 243 80 76 79 261 232 234 236 230 105 233 106 271 177 220 166-167 218-219 12-13 38-39 60-61 73-75 24 287 232 106-107 106-107 190 209 94.95 85 137 4-5 177 53 68 154 145 87 276 276/116 228 279 115 277 158 116 111 92 257 3Dfx 3Dfx Voodoo 2 3DO CO. Requiem 989 Studios/Sony Interactive NFL Gameday '99 Access Software Links Extreme Access Software Links LS 1999 Edition Accolade 3Dfx Multi-titles Activision Activision's Civilization 3 Activision Heavy Gear 2 Activision Heretic 2 Activision Quake II MP2 Alienware Alienware Systems American Softworks Corporation Sanitarium ATI Technolgoies, Inc. Xpert @ Play Aureal Semiconductor A3D Bethesda Softworks Red Guard Blizzard Entertainment Starcraft BSG Intensor Survival Guide Chips & Bits www.cdmag.com/chips.html Creative Labs Sound Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Monster Sound Dreamworks Interactive Trespasser Earthlink Earthlink Network Eidos Interactive Commandos Eidos Interactive Commandos/Thief Eidos Interactive Deathtrap Dungeon Eidos Interactive Dominion Eidos Interactive Eidos Interactive Eidos Interactive Final Fantasy VII Eidos Interactive Gangsters Eidos Interactive Thief: The Dark Project Eidos Interactive Tomb Raider III empire Stars Falcon-Northwest Falcon Mach V Fox Interactive RC Racer Fox Interactive X-Files: The Game Fujitsu BioPunx Gravis Exterminator GT Interactive Software Blood II GT Interactive Software Emergency GT Interactive Software Retaliation GT Interactive Software Total Annihilation GT Interactive Software War of the Worlds Incredible Technologies Golden Tee Golf Interact Accessories, Inc. Interact Accessories Interactive Magic if-18E Interactive Magic Mal Kari Interactive Magic Spear Head Interactive Magic UltraFighters Intergraph Intense 3D Voodoo Interplay Alien Intelligence Interplay Baldur's Gate Interplay Fallout 2 Interplay VR Baseball '99 Kesmai Air Warriors 5 Kesmai Aliens 2 Kesmai Kesmai Gamestorm Gamestorm Kesmai Godzilla 4-5 97-99 288-289 157-159 197 68-69 8 9 C5-C7 253-260 18-19 50-51 41 46-47 44-45 42-43 48-49 109 26-27 194-195 126-127 INFO# COMPANY PRODUCT PRODUCT 197 Kesmai Jack Niklaus 4 Jack Niklaus 4 197 Kesmai Starship Troopers 3 246 LucasArts Entertainment Co. Grim Fandango 130 Mad Genius Gun Metal 100 Micron Electronics, Inc. Millenia 157 MicroProse Falcon 4.0 Falcon 4.0 Microsoft Motocross Microsoft Urban Assault Microsoft Windows WIN 98 Gaming ad 189 Mindscape Entertainment Division Team Apache 141 Monolith Get Medieval 142 Monolith Rage of Mages 143 Monolith Shogo Mobile Armor 94 Novalogic, Inc. F16 128 Novalogic, Inc. Mig 29 129 Novalogic, Inc. novaworld Gaming Services 118 Ocean/Infogames Independence War ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Alpha Centauri ORIGIN Systems, Inc Ultima Ascension Panasonic/Ripcord Enemy Infestation Panasonic/Ripcord Space Bunnies Panasonic/Ripcord Special Operations 140 Phillips Media USB Speakers 134 Piranha Interactive Publishing D ead Reckoning 137 Piranha Interactive Publishing Morpheus 268 Psygnosis Global Domination 260 QuickShot GenX 108 Real 3D Starfighter 199 Red Orb Entertainment Extreme Warfare 175 Red Orb Entertainment Warlords III: Dark Rising 229 Red Storm Entertainment Rainbow Six 270 S31 GX3 Launch 90 Sega Soft Vigilance Sierra On-Line Caesar III Sierra On-Line Grand Prix Legends 156 Sierra On-line Half Life 110 Sierra On-Line Nascar 50th Anniversary Sierra On-Line Quest for Glory 150 Sierra On-Line StarSiege Sierra On-Line StarSiege Sierra On-Line StarSiege 187 Sierra On-Line Tribes 126 Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance II SouthPeak Interactive Dark Side of the Moon: Gun Symantec NCI 2 242 Talonsoft Westfront 107 THQ Bass Masters Classic 152 THQ Brunswick Bowling 153 THO Red Jack Thunderseat Technologies Thunderseat  Total Entertainment Network PGL 205 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Recoil 160 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Sportscar Westwood Studios C&C Tiberian Sun 249 Westwood Studios Dune 2000 Westwood Studios Lands of Lore III 101 Yamaha Corporation of America Waveforce -1333351213 130  210 138 176 235 173 170 171 114 || 44674661 150004165164555 1996191581881916111 206-207 184-185 102-103 82-83 30-31 Q-C4,1. 188 198-199 160 263 110-111 246 246 6-7 202-203 174-175 90-91 59, 189,271 281 275 283 283 273 78-79 C8 151 144 80 192 122-123 64-65 64-65 125 66 178 14-15 138-139 251 104 56-57 56-57 214-216 226-227 162-163 222-223 22-23 234-235 231 233 142-143 121 241,243,245 113-116 20 67 165 36 205 149-152 132-133 16-17 146-147 183 154-155 212 lo 84 85 185 188 72 190 163 166 164 197 197 197 197 252 275 255 273 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 285 "


"MAIL ORDER MALL COMPUTER ZIFF-DAVIS INC GAMNG Chairman and CEO Eric Hippeau Chief Financial Officer Timothy O'Brien The #1 PC Game Magazine Presidents ZD Publishing Claude P. Sheer ZD Market Intelligence Bob Brown ZD Comdex and Forums Jason Chudnofsky ZD Brand and Market Services Terri Holbrooke ZD Internet Productions Dan Rosensweig ZD Education William Rosenthal ZD Television Larry W. Wangberg Senior Vice Presidents Rayna Brown (Human Resources) Daryl R. Otte (Planning and Development) Vice Presidents Steve Gladyszewski (Information Services) J. Malcolm Morris (General Counsel and Secretary) Mark Moyer (Controller) Tracy Nadi (Human Resources, Operations) Treasurer Thomas L. Wright Corporate Sales Joe Gillespie (Executive Vice President) ZD Media Network Jeff Bruce (Executive Director) Scott Murphy (Executive Director) Rita Burke (Executive Director) ZD Brand and Market Services Brooke Correll (Vice President, ZD Brand Marketing) Michael Perkowski (Vice President, Client Marketing) Elda Vale (Vice President, Corporate Research) Herb Stern (Vice President, ZD Brand Management) Gregory Jarboe (Director, Corporate Relations) ZD PUBLISHING MAIL ORDER President Claude P. Sheer Executive Vice Presidents Don Byrnes Chris Dobbrow Jack Dolce Al DiGuido Thomas McGrade Michael J. Miller Senior Vice President Nancy Newman Vice Presidents Bob Bader John Dodge Kathleen Goodwin Roger Herrmann Jonathan Lane Eric Lundquist Jim Manning Charles Mast James F. Ramaley Paul Somerson Mark Van Name Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone! Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director, Benchmark Operations Bill Catchings Director, ZD Labs Lauren Black Editorial Director, New Products Bill Machrone PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff Davis. Copyright  1998 Ziff Davis. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. If you want to quote from an article, write to Chantal Tucker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5802, or fax 212-503-5420. Local Stores don't always have the games you're looking for or the expert advice you need. Take a few minutes to browse the next few pages and shop with the courteous, experienced salespeople in Computer Gaming World's Mail Order Mall: ZD ZIFF-DAVIS a SOFTBANK company Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. Computer Gamit Reprints For reprints, please call Ziff-Davis reprints at (800) 825-4237. ABC AUDITED Audit Bureau of Circulations Member 286 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"\"MEET YOUR NEW GAMING SYSTEM ENGINEERS\" \"PERFORMANCE WAS SIMPLY STUNNING\" Appeal: Gamers looking for the fastest most reasonably priced gaming system -Computer Gaming World, Julu, 1998 PC GAMER EDITORS \"BOTTOM LINE: IF YOU'VE GOT THE MONEY TO SPEND THIS IS THE GAMING SYSTEM TO OWN\" CHOICE. -PC Gamer, January, 1998 boot FAST. PACKED, AND STACKED KIEK \"The Area51 set new records in our CPU/Motherboard ASSI. and hard drive tests, completely crushing anything PRODUCT We've seen to date\" -BOOT Magazine, July, 1998 Sprou. OPTIN . \"The AREA-51\" Intel Pentium II 450MHz MMX Intel 440BX Motherboard 512KB AAVID Cooling System 128MB SDRAM (PC-100) \"The GREY\" \"The HIVE-MIND\" 3.5\" Floppy Drive Intel Pentlum II 400MHz MMX Hercules Terminator 2x/l w/8MB Intel Pentium II 300MHz MMX with Intel 1740 Chipset 2X AGP Intel 440BX Motherboard 512KB Intel 440BX Motherboard 512KB Dual-Diamond Monster Voodoo Il's AAVID Cooling System AAVID Cooling System 64MB SDRAM (PC-100) 24MB (Scan-Line Interleave Mode) 64MB SDRAM (PC-100) 3.5' Floppy Drive 11.5GB Ultra-ATA Hard Drive 3.5\" Floppy Drive Hercules Terminator 2x w/8MB Iomega Internal Zip Drive 100MB Hercules Terminator 2x/i w/8MB with Intel 1740 Chipset 2X AGP Diamond Monster Sound MX200 with Intel 1740 Chipset 2X AGP Diamond Monster Voodoo II w/12MB SoundBlaster 16 PnP Diamond Monster Voodoo II w/BMB 11.5GB Ultra-ATA Hard Drive Cambridge Soundworks Microworks 6.4GB Ultra-ATA Hard Drive SoundBlaster AWE 64 PnP Subwoofer & Speaker System SoundBlaster AWE 64 PnP Altec Lansing ACS48 Powercube Hitachi 2nd Generation DVD Player Altec Lansing ACS45 Subwoofer & Speaker System ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt Subwoofer & Speaker System Power Supply (Dual-Fans) Toshiba 32X CD-ROM Toshiba 32X CD-ROM ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt KoolMaxx Video Cooling System ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt Power Supply (Dual-Fans) Power Supply (Dual-Fans) 104-Enhanced Keyboard KoolMaxx Video Cooling System Microsoft 2-Button Mouse KoolMaxx Video Cooling System 104-Enhanced Keyboard US Robotics 56 V.90 Fax/Modem 104-Enhanced Keyboard Microsoft 2-Button Mouse Microsoft Sidewinder Precision Pro Microsoft 2-Button Mouse Diamond Supra 56K V.90 Fax/Modem Microsoft Sidewinder Gamepad Dlamond Supra 56K V.90 Fax/Modem Windows '98 Operating System Microsoft Sidewinder Precision Pro Windows '98 Operating System Windows '98 Operating System Latest Drivers Installed Latest Drivers Installed Latest Drivers Installed Free Installation & Configuration of Free Installation & Configuration of Free Installation & Configuration of Favorite Games Favorite Games Favorite Games PRICE: $3,699.00 PRICE: $1,899.00 PRICE: $2,699.00 NEWI INTENSOR GAMING CHAIR add: $295.00 (substitute speakers) Quality Monitors 17\" Viewsonic V773.26DP add: $325.00 19\" Viewsonic V95 26DP add: $595.00 13396 Southwest 128 Street Miami, Florida 33136 Customize your own dream machine 21\" Viewsonic P810.25DP add: $1,050.00 Product names used in this publication are trademarks of their companies. Go to #105 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink ALIEN WARE PC Systems Toll Free: 1-800-494-3382 WWW.ALIENWARE-PC.COM "


"CHIPS & BITSINC. Great TOMB RAIDED Huge Selection POB 234 DEPT 11029 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Prices TOMB RAIDER III' Lara's off to even more exotic locations this time around, from the blistering deserts of India to the lush islands of the South Pacific. Now you can choose your own destiny by selecting the order in which you play each of the four different adventures. Revamped game engine, new reflection system, vastly improved Al, new special effects (rain, snow, fire, & more) Eidos (Action) $41.99 Release: 11/98 PC CD RELEAST PRICE 1943 Euro Air War 11/98 $45.99 30 Naval Battles 09/98 $48.99 AH-64D Longbow 2 12/97 $38.99 ATF 98 08/98 $46.99 Alt Warrior 3 12/97 $36.99 Babylon 5 09/98 $48.99 Brnout Champ Dragrcng 05/98 $39.99 Confirmed Kill 09/98 $42.99 Cyberstrike 2 09/98 $42.99 Dawn of Aces 11/98 $44.99 Deep Six 09/98 546.99 Evil Core Fallen Cities 11/98 $39.99 F-15 03/98 $38.99 F-16 Agressor 08/98 $48.99 F-16 Viper 09/98 $45.99 F-22 ADF 12/97 $44.99 F-22 ADF Red Sea Ops 09/98 $15.99 F22 Total Air War 07/98 $48.99 FLY 12/98 $46.99 JANE'S FIGHTER LEGENDS: EUROPE 1944' Fly the 7 beste fighters of WWII with unprecedented effects, terrain, & aircraft detail. Contains training missions, variable difficulty levels, a branching campaign, realistic flight dynamics. & sophisticated Al. Planes break apart, awesome crashes & explosions, with realistic clouds, smoke, & fire. Virtual 3-D cockpits with working dials, EA (Simulation) Release: 11/98 $47.99 PC CD Controllers ACT Powerramp Cont 04/08 $35.99 CH F16 Combatstick 11/95 $59.99 CH F16 Fighterstick 11/96 $84.99 CH Force FX 1295 $95.99 CH Jane's Comb! Sick 07/97 $69.99 CH Joystick Switchbox 11/97 $24.99 CH Pro Pedals 12/94 $79.99 CH Pro Throttle 03/96 $84.99 CH Virtual Pilot Pro 12/94 $75.99 COMPUTER GAMES: SIMULATION TITLE RRIAS PRIME RELEASE PRICE RELEASE PRICE Falcon 4.0 12/98 $5499 Mig Alley 09/98 $39.99 Starsiege 09.99 $459 Fighter Legends 11/98 $47.99 Monster Truck Madnss 2 06/98 546 99 Super Hornet 2000 07/98 $46. Flight Unlimited 3 11/98 $45.99 Moto Racer GP 2 09.98 $44.99 Super Touring Cars 09/98 5439 Flying Corps Gold 0298 $33.99 Motocross Madness 09/98 $44.99 TOCA Touring Car Chump 08/93 $45.9 Flying Nightmares 2 10/98 $39.99 Motorhead 07/98 $44.99 Team Apache 06/98 $46.9 Flying Tigers 09/98 $48.99 Nascar Racing 3 12/98 $47.99 Test Drive Off Rd 2 11/98 $44.9 FrontLine Fighters 08/98 $48.99 Nations Fighter Command 11/98 $35.99 Tie Fighters W/ Refrnce 09/98 $329 Grand Prix Legends 07/98 $44.99 Need for Speed 3 10/98 $44.99 Top Gun 2 Hornets Nest 09/99 $48.9 Gunmetal 0B/98 $42.99 Newman Haas Racing 08/98 $39.99 Trans Am Racing 68-72 09/98 $36.9 Gunship 3 11/98 $48.99 Panzer Commander 05/98 $48.99 WA.P.Israeli Air Fic 11/98 $449 Independence War 08/98 $46,99 Panzer Elite 11/98 $39.99 Warbirds 3D 11/99 $44.9 Jet Fighter Full Burn 06/98 $46.99 Phantom Ace 09/98 $48.99 Wing Comm 5: Prophey 12/97 $41.9 Luftwaffe Commander 11/93 $48.99 Recoil 11/98 $48.99 X-Com Interceptor 06/98 $459 M1 Tank Platoon 2 0 4/98 $39.99 SHOGO: Mobile Armr Div 11/98 $46,99 X-Wing Collector's Srs 06/98 $29 MS Combat Flight Sim 08/98 $48.99 SU-27 Flanker 2 04/99 $43.99 X-Wng V T W Binc Pue 09/98 $39.9 MS Flight Sim 98 09/97 $52.99 Scrmn Demons Europe 11/98 547 99 X-Wng v Tie Cmp 1 12/97 $24.9 MS Flight Sim Triple Pk 07/98 $17.99 Silent Hunter 2 09/98 $46.99 X-Wng y Tie Fghter 05/97 $46.9 MechWarrior 3 12/93 $52.99 Skies 09/98 $42.99 F-22 55.0 03/98 $35.5 MIG 29 10/98 $16.99 Sportscar Supreme GT 11.98 $47.99 F/A-18 CSF 07/93 $38.5 COMPUTER GAMES: HARDWARE Gravis Gip Stnd Alne 03/97 $69.99 Saitek R4 Racing Whi 10/98 $92.99 10/98 592.99R S ound Cards Sound Cards Gravis PC Gamepd Pro 11/96 $26.99 Saitek X-36 Cont Sys 65/99 S107.09 Diamond Monster MX200 06/98 $139.9 Gravis Xtrminatr Game Pd 06/98 $43.99 Saitek X-36T System 11/98 49.99 Sound Blaster PC164 05/98 $95.9 MS SideWinder FF Whi09/98 $149.99 Saitek X8-30 Cont Sys 14/98 $39.99 Turt Beach Montego A3DX06/98 $99.9 MS SdeWndr FrStl Pro Pd 09/98 $89.99 Space Orb 360 10/96 $4299 Mad Catz Andrtti Reng WI 08/98 $109.99 Suncom SFS Throttle 04/98 $89,99 Video Cards Mad Catz Panther XL 01/98 $62.99 TM F16 TOS 06/95 $114.99 Canopus Pure 3D 212MB 06/98 $3299 Saitek Cyborg 3D Jstk 09/98 $59.99 TM F22 Pro 10/96 5129.99 mnd Mnstr 3D II 12MB 06/98 $2699 Saitek Cyborg 3D Pad 08/98 $44.99 TM Fist Fighter 10/98 $58 99 Orchd Rghts 3D II 12MB 05/98 S289.9 Saitek PC Dash 04/98 $49.99 Thom Ent TSW 2 Wheet 67/98209.99 03D Obsdn2 PCITV 24MB 06/98 $6499 COMPUTER GAMES: ACTION Duality 10.98 $45.99 Messiah 0998 $45.99 Starship Troopers 12/98 $469 Flesh Feast 05/98 $36.99 Prey 12/98 $49.99 Starsiege: Tribes 1098 $435 Giants 12/98 $48.99 Quake 2 12/97 $44.99 Tomb Raider 2 11/97 $375 Gruntz 10/98 $34.99 Quake 2 Mission Pk 1-2 06/98 $2899 Tomb Raider 3 11/98 $41.5 Half Life 09/98 $48.99 Redneck Amp Rides Agn 05/98 $3999 Tomb Raider Gold 03/98 $25 Heavy Gear 2 02/99 $48.99 Requiem 09/98 $46.99 Trespass Jessic Park 09/98 3486 Heretic 2 12/98 $49.99 Shadowman 11/88 $49.49 Unrea 06/98 $396 Interstate 76 Arsenal 03/98 $38.99 Sin 08/98 $48.59 Unreal Level Pack 09/98 $249 Interstate 82 04/99 $48.99 SpecOps 04/98 847.99 Wrath 12/93 $48.5 Max Payne 11/98 $47.99 Star Trek Klingon Acadmy 10/98 $48.99 X-Com Alliance 12/98 $47.5 COMPUTER GAMES: SPORTS \"GRIM FANDANGO' You control Manny Calavera, who as travel agent for the Department of the Dead brings people to the Land of the Dead. Characters come to life as folk-art style skeletons in this adventure story of embezzlement & redemption. Inspired by film noir & Mexican folklore, the game features wildly exaggerated hot rods, more than 50 mysterious characters, & 90 locations, all in stunning 3-D Lucas Arts (Adventure) Release: 9/98 PC CD CORRIOTION BEL Battle One Blood 2 Citizen Kabuto DF Jedi Knight W/ Sith Daikatana Dark Fices Jedi Knght Death Trap Dungeon Descent 3 Descent Freespace Dethkarz 03/98 $43.99 11/98 $48.99 11/98 345.99 09/98 $48.99 11/98 $39.99 10/97 $46.99 06/98 $39.99 12/98 $48.99 06/98 $46.99 10/98 $42.99 $47.99 'SIN' As the leader of HARDCORPS sec-force, armed with an array of weaponry and pitted against mean and ugly mutants. you must infiltrate the drug circuit and bring it's master mind to Justice. Driveable vehicles, seamless multi-player gameplay over LAN, modem, or Internet. Quake 3D Engine enhancements include fog & water effects, translucent models, and improved physics. Activision (Action) Release: 8/98 PC CD $48.99 AMF Pro Bowl 3D 03/98 $19.99 Baseball Mogul 99 0 7/98 $28.99 Big Game Hunter 03/99 $19.99 Big Game Hunter Add-On 07/98 $15.99 Deer Hunter 02/93 $18.99 Deer Hunter Companion 06/98 $11.99 Deer Hunter Ext Seasn 05/98 $12.99 Expert Pool 11/98 $35.99 FIFA Road Wild Cup 98 12/97 $19.99 Game, Net & Match 07/98 $39.99 Super Match Soccer 08/98 $42.9 Supremo 98 08/98 $39.9 Tiger 99 08/98 S449 Tiger 99 TPC Courses 08/98 $18.5 Tiger 99 Tournament Crs 08/98 $18.9 Virtual Pool 2 11/97 $325 Virtual Pool 2 DVD 05/98 $45.5 Vitual Pool 2 W/Mase 05/99 $44.9 World Cup 98 05/98 $44.9 Worldwide Soccer 98 09/97 $39.C ritual ACOM 'DUKE NUKEM FOREVER' Duke is back and badder than before in this retooled sequel. Dr. Proton has taken over Area 51 & nuked Las Vegas. Making use of the Quake Il engine, the team at 3D realms promises not to disappoint with new weapons, new villains, and full 3Dfx support. Multiplayer options & incredible lifelike environments 20,000 Leagues 7th Guest 2 11th Hour 7th Guest W95 Abyss: Incidnt Europa Alien Earth Alien Intelligence Badlands Black Dahlia Blade Runner Crime Killer 09/99 548.99 11/95 $14.99 10/97 $19.99 08/98 34399 08/98 542.99 09.98 $45.99 10.95 $48.99 02/98 $39.99 11/97 $39.99 10/98 $39.99 SoutBringer Space Circus Star Trek Birth Fed Star Trek Kling Har Grd Star Trek SFA Mssn Str Trk Sort Vien Fry Wheel of Time X-Files Adventure Game Zork: Grand InstrDVD Zark Gend Inquisitor 11/98 $475 12/98 $44.5 12/98 $52. 11/98 $48. 04/98 $19.5 08/93 $48.5 12/98 $46.5 06/98 $48.5 12/98 $47.5 10/97 $39.5 Golden Tee Golf 98 08/98 $39.99 MS Baseball 30 06/98 $4499 Golf Pro: W/ Gary Player 04/99 $41.99 Madden NFL 99 09/98 $44.99 Golt Elite Collection 03/98 $19.99 NBA Live 99 11/93 $44.99 Hardball 6 04/98 $44.99 NCAA Football 99 09.99 $44.99 High Heat Baseball 04/98 $22.99 NFL Gameday 99 09/98 $42.99 Jack Nicklaus Golf 5 12/97 $35.99 NHL Hockey 99 10/98 $44.99 Knockout Kings 09/98 $44.99 NHL Powerplay 99 09/98 $44.99 Legends of FB 98 08/97 $38.99 PBA Bowling 2 10/98 $35.99 Links LS 98 07/97 $29.99 PGA Tour Pro 07/97 $48.99 Links LS 99 09/98 $48.99 Rocky Mtn Trophy Hntr 05/98 $18.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ADVENTURE Curse of Monkey Isle 11/97 $35.99 Myst 2 Riven 11/97 $35.99 Gabriel Knight 3 09/98 $48.99 Myst 2 Riven DVD 11/98 $47.99 Grim Fandango 09/98 $47.99 Nocturne 12/98 $46.99 Gruesome Castle 10/98 $48.99 Of Light & Darkness 04/98 $44.99 Heart of Darkness 08/98 $42.99 Omikron 01/99 $41.99 Homeworld 08/98 $48.99 Overseer 03/98 $34.99 Indy Jones Intel Mchne 02/99 $48.99 Prince of Persia 3D 05/99 $48.99 Journeyman Projet 3 02/98 $39.99 Quest for Glory 5 06/98 548 99 KO8:Mask of Eternity 12/98 $48.99 Redguard 03/99 $52.99 Morpheus 09/98 $44.99 Sanitarium 05/98 $39.99 HINT BOOKS Adventure Role Playing 20.000 Leagues Under Sea02/99 $17.99 Might & Magic 6 05/98 $16.99 Curse of Monkey Isle 01/98 $15.99 Revenant 09/98 $16.99 Gabriel Knight 3 09/98 $17.99 Thief Dark Project 10/98 $16.99 Homeworld 08/98 $16.99 Ultima 9 Ascension 12/98 $16.99 King's Quest 8 08/98 $16.99 Simulation Prince of Persia 3D 11/98 $16.99 All-64D Longbow 2 1 1/97 $1699 Quest for Glory 5 06/98 $16.99 Falcon 40 109/98 $16.99 Return to Krondor 01/99 $16.99 Mechwarrior 3 09/93 $16.99 X-Files Adventure Game 06/98 $16.99 Starsiege 09/98 $18.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ADULT Celebrity Nudes 01/95 $19.99 Diva X: Kaoru 11/97 $34.99 Crystal Fantasy 09/95 $39.99 Dream Machine 2 10/96 $49.99 Cyber Photographer 08/96 $29.99 Duke Screwem 12/96 $49.99 Dada House 02/98 $19.99 Fantascenes 4 06/98 $39.99 Devil in Miss Jones 12/93 $19.99 Femme Fatale 09/95 $29.99 Dirty Debutnt 6 Pk 04/96 $44.99 Fuzz Buzzers 09/96 $29.99 Diva X Ariana 01/96 $34.99 Girlfriend Donna 12/96 $39.99 Diva X NJ 11/97 $29.99 Girls of Spice 2 06/95 $19.99 Diva X Rebecca 08/96 $34.99 Jade Palace 09/96 $28.99 Diva X: Kanako 03/98 $34.99 Net Erotique 02/96 $35.99 Action GT Interactive (Action) Release: 12/98 $48.99 DUKE MUKEN FOREVER Daikatana Half Life Hexen 2 Lara's Book Prey Quake 2 PC CD 08/98 $17.99 06/98 $16.99 10/97 $13.99 05/98 $16.99 07/98 $18.99 01/98 $14.99 05/93 $13.99 06/98 $15.99 06/93 $15.99 Strategy Age of Empires Alpha Centauri Caesar 3 Dune 2000 Heroes M&M 3 MechCommander Rebellion SimCity 3000 Starcraft 01/98 $149 08/98 $16.9 08/98 $16.4 06/98 $17! 11/98 $16.9 07/98 $16. 04/98 $15! 09/98 $16.! 05/98 $15: Unreal Unreal Cnstrction Kit \"AXIS & ALLIES' puts you in the middle of realistic WWII action! Spearheading your country's military drive, you decide where & when to strike, & whether you make a strategic bombing raid, sneak sub attack, infantry attack, or anti-aircraft barrage. Buy armaments, develop Secret weapons, & take over territory. Solo play or up to 5 players over LAN, modem, or Internet. Hasbro (Strategy) Ace in the Hole Aladdin & City of Sin Arabian Nights Asia X BJ Babes Babe Patrol Beverly Hi Call Gts Busty Babes 4 Cabin Fever Car Wash Angels 10/97 $39.99 04/98 $32 99 03/98 $39.99 11/95 $29.99 01/98 $25.99 10/95 $1999 07/95 $12.99 11/95 $36.99 07/97 $34.99 09/97 $36.99 Nightwatch Int 3 Porno Poker Private Psr Park 2 Romsoft Six Pk 2 Ropes & Chains Sex With Farrah Space Sirens 2 Strip Fighter Strip Poker Pro 2 Virtual Valerie 2 0 7/96 $29.! 12,95 $36: 08/96 $44: 06/96 $29.: 02/96 $19 05/98 $42 09/95 $34 10/96 $39 12/95 $39 08/95 $32 1998 CHPS & BITS Release: 9/98 $43.99 PC CD COWW: "


"Releases New Releases Online Order Online www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 WEST FRONT. mization $35.99 Release: 8798 'WEST FRONT is a fast paced, platoon-level game of WWII tactical combat. Play in Campaign, random battle, or preset scenario Source Code 11029 format. New mission types & character proCOMPUTER GAMES: STRATEGY motions, new terrain features (N.Africa & RELEASE PRO T I RELEASE PAGE TITLE RELEASE PRICE TE RELEASE PRO Europe), 50 new scenar09.98 $42 99 Dominant Species 10/98 $45.99 Malkari 11/98 $44.99 Stars Twinpack 06/98 $27.99 ios, 8 new Campaign miral Sea Battles 11/96 $22.99 Dominion Storm 06/98 $35.99 Master of Magic 10194 $1499 Stratosphere 06/98 $46.99 games, & 16 player Empires Finl Congst 06.93 $18.99 Duel: Mage Wars 09/98 $48.99 Master of Orion 11/94 $1999 Tartan Army 11/98 $41.99 Internet LAN mode. Fullof Empires 1097 $41.99 Dune 2000 07/98 $39.99 Master of Orion 2 11/96 524 99 Theocracy 12/98 $42.99 function map & scenario of Empires 2 05/99 $48.99 Dungeon Keeper 2 1298 $45 99 MechCommander 06/93 $49.99 Total Annihilation 10/97 $19.99 editors let you create of Emprs Rise Rme 09/98 $29.99 Dungeon Keeper Gold 04/98 $39.99 Missn Fic:Cybrstom 2 06/98 $36.99 06/98 $36.99 Total Annihilation 2 12/98 $48.99 your own battles from a ha Centauri 12/98 $47.99 Emperor of Faung Suns 01/97 $18.99 Myth 11/97 $39.99 Total Annitn Cr Ctocy 04/98 $22.99 database of 500 equipPANZER-ASTA my Men 05/98 $34.99 Entrepreneur 10/97 $38.99 Myth 2 11/98 $43.99 Totl Annhlin Biti Tetcs 07/98 $19.99 ment & unit types $ & Allies 09/98 $43.99 Extreme Tactics 08/98 948 99 Populous 3 10/98 $45.99 Transport Tycoon Dix 09/95 $24.99 SC 2: Tiberian Sun 12/98 $48.99 Force Commander 11/93 $49.99 Railroad Tycoon 2 12/98 548.99 Tribal Rage 06/98 $34.99 $44.99 Talonsoft (War) SC Cavit Options 03/96 $19.99 Galactic Mirage 07/98 $44.99 Rainbow Six 08/98 $44.99 Uprising 10/97 $19.99 Release: 9/98 PC CD BC RA Cnter Strike 04 37 $12 19 Ginstels 11/98 $35.99 Reach for Stars 2 04/99 $48.99 Uprising 2 11/99 $46.99 SC Red Alert 11/96 $25.99 Global Domination 09/98 $39.99 Rebellion 03/98 $49.99 War of the Worlds 08/98 $44.99 sar2 09/95 $19.99 \"COMMANDOS: BEHIND ENEMY Guardians Agnts Jst 09/98 $46.99 09/98 $48.99 Rebellion W/ Sort Gde Warcraft 2 12/95 $25.99 esar 3 12/98 $48.99 Heroes M&M 2 11/96 $25.99 Ruthless.com 11/98 $4799 Warcraft 2 Add On 05/96 $19.99 LINES' This real-time combat pitalism Plus 05/97 $29.99 Heroes M&M 2 Exp Pk 05/97 $19.99 SWAT 2 07/98 $47.99 Wargames 07/98 $39.99 game stresses strategy & tactics ve Wars 11/96 $22.99 Heroes M&M3 11/98 $44.99 Settlers 2 Gold 04/97 $19.99 Warhmmr 40k Chs Gate 09/98 $44.99 over firepower. Advanced Al con 2 Fantasy Worlds 1997 $2499 Hollywood Mogut 12/97 $39.99 Settlers 3 09/98 $13.99 Warlords 2 Dix 09/95 $40.99 trols over 40 enemy vehicles & 2 Multiplayer Gold Ed 06:98 $46.99 Imperialism 2 11/98 $44,99 Seven Kingdms And Adv 06/98 $35.99 Warlords 3 08/97 $15.99 troops. Features 24 missions in 12/95 $19.99 incubation 1097 $38.99 Seven Kingdoms 2 11/98 $39.99 Warlords 3 Add-On 08/98 $29.99 N Africa & Europe, 6 commandos with unique abilities, 25 accuratemilization 2 03/96 $19.99 incubation Wilderness 05/99 $19.99 Siege 08/98 $35.99 Warlords 4 06/99 $48.99 wilization 2 Scen 11/96 $23.99 Industry Giant 04/98 $36.99 SimCity 2000 Spec Ed 04/97 $18.99 Wartom 05/98 $45.99 ly modeled weapons, 6 active onization 11/94 $22.99 Jagod Alinc Odly Game 09/96 $19.00 SimCity 3000 09/98 $54.99 Warwind 2 11/97 $34.99 cameras & shadow & light mmandos 08/98 $35.99 Jagged Alliance 2 09/93 $44.99 Small Soldiers 06/98 $28.99 Warzone 2100 01/99 535.99 BEND ENENY LINES effects. Multiplayer on LAN, intrict of Nations 11/98 546 99 Lords Realm 2 11/96 $19.99 Soldiers at War 05/98 $39.99 Wooden Ship Iron Ma 10/96 $29.99 Internet & Mplayer. ma New World Di 11/98 $19.99 Lords of Magic 12/97 $26.99 Eidos (Strategy) Star Control 4 10/98 $48.99 06/98 $26.99 Worldcraft 2 instructor 1097 $36 99 MAX 12/96 515 99 Star Trk Startit Comm 12/98 $48 99 Worms 2 01/93 $24.99 eatures 2 08/93 $39.99 MAX 2 06/98 $44.99 Starcraft 0498 $36.99 X-Com Apocalypse 08/97 $26.99 PC CD ik Reiga Futre War 1997 $39.99 MTG Duels Planeswalker 02/98 $26.99 Starcraft Expansion 07/98 $29.99 X-Com Terr frm Deep 03/95 $1699 wn of War 10:98 $39.99 Magic the Gathering 03/97 $15.99 Starcraft Insurrection 07/98 $19.99 X-Com UFO Defense 06/94 $18.99 MYTH II: SOULBLIGHTER' is the adlock 2 03/98 $42.99 Majesty Empire Darkinds 05/99 $48.99 Starcraft Retaliation 07/98 $9.99 X-Fire 08/98 $45.99 sequel to the hugely popular Myth: The Fallen Lords, & features SOULB LIGHTE COMPUTER GAMES: WAR an improved engine with animated 3-D models, 4x finer terrain 1st Airborne Normandy 08/98 $39.99 East Front 11/97 $39.99 People's General 10.98 $42.99 Tigers on Prowl 2 12/96 $41.99 de de Camp 2 0 1/98 $44.99 East Front Camp mesh, & new lighting model. New 03/98 $24.99 Semper fi 02/98 $33.99 V Victory Bundle 11/95 $27.99 tle of Britain 1940 11/08 $44.99 Great Bitles Hannibal 11/97 $34 99 Sid Meier's Gettysbro 10/97 $26.99 War Along the Mohawk 07/98 $28.99 special effects include 3-D fire, tegrnd Bull Run 0 5/97 $21.99 07/99 $46.99 Harpoon 4 Steel Panthers 2 ambient life, & powerful new 11/96 $19.99 War in East Rostov 04/98 $24.99 ttlegrnd Chickamagua 09/98 $43.99 Napoleon 1813 10/98 $42.99 Steel Panthers 3 11/97 $26.99 spells. Also includes improved 05/98 $39.99 War in Europe ttlegrnd Gettysbro 12/95 $18.99 Napoleon in Russia 05/97 $17.99 Steel Panthers Arsenal 05/98 $36.99 War in the East Crimea 04/98 $24.99 pathfinding, Al, & new units & terrain. More net fun with individual War Experience 10/98 $46.99 Oper Art Wr Exp Pk 1-2ea 08/98 $22.99 Sil Pnthers Cmp 1-2ea 08/96 $15.99 War in the East Izyum 04/98 $24.99 11/97 $42.99 se Combat 2 Opertionl Art of War 06/98 $39.99 Storm in the West 04/98 $33.99 War in the East: Klev & team rankings and in-game 04/98 $24.99 alliances. Bungie (Strategy) se Combat 3 12/98 $48.99 Over the Reich 11/96 $33.99 Tank Resistance 2024 05/98 $39.99 War in the East: Leningrad04/98 $24.99 Igons in the Mis! 05/98 $23.99 Panzer General 2 10/97 $33.99 Third Reich 10/96 $29.99 West Front 09/98 $44.99 BUNGIE PC CD BOARD GAMES DUNE 2000This multiplayer 30 RR & Robr Brons 12/94 $20.99 Battletech 4th Ed. 12/94 $21.99 Ferrocarriles Pampas 03/97 $16.99 Space Marine 11/94 $49.99 update of Dune II has translucent Fleet 01/95 $39.99 Bells of War 05/98 $42.99 Flat Top 12/94 $29 99 Spanish Civil Wars 0 6/98 $9.99 shroud effects and smoke trails, 058 5 April 12/94 $23.99 Blocks of War 06/98 $32.99 Hannibal 03/96 $32.99 Stonewalls Last Battle 08/96 $24.99 2000 real-time lighting, and particle anced Civilization 12.94 $25.99 Britain Stand Alone 01/95 $32.99 History of the World 12/94 $27.99 Storm Ovr Arnhem foli 12/94 $12.99 ALLES ALIVCLI GELD effect explosions. Play one-oncanced Squad Leader 12/94 $37.99 Britannia 12/9: $19.99 Knightmare Chess 2 06/98 $13.99 Sushi-Jalapeno War 06/98 $39.99 one on the internet or with 8 on a anced Third Reich 12/9: $38.99 Campaigns Civil War 02/95 $19.99 Lionheart 10/97 $35.99 They Met At Gettysburg 03/97 $31.99 LAN. All 27 missions have been ica 1880 10.97 $52.99 Circus Maximus 12/94 $11.99 Midway 12/94 $19.99 Tracks to Telluride 04/96 $36.99 updated and feature new FMV of Renaissance 12/96 $42.99 Colonial Diplomacy 01/95 $42.99 Napoleon's Battles 12/94 $24.99 Typhoon! 1941 11/95 $3799 mission briefings and cutscenes Kanders Generals 0 1/95 $32.99 Condottiere 01/97 $38.99 Panzerlitz 12/94 $18.99 Victory in Europe 01/95 $14.99 with 6 different actors. Repair or ent Empires 01.95 $29.99 Crisis Sinal 1973 09.95 $29.99 Piercing the Reich 09.95 $29.99 War of 1812 01/95 $34.99 sell structures & create teams to lanche. Insnltly 01/95 $27.99 Desert Fox Deluxe 12/96 $29.99 Rebels & Redcoats 2 0 4.95 $25.99 Warhammer 40K 11/94 $59.99 carry out orders & Alles 11/9: $39.99 Die Hanse 11/96 $39.99 Republic of Rome 12/94 $29.99 We the People 12/94 $29.99 Virgin (Strategy) tle for Africa 03/97 $32.99 Dinosaurs Lost World 01/95 $29.99 Saratoga 06/98 $24.99 West Front 12/94 $44.99 tles of Waterloo Release 8/98 11/94 $38.99 Emperors of Europe 0 5/96 $32 99 $39.99 Sink the Bismarck 12/94 $26.99 Wooden Ships Iron Men 12/94 $19.99 PC CD ROLE PLAYING GAMES \"FALLOUT 2 This sequel to the &D DM Guide 02/95 $20.99 Cyberpunk 2020 05/95 $17.99 Mage 2nd Ed 02/95 $21.99 StarWars Revised 01/97 $25.99 popular roleplaying game has a Inity Play HB 0498 $24.99 Deadlands Rutebook 10/97 $27.99 Mechwarrior 07/95 $13.99 Traveller 09/96 $24.99 new cast of mutants, droids, 15 & Equipment Guide 05/95 $16.99 Deva Spark 02/05 $8.99 MERP 2 Softcover 10/95 $16.99 Undermtn Trilogy 3 01/97 $7.99 ghouls, lizards, & flesh-eating Magica 4th Ed 08/95 $25.99 Earthdawn Companion 06/95 $14.99 Planescape Mon Comp 2 09/96 $14.99 Vampire 2nd Ed 02/95 $24.99 plants. It features improved of Cthulhu 02/95 $18.99 GURPS Rulebook 02/95 $20.99 Rifts 06/95 $21.99 Warhammer Fantasy 06/95 $24.99 Artificial Intelligence, a car, new Iden of Night: Vampre 11/96 $13.99 Heavy Gear 08/95 $25.99 Robotech 04/95 $11.99 Werewoll 02/95 $23.99 armor, & new weapons. Give ispiracy X 09/96 $21.99 Jovian Chronicles 04/98 $24.99 Shadowrun 2nd Ed. 12/94 $20.99 Wonders of Lankhmar 09/96 $7.99 strategic commands to your party manthyr: Empr of Elves03/98 $23.99 Macross 2 04/95 $11.99 Star Fire 3rd Edition 05/98 $17.99 Wraith 02/95 $24.99 members, tell them to heal themCOMPUTER GAMES: ROLE PLAYING selves, stay put, & even teach them new skills & abilities. chronox 11/98 $48.99 Lands of Lore 3 12/93 $48.99 tur's Gate 08/93 $46.99 Might & Magic 6 04/98 $37 99 Spend the specified amount on any in-stock software and choose one free Interplay (Roleplaying) 01/97 $34.99 Nox 12/98 $47.99 IBM game from the corresponding list. Request must be made at time of io 2 03/99 548.99 Rage of Mages 10/98 $44.99 order. Offer good on In-stock software only, while supplies last. Limit 2 per PC CD Ho Hellfire 12/97 $22.99 Revenant 10/98 $35.99 customer. Valid through 9/2/98. Seriis Mrrowind 07/98 $54.99 Septerra Core 08/99 $48.99 \"BALDUR'S GATE is set in the Quest 11/98 $44.99 Swords & Sorcery 09 93 $48.99 SPEND $60 Wages of War CD, Fable CD, Disciples of Steel CD, Bridge Olympiad 3.5 legendary Forgotten Realms cam1097 444 Thiet The Dark Pr: 10.99 $3599 SPEND $100 paign world. Features a transparlut 2 11/93 $48.99 Ultima 9 Ascension 12/93 $52.99 Realms of Arkania Trilogy Co, British Open Golf Co, Battlecruiser 3000 ent interface and gameplay that 1 Fantasy VII 06/98 $39.99 Ultima Online 09/97 $49.99 CO, Riddle of Master Lu CD Baloans uses a real-time modification of plore 09.98 $39.99 Ultima Underworld 2 12/92 $8.99 SPEND $200 the ADD rules system. There are Is Lore Gruns st 1097 $28.99 Wardry 8 11/93 $49.99 Master of Magic CO. Harpoon 97 CD, Wizardry Gold CD, Under a Killing ole over 60 monsters to fight, you Moon CD control a party of six each with 1. MC & Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD S8. Price, release, availability, shipping times unique abilities and personas Afer not guaranteed & are subject to change at any time. Hardware may require added S&H. Within 10 days defectives repaired or replaced at discretion. After 10 days the manufacturer's warrantee applies. All sales final. S&H calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. per order charge is charged once per order placed, the per item charge Standard Pronty Express Express Mail To Mall To harged once for each item ordered and the per shipment' charge is US MUS MST Canada The World rged once for each shipment we make to you. For each US order $10.00 2.100 23 Days 2 Day 1 Day Interplay (Roleplaying) 407 Days 2014 be allocated to a 12 issue subscription to Computer Games Strategy Plus. Per Shipment Per Order $125 Release: 8/98 I for details. $1.00 $5.00 $46.99 $13.00 $2.00 $0.75 $100 $100 $2.00 $200 $600 29 PC CD 98 CHIPS & BITS, INC Go to #068 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink CGW9982 $43.99 Release: 11/98 DUNE FREE GAME OFFER! ANST INGLAR NIE MATTIS CANE 10 $48.99 Release: 11/08 "


"CGW'S MONTHLY READERS' POLL ach month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of previous months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your feedback. 1 2 Access 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ACTION GAMES W GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 Quake II Activision 8.64 4.5 2 Quake Pack 2: Dissolution id Software/Rogue 8.60 5 3 Quake Pack 1: Scourge id Software/Ritual 8.60 4.5 4 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II LucasArts 8.49 4.5 5 Jedi Knight: Mysteries LucasArts 8.44 4 6 Tomb Raider Eidos 8.00 4 7 Quake id Software 7.98 8 Moto Racer EA 7.75 9 The Need for Speed SE EA 7.74 NIR 10 Tomb Raider II Eidos 7.73 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES NO GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 2 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts 8.19 2 1 The Pandora Directive 8.15 N/R 3 3 Blade Runner Westwood/Virgin 7.81 4.5 4 4 Twinsen's Odyssey Activision 7.65 5 5 5 Realms of the Haunting Interplay 7.46 4.5 6 5 Rama Sierra 7.43 4.5 7 8 The Neverhood DreamWorks 7.414 8 5 Last Express Broderbund 7.40 4.5 9 9 Circle of Blood Virgin 7.39 10 Zork Grand Inquisitor Activision 7.27 N/R JACK TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 1 You Don't Know Jack 2 Berkeley Systems 8.34 4.5 2 2 You Don't Know Jack 3 B erkeley Systems 8.09 4 3 3 You Don't Know Jack Movies Berkeley Systems 7.96 4.5 46 Worms 2 MicroProse 7.73 4 5 5 Smart Games Challenge 2 Smart Games Inc. 7.70 5 6 4 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems 7.58 4.5 7 7 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 7.57 2.5 8 Shanghai Dynasty Activision 7.38 3 98 Power Chess Sierra 7.31 NR 10 9 Lose Your Marbles SegaSoft 6.74 4.5 TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT COMPANY SCORE RATING 1 1 Longbow 2 EA 8.495 2 2 Wing Commander: Prophecy Origin 8.43 4.5 3 4 F-22 ADF DID 7.98 4.5 4 F-15 7.76 4.5 5 5 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 7.72 4.5 6 6 Fighters Anthology 7.65 3.5 7 8 Flight Unlimited 2 Looking Glass 7.50 4.5 8 M1 Tank Platoon MicroProse 7.43 3.5 9 7 Flight Sim 98 Microsoft 7.35 3.5 10 9 X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter LucasArts 7.16 35 EA FIFA THXKOESTI TOP SPORTS GAMES GAME COMPANY 1 FIFA Road to World Cup 98 EA Sports 2 1 Links LS Access 3 2 NHL 98 EA Sports 43 NBA Live 98 EA Sports 5 Jack Nicklaus 5 Accolade 6 4 NASCAR Racing 2 Sierra 7 5 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 8 6 NHL 97 EA Sports 9 9 Diamond Mind Baseball 7.0 Diamond Mind 10 7 NBA Live 97 EA Sports SCORE RATING 8.59 4.5 8.58 5 8.55 4 8.30 4.5 8.19 8.155 7.945 7.86 4.5 7.84 3.5 7.83 4.5 TOP STRATEGY GAMES STOLAS GAME COMPANYADO SCORE RATING 1 1 Heroes It: Price of Loyalty New World Computing 8.95 BI 2 StarCraft Blizzard 8.75 3 3 Heroes 11 New World Computing 8.60 4 4 Red Alert Virgin/Westwood 8.55 5 5 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood 8.24 6 6 Total Annihilation GT Interactive 8.22 7 7 Age of Empires Microsoft 8.04 8 8 Civ II: Scenarios MicroProse 7.94 9 9 Civ II: Fantastic Worlds MicroProse 7.93 10 10 Jag Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech 752 4 COMPANY TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES HE GAME SSCORE RATING 1 Might and Magic VI New World Computing 8.77 4.5 A2 1 Diablo Blizzard 8.55 4.5 3 2 Fallout Interplay 8.26 4.5 4 3 Hellfire Sierra 8.04 54 Daggerfall Bethesda 7.08 4.5 6 Shadows Over Riva Sir-Tech 6.56 N/R 7 5 Lands of Lore II Westwood 6.25 N/R 8 6 Meridian 59 3DO 5.41 3.5 9 7 Ultima Online Origin 4.82 1.5 10 Battlespire Bethesda 4.02 N/R S TOP WARGAMES GAME 1 1 Steel Panthers Camp. Disk SSI 2 3 Steel Panthers Il Camp. Disk SSI 2 Panzer General II SSI 4 4 Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis 5 5 Steel Panthers II 6 7 Battleground: Napoleon TalonSoft 7 6 Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft 8 8 Battleground: Bull Run TalonSoft 9 10 Tigers on the Prowl II HPS 10 9 Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft SCORE RATING 8.44 4 8.43 45 8.435 8.1945 8.07 7.89 4.5 7.88 7.80 7.774 7.76 5 290 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Games on unnumbered lines are tied with game on line above. * = Top game of genre. Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP = Role-Playing, SI = Simulation/Space Combat, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports, CP = Classic Puzzle. Games are retired after two years and become eligible for the Hall of Fame. * * eta THIS LAST GAME MO. MO. PUBLISHER 1 1 1 Heroes It: Price of Loyalty New World Computing 2 Might And Magic VI New World Computing 3 StarCraft Blizzard 14 3 Quake II Activision 5 6 Heroes II New World Computing 4 Quake Pack 2: Dissolution id Software/Rogue 5 Quake Pack 1: Scourge id Software/Ritual 8 FIFA Road to the World Cup 98 EA Sports 9 7 Links LS Access 10 12 NHL 98 EA Sports 8 Diablo Blizzard 8 Red Alert Virgin/Westwood 13 10 Longbow 2 EA 11 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces Il LucasArts 15 12 Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI 29 Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith LucasArts 17 15 Steel Panthers II Campaign Disk SSI 14 Panzer General II SSI 18 Wing Commander: Prophecy Origin 2016 You Don't Know Jack 2 Berkeley Systems 21 17 NBA Live 98 EA Sports 22 19 Fallout Interplay 23 20 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood 24 25 Total Annihilation GT Interactive 25 Jack Nicklaus 5 Accolade 25 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts 20 Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis 28 22 The Pandora Directive Access 23 NASCAR Racing 2 Sierra 30 28 You Don't Know Jack 3 Berkeley Systems 31 27 Steel Panthers II SSI 32 32 Hellfire Sierra 32 Age of Empires Microsoft 34 31 Tomb Raider Eidos 35 34 F-22 ADF Novalogic 36 Quake id Software 37 37 You Don't Know Jack Movies Berkeley Systems 38 34 Civilization II: Scenarios MicroProse 38 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 40 42 Civilization II: Fantastic Worlds MicroProse 41 43 Battleground: Napoleon In Russia TalonSoft 42 40 Battleground: Shiloh Talonsoft 43 39 NHL 97 EA Sports 44 55 Diamond Mind Baseball 7.0 Diamond Mind 45 40 NBA Live 97 EA Sports 46 44 Blade Runner Westwood/Virgin 47 45 Battleground: Bull Run Talonsoft 48 47 Tigers on the Prowl 11 HPS 49 F-15 EA/Origin 46 Battleground: Antietam Talonsoft GAME SCORE RAFON ST 8.95 5 RP 8.77 45 ST 8.75 5 AC 8.64 45 ST 8.60 5 AC 8.60 5 AC 8.60 45 SP 8.59 45 SP 8.58 5 SP 8.55 4 RP 8.55 45 ST 8.55 45 SI 8.49 5 AC 8.49 45 WG 8.44 4 AC 8.44 4 WG 8.43 4.5 WG 8.43 5 S 8.43 45 8.34 4.5 8.30 45 RP 8.26 45 ST 8.24 4 ST 8.22 4.5 SP 8.19 5 AD 8.195 WG 8.1945 AD 8.15 NR SP 8.15 5 CP 8.09 WG 8.07 4.5 RP 8.04 4 ST 8.04 45 AC 8.00 4 SI 7.98 45 AC 7.98 5 CP 7.96 ST 794 4 SP 7.94 5 ST 7.93 4 WG 7.89 WG 7.88 5 SP 7.86 4.5 7.84 3.5 7.83 45 AD 7.81 45 WG 7.80 4 WG 777 4 SI 7.76 45 WG 7.76 5 THIS LAST GAME/ MO. MO. PUBLISHER 51 48 Moto Racer EA 52 50 The Need for Speed SE EA 53 63 Worms 2 MicroProse 52 Tomb Raider 11 Eidos 55 48 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 56 61 Smart Games Challenge 2 Smart Games Inc 57 F1 Racing Simulation Ubisoft 58 53 Twinsen's Odyssey Activision 51 Fighters Anthology EA 60 54 Triple Play 98 EA Sports 55 Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft 62 58 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems 63 71 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 57 Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin 65 Battlezone Activision 66 59 Jack Nicklaus 4 Accolade 67 60 Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech 68 77 Flight Unlimited 2 Looking Glass 69 63 Realms of the Haunting Interplay 72 Myth Bungie 71 62 Interstate '76 Activision 83 Virtual Pool 2 Interplay 73 M1 Tank Platoon MicroProse 63 Rama Sierra 75 67 The Neverhood DreamWorks 76 63 Last Express Red Orb 77 70 Dungeon Keeper EA Bullfrog 69 Circle of Blood Virgin 79 Shanghai Dynasty Activision 80 63 PGA Tour Pro EA Sports 81 89 Steel Panthers III SS! 73 Flight Simulator 98 Microsoit 83 74 Tripleplay 97 EA Sports 76 Achtung! Spitfire Avalon Hill 85 78 Power Chess Sierra 82 Age of Rifles Campaign Disk 551 87 Zork: Grand Inquisitor Activision 88 78 MDK Playmates/Shiny 89 88 X-COM: Apocalypse MicroProse 90 85 Lords of the Realm Il Sierra 91 Grand Theft Auto ASC Games 9 2 81 Baseball Mogul Infinite Monkey 86 Obsidian SegaSoft 94 90 Leisure Suit Larry 7 Sierra 95 87 Close Combat: A Bridge Too Far Microsoft 96 95 X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter LucasArts 97 93 Imperialism 551 98 97 FIFA 97 EA Sports 99 83 Star Wars Rebellion LucasArts 92 FPS Football Pro '97 Sierra GAME SCORE RAPE POLL AC 7.75 4 AC 7.74 NIR CP 773 4 AC 7.73 4 51 7.72 45 CP 7.70 SP 7.66 5 AD 7.65 5 S! 7.65 3.5 SP 7.62 3 WG 7.6245 CP 7.58 45 CP 7.57 2.5 AC 7.57 45 AC 7.54 5 SP 7.53 5 ST 7.52 4 Si 7.50 45 AD 7.46 45 ST 7.46 45 AC 7.44 45 SP 7.44 45 5 7.43 3.5 AD 7.43 4.5 AD 741 4 AD 7.40 45 ST 73945 AD 7.394 CP7:38 3 SP 7.3735 WG 7.333 SI 7.33 3.5 SP 7.32 4 ST 7.325 CP 731 NR 7.314 AD 7.27 NR AC 7.25 45 ST 7.24 4 ST 7.234 AC 7.202 SP 7.19 4 45 AD ST SP ST SP 7.18 7.17 7.16 7.15 7.11 710 7.10 3.5 4.5 3.5 45 4.5 3 45 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 291 "


"HALL OF FAME WELCOME TO THE COOPERSTOWN OF COMPUTER GAMES. Games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. Alone in the Dark (I-Motion, 1992) Lovecraftian horror goes 3D, with shifting camera angles adding to the creepy atmosphere. King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) Redefined the graphic adventure with new parser and VGA graphics. Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) WWII sim with great campaigns, realism, and many crew-member options. The Bard's Tale (EA, 1985) Pioneered three-point animation, 3D color mazes, and automapping. Lemmings (Psygnosis, 1991) The lovable cartoon Lilliputians were hits on every platform TIE Fighter (LucasArts, 1994) Most satisfying Star Wars space-combat game to date lets you live on the dark side. Battle Chess (Interplay, 1988) The Franklin Mint of computer chess games, with violent and funny animation disguising a solid chess engine. Links 386 Pro (Access Software, 1992) Topped the leader board in graphics and realism for its era. Ultima III (Origin Systems, 1983) Coherency and surprising subtlety emphasized role. playing, and set the tone for later ULTIMAS. Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, 1993) As rich and imaginative as Raymond Feist's world itself. M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Realistic sim that properly focused on armored formations rather than on single vehicles, good mission designs. Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) The Cadillac of castling, it gets better with each version. Master of Magic (MicroProse, 1994) The atmosphere of MAGIC: THE GATHERING with the sophistication of Civ. Ultima IV (Origin Systems, 1985) High-concept RPG explored meaning of virtue and put the role in role-playing. Ultima VI (Origin Systems, 1990) RPG as morality play, replete with moral choices and realistic environs. Command & Conquer (Virgin/Westwood Studios, 1995) Moved beyond Dune Il with innovative features and multiplayer play, ushering in the current real-time strategy game explosion. Master of Orion (MicroProse, 1993) Remarkable diplomatic Al; deep and varied technology tree, aliens required radically different playing styles. Ultima Underworld (Origin Systems, 1992) The first truly 3D RPG, and still the most convincing; its dungeon walls were nicely \"painted with texture. mapped graphics. Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts, 1993) Offbeat sequel to MANIAC MANSION the interactive equivalent of a classic Chuck lones cartoon Mech Brigade (SSI, 1985) Improved KAMPEGRUPPE System for modern armored battles. War in Russia (SSI, 1984) More realistic than EASTERN FRONT, it captured the essence of the largest land campaign in history. DOOM (id Software, 1993) Revolutionized PC action games and network gaming: now surpassed in technology, but not gameplay MechWarrior 2 (Activision, 1995) A serious treatment of Mech design and resource management, combined with complex and addictive battles, legitimized \"giant robot simulations. WarCraft II (Blizzard, 1996) More cerebral than most real-time strategy games, it offered deceptive depth and personality to spare Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Trend-setting graphics, digitized stereo, and great hackand-slash from a decade ago. Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) First-person, maze-based RPG with huge environment and tough combat. Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Derived from Mike Stackpole's Mercenaries, Spies, and Private Eyes, this is the definitive postapocalyptic RPG. Earl Weaver Baseball (EA, 1986) Revolutionary physics-based baseball game pleased both action and statistics fans; still unsurpassed more than a decade later. M.U.L.E. (EA, 1983) A landmark multiplayer strategy game that had no weapons of destruction, just cutthroat competition that made economics fun. Wing Commander (Origin Systems, 1990) A hot spaceflight engine, unfolding story path, and great characters. Empire (Interstel, 1978) wwil in space, this mainframe transplant brought elegant mechanics, depth, and unending replayability to the PC. Panzer General (SSI, 1994) Entertaining wargame with an elegant interface, great campaigns, strong Al good graphics, and impressive sound. Wing Commander 11 (Origin Systems, 1991) Darker story, grittier feel, sound card advances, and tougher Al made this a sequel of sequels. F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) A \"thinking man's\" sim, with great missions, in which sneaking around is as fun as dogfighting. Wing Commander III (Origin Systems, 1994) Surprisingly satisfying FMV space-opera didn't lose the essence of the space-combat game. Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) Tough, detailed jet sim with ambitious Al, graphics, and connectivity to match its realism. Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) wwi air combat with great graphics, incredible realism, and a versatile replay feature. The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts, 1990) Comedy that set new standards in writing quality and social sensitivity. Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Defined the computer RPG with maze-based viewpoint and atmospheric spell names. Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix, 1993) Physics-based system, good Al, and unmatched career play make this the ultimate in pigskin play. Sid Meier's Civilization (MicroProse, 1991) CGW's #1-rated game of all time; indescribably addictive world-conquest/exploration game. Wolfenstein 3-D (id Software, 1992) Smooth-scrolling action blastfest cleverly updated the original, and put shareware back on the map. Gettysburg: The Turning Point (SSI, 1986) First variable order of battle changed the look of all American Civil War games on the PC. Sid Meier's Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Combines pirate adventure, action, RPG, and strategy to make the most successful hybrid of all time. X-COM (MicroProse, 1994) Premier tactical squad-level engine combined with alien tech research and pop culture for a sci-fi game nearly as addictive as CIVILIZATION. Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Great character continuity, R&R for fatiqued pilots, and even sick leave; best chopper fare until Jane's LONGBOW. Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) SimCity meets 1830 with robber barons for emphasis. You Don't Know Jack (Berkeley Systems, 1996) Fresh and irreverent, JACK turned trivia gaming on its collective ear to become the first mainstream CD-ROM with a gleeful gameplay bite. Harpoon (360 Pacific, 1989) In-depth modern naval battles in real-time, based on the world's Cold War fears. SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Urban planning with fascinating consequences and challenges, the first great software toy. Kampfgruppe (SSI, 1985) Its WWII East Front armor battles were a success on multiple platforms. Starflight (EA, 1986) Depth, great characters, and a good sci-fi storyline set early RPG standard. Zork (Infocom, 1981) The progenitor of adventure games on the PC, its humor and challenging puzzles seem timeless. The game has since spawned a number of sequels, none of which has equalled the original. 292 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"CGW ONLINE GameSpot: CGW's Home on the Web Turn to GameSpot For the Fastest Online News and Reviews in Gaming iff-Davis has combined the talent and expertise of Computer Gaming World, GameSpot, and ZDNet to bring you the best gaming resources on the Web. Whether it's the latest game demos, breaking reviews, detailed strategy articles, hot scoops, or online forums, you'll find everything you need to stay on the cutting edge. G A M E S If you're looking for the fastest online news and reviews in gaming, turn to the experts at GameSpot. Here's a brief overview of what you can expect on GameSpot over the next few weeks. To see these articles and others, point your browser to http://cgw.gamespot.com. COMMANDOS / W A HEDEMD  PC Workshop het LogCare' Siret Strategy Guides Even expert gamers need help with a game from time to time. That's why when we do a strategy guide at GameSpot, we don't sell you short. For the hottest games, GameSpot's editors try to provide you with all the help you need, from start to finish. Through this commitment, GameSpot has built a solid reputation for providing the best strategy guides available for free anywhere on the World Wide Web. Now, we've taken these great strategy guides and put them under one roof. It's called GameGuides.com (www.gameguides.com) and it's a one-stop shop when you need help Quala love Quake Arena Quake The Red them available for download! For a mere $4.95 (through a secure transaction site) you'll get a bookquality guide—fully searchable and printable-right on your hard drive. A full assortment of official strategy guides will also soon be available, so be sure to bookmark this new site. Designer Diaries Have you ever wondered what's going on behind the scenes while those muchanticipated games are in development? GameSpot's Designer Diaries follow the progress of game designers like Jane Jensen, embarking on her third GABRIEL KNIGHT game for Sierra On-Line, and Tim Schafer, who's currently working on GRIM FANDANGO for LucasArts. Tom Hall also gives GameSpot readers regular updates about ANACHRONOX, the new game he's developing at ION Storm, and Brian Reynolds, the lead designer of SID MEIER's ALPHA CENTAURI writes about how that project is coming along. And there's more, so check out the Designer Diaries on GameSpot Mieresor Golf 1011 Eetlen G RAMS Top Five Danies Diga ove isit GameSpot for demos, hints, tips, strategy guides, and more for the games covered in this issue. Just enter www.gamespot.com into your browser to find the following gaming essentials: Workshop Demos and Patches: SPEC OPS MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2 SANITARIUM TEAM APACHE F-22 AIR DOMINANCE FIGHTER COMANCHE GOLD EXTREME TACTICS INDUSTRY GIANT JANE'S F-15 STARCRAFT CHRONX DEER HUNTER DIE BY THE SWORD BLACK DAHLIA GRAND THEFT AUTO SHADOW MASTER TRIPLE PLAY 99 ULTIMATE RACE PRO WARBREEDS Strategy Guides: STARCRAFT DEER HUNTER ARMY MEN se contact with the games you're playing. Through GameGuides.com you can access GameSpot's library of great, online strategy guides. We've also taken a select few of those guides, redesigned them, and made Demos GameSpot has the most thorough and regularly updated game demo libraries on the Web. You'll find demos of many of the games that we've reviewed recently, including SPEC Ops, MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2, SANITARIUM, TEAM APACHE, COMANCHE GOLD, EXTREME TACTICS, INDUSTRY GIANT, and more. CGW www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 293 "


"READMED managers are never forgiven for shipping a low quality product, even if it was on time. I had hoped that ULTIMA IX was going to change all that and restore our ship by the next summer at all playing ULTIMA IX right now and costs. The crazy part of this story is loving every minute of it. Oh well, that it was the right decision at who knew? the time. MERIDIAN 59 was As a member of the ULTIMA: already in public beta test and we PAGAN team, how did you feel all figured that if ULTIMA ONLINE about CGW's description of the didn't make it out by summer it game as ULTIMA: MARIO? wouldn't make a big splash in the thought it was an accurate industry. Besides, we knew that description of the game. The irony ULTIMA IX could ship anytime and is, that's the game the team set be successful. So we presented a out to make. We wanted to create stiff upper lip and went onto the game with more physical puzzles ULTIMA ONLINE project. \"I feel that the Not everyone came back (to direction being taken with ULTIMA: ASCENSION is terrifyingly similar to the one we took to design ULTIMA VIII\" Continued from page 35 ULTIMA IX core team went over this with a fine-toothed comb, and we decided, along with Richard and Warren, that we should get back to the original ULTIMA design formula. ULTIMA IX was going to be a game inspired by ULTIMAS IV and VII and nothing else. When think of that game design I get chills; it was going to be awesome. Our development plan was pretty simple; the old ULTIMA VIII team split into two parts. One group was going to develop CRUSADER while the other group designed ULTIMA IX. When CRUSADER was finished they would come back to ULTIMA IX and we would put world building and other tasks into full force. The problem was this: CRUSADER ran late and when it finally shipped no one came back to ULTIMA IX! A full year into our development we suddenly discovered we had no team to imple. ment the design. Things weren't all bad, however, because Electronic Arts had given Origin a mandate to make sure that the ULTIMA franchise was reestablished by ULTIMA IX, no matter how long it took. Over a long period of time, the new ULTIMA IX team was built. [The team) rebuilt our skills to include 3D graphics and Windows 95. By the summer of 1996 the team was in full production mode and we were finally making steady progress on our schedule. The basic design that gave me chills was still there. Everything changed because of ULTIMA ONLINE. In December 1996, the ULTIMA IX team was told that everyone (save two programmers) was to begin work on ULTIMA ONLINE immediately following the Christmas holidays. ULTIMA ONLINE had been upgraded from a small research project to a corporate strategic title by Electronic Arts, and it needed to ULTIMA IX]. Some were fired, and some, including myself, resigned before returning to the project. Others stayed on ULTIMA ONLINE. Many more resigned shortly after returning to the project after reali zing how the project's direction had drastically changed while we were on ULTIMA ONLINE. Of the original 23 team members, only 11 are still on the team. Of those 11, 7 are artists (which is why ASCENSION looks so fantastic). None of the original designers, save Richard Garriott, remains on the team. Only one programmer remains on the team who worked on ULTIMA VIII. Most importantly, none of the original ULTIMA IX team management remains. The most contributing factor that changed ULTIMA IX is this extremely high turnover. [In] hindsight, there were no big-splash online only games at E3 that year. ULTIMA ONLINE could have taken an extra year to get really clean and stable and no one in the industry would have beaten them to the punch. The ULTIMA IX team would have remained intact, and you would probably all be and less conversa tion than ULTIMA VII: THE BLACK GATE or ULTIMA VII: SERPENT ISLE. The design was inspired largely by PRINCE OF PERSIA. One thing you must remember about ULTIMA VIII is that it was the first product released from Lord British Productions (a producer group at Origin headed by Richard Garriott) after Electronic Arts bought Origin. The team's goal was to ship ULTIMA VIII by fiscal year's end. We achieved that goal, but at the cost of the product's quality. I know now that project fans' confidence in the product. To be honest, I don't know what will happen and I won't try to predict it. ULTIMA: ASCENSION will certainly be very different that what ULTIMA fans expect I feel that the direction being taken with ULTIMA: ASCENSION IS terrifyingly similar to the one we took to design ULTIMA VIII. CGW COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ON THE CG-ROM Reach for the Stars This Month's CG-ROM Has Something for Gamers of All Stripes 100110 44. 0 1001 200111 0112 QUE How to Use the Disc The CD is Autoplay-enabled and should begin when you load it into the CD-ROM drive. Otherwise, select Run from the Program Manager in Windows 3.x, or Start Menu in Windows 95, and type D:\\RUN-ME (where D is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) to run it straight from the CD. You may type D:\\INSTALL to create a CGW program group on your Windows desktop for future fun. Many demos require the disc to be in the CD-ROM drive in order to run; therefore, we recommend installing the demos from our disc. 0212001100110 0131002 If you haven't bought into the STARCRAFT craze yet, here's your chance to check out the five-star, CG-Choice-winning real-time strategy game. CGW managed to secure this exclusive, five-mission prequel campaign that sets the stage for the full game. If you prefer more action with your sci-fi, then you'll probably want to load up the demo for DESCENT: FREESPACE, one of the better space sims out there. Action aficionados should also check out DIE BY THE SWORD and Spec Ops. And for strategy gamers who aren't into sci-fi, we have COMMANDOS and LIBERATION DAY. Sports fans can see how England and Brazil stack up in WORLD CUP 98, and adventurers can play a dashing corsair in REDJACK: REVENGE OF THE BRETHREN. Finally, if you want some entertainment during your coffee break, fire up the cute shareware game Pop! THE BALLOON PUZZLE GAME. How to Get the CD-ROM To subscribe to the CD-ROM version of the magazine, call (303) 665-8930. If you already receive the magazine without the CD, you must wait until your current subscription expires before receiving the CD version. Please address subscription complaints to cow@neodata.com. Neodata is a magazine fulfillment house which is not owned or operated by Ziff-Davis. September CD Titles PRODUCT NAME PLATFORM DIRECTORY EXECUTABLE W95 W95 W95 W95 W95 WORLD CUP 98 W95 C&C Tiberian Sun AVI Commandos Descent: Freespace Die by the Sword DirectX 5.2 Earthlink opt 1 Earthlink opt 2 Flight Unlimited Il patch Liberation Day Overseer patch Pop! RedJack Sanitarium SpecOps StarCraft World Cup 98 W95 W95 W95 W95 W95 tiberian sun commandos freespace die by the sword directx earthlink 1\\win95 earthlink2lwin95 fu2 upgrade liberation day overseer patch pop redjack sanitarium patch spec ops sc_cgw world cup 98 sizzle.mov commandos.exe fsdemo10.exe dbts_demo.exe dxsetup.exe setup.exe setup.exe fu2upgrade.exe Idaydemo.exe tex5b101.exe installpop.exe redjack.exe sanipatch1.exe so_demo.exe setup.exe wc98_english.exe W95 W95 Disappointed with the World Cup results? Put your own soccer skills to the test and see what kind of performance you turn in. W95 W95 W95 DESCENT: FREESPACE STARCRAFT COMMANDOS: BEHIND ENEMY LINES ION How do you suppose DESCENT fares in space? See for yourself in this demo. Play the prelude campaign of one of the best real-time strategy games ever. Eidos' latest real-time tactical game offers unique gameplay in a WWII setting. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1998 255 "


"Girl Trouble Or, a Philosophical Meandering on the Merits of Polygonal Butt Jiggle unenlightened, mouth-breathing pig (I took drama classes in high school), and visited the SegaSoft booth, where I had my picture taken with the latex-clad VIGILANCE babes. Here's the deal, though: I admit that not only do not even know what this game is, or care, but I also didn't even bother to find out while I was in their booth. All I did was stand in line with the other sheepishlooking losers and get my picture taken. Then I moved on. Since can honestly say I'll never play this game, the question is: Did they get what they wanted? Elsewhere at the convention, was treated to an enthusiastic demonstration of SPACE BUNNIES MUST Die, an amusing-looking my female friends in the industry, or female gamers in general, deal with this stuff. You really have to hand it to them for sticking around. Because if the tables were turned, we couldn't handle it. As soon as some group of women designed a first-person shooter with a male protagonist-let's call him, say, Dirk Manhandle-prancing around in a butt thong, shaking his tuhkus, we'd flee from our computers ASAP and find the nearest baseball game or car to repair. We wouldn't play this game for one minute, lest anyone see us do it or, even worse, we found ourselves actually enjoying it. What I really want to say to any woman, girl, or gril reading am a guy. clothes back on and calm down. I hope this doesn't II come as too much of a Let's take, for example, the shock to my friends and recent Electronic Entertainment members of my family. Expo in Atlanta. Here we have a who presumably stopped convention dedicated to showing questioning my gender off the latest, cutting-edge comaround the time I turned puter technology-a monument 30 and-aware of impending to human scientific, mathematic. sag-1 finally gave up on the and creative thinking yet the hot-pants-and-halter-top look. As a gamer, I'm glad I'm a guy. Because, as a guy, I constantly get to have my baser instincts satisfied by the incessant pandering of the computer gaming industry. Exhibit A: Lara Croft's breasts. Actually, let's make that Exhibits A and B. The thing is, we don't really need to catalog all the examples, do we? JEFF GREEN Because there are so many of them and we all know what they are. It just seems to me that the knuckle-dragging, frat-house mentality of game designers and publishers is reaching a fever atmosphere of the show resempitch of late, and I'm not sure bles nothing so much as an auto what it means. All I know is, I'm industry convention circa 1950. If suddenly seeing polygonal cleav it wasn't enough for you that age wherever I look, and, after every other game on the show looking many times (because it's floor featured jiggly half-naked my job, as a journalist), I've female protagonists, you could decided that I'm offended. always just ogle the jiggly halfPlease, everyone, let's all put our naked booth babes, whom the game companies hired to entice dolts like me into heading their way. And you know what? It half worked. As part of my research for this column, I went deep undercov Another lousy editorial assignment. er as a typically All I know is, I'm suddenly seeing polygonal cleavage wherever I look. TOMB RAIDER-style action game that might be cool, if for nothing else than the fact that Bo Diddley and the Reverend Horton Heat are on the soundtrack. However, rather than focusing on elements like-oh, I don't know-gameplay, a huge portion of the demo was spent demonstrating how the female protagonist's butt jiggle was more \"fluid\" than Lara Croft's. This was a feature. This was important. This was something a programmer spent time on. This was supposed to make me like the game. And you know what? It half worked. this magazine, then, is this: I'm sorry. We suck. I'm glad that you're hanging in there, forming guilds, writing Web 'zines (try www.grrlgamer.com for a great one), and generally not hating our guts. Okay? Thanks. All right, so much for that. Are we alone again, guys? Cool. Yo, bro—have you checked out the legs on that FORSAKEN chick? Mama! Somebody hose me down here! CGW What Jeff doesn't realize is that his blatant attempts to reach out to female gamers, while still embracing his fundamentally sexist viewpoint, are as transparent as they are pathetic. Go ahead and call him a girlyman at jhgreen@zd.com. III I'm kidding, but I'm not kidding. Honestly, I don't know how Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744.6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis, Inc. One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one-year subscription (12 issues), Canada and all other countries add $16.00 for surface mail. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World P.O.Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80328 7167. Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT. Canada Post International Pub's Mail Product (Canada Distribution) Sales Agreement No. 1058649. Periodicalspostage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Printed in the U.S.A. 296 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"DON'T LET COMMANDOS SNEAK UP ON YOU. "


"FINS G ER MAXI CU S You send in your nautical expert to singlehandedly remove a gunboat from the Nazi fleet. He will prove invaluable to you in all your naval operations. Burcha TREAD Visurga Fatbarla Glasare Not always satisfied with being the getaway driver, you allow Tread to hone his skills in close combat. He considers it R&R. VORES * Zil phang 531bN Alina RUS Monit ch COMMANDOS: Behind Enemy Lines and Eidos interactive are trademarks of EIDOS Pic. 1997-1998 Eidos. All Rights Reserved. Harry Noviona Gronia Tiad SPOOKY Your finest draft pick, this former French spy master leads a raid on an unsuspecting Nazi U-Boat. Use him widely for infiltration and sabotage missions. Colonia Agrii Sendunum BUS Contato Imbrate YOU CONTROL EACH COMMANDO THE DIRTY HALF DOZEN Play the DEMO! Buy the game! www.eidosinteractive.com "


"DUKE Call in your sniper to weaken enemy fortifications and expose this Nazi stronghold to a weapons raid. To him every Nazi looks like the one that took out his family. 050 Iron n You send in your pyro lovin' munitions expert to take out enemy mobile missile capability. Apparently, there's plenty of dynamite to go around. INFERNO Calandri Calisia TINYiminale When the going gets tough, you send in your fiercest warrior to finish the job. Tiny takes out a communications center without the usual supporting cast. GO TO casts I RI rochu COMMANDOS B E HIND ENEMY LINES \"A real-time strategy sleeper.\"—Computer Gaming World. \"Excellently rendered terrain and brilliant AL make this a fantastic combat simulation._Gamespoti Go to #276 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Experience A World Beyond Imagination UiTMA A S.CENSION The Fantasy Gaming Masterpiece www.ultima-ascension.com AATING ORIGIN We create worlds Copyright 1998 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ulum), ORIGIN. We Create Worlds and associated logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Ine. In the U.S. and'r other countries. All rights resenied. Origicha an Electronic Arts company. "

