March 1989

Number 57

Features
Decisive Battles of the Civil War, Vol. III

4

SSG Wraps Up Its ACW Series / Joe Sherfy

In Harm's Way

12

Tactical Naval Warfare in the Pacific / Lt. H. E. Dille

Twilight Zone Hints

14
17

Neuromancer

20

Grand Prix Circuit

PSS' Game of Magical Mayhem / Ken St. Andre

45

23

Departments
26
28

New World's Game of Monstrous Mayhem / Scorpia

Sorcerer Lord

43

An Autocross Champion Takes the Wheel / Charles Ardai

Access' Game of Mechanized Mayhem / Ronald F. Williams

Might & Magic II

40

Caveman Ugh-lympics

Mindscape's Game of Motorized Mayhem / Adam Sherwin

Heavy Metal

37

Cro-Magnon Comedy on Your Computer / David Wilson

An Addictive Arcade Game / Charles Ardai

Road Raider

Strike Fleet Strategy Notes

Interplay's Game of Matrix Mayhem / Douglas Seacat

SSI's Long Awaited Napoleonics Game / Jay Selover

Tower Toppler

34

ASW Tactics in "Strike Fleet" / Lt. H. E. Dille

Scorpion's Tale Provides a Signpost Up Ahead / Scorpia

Battles of Napoleon

The Legend of Blacksilver
An Epyx Confrontation / Douglas Seacat

32

Inside the Industry
Letters
Taking a Peek
Rumor Bag
Back Issues
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

5
6
8
11
53
55
55
56

Review

T

he final volume of SSG's innovative series of American
Civil War simulations covers the period of the war from May,
1864 to April, 1865. In fact, all of the pre-designed
scenarios are for battles fought prior to the end of 1864. The
scenarios include: Wilderness, Spotsylvania, Cold Harbor, Atlanta,
Franklin, and Nashville.
In essence, the game system has remained unchanged from
Volume I. Players are cast
in the role of the field commander of either the Northern or Southern army and
given the task of taking (or
holding) important field objectives and destroying
enemy formations. The
game system is built
around the chain of command which existed historically. As the field commander, players issue commands for offensive or
defensive action and particular objectives to their
subordinate corps commanders. These, in turn,
take care of passing them
on to the lower level commanders. The ability of the
commanders at each level
of command will determine
how quickly the orders are
carried out. Losses are
reflected in a unit's loss of
cohesion to the point at
which it is no longer an effective fighting force.
At the same time that the
player issues commands to the corps commanders, it is possible
to issue direct orders to any brigades within a four hex radius. In
addition, a commander can take over the duties of issuing commands directly to the divisional commanders, should he so
desire. All of this helps to recreate the historical situation confronting the field general. The commander has to decide which part of
the battlefield is most critical and take direct command of it. Of
course, another successful ploy is to determine which commanders are better and can be left on their own and which need
the player's direct involvement.

Offensive Bombardment (Critique)
Probably the biggest drawback to DBACW III is the time period
it seeks to cover. As the war came to a close, the battles in the
East saw a determined Southern command dug in to fight to the
last man. Consequently, the scenarios in DBACW III are not the
same wide-open affairs to be found in the previous two volumes.
In addition, it would be nice if the game contained an order of
battle for each scenario. It
is tedious to access the
design system and write
down this information
before each game, but if
one doesn't, it is possible
to be almost completely unaware of what forces he
has or reinforcements to expect. Another welcome addition would be specified
by Joe Sherfy
levels of victory for each
scenario rather simply accumulating more victory
TITLE:
Decisive Battles of the American
points than one's opCivil War—Volume III
ponent. One way to get a
Wilderness to Nashville
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, C-64/128
better idea of a real victory
VERSION
is to let the computer play
REVIEWED:
C-64/128
a scenario against itself five
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$40.00
to ten times and average
DESIGNERS:
Roger Keating
the results. This should tell
Malcolm Power
how well the scenario is
Ian Trout
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Studies Group
balanced and give a better

The End of the War
SSG's "Decisive Battles of the
American Civil War: Volume III

General Commendations
DBACW III and its unique play system has much to recommend
it. First, the game is flexible. If one doesn't want to play within the
confines of the command structure, the system allows one to
take complete control of his forces. It is possible to play with all
units visible or with the fog of war built in according to special
sighting rules. Second, the game comes with a powerful design
kit which allows players to design their own scenarios or alter existing ones. For example, this reviewer modified the Gettysburg
map in DBACW II in order to add the Sherfy House. This house
stood on the battlefield across from the Peach Orchard and was
actually occupied by both sides on the second day of the battle. It
was necessary to add our family's claim to historical fame to the
scenario. Perhaps more important to actual play, it is possible to
vary the likelihood that reinforcements will arrive and hence, add
extra suspense to a given scenario. Third, once a player tires of
the scenarios available in the package, SSG's own Run 5
magazine has new scenarios which extend the lives of all their
games. For this series, try the South Mountain scenario. Finally,
one of the great aspects of the game is the length of time it takes
to play a scenario. One can come home from work and finish a
game in just a couple of hours.

Walnut Creek, CA

idea of success.

19th Century Command School
So, how does one better one's chance of winning? First, as in
most SSG games, it is important to review the friendly troop information prior to the game and check the types of weapons
each unit will be using. This will come in handy in situations
where a commander has the opportunity to assault an adjacent
enemy unit. For example, since each type of rifle is rated for its effectiveness in melee and in simple firing, it is usually wiser for
smoothbore muskets (rated 6 for melee and 2 for firing) to assault an adjacent unit of rifled muskets (rated 6 for melee and 5
in fire effectiveness respectively) rather than standing and trading
volleys.
In longer scenarios, it is wise to take one's time in planning
major assaults. With the enemy in prepared defenses, it pays to
coordinate an attack. For example, the wise Union commander
in the Spotsylvania scenario will let three divisions march around
the Confederates' left flank while he moves up artillery to soften
the Confederate center. Then, when the flanking troops are positioned on the Po River, he can attack the center and left flank at
the same time. One should also check the ratings of the corps
commanders and decide who is good and who might need to
have direct control from the player.
It is also useful to double-check the artillery pieces' range to
make sure the targets are in range. Some pieces can fire three
hexes and others can fire five hexes. In the longer scenarios particularly, one can really hurt one's chances by attacking positions
without first using cannon from long range to soften up the
enemy.

Disposition
DBACW Volume III is successful because it stresses realism
without sacrificing playability. DBACW has brought it all together
with a highly playable game which allows the player to determine
which variables are most important. While I would recommend
that the uninitiated start with Volume I or II of DBACW, the third
volume is a must for anyone with a genuine interest in the war or
who simply likes a tough challenge.

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
software will enable the
defense contractor " . . . to
build trainers at a fraction of
the cost of traditional military
simulators."

Court Reverses
"Karate Champ"
Decision
On November 30, 1988,
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals overturned the 1987
ruling where U. S. District
Court Judge William Ingram
had ruled that Epyx must
stop reproducing World
Karate Championship because it was substantially
similar to Data East's
Karate Champ and "Qualitatively identical in every
respect." In reversing
Ingram's opinion, the appellate court found no infringement in the World Karate
Championship game and
upheld the right of game
developers to create and distribute products that express
the same ideas, even if there
is, of necessity, some
similarity.
Commenting on the
decision, Epyx CEO David
Morse asserted, "We are
pleased that we were able, in
this case, to stop Data East
and others with similar intentions from setting a damaging precedent that would
have an adverse effect on
the software business for
producers and customers
alike.

Phil Handley, Product
Manager for Perceptronics
and a former United States
Air Force F-15 wing commander, suggests, "With
their low cost, we expect the
military to acquire multiple
trainers and place them in
strategic locations to provide
readily available training to
all personnel."
simulator to be produced by
Perceptronics, Inc. of
Woodland Hill, CA.,
developers of network tank
simulators and precision
gunnery training simulators
for TOW and DRAGON antitank missiles. The simulator,
called the ASAT" (Avionics
Situational Awareness
Trainer), will be based on
the Falcon A.T. software
originally developed as an
entertainment product.
There will be seven different trainers including a
Basic Tabletop Trainer, Advanced Instrument and
Emergency Procedures Cockpit Trainers, and Cockpit
Trainer with a Mini-Dome.
Each trainer will have full
color displays, high-fidelity
stick and throttle, and
capability for scenario
review, as well as userprogrammable flight and
weapons parameters. In addition to these features, up to
a dozen of the ASAT trainers
can be networked so that entire flights of pilots can hone
their team skills.

Falcon A.T.
Invades
Pentagon
Sphere, Inc., the parent
company to the Spectrum
Holobyte division, has announced an agreement to
produce software for a
military flight training

According to Sphere CEO
Gilman Louie, using
aAFsthebi.lfocrTn

Accolade
Promotes "Test
Drive" Sequel
With Support
Products
At press time, CGW
received word that Accolade
was expected to announce
the release of The Duel: Test
Drive II for both the Amiga
and IBM on March 1, 1989.
Better graphics than the
original Test Drive were
promised, including a sequence where players actually drive off cliffs. Players will
be able to drive a Ferrari F40 or Porsche 959 with the
basic product. At the same
time as Test Drive II ships,
however, two supplementary
disks will be released (at
$14.95 each). One is Super
Cars which contains data
files for driving a 1988 Lotus
Turbo Esprit, Ferrari Testarossa, Porsche 911 RUF,
1988 Lamborghini Countach, and 1989 Corvette ZR1 (the actual car was not unveiled until its European
debut in February of 1989).
The other product is the

California Challenge, a border to border race down the
coast of California in six different "legs." One leg features terrain surrounding the
"Trees of Mystery" and
another offers the drive between San Francisco and
Carmel. With all three
products released together,
the company expects The
Duel: Test Drive II to live up
to the potential
demonstrated in the original
Test Drive.

Epyx Awaiting
Word On
"Infogrames"
Acquisition
On November 15, 1988,
Epyx announced an agreement in principle in which
the U.S. software publisher
would purchase all of the
outstanding stock of Infogrames, S.A., the French
software publisher. Although
the basic agreement has
been reached, the deal must
still be officially approved by
both Epyx' and
Infogrames' boards of directors, Infogrames'
shareholders, and the
French government itself.
The French company had
revenues of eight million dollars in its last fiscal year and
has sixty employees in three
different divisions. Cobra
Soft, Ere Informatique,
and Infogrames are the
three divisions and labels
under which the company
markets software. At the current time, the French company is reported to be the
largest developer of entertainment software in France.
Under the current understanding, Infogrames will
produce, at least, six new titles for worldwide distribution
under the Epyx brand name
prior to the end of 1989.

Letters

fractional ads, many of which were included in the scavenger hunt.] What's
next? Good reviews and ratings for poor
quality products just to save a client?
Secondly, who cares what the "Top Ad"
is?! Since when did you start judging a
book (or in this case, a disk) by its cover?
Making readers search for the Duck of
Sparks or Dorman's artwork doesn't
make them know any more than what
you haven't said in past issues about
Wizardry and Empire.

The Hunt For
"Dead" Octobers (et. al.)
Thank you for the certificate and check
as the award for winning your 50th Issue
Scavenger Hunt! I've enjoyed CGW
throughout all of its 50+ issues. The
reviews and news have been very interesting and helpful.
That Scavenger Hunt was quite a challenge! My #2 daughter, Christine, and I
spent a good part of two days going
through all the back issues.
Page-by-page. Finding each of the answers was a
kind of mini-thrill. I guess what I also enjoyed, though, was remembering about
some of those early computer games
mentioned in those early issues. It was all
kind of a quick review of the computer
game industry.
Having my daughter as a partner in solving The Hunt made it all the more enjoyable as we encouraged each other to find
those answers. It also has had its
downside, of course, Chris has given me
the certificate, but has put her claim on
part of the check. Ah, well.
Thank you, Mr. Sipe, for sponsoring the
50th Issue Scavenger Hunt. I look forward to your 100th Issue Contest.
William N. Moes
Defiance, OH
Hmm! We must have made a tactical
error in providing the certificate. If we
hadn't, you probably would have
"framed" the check. Actually, you are
most welcome.

Ad Annoyed Problem
I can't help but be angered by your apparent lack of backbone by running your
latest contest, entitled "Top Ad Awards."
It looks to me like it's just another ploy
from your sales department to get your
readers to look at all the ads. You don't
have to be Sherlock Holmes to see that
there are 28 full page ads and 28 questions. [Ed. Note: Actually, Sherlock
would have noted that there are 34 full
page ads from 27 companies and 14

Let's face it, your magazine is not like
Sports Illustrated where people flip the
page when they see an ad. The combination of ads, reviews, and ratings from
your magazine have always influenced
my purchases and this contest only hurts
your reputation.
So, from now on, let your advertisers
run their own contests. You just stick to
putting out a "Top Computer Magazine"
each month. If the advertisers don't know
what makes a good ad and product, have
them get in touch with me. I could always use a better job.
Bob Cahill
Haskell, NJ
One of the unique qualities about CGW
is the fact that we serve three distinct
audiences. Not only do computer game
players (our primary audience) read
CGW, but most game designers and
employees at the software publishers, as
well. Since our readers are intelligent
enough to demand background on companies, designers, products, and industry news, we actually serve as something of a "trade journal" in addition to
being a consumer-oriented publication.
Therefore, we thought it would be fun to
let our readers in the buying public tell
our readers on the selling side which
ads are most effective. The software publishers are small companies compared
to those who usually win the "CLIO"
awards (the "Academy Awards" of advertising), so there was a lot of genuine
and good-natured excitement about the
"Top Ad Awards." Frankly, no one
would begin to deny that our "Top Ad
Awards" competition was extremely successful in promoting advertising sales.
However, our advertisers received the
bonus of strutting their stuff and our
readers got a thicker issue with extra
color pages, not to mention a chance at
a cash prize. Who cares? Our readers
do! More than one segment of our
audience, too!
Finally, we hope you are simply overstating your case in your aspersions
toward our editorial integrity. If you ask
around, you will find that CGW's long
suit is integrity. It seems ironic that an
editorial staff which has on a number of

occasions published negative reviews of
our designer friends' games should face
such a charge. For example, Chris Crawford still chafes from our review of
Tanktics (and probably Trust and
Betrayal, as well), Dan Bunten was not
exactly pleased with our assessment of
Robot Rascals, and Brian Fargo was less
than thrilled with our treatment of Bard's
Tale II and III. Nevertheless, we have
positive relationships with them because
they know we call 'em as we see 'em.
We do put out a "Top Computer
Magazine" every month. For a different
perspective than yours, however, see the
next letter.

Hype So Allergenic
Yesterday, I discovered your magazine
while shopping at B. Dalton Bookseller.
Needless to say, I am very impressed with
the depth of coverage and intelligence
shown in each review. Most reviews I read
elsewhere seem as if they were written by
the game makers themselves. All seem to
be full of hype and written as if the game
maker would pull his advertising at the
first sign of a discouraging word.
Is it possible to purchase back issues of
your magazine? The way you people
review these games, it should give me a
good idea of whether or not I should part
with my hard earned dough. Keep up the
good work.
Chuck Sandnes
Port Huron, MI
Thanks, Chuck. Check out page 53 in
this issue for our latest "Back Issue" bargain pack and instructions for ordering
regular back issues. Could we schedule
you to debate with Bob Cahill? We
know Bob and, frankly, he's no Chuck
Sandnes. . . . Bob?!)

A New Suit For Mail
I would like to see a "Scorpion's Mail"
column every month.
George Forker
Lisle, IL
Make "Scorpion's Mail" (or a similar hint
column) part of every issue.
Mark Alberts
Bensalem, PA
There seem to be lots of fans of
Scorpia's reviews and hint columns.
We're pleased about that and, beginning
in the April, 1989 issue of CGW,
"Scorpion's Mail" will appear every other
month. This may be the first step toward
a monthly column. Let us know how
you feel.

Taking A Peek

Antic Software
544 Second Street
San Francisco, CA 94107
BOBO: The French comic book character, Bobo, a loveable prison inmate,
comes to life as players try to help play
"spring the con". Up to six can play the
six mini-games that comprise a day in
Bobo's life: serving porridge in the
cafeteria; peeling potatoes; sweeping
floors, jumping over walls, etc. The
graphics are exceptional, and the comic
book like feel to the game supplies a lot
of laughs. Atari ST (pictured) and Amiga
($34.95) Circle Reader Service #1.

Arcadia
711 W. 17th St. Unit G9
Costa Mesa, CA
ARTURA: Journey back in time to the
violent days of the fifth century as the
player becomes Artura, son of
Pendragon. This action game pits you
against the usual horde of ghouls,
spiders, soldiers and giant rats that look
like cuddly squirrels. Multiple screens
and monsters keep the action fast
moving. Atari ST (pictured) and Amiga
($39.99), C-64 ($34.99). Circle Reader
Service #2.

Bethesda Softworks
15235 Shady Grove Rd.
Suite 100
Rockville, MD 20850
WAYNE GRETZKY HOCKEY: We've
been waiting at CGW for the ultimate
hockey game on computer and it's finally here! Individual player ratings in 11
categories, multiple difficulty levels, instant replay, spectacular sound, ability to
control any player, simply coach or let
Wayne do the work. This package really
puts you on the ice! Amiga ($49.95)
Circle Reader Service #3.

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
STAR WARS: Relive the movie and
replay the coin-op game in this musical
package from Broderbund. A sound

chip inside the package plays the movie
theme when triggered. The game itself
features smooth, 3-D wire-frame
graphics that move toward you at close
to light speed as you make your final assault on the Death Star. IBM (pictured),
Atari ST and Amiga ($39.95) C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

Covox
675-D Conger Street
Eugene, OR 97402
ESCAPE FROM PLANET X: This is a
most unusual text adventure which
comes with the ability to interface with
the game via a voice command module.
This allows you to talk to the game instead of using the keyboard. ("Open the
pod bay doors, Hal".) The game starts as
the player tries to escape from an alien
Human Research Lab that has him listed
(Continued on page 48)

Industry News

D

on't you just hate long lines? So
do I. Still, that's where I was. Waiting in a 90 minute line to see
Disneyland's most popular attraction,
Star Tours. I was just about to go crazy
when I flashed on something other than
my own discomfort. A familiar Japanese
name caught my ear over the familiar
strains of C-3PO's worried remonstrations
toward R2-D2. The name was Kyodai,
the joint venture between Broderbund
and eleven Japanese partners. As imaginary travelogues about
fictional outer space destinations played on the
overhead screens, I overheard a conversation
about two Kyodai
releases I hadn't heard
about before.

convincing, but each release seems to
get closer. In fact, Velocity Software (an
affiliated label of Broderbund who recently published Jetfighter) is expected to support formation flying (e.g. "Blue Angels"
or "Thunderbirds" style acrobatics) in future releases. Speaking of Velocity
Software, there are persistent rumors
that a more significant "marriage" between affiliate and distributor may be in
the offing.

The
Rumor
Bag

It seems that the next
wave of imports (after
the three mentioned in
the WCES report in
CGW #56) will include a
C-64 arcade game entitled Babylon and a
graphic text adventure
for the IBM to be known
as Murder Club. The arcade game will utilize a
simple adventure format with a side-view
like coin-op action games and provide a
choice of four different soundtracks. They
hope to appeal to a younger audience
than most action-adventure games.

I would have listened longer expect I
was startled as the line progressed past a
"droid" welding a portion of our imaginary
starship and the noise of the tools
caused me to briefly suspend my disbelief
about waiting in an alien starport. Those
repairs jogged my memory regarding a
recent conversation I had with Gary
Grigsby, SSI's prolific wargame designer.
I was trying to find out Gary's current
project and he told me he had just completed reprogramming a custom version
of Typhoon of Steel for a customer who
wanted the "Banzai" routine removed
from the game and was willing to pay
$150 for it. His story reminded me of the
recurring rumor that Mark Baldwin was
working on a special "Jerry Pournelle" version of Empire where fighters can safely
overfly armies. Wonder how I could get
that version?
The line continued to wind through
enough atmospheric scenery to help us
let down our mental guards and almost
believe we were awaiting an actual space
flight. We entered the "vehicle" and took
off on a simulated flight that was like
riding a rollercoaster after being force-fed
amphetamines. Even though we knew
we weren't flying, there were plenty of moments when it was difficult to be sure. I
can't wait until flight simulators are this

by Hari Watanaiful

After the Star
Tours experience,
the Tomorrowland
Jets just weren't the same. Of course, it
takes variety to make a successful amusement park and the same principle applies
to software publishers. Microprose
seems poised to accomplish this with its
Medalist International program. They
just signed French publisher Loriciels to
the Medalist program and will publish
U.S. versions of the arcade games, Albedo and Mach 3 (with their excellent
animation and sound on the Amiga and
ST versions), as well as the popular action-adventure, Sapiens. The company
also plans to launch their new Microplay
label. These products will be published
under Microprose direction, but will not
actually be programmed by Microprose
Labs, the in-house design team. The first
Microplay titles are expected to be
Destroyer Escort and Microplay Soccer.
Next, we rode through /t's A Small
World. One of my worst nightmares is
getting stuck in the middle of that ride
with that incessant soundtrack ringing in
my ears. Apparently that same nightmare
was in the mind of a British tourist in our
boat. She thought those marionettes
were really freaky and reminded her of a
new game to be released by Rainbird.
Entitled Weird Dreams, the arcade game
will feature nightmare sequences like
battling roast chickens and other oddities. Encouraged by meeting a fellow
software aficionado, I asked her if she

was aware of Psygnosis' Baal (a battle
against the Canaanite god of evil with
Obliterator style graphics) and Ballistix, a
wild and crazy pinball game with incredibly fast play. She seemed rather knocked
out by them.
As a software reviewer, though, there is
one attraction at Disneyland that makes
me extremely uncomfortable. I mean,
"Yo, ho, ho, ho, a pirate's life for me!" is
not a happy theme for someone who
depends on the software industry for his living. Nevertheless, we joined those "Pirates of
the Caribbean" on their regular
fun cruise. Then, as we cruised
past the "Blue Bayou Restaurant," I noticed a programmer who works with several
software publishers. I couldn't
wait to get back from the "Barbary Coast" to eavesdrop on
him. He said that SSI is hard at
work on the Pool of Radiance
sequel. Watch for Curse of the
Azure Bonds during the latter
half of the year. He also
revealed that Westwood Associates, the developers of Battletech for Infocom, is working
on a new game in that style.
Tentatively titled Hawks On The
Edge, it is expected to be more
challenging than their first Battletech game. In fact, I was just sneaking
out of the in
restaurant
with Imy
littlehim say
notebook
hand when
heard

that FTL Software is projecting a first
quarter 1990 release of the Dungeon
Master sequel. Entitled Chaos Strikes
Back, the Amiga, ST, and IBM versions
will have priority over other machines.
I didn't get out in time, though, and the
programmer caught up with me in the
"Haunted Mansion." It's a little spooky to
have an acquaintance pound on the
back of your ghostly carriage, call you by
name, and tell you that Scorpia's
February hint on Wasteland was incorrect. According to this fellow, taking the
helicopter wipes out the set encounters
outside Base Cochise. "Just think how
many readers could have avoided those
heavy duty robots!" he chided me. Then,
he went on to tell me that he had heard
about that as yet untitled Koei game we
reported on in CGW #56. The Chinese
folk tale it's based on is called "The Tale
of the Willow and the Pond" and is essentially a Chinese Robin Hood tale. It might
be called Romance of the Three
Kingdoms H in the U.S.
This issue's rumors involve British
games, French games, and Japanese
games in addition to U.S. games. I guess
it really is a small world after all.

Review

Going
"In Harm's
Way"
Simulations Canada's
Sequel to "Long Lance"
by Lt. H. E. Dille
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

In Harm's Way
Apple II, C-64/128, IBM, ST
IBM
1-2
$60.00
W. Nichols
Simulations Canada
Nova Scotia, CANADA

25 November, 1943: Kiyoto Kagawa peered intently into the
velvet darkness of a moonless night. Standing on the bridge
wing of his flagship, the Onami, his only illumination came
from the faint phosphorescence generated by the sleek bow cutting the sea at twenty knots. Conditions were perfect for his
covert transport mission. The emperor would be pleased. While
he pondered his withdrawal options in the event of unexpected
contact, his eyes sought to define a greater blackness amidst
the night. It appeared, for a second, as if something had
loomed up out of the darkness off the port bow. Try as he
might, however, Kagawa could not retain the image. The
lookouts were silent, so he concluded that his eyes were seeing
phantoms. It was a common occurrence when one was
fatigued. As he lowered his binoculars, Kagawa felt a sudden
shudder in the deck and, before his mind could register its
source, a blinding sheet of flame leapt skyward.

Once again, Simulations Canada has brought us into the nail
biting position of leading either the Japanese or American forces
in a desperate bid for control of the Pacific theater. Picking up
where Long Lance (Reviewed in CGW #48) left off, this game
focuses upon surface warfare in 1943/44. It is not necessary to
have played the earlier game in order to enjoy In Harm's Way,
but those who have done so will find the two games very similar
in execution. The primary differences involve addition of smoke
screens to daytime tactics (very effective), elimination of the USN
patrol function, and the removal of bombardment missions in
favor of covert "Tokyo Express" runs. In the case of the latter two
changes, they are in keeping with the historical tactical modifications between 1942 and 1944. Victory point scores are still largely affected by the level of mission accomplishment. Thus, one is
cautioned not to lose sight of the objective in the heat of battle.

It's Lonely At The Top
In Harm's Way emphasizes the uncertainties inherent in warfare, the need for thorough planning prior to engagement, and
the all too real frustration experienced by operational commanders as they watch their painstakingly laid plans disintegrate
under the friction of combat. As echelon commanders, players
must determine the battle doctrine and rules of engagement for
their forces prior to the mission. Some of the actions available include: assignment of ships to groups, modification of the track
for each group, determination of firing criteria for unknown contacts, and establishment of weapons employment doctrine such
as optimum gunnery and torpedo release ranges. Mission success is often dependent upon how well these items are tailored to
fit the intended function of each group. For example, in night actions, destroyer screens should be utilized to close unknown contacts and conduct torpedo attacks, if applicable. Flawless execution of that doctrine would reap surprise and success, but, as we
all know, success can be elusive. Hence, the frustration, as well
as the fun, of trying to hold it all together once contact has been
made.
Players will find that they may only exercise direct control over
the flagship they are embarked upon. All other guidance must be
radioed to the remaining ships in company. This feature
recreates actual command problems faced by forces of the past
and present. During World War II, slow transmission times and
potential non-receipt of message traffic lead to enhanced difficulty in coordinating fleet actions. Consequently, if operating several
groups in a dispersed formation, the player may find the flagship
element under attack and watch his other elements continue on
their previous course because they did not receive a contact message. An even more disastrous situation that occurred to this
reviewer was to witness the sinking of one of my vessels from
friendly fire because neither ship would acknowledge a "cease

fire" order. Such are the fortunes
of war. Lacking guidance from
you, your subordinates will act
upon their own initiative, in accordance with the battle doctrine
you specified prior to the engagement, or upon the last orders they
received. The end effect of the
limitations placed upon the
player's degree of control is to provide a much more engaging
simulation than is possible in omniscient set-piece battles.

Endurance
Nine scenarios are included, as
well as a scenario builder. Each of
the pre-generated scenarios can
be manipulated in a number of
ways. One may alter the effectiveness of torpedoes, increase or
decrease the night fighting abilities of the Japanese forces, or
allow the computer opponent a random set-up outside the historical limitations. The scenario builder utility allows use of all the
ship classes depicted in the game, but lacks a map editor function. All 1943 scenarios will be night actions on the Solomon Islands map and all 1944 scenarios will be open ocean engagements, although they can be either day or night battles. Because
of the flexibility inherent in these options and features, In Harm's

Way can be played again and
again without sacrificing entertainment value.

Some Things
Haven't Changed
The supporting documentation
is of poor print quality, but adequately covers the basics needed
to play the game. Graphics
remain non-existent. Grease pencils and laminated maps are still
utilized to keep track of force position and contact reports (Note:
WD-40 or a good spray cleaner is
required to clean pencil marks off
the maps). Overall, however,
these shortcomings are minor
and easily forgiven in light of the game's more positive attributes.

Recommendation
/n Harm's Way is an excellent simulation of operational level
decision-making that also remains faithful to the historical period
covered. Those players who demand complete tactical control
may be frustrated by this simulation, but for those who are willing
to accept that chaos and confusion are a natural part of warfare,
this is a "must" to add to a game library.

Game Hints
As Told by Scorpia
Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle
reader eschews hints, let him beware!

appears after you've completed a sequence).

Well, spring is just around the corner
(where did the winter go??? It seems to
get shorter every year . . . sigh). Fred's already doing his
cleaning (about
time he got rid of all
those bones), but
he has a moment to
spare to fix up your
favorite beverage
while you settle
down in the chair by
the fire. Enjoy your
moment of peace,
because things are
going to get very
weird very quickly
(you didn't notice
anything odd about
the door when you came in? Too bad!).
Is that Rod Serling up ahead? Do you
hear some strange music in the background? Could this be...The Twilight

Once you're out of the house, take
some time to wander around and map
the area. As you go along, you will find
several places that bear investigating, but

In any case, after you're up and ready
to face the world, save the game. Sometimes, leaving the house is a deadly procedure (randomly determined).

Scorpion's Tale

Zone?
Before we get down to the clues, a
word of caution: save often while playing
this game. There are many situations
where you only have a move or two to do
the right thing. If you blow it, you end up
dead. So, make sure you have a recent
position you can go back to.
Also, note that the saves in Twilight
Zone are "soft." They are held in memory
and not written to disk until you specifically quit the game. If you get frustrated,
don't just turn off the computer or
reboot. Quit properly so your saves won't
be lost and hope you have no power
failures while playing the game.
Finally, the IBM version does not have
the "graphics off' command. This means
once the text has scrolled up behind the
picture, you can't read it again unless
you type in "look," and there may not be
time for that. You may want to play the
text-only version to make sure you don't
miss anything important.
Ok, here you are in your very cluttered
bedroom. There seems to be more stuff
here than in the trophy case of Zork and
you can spend a lot of time wondering
what's important and what's not. As a
matter of fact, very little of it is worth worrying about. This is common in the
game: many of the items you come
across aren't necessary to finishing the
adventure (Then again, many are. The
idea is to keep you confused. However,
it's a good idea to pick up anything that

you should start
with the train station, since the
game does have a
sequence (weird
though it is) that
you must follow.
After you've
bought your ticket
and gotten on the
train, take a good
look at your travelling companions. The
guy in robes is definitely a strange one.
Makes you feel a little nervous, eh? The
lady with the pendant is a bit odd, too. In
fact, after a short while she rushes off
and leaves a few things behind. I'd suggest grabbing everything you can and
giving it a careful examination. I also suggest not staying on this train much
longer. Ah well, you didn't really want to
take a trip right now anyway.
Ummm . . . looks like you're being followed by your friend in the robes. Best
not to let him get too close. Unfortunately, a little boy has just wandered onto the
scene, and you're going to have to do
something to save him. You don't have
much time here, so think fast. Luckily,
you have what you need to do the job.
After that, a quick exit from the train station is in order. Where to now? Well, you
won't be getting into the museum for
quite some time yet, so why not take a
look at the toy store, which brings back
fond memories of your childhood?
Too bad the place is shut and the door
locked. Of course, there are ways around
that, with the right item (good thing there
are no police around to ask embarrassing questions).

Once inside, though, you wonder if you
might not be losing your marbles. It
looks more like a jungle than a toy store.
This part of the game is actually pretty
simple and everything you need to finish
it is somewhere in the area. If you took a
good look at the photos back home, you
have a pretty good idea of what you have
to do here.
No sooner have you finished than you
find yourself on a
farm somewhere or
other (How? Who
knows? Anything can
happen in this place).
A quick walk around
will soon bring you to
a burning barn. This
is a very good place
to save. You can end
up dead rather quickly if you make the
wrong move (Do pick
up anything you happen to run across as
you ramble about).
You may also want to
check your inventory
to make certain of
just what you have
on hand at the moment.
As you might have
expected, you need
to enter the barn. It's
hero (or heroine)
time. Once you're inside and up in the
loft, there is no time to lose. Read the
description of the scene carefully, because moves are limited here. Your main
objective is to save the little girl and then,
get yourself out (not in the same way).
The real trick is figuring out what to do
after the loft collapses, because the rest
of the building will soon follow suit.
Violence is necessary here. Also, you will
pretty much have to guess which direction to go after that, since it isn't at all
clear from the text. If you pick the wrong
one, restore and try again (there is a fair
amount of trial and error in this game).
Having succeeded in saving both yourself and the girl, you are soon in possession of some car keys. Well, there's a
truck parked nearby, and the connection
is pretty obvious. However, it seems this
isn't a truck at all, but a racing car (hmm,
things have changed yet again!).
This sequence is, to say the least, one
of the most dangerous in the game, and
you may find yourself doing a lot of restores until you get through it. As you
probably figured out, the idea is to win
(Continued on page 31)

Review

Dr. Selover has contributed to CGW for
more than half a decade
and previously served
as editor of Fire and
Movement magazine.
He has a Ph.D. in organic chemistry from
U.C.L.A. and attributes
any knowledge of history to his inveterate
habit of wargaming.

I speak here to the
demographically typical
reader of CGW (male,
mid-thirties, well-educated, married with
children). Quit your job,
divorce the wife, sell the
children, and lock yourself in the den. You now
have the opportunity to
play the game that can
keep you satisfied, even
addicted, for many years
to come. With that as the lead sentence,
what is there left to say about SSI's Battles of Napoleon? Frankly, this game is
not to be taken lightly. It is a serious,
heavyweight offering, a real WARgame! It
provides the most realistic simulation yet
seen of army-level combat on a grand tactical scale during the Napoleonic Age. You
do not have to be well read in the period
to get into the game, but I can guarantee
that anyone who spends the time and effort the game deserves will be compelled
to learn more about this fascinating period
of history.
Battles of Napoleon is Chuck Kroegel
and David Landrey's translation of their
eminently successful American Civil War
system (four releases to date) to cover a
date approximately 60 years earlier (18051815). The game comes on two disks and
the package contains a rules/scenarios
booklet (43 pgs.) and a booklet with directions for the system editor (37 pgs.). Four
scenarios are included (Borodino,
Auerstadt, Quatre Bras, and Waterloo)
and the system editor allows the player to
design or modify limitless additional
scenarios. Games are played using thirty
minute turns, squares on the playing field
are 100 yards across, and the units of
maneuver are generally brigades or regiments.

A Long Way From Antietam
The game system obviously owes a great
debt to Kroegel and Landrey's Civil War
system (which started with Battle of Antietam and was refined through three later
releases). It is just as obvious, however,
that the designers, developers, and

scenario designers were all aware that critical changes had taken place between
1815 and 1860.
Additions to and modifications of the
Civil War system abound in Battles of
Napoleon. For example, infantry units
have four formations available to them:
line, column, open, and square. The open
formation represents a spread out status
allowing infantry to take, but also give out,
fewer casualties while advancing in the
open. Square, of course, is the classic
Napoleonic "anti-cavalry charge" formation. In addition, leader transfers are now
allowed only at the beginning of each
player's turn (no more cavalier hopping all
over the mapboard at the drop of a hat).
Provisions are now included for specific objectives for formations (divisions and
Corps) on the map. This means movement costs for units are minimized while
they move towards the objective of their
parent formation, but counter-productive
movement extracts a heavy toll in movement points. Now, changing formation objectives cannot be accomplished on a
whim because a formation will be
hamstrung (one half of their normal movement points plus a loss in readiness) for,
at least, the turn which immediately follows a change in objective.
Cavalry charges have been included in
exquisite detail. Cavalry (the original "fire
and forget" weapons system) can be ordered to charge a particular target hex
and the system takes it from there. Before
sending the cavalry unit on its merry way,
the system first does a "morale check"
(they may just decide not to go). Passing
that hurdle, the cavalry unit begins
moving in a special phase between

Our experienced
reviewer says
"Battles of Napoleon" is

Better
Than
Sex!
by (the normally conservative)
Dr. Jay Selover
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Battles of Napoleon
Apple II
1-2
$39.95
Chuck Kroegel
and David Landrey
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, CA

regular movement and combat. As the
charging unit moves forward, all sorts of
things can happen. If the opposing army
had placed any cavalry units on "counter
charge" and they happen to spot your
unit, they might gallop over to intercept
(assuming, of course, that they pass their
own morale check). This can stop your
charge short and lead to a bloody cavalry
vs. cavalry melee. If not intercepted, your
charging unit might also encounter
enemy units before reaching the target
hex. Any units so encountered will attempt
to form a square (success will force your
cavalry to stop and melee with them). Any
units which fail to form a square will
retreat or rout out of the way. Finally,
when and if the cavalry reaches its target,
enemy units which happen to be there will
also attempt to form squares. Cavalry
melee against an infantry unit in square is
a losing proposition, but if the target units
don't manage to get into that formation,
your cavalry can knock a unit out for the
course of the battle (high casualties, high
disruption, and real low morale) before dispersing to open formation and retiring
back toward your lines. All of this system
is hugely realistic and the details of each
charge are kept suitably out of your direct
control.
Morale, efficiency, fatigue, and disruption
are all tied neatly together: routing units
which pass near other friendlies can cause
disruption, which can, in turn, cause
those units to rout as well. Nothing is
more fragile than an army which is
uniformly high on fatigue and disruption. I
once watched helplessly as virtually the entire French army melted out from under
me when my lead regiment broke at the
gates of Quatre Bras (I had been using
the spurs on the whole army for a hard
day and tried one last assault with tired
troops against the fresh reinforcements in
the town).

The System Editor
I had to save a few words for this capping glory of the game. Unlike the ACW
releases from Kroegel and Landrey, Battles of Napoleon includes a complete
scenario design kit and system editor. You
can create virtually any battle you desire
from 1805-1815. There is pre-set data for
building 262 different types of units (19 different nationalities) and creating your own
personalized armies. You name the
leaders, designate their ranks, set up the
command structure, and build each of the
units in the various formations. There is a
complete map editor and you can specify
all the scenario specifics (e.g. designing a
scenario in June will give you more
daylight turns than setting the scenario in
October).

System editors are no longer new
(thanks to publishers like SSG and SSI),
but there are two new wrinkles here. First,
you can also edit the tables that are used
for combat resolution, range attenuation
of various weapons, terrain effects on fire
and melee combat, and formation effects
on combat. All of those details are potentially under your control. Second, you can
save parts of scenarios to disk rather than
only completed products. This means that
you can build a disk full of various armies
independent of scenarios. Construct the
French II Corps of 1814 and save it on
disk, right next to your Portuguese army
of 1808. Then, later, you can design a
scenario that pits these two against each
other on some freshly designed terrain by
simply loading each of them off the disk
and into your scenario creation routine.
Darn, I should have known there would
be no way I could do this game justice in
the space those misers at CGW allotted
me. There is more than one year's worth
of stuff in the box. Trust me! Now, get out
of here. Run down and buy this game.

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Tower Toppler
Amiga, Apple II,
C-64/128, IBM, and ST
C-64/128
1-2
$39.95 (Apple, C-64, IBM)
$49.95 (Amiga, ST)
U.S. Gold
U.S. Gold
c/o Epyx
Redwood City, CA

Charles Ardai is a regular contributor to COW, as well as
a published mystery writer for Ellery Queen's Mystery
Magazine and Twilight Zone magazines.
"Was this the face
that launched a thousand chips,
And toppled the topless towers of Ilium?"
--with apologies to Christopher Marlowe

An Addictive
Arcade Game
from Europe
by Charles Ardai

toxic ocean, and a snowball gun. I groaned when I read the
plot on the back of the box. Everyone knows that the reason
you climb to the top of a building in a climbing game is the
same reason the chicken crosses the road in the joke.
Neither does the appeal lie in the addition of a bonus
round after every successful tower topple. In this round, the
player gets into his submarine and mows down all the fish
he can as he makes his way to the next tower. Including
bonus rounds is probably just an irritating habit that designers can't seem to break.
So, what am I raving about?

Normally, a game like Tower Toppler would get only a cursory glance in COW. Our readers are sophisticated and look
for complex scenarios and strategy, even in their action
games. Tower Toppler has neither. It is what we used to call
a "climbing" game, in which the scenario consists entirely of
getting past obstacles
which lie between
your character and
the top of a tower
loaded with creatures
and gadgets. It is also
what we call a "pattern" game, in which
an easily discovered
set of moves will invariably get you to
the top in one piece.
Why, then, are you
reading about it?
It is because I've been addicted to it for over a month. I
love it! I'm almost ashamed to admit it, but I do. The thing is
goofy, pointless, and old-fashioned, but it is as addictive as
the devil. If I didn't have to write this review, I'd be playing it
right now. That is how absorbing it is.
The problem is, it is hard to put my finger on just what it is
about the game that has so enthralled me. It is certainly not
the story, which involves some nonsense about a mission, a

The best answer I can give is this: what keeps me playing
is the way the game looks and feels. I've climbed enough
computer-game buildings in my day to put King Kong to
shame and they all feel pretty much the same. Tower
Toppler's buildings feel different. For one thing, they are not
flat and, as you go around them, they circle beneath you.
Don't ask me why, but this 3-D effect is stimulating, all by itself.
Then, there are the characters in the game, all roundedged and bouncy. You are a lumbering little toad-thing with
big eyes. Your enemies are giant, floating eyeballs, spinning
jacks (as in onesies and twosies, not spades, clubs, or Nicholson), and plain, old, non-eye balls. In addition, your submarine is a bubble-hatched contraption that looks vaguely
like The Jetsons' space ship.
Weaving the graphics and the animation together is the
game play, which is as pleasant as any. One especially nice
touch is that you are fighting a time limit. Therefore, when
you hit a creature or step too far when getting onto an
elevator, you usually do not die. Instead, you fall to a lower
level and lose time working your way back up.
Between delightfully benign game play (the sole shortcoming is that each time a game ends, you must start the next
game back at Tower #1, no matter how far you have gotten), clever obstacles (though none are very difficult to figure
out), and lively animation, you will have a great time with this
game. Well, maybe you won't, but / will.

Review

Adam Sherwin is
a thirteen year old
who has been writing software
reviews for five
years. He has previously written for
both the New York
Daily News and
Home-Office Computing (formerly
Family Computing)
magazine. In this
brief article, he
shares his feelings
about Mindscape's new action-adventure.

Road
Raider
by Adam Sherwin

Setting Your Fears To Rest
If you are sick and tired of futuristic, shoot'em up games
with simple concepts, you'll be happy to know that there is
now a game that takes more than just a quick trigger finger
to master. Road Raider is not a typical action game, even
though at first glance it may look like one. The cover design
might turn some people off (it shows a man in battle armor
and the racing car featured in the game streaking down a
highway from a desolate city), but do not be deceived, this is
a game even the faint-hearted can appreciate. This game
may take long hours to master, but it only takes minutes to
enjoy.
The instruction manual for Road Raider is not only clear
and concise, but it actually tells you everything you want to
know, not simply how to start the game.

Riding the "Fear Express"
Road Raider is set in the United States, apparently after the
"Great Biological Holocaust." The mad doctor Dr. A. Noid
has turned most of humanity into zombies and mutants that
crave just one thing, a food substitute called Slu that the
doctor created and marketed.
This is where you come in. You are a retired bounty hunter
who hears about the handsome price on Dr. A. Noid's head
and, as a result, quickly decide to come out of retirement.
You are lucky enough to live in the last city that is mostly unaffected by the horribly addicting Slu. Dr. Noid is also lucky,
because he has stationed himself deep within one of the
cities that has now been ruined by hoards of Slu- craving
mutants. This makes finding Dr. Noid not only dangerous,
but nearly impossible.

By Fears Possessed
Once you enter the first city you pass on your way, you will
find rebel cars outfitted with hi-tech equipment and itching
to blow you to oblivion. Rebel cars might seem scary, at first,
but you are also equipped with a souped up racing car that
has its own cannon and is as tough as nails.
You will also find (after much trial and error) something
called an arena pass in one of the buildings inside the city.
The arena pass gives you access to the only way out of the
city. This rather restricted "emergency exit" will involve a
demolition derby dog-fight with several marauding cars.
Once in the arena, all of your and your opponent's weapons
will be taken away.

Should you be
lucky enough to
escape the first
city by winning
the battle in the
arena, you will
enter a second
and a third. In
each locale, you
must find the
arena pass and
the arena.
Naturally, this becomes progressively more difficult with larger areas to cover and
more enemy cars lurking behind
every corner. In the arena on the
third level, you will be forced to fight
to the death with Dr. A. Noid himself.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
PLAYER(S):
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Road Raider
Amiga, ST, C-64/128
Amiga
1
$39.95
Chris Gray
Mindscape Inc.
Northbrook, IL 60062

A word to the wise: If you are unable to get anywhere after your first few tries, don't worry!
You will probably have to play this game three or four times
before you find either the arena pass or the arena.
If you are having trouble, here is a hint: Find the radar attachment for your vehicle. It gives the location of all enemy
cars and is helpful in locating buildings.
Road Raider has an interesting concept, an acceptable
level of difficulty, and a tremendous graphics presentation.
Everything, even the title screen, shows meticulous design
and care.

Review

Mechanized
Mayhem
"Heavy Metal"—Access' Game
of Armored Combat
by Ronald F. Williams

Heavy Metal,
an arcade action
war game combining elements
of simulation and
strategy, offers a
convincing argument that the "GI
Joes" of the
world are now as
technically
oriented as their
brothers of the
air and sea! From
the moment you
hear the steady
increasing sound
of engine thrust
and see the tracing of the Access name you
know you are in
for a treat. Action
is nonstop and
the graphics and
audio are distinctly a cut above
most entries in this type of game.
A joystick is required to play this
game. Players possessing the Access LipStik or LipStick Plus may
find it advantageous for firing missiles from the ADAT while simultaneously using the joystick button
to fire at other targets or to release
smoke while maneuvering the MBT with the joystick. This
reviewer found his score improving after powering back up
with the LipStik obtained with Access' Echelon.
Players can operate any of three hi-tech weapons systems:
an M1A1 Abrams Main Battle Tank (MBT), the Martin Marietta Air Defense Anti-Tank System (ADAT), or the XR311 Fast
Attack Vehicle (FAV). After qualifying in each of the three
vehicles (5000 points required for each), you earn a commission as a 2nd lieutenant and are given your opportunity to
play in the Tactical Command arena as Field Commander.
As Field Commander, your orders are to stop numerically
superior forces from overrunning your positions and capturing your Headquarters. Decisions on deployment of your forces, etc. are made from the Tactical Command Center

(TACC) screen. This view provides a detailed map of the battle area and enables players to issue commands via cursor
and keyboard. Your objective is to destroy as many of the
enemy as possible, and survive. You can choose to sit and
watch the battle (and, probably, lose) or join your men (man
the weapon(s) vehicle of your choice) and possibly win a
promotion.
The challenge in the FAV simulator is to penetrate the
defense perimeters of the enemy. You operate the FAV, a
cute little 100 mph hot rod type of vehicle replete with knobby tires, from an exterior perspective. The initial view of the
terrain is deceptive; just a flat desert with looming red-brown
towering mountains in the foreground. A cinch, you tell yourself. You change your mind quickly as you desperately try to
avoid the detailed massive grey granite boulders, road signs
and other such hazards. When you hear the whistling of
shells (tanks firing at you), you had better turn fast. Watch
out for the helo's, though. They have a habit of dropping
directly in front of you.
The ADAT simulator objective is to destroy as many enemy
"Mig" fighters and TR-80 tanks as possible. Your view is from
a position behind the controls of the 30mm anti-tank Gun
and laser beam riding anti-aircraft missile launcher. The control panel contains detailed and vivid instrumentation, and
munitions and score counter, etc. With rapid firing capability
in hand, the "arcade artist" will be in his realm. Who can
resist firing upon the finely defined tanks churning across
the desert sands, or picturesque swooping jets twisting and
turning in the blue skies? The view of exploding jets and the
reverberating sound of your gun fire may entice you into
lingering longer than expected in this simulator.
The destruction of enemy tanks, half-tracks and gun
emplacements is your task in the MBT simulator. You are
positioned inside the tank, facing the hi-tech instrumentation
panel. The lower half panel is devoted to your view of terrain
and enemy. You control the tank, turret, and gun angles. In
addition, it is your responsibility to choose one of three types
of armor piercing projectiles for firing. When you hear the
scanning alarm ring, it's time to call for smoke, make a rapid
direction change, and increase or decrease speed. The
whine of incoming shells and outgoing firing is all around
you. This scenario has many graphic details, including
enemy drivers that pop up when in close range.
Heavy Metal has the high level graphics, sound and action
that delight arcade enthusiasts of all ages, and offers a challenge to the budding strategist. It should be therapeutic excitement for gamers needing a momentary break from more
cerebral games and be of special interest to those who collect games of artistic craftsmanship.

Review
by Scorpia

Warning: Specific clues
are included in this review.
Might & Magic II takes up
where the previous game left off.
Your team of adventurers has
passed through the gates to
another world and ended up in a
strange new place. It can be
played as a stand-alone game,
but it does help to bring over
your party from M&M I in order to
get off to a better start. They will
not come over with all their
goodies and levels intact, though.
Characters that finished the quest
are brought in as level 7, others
will come in as level 6 (unless
they are lower than that at transfer time). All weapons and equipment are taken away so that only
1000 gold and 100 gems per
character will remain to get you
started. Brand new characters
begin with nothing at all, except
for ten days worth of food and a minor
weapon.
Character classes are the same as
before. However, spells have undergone
revision, with some being dropped and
new ones added. If you're familiar with
the previous M&M, make sure you look
over the spell lists carefully so you know
what's there and what isn't. Also,
spellcasters do not learn all spells on attaining a new spell level, they only
receive some of them. The rest must
either be purchased at a temple, mage
guild, or found in the outdoors.
Speaking of spells, one that you don't
need to buy is "Remove Curse." It's quite
expensive and I never found any item in
the game that turned out to be cursed.
Also, if a character should happen to be
cursed, you will need "Remove Condition"
to get rid of it.
A new feature in M&M Ills the ability to
purchase secondary skills for various
members of your party. Each character
can have two different skills, which can
either raise their stats (speed, might, endurance, etc) or allow certain actions in
the outdoors (climbing mountains, going
through dense forests, etc).
The first one you'll want is Cartographer
(only one needs to have this). This
enables the auto-mapping feature. It is
beautifully done, is a great timesaver,
works both indoors and out, and is permanent: the game remembers where you

costs to have him or her in the
party. Further, hirelings have nothing whatsoever in the way of arms
or armor. You have to purchase
equipment out of your own pocket or give them spare equipment
picked up while adventuring. On
the other hand, hirelings are
trained and healed for free. You
don't have to pay to raise them in
level, and the temples cure
whatever ails them without
charge, even raising them from
the dead.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
VERSION
REVIEWED
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Might & Magic II
Apple II (with 128K),
IBM (C-64/128 coming soon)
1
APPLE II
$49.95
Jon Van Caneghem
New World Computing
Van Nuys, CA

have been (provided you save the game
after you've been there!), so when you're
there again you need only hit M for map
to see as much of the entire sector as
you've covered (unmapped areas are
black). If your cartographer happens to
die, the maps don't go away. Whatever
was covered before is still there. However,
the auto-mapping feature will now be disabled.

No hirelings are available at the
start of the game. Most of them
have to be rescued from some
predicament or other before they
will be available. Inns are the only
place to actually take on hirelings,
although you can dismiss them
from the group at any time. If you
do this, they return to whatever
inn they were last saved at. This
often occurs when you don't have
enough money to pay them. The game
won't let the party rest if you can't cover
the hirelings' fees.
As before, you can save the game only
at inns, not in dungeons or the wilderness. Fortunately, if your group is wiped
out entirely, you are sent back to
wherever you saved last to try again.
Nothing is lost except whatever items or
experience you picked up between leaving the inn and dying.
The world is much the same as before,
in terms of size. Of course, this isn't Varn,
so the actual places are different from the
last game.

Another good feature is the ability to
find out the exact (in most cases) properties are of any item. Now, you can take
any goodie you find to the nearest blacksmith. For a price, he will tell you exactly
what it is, what it does, who can use it,
and, if it is magically charged, how many
charges remain (a Detect Magic spell also
tells you how many charges are left in an
item, but nothing else).

Combat has not changed at all. It is still
based on the speed of the individuals involved, with the fastest going first. Thus,
moves are generally back and forth, with
some characters performing an action,
then some monsters, and so on. Individuals can run (or try to) after fighting
has begun. However, if any members of
the party are down when you choose to
retreat, they will be dead at the conclusion of the encounter.

The biggest change in the game is the
addition of hirelings, NPC's you can bring
into the party and take adventuring with
you. Each has a cost in gold per day that
must be paid each time you the group
rests. A hireling's price is generally determined by his or her level and class. The
more advanced a hireling is, the more it

You begin in the town of Middlegate.
Get equipped (the blacksmith is only a
few steps from the inn, so you should be
able to reach it safely), and spend some
time going over the town thoroughly. Not
everything is noted on the partial map in
the manual (they show a solid wall, for in-

stance, where
Edmund's Expeditions is located).

Typically, you
need only do
one or two
things in any
particular era.
General exploration isn't
really
worthwhile.
Various dungeon clues will
pinpoint the
locations and
time periods
you need to
visit. Without
them, finding
the right spots
is a pretty
hopeless task.

Eventually,
you will be
given your first
quests, which
will send you
down into the
dungeon
under the
town (there is
a dungeon
under every
town). Completing these
quests
provides you
with your first
hirelings, as
well as the
means of
entering the
castles.
At this point,
you are left
pretty much
on your own.
Most of the
game from
here on is careful exploration
of the outdoors and dungeons to pick up clues
and information needed to complete your
major task (which you also have to discover on your own).
The majority of quests from the castles
are not necessary in order to finish the
game. They are mainly useful in providing experience points for the group. Lord
Hoardall at Woodhaven asks you to
retrieve various items, while Lord Slayer
at Hillstone wants you to kill certain
monsters. You get no clues to the
whereabouts of these things; you just
keep going until you run across whatever
it is you're supposed to find (or kill).
The one exception is the Lord's Quest
(your choice from four). For these, there
are clues in various dungeons as to
where the items or monsters can be
found. These are the toughest assignments, and generally best left until your
party is fairly strong and high in level.
Lord Peabody at Pinehurst is very important, as is Queen Lamanda at Luxus
Palace. Don't expect to talk to the Queen

for quite some time, though. Getting an
audience with her will be an extremely difficult chore, another task best left to high
level characters.

The graphics
have improved
enormously
over the previous game.
There are no
more
"cardboard
cutout trees"
or two-dimensional views of
terrain.
Monster pictures now
sport animation, with moving hands,
arms heads, etc. The druid in particular is
fascinating to watch in its wide range of
motions.

Along the way, in the outdoors, you will
come across a number of mysterious
messages. In M&M I, they were numbered or lettered; here, they are red, yellow, or green. All of them have different
methods for deciphering what they say,
so you also need to find the interleave
key for each color in order to read them.

Equally fascinating are the Eagle Eye
spell and Wizard Eye spell, which provide
5x5 minimaps of the immediate area for
outdoors and indoors, respectively. An
added bonus of Wizard Eye is that it can
show you behind walls and into rooms, although not what may be inside.

Time travel is a new feature in the
game. You can find a time machine that
allows you to go back to previous centuries. This may be confusing at first,
since the map looks the same as before,
but things that are there in the present
(such as towns and castles) won't be
there in the past. On the other hand, the
terrain doesn't change at all, so walking
over previously-unexplored areas will add
them to your map. Of course, if anything
special is around (such as a color message), you won't know it, since it doesn't
yet exist.

Overall, however, there are a lot of
problems with Might & Magic II. One is
the lack of adequate playtesting, which
let some bugs slip through into the
game. The quest for Lord Haart, who
wants some items from his ancestors,
cannot be completed, as one of these ancestors wasn't "turned on" and is not in
his proper location. Fortunately, you
don't need to do this quest to complete
the adventure. Also fortunately, New
World is aware of this, and the "Long
One" should be in his rightful spot in ver(Continued on page 50)

(Continued from page 14)

The Twilight Zone
the race. Each move you make is critical,
one mistake will cause you to crash.
Mainly what you have to do is know
when to step on the gas, when to turn
(and in which direction), and when to
slow down. This, again, is a matter of trial
and error, combined with careful reading
of the text.
Well, you've won the race and accepted
the trophy, and the scene changes yet
again. Now, you appear to be a knight in
service to a king with a problem. This
one is a little different. Your task here is
to answer a number of riddles written on
different doorways. They aren't especially
difficult, if you give it some thought (take
your time, nothing will happen while you
think), although one or two may seem a
little ambiguous. Of course, that's why
you have the ability to restore the game
(grin).
Now you get to the complicated part,
because you suddenly find yourself back
in your home town again (do you have
the feeling you're going in circles?). This
is a good time to visit the dilapidated
warehouse. Oops, you just fell into the
water. Good thing you know how to swim!
Hmmm . . . what's that up ahead? Land
ho! Although once you get there, you
might have wished for a whale to swallow
you instead (heh). It won't take you very
long to notice that this part is right out of
that famous short story, "The Most
Dangerous Game." Anyhow, make your
way to the house, where the fun will
begin.
Once you're actually inside, be careful
in what you say. Be polite and remember
your manners. That will keep you alive a
little longer. Then, just move along as
directed, taking a moment along the way
to peek at the diary. Yep, you're in
trouble all right (so what else is new?).
You may be tempted to grab an item or
two right now. It's better that you don't
(come back for anything you want later).
On your way out, you are thoughtfully
provided with a knife and rope to help
you along. Hang on to them because
they will come in handy.
Now it's a matter of hide and seek. You
know who's doing the hiding. That, however, is a temporary measure, at best.
You won't be safe until you do something about the hunter. No doubt you
saw something back at the house which
could be of use (think about it). The hard
part is figuring where to put it (love that
restore function!). Remember to check
your inventory, too.
Once the hunter has been dealt with,
you can explore the area more thoroughly and find your way to the dock with the

good boat. This brings you back to
(where else?) your home town. Now
you're ready for the end game at the
museum.
First, you need to get past the gates.
This requires a key. The lasers at the
door are a bit more difficult. Look at
them and read the description carefully.
You should have something with you to
put them out of service.
Once inside, you find yourself in a room
decorated with mirrors everywhere. Well,
almost everywhere; on one wall is a set of
buttons and some lights. Take a look at
the lights. They aren't that helpful in
themselves, but the description gives you
a clue of sorts.
What you really have to do here is determine the sequence of buttons to push.
This is pretty much a trial-and-error
process. Fortunately, you won't die if you
press the wrong one. However, each time
you push the wrong one, you have to
start the sequence over again. Tedious,
but at least you don't have to restore the
game.
Well, you're almost there (where? Keep
going, and you'll find out). The last
obstacle is a door with no lock or handle.
Examine it carefully. Keep in mind that
the important word here is "slot". Otherwise, you will become extremely
frustrated when you do the obvious (and
correct) action, only to have the game
reject it.
There you are, through the door to
where, at last, you get an explanation for
all these weird things that have been happening to you. Personally, I felt a bit disappointed. I was hoping for something a
bit more imaginative. Ah well, just be
careful the next time you walk through a
door.
Looking at the old invisible clock, I see
it's that time again. Remember if you
need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: Send SMail to ST1030. By US
Mail (Enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028. In regard to mail, I
must say that service has not improved
(as I write this in January); letters are
taking an average of 6-10 days (or sometimes longer!) to reach me. Please be
patient; I answer letters as soon as I get
them, but I do have to get them first.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Review

The Goblins Are Coming!
The Goblins Are Coming!
by Ken St Andre
Ken St. Andre has a fond regard for fantasy worlds,
haying spawned his share of them for Tunnels and
Trolls, the pen and paper game he created.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Sorcerer Lord
Amiga, IBM
Amiga
1
$34.95
PSS
Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA

Imagine, if you
will, that Sauron the
Great of Mordor
had a little brother.
The rules do not
imply such a
relationship, but
that's the way the
Shadowlord in Sorcerer Lord, the
latest PSS game in
the "Wargamer's
Series," strikes me.
This fellow is something of a
biogeneticist. For
the last century, he
has been breeding
his own race of warriors, combining all
the meanest and
hardiest traits of
men, elves, and wolves to make a race
of goblins that are
fast and tough, but
not brainy (There
are trade-offs in
everything).
Shadowlord has also been recruiting every
evil wizard he can find. Now, he has
enough commanders for his numerous
troops to, you guessed it, invade the fair
fantasy world of Galanor. In Middle Earth,
the defense was coordinated by Gandalf
the Grey, but in Galanor, it is up to the
player to save the day.

Sorcerer Lord, with only a few quibbles, is
a fantasy wargamer's delight. It uses all of
the standard conventions of wargaming, except zones of
control. The mapboard, which takes up six screens and
does not scroll, is divided into invisible hexes for movement; units may move in six of eight compass directions
(not north or south); and there are several different types
of troop units (riders, warriors, elves, barbarians, mountain
men, etc.), each with its own advantage and disadvantage.
In addition, every troop in motion must have a leader and
the leaders all have names and ratings in leadership, sor-

cery, fatigue, and movement. Garrison forces may defend
fortresses without leaders, but cannot attack on their own.
Troops can be stacked to achieve greater numbers and armies may be combined under a single leader (in order to
produce larger tactical units) while they are located in a
fortress. The computer, always directing the evil forces, is
subject to the same constraints.

My Favorite Rings (Map)
The mapboard is littered with strategic objectives: fortresses, citadels, and rune rings. The "good guys" control four
nations and four separate citadels. The only one that really
matters, however, is Yarthros, the citadel in the far
southeast. If the Shadowlord's forces capture it, you lose
the game. The "bad guys" have a similar citadel in the far
northwest and you must capture it to win the game.
Further, the map offers beautiful screens to observe with
natural colors of dark and light green contrasted with yellow grasslands, white glaciers, sparkling blue lakes, and
oceans. Oddly enough, there are no rivers, though.
The rune rings play a colorful role in the battles which
take place in the game. Since both good and evil forces
use magic in the battles and said magic is drawn from
these mystic rune rings, it is obvious that forces wish to be
on or next to a rune ring when fighting a battle. Unfortunately, magic levels tend to be the same for both forces
and to have a negligible effect on the outcome of the battle. It would have been nice if the sorcery had played a
more significant role in the combat.

The Shadow of Your Style (Combat)
The most important factor in any battle is the number of
troops on each side. The Shadow Legions not only outnumber the forces of good by, at least, five to one, but
they also fight better in evenly matched combat. To really
win any battle, the odds must be significantly on your side.
Terrain and leadership are supposed to help in battle, but
the effect does not seem to be sufficient to pay attention
to them. Elves are supposed to fight twice as well in the
woods, but should they be outnumbered by more than
three-to-one, they will all die without so much as taking an
equal number of Shadow Legions with them. The basic
strategy, then, is never to fight unless the odds are heavily
in your favor.
Sorcerer Lord is one tough game. It took five tries before
I even won at the beginning level of play. The game takes
about three hours to play, but it does have a save feature
and allows players to save directly to the game disk.

The Shadow Legions seem more mobile in addition to
more numerous than the forces of good. The program
sends those nasty hordes cascading south and east directly against fortresses, rune rings, and any armies in the
field. It is important, therefore, to defend your fortresses as
long as possible, because your reinforcements come on in
castles that you own. Fortunately, the Shadow Legion
don't get reinforcements, but if you do not play solid
defense, they won't need any.

Idle Advice (Critique and Conclusion)
It is strange to play an Amiga or ST game that does not
use either mouse or joystick. All movement commands
must be input by means of the number keys. This makes
it easy to make mistakes in the placement and marshalling
of your forces. If one plays slowly and carefully, reads all
menus, and regularly consults the hard copy map that
comes with the game, one could possibly avoid mistakes.
Many of us play faster and looser than that, however, and
it is possible to pile up mistakes in this game. Further, mistakes in movement are final. Once a movement point is
spent, one cannot back up.
Sorcerer Lord comes with a couple of sound effects, but
no music. Actually, they are only good for a few games,
then silence is preferable to hearing the same digitized
death scream and tinkling noises (representing movement)
over and over.
Perhaps the most disappointing omission in Sorcerer is
that there is no big payoff or exciting finale for playing the
game. If the player loses and the Shadowlord takes
Yarthros, the screen goes black and the computer gets a
victory message. If you take the Shadowlord Citadel, the
screen goes black and you get a victory message. With the
power of today's computers, it seems like simply a failure
of imagination to cop out with a simple victory message.
For a Shadowlord victory, the game could finish with an insane-looking sorcerer capering on a pile of skulls while a
tide of blood washes over the map and blots it out to the
"tune" of some heavy metal cacophony. For an allied victory, there could be a "Star Wars" style ending with the surviving leaders being shown on screen taking their bows
and receiving their rewards. Some such grand finale would
take some memory and a good artist, but it would add a
lot to the game.
In the final analysis, Sorcerer Lord is good as it is, but it
could be so much more!

Review

The various commands in the game may be either joystick
or keyboard driven. The keyboard seems to be the most effective, allowing commands to be activated by hitting the first
letter of the command. The joystick feels more natural for
movement, but is a hassle with commands, which must be
scrolled through and selected with the button.

The Source
of Magic
Epyx' "The Legend
of Blacksilver"
by Douglas Seacat

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The Legend of Blacksilver
Apple II 128K, C-64/128, IBM
C-64/128
1
$39.95 (C-64), $49.95
John and Charles Dougherty
Epyx
Redwood City, CA

t seems the world is once again in danger. Another evil
madman has started a reign of terror. The Lands of
Thalen, recently recovering from a previous holocaust,
are in need of a savior. An evil baron has somehow
managed to get his hands on some Blacksilver, a vital substance from which all magic springs. He is trying to use the
magic of the silver to destroy the world with earthquakes. At
the same time, however, he is attempting to bring back an
evil sunken land where he will rule. The only hope for
mankind is for a single hero to roam about the land, learn
the secrets it holds, and gain enough strength until he can
meet the villain in person.

I

This is the basic premise of The Legend of Blacksilver, the
slick-looking (though unoriginal) game from John and Charles Dougherty, creators of Questron, Questron 11, and
Legacy of the Ancients. In many ways, the game seems to
be a Legacy of the Ancients reborn. The graphics, user interface, and plot structure are extremely similar. Just as the
player has no choice in his character in Legacy, so is the
player furnished a character in Blacksilver. He comes
equipped with the traditional attributes and the shoddiest
weapons and armor available.
Further, the graphics are still very well crafted, especially
the close detail on all dungeon monsters, flickering torches,
and the clear overhead view seen when the character walks
overland or into towns. The sound effects are similarly effective, with different sounding footsteps in varied terrain, the
noise of the sea, and the grunts of monster attacks.

There is very little interaction with other characters and the
game tends heavily toward hack and slash. This is somewhat
ameliorated
by the fact
that not all
"monsters"
are
enemies
(some are
willing to
sell goods
at inflated
prices), but
all encounters
are strictly
on a buy,
sell, or kill
basis.
The use
of magic is
limited.
The
player's
character
is not a
wizard, so
he must
buy prepackaged
spells from
various shops. There are several offensive types of varying efficiency (depending, of course, on the price) and shield/invisibility spells for defense. There are also a few utilitarian
spells (provide light, avoid traps, teleport, etc.).
The plot itself is very reminiscent of Legacy. As in the earlier game, the character must work his way up from a poorly
armed peasant to a worthy warrior/savior. In the beginning,
the primary activity for any character is limited to exploration.
He must locate the numerous towns, castles, temples, and
dungeons. This task is simplified by the map which is included with the game. A sheet of stick-on labels is included,
so that places of interest can be marked on the map as they
are located. It seems a nice touch and the world is not so
large that the exploration phase ever becomes arduous.
Progress is much more difficult in Blacksilver than in the
earlier game, however. Healing is not available at the beginning, nor are boats, mountain climbing gear, and most
armor and weapons. Even if the player has a large amount
of money, such items must be earned through experience
and the completion of quests. This puts positive pressure on
the player to immediately begin working toward his goal.
Such pressure is intensified by ominous earthquakes, which
increase in frequency as time goes on. There can be no
doubt that the Baron is working steadily to destroy the world
as the player wanders about sight-seeing.
Perhaps the most important starting locations (other than
the towns themselves), are the temples. There are three of
(Continued on page 52)

Strategy Tips

T

he swift, deadly hull

of the destroyer sur-

Combined Arms
Across The Sea

rounds you. Deep
within the Combat Information Center the atmosphere is one of tense anticipation as you attempt
to localize an intermittent
frequency line, the signature of a Soviet submarine
shadowing your force. The
Captain is occupied on
the Bridge and the young
faces that look to you for
guidance are bathed in
subtle red light. As you
have been taught, you
mentally review the threat
and tactical options while
you wait for the coming
engagement. Suddenly,
the silence is shattered as
the amplified circuit next
by H.E. Dille, Lt., USN
to you erupts with, "Sonar
has active contact, bearing 025, range 13
Recommended
kilometers!" The time for review is over,
you have a job to do.
Surface Force Mix

ASW Strategy
for "Strike
Fleet"

Successful engagement of enemy subsurface assets, Anti-Submarine Warfare
(ASW), is one of the greatest challenges
to naval surface forces. Current naval
theory and practice utilizes a combined
arms concept to localize, track, and
prosecute submarines. Unlike the combined arms concept utilized in land warfare (Infantry/Cavalry/Artillery), the Naval
component of combined arms involves
the utilization of air, surface and subsurface forces. Surface units can be augmented by friendly submarines in direct
support and ASW aircraft such as the P-3
Orion. This approach is effective because
it utilizes the unique strengths of each
type of asset to counter the threat. Air
units provide mobility for broad area
coverage and can place ordinance rapidly
on target. Surface units have the advantage of endurance and also carry air
assets in the form of helicopters. Subsurface units have the advantage of operating in the same medium as their opponents and can therefore counter environmental factors, like thermal layers,
more readily than either of their counterparts.
In Electronic Arts' Strike Fleet, unfortunately, you will not have the benefit of
submarines in direct support and the P3's portrayed in the game are of no apparent use to you. These deficiencies are
correctable through proper determination
of surface force mix and are even excusable given the excellent use of the
"fog of war" throughout the simulation.

Modern naval architecture stresses multimission capable platforms that retain a
particular strength in one of the mission
areas. The Belknap and Ticonderoga
class cruisers, for example, specialize in
Anti-Air Warfare (MW). With regard to
ASW, the premier platform is the
Spruance class destroyer. Armed with 16
torpedoes, 24 ASROCs, and two helicopters, it possesses the capability to engage
and destroy submarines at short, medium
and long ranges respectively. Spruance
destroyers also possess an average ability
to attack enemy surface units but, unfortunately, are severely limited in their
ability to defend against incoming cruise
missiles. Consequently, to successfully
operate in a multi-threat environment, a
Spruance should be escorted in close formation by two Oliver Hazard Perry
frigates to provide additional air and surface protection. The second best option
for an ASW picket is a Kidd class
destroyer operating independently. This
unit is capable of defending itself against
all types of threats and is more economical in terms of force points required than
the three ship group listed above. Anti-air
and surface attack capabilities are slightly
reduced, however, and you are essentially
putting all your eggs in one basket.

Passive ASW
Once you have determined the force
mix you will utilize, it is time to consider
tactics. ASW can basically be divided into
two separate categories, passive and active. Passive ASW is the attempt to localize, track and engage submarines on the

basis of the noise they
generate alone. It is most
effective while moving at a
slow rate of speed, although you may utilize the
sprint and drift method
described in the operations
manual. In fact, sprint and
drift is how the enemy submarines will attempt to
close and engage your forces. The danger in utilizing
this tactic, however, is that
enemy submarines may appear suddenly in the middle of your formation, while
you are sprinting and cannot passively track them
due to your own noise. If
this happens, you have already lost the advantage
and should go active immediately, because he has
probably already launched
torpedoes against one of
your units.

At this point, you should quickly cycle
through the bridges until you find the
one with an illuminated missile lock and
switch to sonar display. If the submarine
is within the firing arc of either ASROC or
shipboard launched torpedoes immediately launch two at the target. Since you
already have the submarine in the
binocular view, and the torpedoes will
have originated from virtually the same
spot, turn away until he is 180 relative
from the unit and proceed at maximum
speed. Remember, these torpedoes will
actively follow you, and a simple course
or speed change, often effective in a
WWII based simulation, is ineffective
here. Since you have no countermeasures against torpedoes, once they
have been launched, your only hope is to
outrun them. Once you have turned the
engaged unit as described, ensure that
you remotely target the submarine for follow-up attack by helicopters, if required.
Finally, ensure all other friendly units are
clear of the submarines firing arc as well.

Active ASW
Despite the current trend toward passive ASW, this Strike Fleet Admiral utilizes
active sonar whenever a submarine
threat exists. The reasoning for this is
based on a number of factors. The
manual states that active sensor use acts
as a beacon to enemy forces but, in
reality, sonar has much less impact than
radar due to the shortened counter detection range. Also, many of the scenarios,
such as "Escape to New York" and
"Wolfpack 1990", have time constraints
imposed upon your transit from one
point to another. Failure to meet these

time constraints leads to failure and, consequently, a lower rank at the end of the
scenario. It is, therefore, vital to travel at
the maximum speed available. In order to
do this without sacrificing any of the
defensive posture of your force, place an
ASW picket approximately 10 km in front
of your main body and monitor your
progress from that unit's active sonar display at 64 km range, and no greater than
64 time acceleration. You do not have to
be concerned with surface or air attack
while you are monitoring the sonar display because you will be notified if such
an event occurs by an audible missile
lock alarm.
As you proceed at 28 to 32 knots, the
first indication you will receive of an
enemy submarine is the appearance of a
red vertical bar somewhere in a 90 degree arc, forward of your picket, at a
range of 13 to 14.5 km. When this occurs, you must rapidly switch to normal
time, remotely target, launch two helicopters, and turn the whole formation away
while you prosecute with your air assets.
The first helo on top should attack while
the second remains in close proximity for
a follow-up attack, should one be required. It is vital that, when conducting a
helo attack, ordinance be dropped within

100 meters of the target for a quick kill.
This is especially critical when your opponent is an Alfa class submarine, because of its ability to outrun torpedoes
launched at longer ranges. Throughout
these engagements, monitor the
submarine's speed and alter your ship's
speeds accordingly to prevent him from
reaching a range of 11 km, the point at
which he may fire torpedoes. Mastering
these tactics will soon make the destruction of submarines routine and should
also prevent you from ever having to run
for your life in a torpedo attack again.
Before you think, "Aw shucks, that
takes all the fun out of it", remember that
this is a multi-threat environment. Thus
far we have only discussed ASW engagements exclusive of surface and air
engagements. Obviously, it always pays
to toggle back and forth between sonar
and radar displays during any engagement to see if you have any new threats.
Aside from the sheer complication of the
tactical picture that arises whenever you
are involved in simultaneous engagements you must also consider how the
forces you are engaged with may support
one another. For example, take the standard ASW engagement described earlier
and add an enemy surface group to the

threat. Soviet surface platforms have
some long range anti-air missiles and will
target your helicopters. The tactics to
counter this threat depend on the range
of the enemy surface units. If they are
firing at your helo from extreme range,
turn the helo away from the threat and
proceed outside their weapons envelope,
thereby causing those missiles already
launched against it to crash into the sea.
Proceed along the edge of their maximum range until you are at your closest
point of approach to the enemy submarine. At this point, turn inbound to attack the sub and the amount of time you
spend in the danger zone is minimized. If
the surface units are closer, then utilize
only one helo for ASW and ensure you
target any SAM's headed for your helo
with missiles of your own. Chaff and erratic maneuvering by the helo are only
marginally effective against SAM's, so use
them as a last resort.
Remember, every Admiral started as an
Ensign, and remembers the long, tedious
watches punctuated by moments of
sheer terror.
In tribute to "those in peril on the sea."

Review

Neuromancer is the excellent, witty game based on William Gibson's book of the
same name. As explained in
the Sneak Preview (CGW
#51), the plot is similar to
the book, yet is different
enough so the game can be
enjoyed even if one has already read the novel. In fact,
reading the book beforehand
primarily enables the player
to get a handle on some of
the lingo and terminology of
the Neuromancer universe
and to appreciate some of
the in-jokes in the game.

Cyberspace
Rider
Interplay's "Neuromancer"
by Douglas Seacat

In many ways, this game can be
seen as somewhat of a departure
for Interplay, the creators of The
Bard's Tale and Wasteland. The
graphic interface bears no
resemblance to the previous games
and the graphics themselves are
more interactive, consisting of a
third-person cartoon-like representation of the room in which the
character is located, the characters
in the room, and the player character himself. In addition, the game
has virtually none of the "traditional"
role-playing elements, such as character attributes, professions, or
other trappings. The only real carryover is the use of "Skills" as seen in
Wasteland. By implanting chips
into a player's brain, it is possible to
instantly gain knowledge in
specified areas. A skill-based adventure is still a very strong concept
and works just as well in Neuromancer as it did in Wasteland.

The setting of the game is Chiba City, a rough
town where the "streets" have their own use for
technology and the "neighborhood" is full of interesting characters. Actually, the game environment could be said to be composed of three distinct "worlds" where the action takes place.

In addition, there are a few
PAX terminals located in the
real world. These public access booths are very useful in
providing information, especially in the early phases of
the game. They are composed of a bank network, a
newspaper, and a bulletin
board for messages to and
from different characters. By
reading the newspaper and
bulletin board, it is possible to gain
useful clues and leads to explore
later. The PAX terminal should be
accessed immediately at the beginning of the game, if only for the use
of the bank option.
The real world is somewhat
limited, however, when it comes to
finding useful information for the
player. The other characters are
usually canny when it comes to
giving away secrets, so the other
"worlds" must be explored as soon
as possible. Both are accessed by
computers and are only available to
the player under certain conditions.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Three Worlds

use of "word-bubbles"
through which the player is
given a choice of different "appropriate" responses.

# PLAYERS:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

PUBLISHER:

The first world which the player must explore is, appropriately
enough, the "real world." This is Chiba City itself. Mapping should
not be necessary since the number of locations is not overwhelming, although each location has been thoughtfully presented.
There are a number of stores, bars, restricted areas, and other
places to visit. The city is basically divided into the low-life section,
where the player begins, and the high-tech area, a location carefully guarded against illegal entry. In addition, there is even a
launch terminal where the player can explore several locations off
the earth. The primary activity to undertake here, as well as in the
other two worlds, is the gathering of information. There are many
people to talk to and all have something to say, if they are asked
the right questions. Conversation itself is conducted through the

Resembling the computer networks of today is the Database network of Neuromancer. These stores
of information are accessed by plugging a special computer called a
"deck" into certain "jacks" and using
communications software. Because
most databases contain sensitive or
secret information, it is necessary to
go through several levels of security to access
Neuromancer
Apple (w/ 128K) and
their information. First of all, there are different
C-64/128
levels of information software which the player
1
must locate. The more important databases reC-64/128
quire
a higher level of software just to contact
Apple ($44.95)
them. Also, it is necessary to know certain code
C-64/128 ($39.95)
Bruce Balfour,
words in order to actually view the information a
Brian Fargo, Troy Miles,
database contains. In fact, most databases have
and Mike Stackpole
Interplay
several passwords, each of which gives access to
Costa Mesa, CA
more information. For example, a database may
actually give the user a certain low security
password to use to "tour" the base, but another password is actually needed to view critical information.
By following the leads of some of the characters in Chiba City,
as well as the PAX bulletin board, the player should be able to access several databases right from the start. Careful notes are essential in the boards, since clues can be found everywhere, as
well as red herrings. The first priority of any player is to get higher
levels of communications software in order to be able to enter
the more secure databases. When level six communications
software (called Comlink 6) has been found, the player can enter
the third world, Cyberspace.
This is the area of the game where all the real action and
suspense takes place. Cyberspace is a computer simulation of all
(Continued on page 51)

Review

Neanderthal
Nonsense and
Cro-Magnon
Comedy
Electronic Arts'
"Caveman Ugh-lympics"
by David Wilson

E

lectronic Arts' new comic arcade hit, Caveman Ugh-

lympics, is a look at sporting events the way they
"should have been." The game is a tongue-in-cheek
prehistoric parody of our modern olympics that manages to
keep players snickering and chuckling throughout. The
game's graphics are colorful, especially the scenery, and the
characters seem like genuine cartoon characters that the
player is allowed to control.
The title sequence foreshadows the entire game experience
as an Olympic torch bearer runs toward the bowl where the
Olympic flame is to be kindled. As soon as the flame is lit, a
huge stone-carved title page falls on him and he is quickly
replaced by a comical caveman and the serious theme
music is usurped by an offbeat overture.
One of the game's strong points is the number of players
that can compete. We had a group of teenagers over for an
evening and they had a great time. This game is ideal for
more than one player. In fact, the game is much more enjoyable with two to four players. With more than that, it tends to
bog down somewhat.
The game offers six exciting events to compete in. Each
takes a particular skill and effort with a joystick. You begin by
choosing one of the cast of characters. It is wise to note a
character's strong points before making a final choice. Most
characters are outstanding in one event or another. The
noteworthy exceptions to this rule are Vincent and Gronk.
Vincent is the studious type (a wimp) and has no advantage
in any event. Gronk is the opposite, a born athlete with a
natural advantage in all events.

Have Mate Will Travel
The mate toss is an event which is hilarious. Players whirl
their mate around until enough speed is built up for a good
throw and then, since this is a male-dominated world, literally
let her fly (actually, Crudla can throw her husband, too!). If
you hang on too long, though, you will turn blue and end
up with a rotten toss. Make sure you throw her far enough
to make her happy. The spouses do not like those short distance throws. They really have a desire to travel.

order to keep from being eaten by a "not-so-nice" kitty. Instead of the hurdles runners would face in modern competition, the characters must avoid cacti and mud bogs. Nimbleness is certainly required in order to avoid being stuck in the
mud or stuck by the cacti. Those who successfully reach the
end of the course may catch their breath from a safe distance up in a tree, while they taunt the angry tiger.

Quest for Fire
The quest for fire
was a suitable topic
for a feature length
film and it is especially
suited to this game.
In the firemaking
event, characters
must rub sticks
together rapidly and
blow the resultant
glowing embers into a
burst of flame. Success will leave the
character feeling
warm and toasty. Of
course, should your
opponent get too far
ahead, you already
have a stick in your
hand. Surely you are
barbaric enough to
know what to do. A
simple bust in the noggin
should stun him long enough to
get a nice fire going.

The "Club Head"
Vacation

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

Caveman Ugh-Lympics
C-64/128
1-6
$39.95
Greg Johnson,
Richard Rayl, Jr.,
Jon Leupp, Brian Hahn, and
Derek Lukaszuk
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Another wacky event is clubbing. There are two phases to
clubbing. In phase one, the character waves his arms, jumps
up and down in an attempt to frighten his opponent. Thereby, giving himself an edge. The player moves the joystick
wildly in as many different directions as he can. The wilder
the moves, the more intimidated the opponent should be. Intimidation can cause your opponent to back away and thus,
place himself closer to the edge of the cliff.
Phase two allows the player to choose from three different
styles of clubbing. One can stand toe-to-toe with his adversary in order to bust him directly in the face; utilize the subtlety necessary to smash him in the knee; or develop the
grace sufficient to accomplish a prehistoric "sky hook" and
smash him with a powerful overhead smash. Players will
need to use all three styles if they hope to win their matches.

Hold That Tiger!

There is also misdirection. Characters can point at the sky
behind their opponent in hopes of getting him to look. After
all, since shoes haven't been invented, you can't tell him that
his shoe is untied. In addition, a comet occasionally shoots
across the screen during this event. If you cause the
caveman to point while the comet is crossing, he lets out a
prodigious holler that will physically knock down his opponent.

Saber tooth tigers are not exactly slow moving creatures.
That is probably what makes the Saber Race such a challenging event. Players will run as fast as they possibly can in

The event ends when your caveman or your opponent's is
knocked out or falls over the ledge where the match is held.
Sometimes, an aggressive player can just keep chasing his

opponent off the edge. A comical touch is added when the
falling caveman waves "bye bye" just before he falls.

Dinosaurus Wrecks
One thing about being a dino jockey, you don't have to
watch your
weight. In
fact, the bigger and
stronger
your
caveman is,
the better.
Dino racing
gives the
player the opportunity to
ride a
dinosaur
Alley Oop
style. Players
spur their dinos and, once they get them moving, bop them
in the head to encourage them to go faster. Don't bop them
too often, however, because an unconscious dinosaur can't
win the race for you.

Vault of Error
The dino vault gives new meaning to the agony of defeat.
This may be the hardest event to master. As with all events,
the key to success is joystick rhythm with the back and forth
(running) movements and perfect timing with the fire button
(jumping). When players fail to master the timing necessary,
their on-screen characters will find themselves falling into a
chasm or sliding into the gullet of the waiting Tyrannasaurus
Rex. In other words, make it over or you are, literally, dead
meat.

Good Humor Plan
This game is a humorous treat for all, young and old alike.
The game's mechanics will give player's wrists, hands, and
fingers a good workout, but the most commendable aspect
of this game is its humor. Even the game's documentation is
part of the fun. Not only is it filled with tips given in
Caveman-like talk (i.e. guttural English) that will tickle your
funny bone, but it also includes the Ugh Zaminer newspaper
that continues the comedic mood that runs through the entire product. So, the next time you find yourself longing for
those simpler times and looking for a way to sate the barbarian within, don't lose your cool—boot up Caveman Ughlympics instead.

Review

Barry Werger was the 1988 New York Region Champion
in G-Stock Autocross. His SCCA Activities include serving
on the NY Region Race Management Committee and as a
Steward for track racing. In private life, he drives a jetblack Chrysler GTS with vanity plates that read "Cthulhu."
Charles Ardai contributes to CGW so regularly that he's
never had a bio-note prior to this issue.

Gentlemen,
Start Your
Engines

Once you've selected a car and a track, you must qualify
and then, race. Controls are identical to Test Drive's: turn
the wheel by pushing the joystick left or right, accelerate or
brake by pushing forward or back, and shift with the fire button depressed. Barry had high praise for the inclusion of
manual shifting ("There's a neutral," he said. "That's good.
Most games don't have five gears."), but strong criticism
otherwise. "I'm not sure there's a way around it, but the joys-

Once Around
The Block

The last time I
got into a car with
Barry Werger, we
spent half a day
fighting Manhattan
traffic, steering
through the misshapen streets of
Greenwich Village,
and hunting for
that most elusive of
commodities in
New York, the
Legal Parking
Spot. All in all, not
a bad way to kill an
afternoon—perhaps someone will
make a game out of it someday—but not the most satisfying
of driving experiences either.

An Autocross Champion
Takes Accolade's Latest
Racing Game Out
For a Test Drive

When you have an expert driver at the wheel, you want to
be careening down an empty highway at speeds somewhere
around Mach 2, not following an old woman on a bicycle
and a meat-packer's delivery truck down Green Street at two
miles-per-hour. Alas, empty highways are scarce these days,
and in any case, Manhattan's not the place to find them.
Barry once invited me to ride with him in one of his races,
but that curious I'm not. It seemed for a long time as
though I would never get to see from up close what he does
best: navigate complicated courses with speed and precision,
pushing his cars and his skills to their limits.
Then, fate stepped in, in the person of my mailman. A new
game had arrived from Accolade, Grand Prix Circuit. Eight
tracks to choose from, three cars, functional rear-view mirrors, pit stops, everything you could want. As the package
says, "The power. The passion. The performance." (Are they
really talking about racing?)

Off To The Races
Grand Prix Circuit was promising right from the start. The
opening sequence was even more polished than the opening of Test Drive, the introductory graphics more startling.
The cars—Ferrari, Williams, and McLaren—were displayed
Road & Track style as in the earlier release, and the onscreen information was absolutely on the mark. Barry did
question some of the information in the manual, though.
For instance, the manual says that the McLaren's " . . .
speed comes at the price of braking, handling, and gripping
power."
"Nonsense," says Barry.

by Charles Ardai
tick system is inherently unsatisfying for racing
games. Control
isn't precise enough and it's too difficult
to steer, control your speed and shift all
with the same stick."
Keyboard controls are available, but
the control keys are inconveniently located: I, J, K and L. "Why choose keys
placed so close together?" Barry asked.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Grand Prix Circuit
C-64/128, IBM
C-64
1
$29.95, $39.95
Brad Gour
Accolade
San Jose, CA

After much experimentation, Barry came up with a comfortable control system: steering with the keyboard, controlling
acceleration with the joystick, one-handed, and having me
shift for him via the keyboard. Obviously, if a friend's not
available, this system won't work—unless you can train yourself to shift one-handed, too.
Is all this trouble worth it? Yes and no. "It takes so long to
master—no, to get used to, the controls," Barry said, "that
you don't know for a long time whether you like the game."
If you're not an autocross driver, or a racing-game fanatic,
you may not want to bother learning the interface.
However, once you do get the controls under your belt,
you uncover what Barry called "the best computer racing
game I've played." True, the background graphics and engine sounds don't vary significantly from place to place or
from car to car, but the tracks are accurate, including such
details as the tunnel in the Circuit de Monaco course. True,
the animation is chunky, but the cars all look like cars and
the twin rear-view mirrors are useful as well as decorative.
True, the package hype is ludicrous. You don't "slither and
slide" by any stretch of the imagination, but the action is
fast, and filling. There is enough to do, and there are

enough different ways to do it, that you come away feeling
you've eaten a feast, not just gobbled down a trifle.
Admittedly,
you never
stop weaving
like a drunk,
but you do
sober up as
you become
accustomed
to the controls. Once
sober,
there's good
racing to be
had on the

Grand Prix
Circuit.

The Final Lap
Barry still had some questions, after he'd burned out his
wrist, fingers and eyes on too many laps at too many tracks
in too many cars. "Why does it take so long to load?" I told
him it was because it was a Commodore 64.

'Why do all racing games have a drag race start (three red
lights, then a green) when they're not drag racing games?" I
told him I didn't know.
"If they use real teams for your competitors, shouldn't they
use real racers' names?" I told him they probably didn't want
to be sued. "That's silly," he said. "They could have gotten
permission." I said they might have tried, but could have had
to pay too much for the privilege.
"They should make the pit stops easier to find." I agreed.
He stood, shook his hands out and rubbed his eyes. I shut
off the system. "Did you like it?" I asked.
"Yeah," he said. "Grand Prix Circuit is a good game." He
grabbed his coat and headed for the door. "So, next time
we'll do it my way, right? You'll come to a race with me, feel
what it's really like?"
I smiled. "Not on your life," I said.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 8)
as the Experiment du Jour. The Voice
Master comes with or without the game.
C-64 ($19.95), with the Voice Master Jr.
($49.95), with the Voice Master ($89.95).
Circle Reader Service #5.

Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
Redwood City, CA 94063
TECHNO COP: Miami Vice meets
Road Warrior in this action game from
U.S. Gold. Players chase drug overlords
in a modern day Batmobile with
machine guns and bombs or use radar
criminal locators, Magnum .88's and
snare guns as the weapons of
preference when they are on foot. "Holy
Crimebusters, Techno Cop!" C-64 (pictured), Apple II and IBM ($39.95) Atari
ST and Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #6.

Mindcraft Software
2341 205th St., Suite 102
Torrance, CA 90501
THE MAGIC CANDLE: The demon
Dreax is held prisoner in a magic candle
that is burning low. The player must
travel the world, searching for the secret
to prolong paraffin. Ultima style
graphics, castles, dungeons, sages,
towns, villages, magic....it's all here in
this fantasy role-playing game. The twist
is you can have separate parties working
in simultaneous time and characters improve by other means than experience
points. Apple (pictured) and IBM
($49.95), C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #7.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, II 60062
DEJA VU II: LOST IN LAS VEGAS:
Well, here you are again. This time,
Chicago mobsters have dumped you in
the city of lights. The player must come
up with $100,000 in seven days or he'll
get a new pair of cement overshoes...he'll sleep with the fishes...(hey,
it's hard to find a mobster idiom for the
desert!) in this graphic adventure game
utilizing ICOM's familiar MacAdventure interface. Mac ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #8.
BALANCE OF POWER: THE 1990
EDITION: The classic original has been
updated and expanded in this new edition. Some of the new features include
active foreign policies by non-superpowers, an updated database, 18 additional countries and an on-screen advisory council for crisis advice. Oh, and
you can still die on the first turn! Mac

(pictured), IBM (640K, hard drive and
Microsoft Windows required) ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #9.
720 DEGREES: The skateboarding arcade game has come to the home computer. Players practice in the streets and
then compete in skate parks in various
competitions such as downhill, jump,
ramp, and slalom. The 720 in the title
refers to a double 360 while airborne. In
your dreams! Joystick required. C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Mindware International
110 Dunlop St. W., Box
22158
Barrie, Ontario, Canada
L4M 5R3
CHARON 5: The player must rescue a
team of research scientists who have disappeared while investigating a

mysterious alien Colony Ship. Eleven different levels and over 5400 color
screens make up this joystick driven, action game. Extremely smooth scrolling
helps this game move rapidly along.
Amiga ($34.95). Circle Reader Service

#11.
Paragon Software
600 Rugh Street
Greensburg, PA 15601
GUARDIANS OF INFINITY: TO
SAVE KENNEDY: The player becomes
a time-traveling physicist from the future
who must keep JFK alive and prevent
the time continuum from unraveling.
This text adventure has a graphics disk
that sets up the mission, multiple agents
for the player to send on various missions, several windows to monitor the
agents, and a 90 page novella describing the circumstances leading up to the

Atari ST (pictured) and Amiga ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #16.

Sir-Tech
P.0 Box 245
Charlestown Mall
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
THE USURPER: This lighthearted text
adventure will send the player after the
long-lost Orb of Qyntarr (say that fast
three times) which will topple the evil
King Aken from the usurped throne he
now sits on. Function keys and numeric
keypad input are featured in the IBM version. Apple 128K (pictured) and IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #17.

Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
MACARTHUR'S WAR: The Battlefront system keeps churning along
with new battles to fight. This one features eight battles from the Korean Conflict. The player takes either side and
fights face-to-face or solo against the
computer. The game comes with the impressive SSG construction tools so you
can even create a MASH unit if desired.
Apple ($40.00). Circle Reader Service

Conversions Received

mission. An intriguing product with a lot
to it. IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service
#12.

PSI
2 N. Highview Ave.
Nanuet, NY 10954
CYBER COP: Mechanoids come to
the computer! The player is a multitransformable termination unit that must
terminate the Rebels of Hollerith in this
action game. Different worlds and multiple levels let Cyber Cop go for points
(kills) or longevity. IBM (pictured), Apple
and C-64. ($34.95). Circle Reader Service # 13.

CRL
Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER: One or
two players compete against each other

or the computer for bragging rights in
this joystick driven, action game.
Originally released on cartridge, the
game is now on disk. Multiple levels of
play when the player goes against the
computer. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #14.
3D GAME MAKER: This arcade game
construction set comes with a graphics
editor which allows the player to design
all of the graphics in a game, and a 3D
room designer that enables the player to
select and position objects in a room.
The package also comes with a sample
game to get the creative juices flowing.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #15
TRANSPUTOR: Similar to a 3D version of Breakout, the player must work
through 32 screens which have 32 different types of blocks, without having
his ball roll off the edge of the earth.
Each block has different characteristics
and the player has missiles to disintegrate any particularly difficult blocks.

For the Amiga
Falcon (Spectrum Holobyte)
Heroes of the Lance (SSI)
Master Ninja (Paragon)
Out Run (Mindscape)
Platoon (Data East)
Willow (Mindscape)
For the Apple IIGS
4th & Inches Team Disk (Accolade)
Perils of Rosella (Sierra)
For the Atari ST
Elite (Rainbird)
Falcon (Spectrum Holobyte)
Orbiter (Spectrum Holobyte)
For the C-64
Menace (Psygnosis)
Willow (Mindscape)
For the IBM
Arkanoid (Taito)
Dungeon Master's Assistant (SSI)
4th & Inches Team Disk (Accolade)
Mean 18 Course Disk (Accolade)
Phantasm (Exocet)
Rush'n Attack (Konami)
Time Bandit (Microdeal)

#18.

(Continued from page 29)

sion 1.01 of the game now available (it
also fixes the initialization process with
the RGB color cards on the Apple). Also,
it fixes the small room under Middlegate
that you cannot get out of in the original
version.
Another bug is with Lord Peabody, who,
after you have seen Queen Lamanda, is
supposed to give you some important information, which he never does. This is a
bit more serious, but if you read the introductory story at the front of the manual,
you should have a good idea of what to
do.

Much more serious, and the strongest
mark against M&M II, is that it is mostly a
lot of padding around a very simple plotline. The castle dungeons, for example,
are quite extraneous to the plot. They
have a number of areas with signs that
say "No Paladins", "No Dwarves", "No HalfOrcs", "No Clerics", etc. There is no rationale for this; it merely forces you to juggle party members and hirelings to enter
these areas (and what you find there isn't
worth the effort). Better items can be obtained from ordinary combat. No clues to
the major quest are to be found in any of
the castle dungeons.
The hirelings have no personalities of
their own (their names aren't even imaginative). Their main purpose in the
game is to help the various characters
complete special, individual quests (there
is one for each character class except the
Robber, who can help any class), and for
playing "musical chairs" with your party
members to get into those special castle
dungeon areas. While they can be helpful, it would have been just as easy to

allow for a regular party of eight characters instead.
Combat is disappointingly excessive, as
you need to advance fairly high in level to
finish the game (my own party was 40th
level or so), and also tends towards large
numbers of opponents. There is, in fact,
one point in the game where you must
fight 200 monsters in order to reach a
particular area. These monsters are pretty
much wimps and easy to kill. To me, the
process seemed a tedious and time-consuming exercise in mass butchery.
Further, finding things in the outdoors
can be difficult, especially the color messages. You not only have to be on the
right spot, but also facing in the right
direction. It's a good thing that much of
the information they contain can be
found out in other ways. The green ones,
for example, tell you nothing you can't
learn from a quick trip to Atlantium and a
visit to the statues there.
The ending itself is remarkable for its
pointlessness. Having fought your way to
and past the final confrontation, you are
suddenly presented with a cryptogram
that must be solved in fifteen minutes:
real time! This comes out of nowhere
and is quite a shock. Nothing before this
prepares you for it (well, at least you're
prepared now). I have no idea why this is
in the game. It certainly doesn't fit with
anything else.
Beyond that, your characters get 50 million experience points each when you
finish the game. It sounds terrific, but
what are you going to do with that? The
game is over. You can go around and,
perhaps, investigate any areas you left unexplored, or bash monsters with your
new godhood, but this has little meaning.
Further, should there be a Might & Magic
III, it is highly unlikely such powerful characters and mega-goodies will be allowed
to transfer over intact. Thus, the final
reward brings no true satisfaction.
The original game, while not perfect,
was imaginative and interesting, and
showed great promise for future entries
in the series. However, Might & Magic II
seems to have swerved off the path in
the boring "monster mash/Monty Haul"
direction, where ever-more-powerful characters with ever-more-powerful weapons
fight ever-more-powerful monsters until it
all escalates into the realm of the
ludicrous.
Bottom line: Not up to par with the
original; great graphics but emphasis on
combat overshadows all else. Great for
monster mash lovers, but not recommended for others.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

(Continued from page 40)

Cyberspace
Rider
the data in the world. By traveling through Cyberspace, the player
can attempt to force entry into any database, whether he knows
the passwords or not. In addition, there are some databases
which cannot be accessed through normal databases at all, yet
can be found in Cyberspace. The best thing about Cyberspace is
the fact that, once a database is penetrated, the player has access
to all the information in the base, at all security levels.
Naturally, there are drawbacks, as well. The most obvious is that
Cyberspace is not initially available. Until Comlink 6 is found,
Cyberspace cannot be entered. Also, it is necessary to use a more
expensive "deck" called a Matrix Simulator to access Cyberspace.
One real drawback to Cyberspace is that, at least initially, where
the player "jacks in" will determine what databases he may access.
Not all databases can be reached from the same jack, so exploration in the "real world" is necessary in order to locate other places
to "jack in."
Finally, when accessing databases directly, there is no real
danger, either a password is known or it is not. If the player does
not have the password, he cannot enter the database. It is that
simple. In Cyberspace, however, things are different. Since most
legal computer users never even attempt to use Cyberspace, all
entry is considered illegal. So, safeguards have been imposed.
Each database is protected by a special "security guard" called
ICE (Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics), determined to keep
people out. Before the information in the databases can be seen,
the ICE must be broken. By using certain software (prosaically
named such things as Blowtorch, Drill, Injector, Depth Charge,
etc.) along with skill chips, the ICE can be brought down. It is a
skill which takes practice and patience, though. Needless to say,
the ICE tends to fight back against the player and can even kill
the unwary.
In addition to the ICE, some databases have a second line of
security, Artificial Intelligences. These individuals are extremely
powerful and are completely impervious to the software used to
crack ICE (in fact, they actually design the ICE itself). Each Al has
its own personality, weaknesses, and information. Beating an Al is
the most difficult feat in the game.
Through the exploration of the interesting and extremely varied
details of these three "worlds," it is possible for the player to gain
a grasp on the convoluted plot in the game and, as a result, form
some purpose and goal. The game is, in many ways, a detective
story with the detective's life on the line and only his clues (and
skill) to protect him. Information is definitely worth more than
money in this game, a fact which should be remembered at all
times.

The Zen of Cyberspace (Positive Thoughts)
While Neuromancer is far from perfect, this is an engaging and
genuinely enjoyable experience. The concept itself, outlined by
William Gibson in the novels, is an original and infinitely gameable one. The use of the different worlds to explore, with a welldeveloped plot line are definitely positive factors in the game's
favor. While the game contains much more humor than the more
hard-hitting novels, the humor is cleverly presented and works
well in a gaming atmosphere.
In addition, I enjoyed the subtlety of pacing which the game's
authors display. Initially, I would have been prepared to state that

the non-linear nature of this game is a plus. On further reflection,
I realize that the game is, in fact, very linear. It is simply that the
designers were smart enough in plotting and placing their clues
that the player feels little confinement in his actions. Either the
player has the information and intelligence needed to advance or
he does not. In a way, this approach made the game an easy and
enjoyable experience. I found myself stuck on several occasions,
but was able, within the large scope of the plot, to find another
clue to lead me further along. If a player gets genuinely stuck, it
is simply because he has not tried everything or thought things
through carefully enough.
The Cyberspace battles with the ICE were also a plus. This approach to combat was, at once, more exciting and more intellectually stimulating than systems of combat used in more "traditional" role-playing games. The player character's life is on the line,
providing an element of suspense and there is a compelling
reward (information) at the other end of the "monster." Finding
additional threads of plot after combat is better than "gold" any
day.

Jack Range Limits (Negative Thoughts)
My main concerns with the game involve cosmetics rather than
the concept. I found the "Talking Bubbles" method of character
interaction to be rather crude. The player cannot ever really have
a conversation with the characters in the game, since he is just
making choices between certain predetermined responses. While
this does not really detract from game play, it does make the
game world seem a little less "real."
Further, the disk swapping gets to be frustrating. Of the four
disk sides, all get extremely heavy use. This is especially prevalent
in Cyberspace, where sometimes the disk must be changed three
times! This might be understandable, due to the amount of information found in the databases, but it still becomes tiring. A slightly better organization on where the information is stored might
have been in order. Perhaps, it would have been useful to use offline paragraphs for this information a la Wasteland.
In the novels, matters were simultaneously brought to a climax
both in the real world and in Cyberspace. The action on both
levels became more and more intense until the conclusion was
reached. The game departs from this in what seems to be an intentional focus on Cyberspace as one approaches the climax.
The "real world" becomes less and less important as one progresses in the game until it can almost be ignored at the conclusion.
This may have been the thematic intention of the designers, but
the game may have been more enjoyable and truer to its roots
had the action continued at a fast pace in the "real world," as well
as Cyberspace.
Further, and perhaps this will occur in a sequel, it would have
been interesting to have some actual interaction with the Als. In
the game, contact with these creatures was limited almost entirely
to combat, where it was either kill or be killed. In the Gibson interview (CGW #51), he certainly expressed the hope that any Count
Zero product would involve interaction with the voodoo entities.
Conversation with the Als would certainly have been welcome in
this one.

Turing Registry (Recommendation)
Neuromancer is an extremely enjoyable game. By using the
backdrop of William Gibson's Cyberspace universe, the designers
have been able to create a very good, very different sort of role
playing game. This game is an excellent example of how the
genre can be improved for the better. With consummate pacing,
a witty sense of humor, and the excitement of Cyberspace combat, Interplay has created one of the best CRPGs ever.
The game deserves the highest recommendation, both for novice
and experienced players.

(Continued from page 34)

feel of a cutting edge product. This is primarily due to the
fact that there are almost no actual innovations in the game.
Everything from plot to graphics have been seen before in
other products, giving the game a dated tone.

these: Eagle, Owl, and Hawk. Each one of them has something to offer the player. The temples provide healing (although not initially), training to raise attributes (using arcade
game sequences), and numerous sub-plots for the player to
pursue. Two of the temples contain underground archives
which are basically museums of magical display cases to provide them with certain items or send them on quests. Does
this sound familiar? Just as in Legacy, each display must be
paid for with a certain coin which in turn, must be found on
the quests
and in
towns. It is
important to
view all of
the displayed, although the
order must
be determined by the
player's discretion.
By means
of such displays, the
player's hero can accomplish the varied initial quests of the
game: rescuing the castle from evil trolls; storming the
citadel, and searching the introductory dungeons of the
game. When these have been finished, the hero is
transported to the evil continent of Maelbane. There, he
must work his way through more difficult perils and eventually confront the evil baron in a final fight.

Technical Treasure (Good News)
Technically, there is little wrong with The Legend of Blacksilver. The Doughertys have created a good looking program with excellent graphics, delightful sound effects, and intriguing puzzles. The interface, while somewhat awkward with
a joystick, works very well on the keyboard for smooth movement and logical commands.
The puzzles themselves are much improved from Legacy,
which was a very easy game. This program will take much
longer to complete and has some interesting solutions to old
problems. The game still is not overwhelmingly difficult, so
most players will figure things out without hints, even
though there is a significant challenge.
The earthquakes, as well as the increased difficulty and
variety of the puzzles give the player more to do and a sense
of urgency about what he is doing. This pressure, missing
from Legacy, is a welcome bonus. A little excitement is a
good thing in a CRPG, so the player will not get bogged
down just killing monsters and wandering the countryside.

Troublesome Traps (Bad News)
While the game is technically good, it does not have the

In addition, the necessity of using a pre-packaged character seems confining. It has been successfully accomplished
in other products, but it just doesn't work in Blacksilver.
There is nothing to cause the player to really identify with the
protagonist or even personalize the actual attributes. This
apathy makes it hard to enjoy victories or lament defeat.
Also, the manner of pacing used in the product seems
rather forced. The idea that weapons can only be purchased
when the player is experienced enough seems unreal to me.
I cannot really picture a medieval arms deal pushing off a
five gold piece club on a guy that can afford the 500 gold
piece sword, just because he might cut his fingers with it.
The same goes with the monsters in the game. They always
seem the same. When the player gets stronger and starts
using better weapons, the monsters simply get stronger or
more numerous. There is a sameness in combat throughout
the game that leaves the player with very little feeling of
growth or development.
Something definitely should have been done about character interaction. Role playing games should not be able to get
away with simple hack and slash, anymore. There ought to
be some communication between characters, even if only
on a simplistic level.
To be truthful, the dungeons in Blacksilver only serve the
purpose of mindless treasure hunts, barging around killing
monsters until every piece of loot has been scraped up. If
only some of the disk space could have been used for something more unique.

Endgame (Critical Appraisal)
When everything is put together, Legend of Blacksilver is
somewhat disappointing. The game is fine on a technical
level, but on an artistic level it seems to be a rehash of a
thousand other games, with nothing new or interesting for
experienced players. Certainly, anyone who is bored with the
old "Go Kill the Evil Magician" plot should stay away. However, it does have some good puzzles and could be recommended for those who have not played many role playing
games or those who find comfort in the familiar old plot/style.

Back Issues

Hall of Fame / R.1

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been well
spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they have been
enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all

Game Ratings Chart

The game ratings have been frozen for three months
while the new Reader Input Device database is under
construction. The ratings printed here are those compiled with the last figures received prior to adopting an
A through F grade scale. Be sure to tune in next issue

when we unveil the results. In the meantime, the
response has been fabulous. If you haven't mailed in
your responses for the new database, turn to the R.I.D.
and let us know how you feel.

