June 1991

Features

Lining Up With Lemmings

B.A.T. on a Hot Tip's Spoor

8

Hanging Out in the SPA

Time Enough to Solve

A Pool of Talent for Software Publishers

12

Moon Over Pellarid

CGW Looks at Legend's TimeQuest

Booty in the Eye of the Beholder

14

Virgin Mastertronic's Overlord

Flight "4.0" to Anywhere

Demagogues Apply Here / Leah Wesolowski

20

Unhooding Falcon 3.0

Red Planes in the Sunset
24

Extending Napoleon's Lifespan

28

Entertaining Educational Games

PCs in the Sky With Richtofen

Straight Talk About Learning Games / Caitlin Ackelson

31

Dogfighting in F-16 Combat Pilot

More Mileage for Test Drive III
35

Combat Tips for Modem-to-Modem Play / Scott West

What Reviewers Really Play

37

A Look at a Reviewer's Hard Drive / M. Evan Brooks

What Do Developers Do?

42

Fifth Annual Computer Game Developers' Conference

"Sticking" It to the Enemy
"Thrustmaster" Air Combat Control Device / Scott West

54

72
75
80

Broderbund's Galleons of Glory / Alan Emrich

The War of 1812 in Battles of Napoleon / G. Collins

A Survey of Four WWI Air Combat Games/Mike Weksler

68

Combat Tactics for Knights of the Sky / Gary "Mo" Morgan

Getting "Strait" With Magellan

A Playtester Sneaks a Peek / Mike Weksler

64

Scott Pellarid Looks at Wesson's Moonbase

SSI Unwraps a New Style CRPG / Dennis Owens

J. Trimble

56

Psygnosis' Humorous Mental Challenge/Allen Greenberg

"Bureau of Astral Troubleshooters" / Wilson and Bowers

Microsoft Flight Simulator 4.0 / Timothy

Number 83

82
88

Accolade's Road & Car Disk / Wayne S. Kawamoto

Departments
Taking A Peek
Rumor Bag
Scorpion's Mail
Game Ratings Chart (Top 100 Games Rated)
Scorpion's View (Eye of the Beholder)
Inside the Industry
Reader Input Device
Over There (European Games Report)
Editorial

6
22

38
48
51
62
90
92
96

Taking a Peek

California Dreams
Los Gatos, CA
STREET ROD 2: Hanging out at the
local burger joint, "relish" once again
those long-lost hot summer nights spent
cruising for chicks, checking out bitchin'
rods and drag racing for pink slips.
Browse the daily newspaper for cars and
parts for sale. Start off with a junker and
turn it into one bad street rod using
grease-monkey skills. Then, cruise down
to the Burger Bungalow and check out
the action. Challenge other drivers to a
drag race, either in the Los Angeles
Aqueduct or on Mulholland Drive, for
more bread or pink slips. Beat the King
of the Road, scam his Betty and be the
new Leader of the Pack! Includes an expanded "construction set" and improved
graphics over its "little brother." IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Data East
San Jose, CA
THE DREAM TEAM 3-ON-3 CHALLENGE: One player's dream is another's
nightmare. Just try defeating Patrick
Ewing, Dominique Wilkins and Joe
Dumars! With a straightforward basketball/arcade interface, players can create
their own "dream team," including designing plays (and calling them) for 1-on-1,
2-on-2 and 3-on-3 team play. Fouls, 3-point
shots and a 24-second clock keep the action moving through individual games or
tournaments. For one or two players, on
the same team or as opponents. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
ROBOCOP 2: A new drug, nuke, is all
the rage in Old Detroit and is being
pushed by druglord Cain. Where's the
anti-nuke crowd when you need 'em? No
matter. RoboCop is on the way through

plenty of arcade shooting-gallery sequences and occasional puzzles over its three
levels. All of the snazzy sound and
graphics you'd expect from an Amiga
($44.95). Circle Service #3.
General Quarters Software
Rancho Palos Verdes, CA
BANZAI: Fans of General Quarters
software products have reason to
celebrate. Banzai: The Death Sortie of
the Yamato adds exciting air/sea operations, shell selection, damage control,
counter-flooding and other new features
to highlight this, the latest in their
popular series of strategic/tactical WWII
naval simulations. Players can also
switch sides during the game and set
computer strategy. A "modem play" file
transfer option has also been added.
While the sound and graphics quality are
below the industry standard, the
gameplay value is there. IBM, Apple II
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
DOUBLE DRIBBLE: For those seeking
cartridge-based game quality for their

IBM computer, Double Dribble is worth
a drive downcourt. Standard arcade basketball fare with some nice touches for
team selection, this joystick jiggler is bargain priced for PC owners. IBM (19.95),
C-64 ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Maxis
Orinda, CA
ROBOSPORT: In the best traditions of
Net Trek and Mad Maze, this network
game is something for the irreverent
strategist. For one to four players (two
via modem, and more via Appletalk network), commanding the droids o' death
is as easy as can be. Advanced
scenarios add Kamikaze maneuvers,
time bombs and the dreaded Stealth
Robot. Frenzied action with a Running
Man sort of feel to it, this is definitely the
high-tech version of "kick the can." Mac
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
MicroLeague Sports
Newark, DE
MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL — THE
MANAGER'S CHALLENGE: While supporting only EGA-level graphics, this
(Continued on page 91)

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

B.A.T.
Amiga, Atari ST,
C-64/128 and IBM

chat's a melodramatic science fiction role-playing game
without a really despicable villain? Nothing, of course,
but fortunately, that's not the case this time. In UBI
Soft's B.A.T. (Bureau of Astral Troubleshooters), Vrangor is a
typical mad genius (or UBG, "Ultimate Bad Guy") set on galactic
domination. After escaping from prison with his (all too typical)
henchman, Merigo, Vrangor contacted the Confederation of the
Galaxies with the vile threat of destroying the City of Terrapolis
on Selenia if it wasn't deeded over to him within ten days.
Vrangor's method of destruction? Secretly hidden Nuctrobiogeic
bombs planted somewhere in the city. The Bureau of Astral
Troubleshooters ("B.A.T.") has been secretly asked to send an
agent to track Vrangor and put a stop to his diabolical plan.

Troubleshooting on Selenia
By Martin Bowers and David M. Wilson

"This Is the City..."
B.A.T. contains a carefully constructed model of a futuristic city
on the fictional world of Selenia. Terrapolis hosts a variety of
alien and robotic characters and caters both to refined tastes and
to coarser desires within the city limits (the dance halls, arcades
and, of course, the exclusive Xifo Club). The local adult movie
theater is also available, utilizing the latest techniques in appealing to all five senses. B.A.T. agents must carefully explore every
inch of the city, from the highest penthouse to the lowest gutter
in order to stop Vrangor.

Of Mice and Men(us)
B.A.T. utilizes a graphic interface, meaning the player selects
options from the screen using a joystick/mouse cursor and
various command menus. This forces the player to drag the cursor across every inch of each panel (a process which becomes
very tedious). The Amiga graphic art was outstanding, but the
C64 graphics were fuzzy, grainy and (generally) less than exciting. Both versions boasted a well-programmed soundtrack.

Follow Your Nose
In game play, it is extremely easy to get lost, since the panels
do not seem to fit together in a coherent fashion. Compass-style
directions have no real bearing in this game, either. The arrow
icons which indicate the direction a player may select relate
ONLY to the picture the player is involved in at the time. Upon
entering a new panel it is unclear whether an arrow option will
return the character to his previous position or lead him to a new
direction. The player will discover that he must memorize (or
map) the relationship of the panels one to another in order to
find his way around Terrapolis. In the initial stages, players will
find themselves doing an undue amount of accidental backtracking, much to their annoyance.

Talking to Strangers
Talking to non-player characters is simple. The player only has
three questions he can ask (the same three questions for almost
(Continued on page 10)

Review

Troubleshooting on Selenia
(Continued from page 8)

every person encountered). Players can basically find out about
either Vrangor, Merigo or the city. Players can buy or sell items
from these characters as well as offer gifts or bribes. Bribing
these characters was not helpful at all in the Commodore version, by the way (every one, without exception, was insulted).
The Amiga version's non-player characters, however, seemed
open to the idea of either money or objects whenever they were
offered.
Non-player characters will sometimes make illogical appearances. For example, in the secret place where Vrangor's bombs
were planted, police appear. Even after killing Vrangor in his
hideout, there were nonsensical appearances of police and others
who logically would not have been there.

My Buddy B.O.B.
Players will be grateful for the assistance of B.O.B., their built-in
Bidirectional Organic Bioputer. B.O.B. is situated on the agent's
arm for quick access. Players would do well to take a quick
course in computer programming in order to get B.O.B. to
operate at optimal levels. Agents will have to use B.O.B. to perform translation from the exotic languages of robots and aliens
into standard galactic speech. B.O.B. can also accelerate or
decelerate pulse rates, remind the agent that he is hungry, thirsty
or injured and advise if the agent is being followed. While
programming B.O.B. is time-consuming until one gets the hang
of it, it is well worth the effort.

The B.A.T. Quickstep
There is a game within the game. In the arcade, there is a
game called Bizzy. The object of Bizzy is to memorize a progression of shapes. The player must learn to play Bizzy in order to
save Selenia. Another place of entertainment the player will need
to frequent is the dance hall. The Amiga mouse control made
dancing a snap! The Commodore joystick dance, however, like
the Lambada, was truly physically demanding. Players must jerk
the joystick back and forth unduly vigorously. The writers tried
several joysticks, but found little difference in performance. Sadly
enough, this is another segment of the game which the player
must accomplish to meet his goals (i.e., Secret Agent School
should offer required courses in modern dance).

"Arcade-ic" Combat
The game's combat system was unsatisfying. Players seeking a
nice evening of hack-and-slash gaming will not find it in B.A.T.
The designers meant the game to be more of a puzzle-solver
than a battle-oriented game. Combat consists of choosing a
weapon, activating a shield (if available), placing the sights of a
weapon on the enemy and pushing the button as rapidly as possible until the enemy flees or dies. Most role-playing games allow
players to take all the time they want to decide upon what action
to take. B.A. T.'s combat is more like an old arcade gunfighter
game where speed is the most important element and strategy
nonexistent. Post-battle booty gathering also seemed to be a glaring omission.
In order to catch up with Vrangor, B.A.T. agents will have to
pilot a "drag." The drag is a specially designed aerial transport
for Selenia. Piloting the drag in the Amiga version is fairly complex. The controls are sensitive and the player can find himself

piloting around in
circles. The Commodore version is uncomplicated because all
the player has to do is
follow the arrows and
use his lasers to blast
the debris which is
directly in his path.
' Another machine the
agent will encounter is
the Mobytrack. The
agent will drive the Mobytrack around an underground portion of
the city. The underground is a confusing maze, so players may
benefit from mapping the underground, especially in the Amiga
version. Commodore players will find the underground simple if
they remain persistent.
B.A.T. takes a radical departure from many traditional role-playing games. The key non-player characters are fleshed out and
more realistic and the innovative use of the on-board computer
(B.O.B.) adds more player interest to the game. These positive
qualities are balanced, however, against puzzles that come
together slowly, a poorly designed combat system, a frustrating
interface and arcade elements which tend to detract from rather
than add to the overall game experience. Unless one is willing to
attempt the "completely different" system, traditional role-players
will want to avoid B.A.T. Those who are willing to overlook some
of the rougher edges of the game system may find plenty of
chrome and flash to keep them satisfied.

Touring in Terrapolis (Game Hints)
Warning: The following paragraphs have specific game
hints. Readers who are troubled by seeing too many clues
may wish to avoid this section.
Bizzy is easily played if each shape is assigned a number. The
player simply writes down the number of each shape as it is displayed and then the sequence is easily keyed in.
After winning at Bizzy in the Commodore version, try searching
the arcade. Every item needed for the game will be there.
To contact Crisa, Lydia offers assistance when the player is low
on funds. She has Crisa's phone number. You've got to go back
to the starport, however, to find a phone.
The technicians in the airlock have some critical access codes.
The "R" stands for right and the "L" stands for left.
Don't ask the hotel clerk for information more than once. The
game locked up on us whenever we tried this.
Make sure B.O.B. is programmed to translate both robot and
alien. A lot of time will be wasted trying to switch B.O.B.'s translator mode back and forth and he will do it automatically if he is
told.
Keep a close eye on energy, hydration and calorie levels. Have
food, energizers and drinks or hydrator pills on hand.
Don't start fights unnecessarily. Most combat situations are not
consequential to the game.
Don't forget to search Merigo after he's dead. He is the only
character who has anything after he is killed. He has something
vital to solving the game.

Sneak Preview

rom H. G. Wells' The Time
Machine through Simon Hawke's
modern pulp series about
Timewars (The Ivanhoe Gambit and
The Lilliput Legion among others), the
prospect of time travel has been a staple
of the science fiction genre. Whether the
villains who try to change time are aliens
(or our analogues) from different universes trying to destroy our time continuum
or sociopaths of our society's own
making, the possibilities are endless.

TILL THE END
OF TIME

Recent decades have brought films on
the theme like Time After Time, that Victorian romp through time as H. G. Wells
chases Jack the Ripper, and three permutations of Back to the Future. Even
television shows (Quantum Leap), board
games (Time Tripper by SPI) and pen
and paper role-playing games (Time
Master: Adventures in the 4th Dimension — Pacesetter) borrow the theme.

by Johnny L. Wilson

Naturally, then, one expects to see the
time travel theme in computer games. In
the early days of computer game
software, there were several games that
employed this concept: Time Traveler
(Krell Software), Timeship (Five Star
Software) and Time Zone (On-Line
Software, now Sierra). Now, Bob Bates
is, pardon the expression, turning back
the clock to bring the concept back to
life.

Historical Friction
Perhaps it is because time is the most
elusive of resources and can never truly
be saved, only spent (wisely or unwisely)
that readers, viewers and gamers wish
they could travel back in time in order to
right wrongs; meet those rare visionaries
who offered timeless wisdom; see the formative events of civilization from a firstperson perspective and entertain alternate "historical" possibilities. Timequest
succeeds in all but the latter task.
Bates' view of time is not as elastic as
Robert A. Heinlein's view in A Door Into
Summer or Robert Silverberg's hilarious
Up the Line where minor changes could
occur without completely disrupting the
time stream and major changes would
simply create a new time stream. The
conceit underlying Bates' story is that,
should the player fail in his/her mission,
the time continuum would end and the
player's person and society be annihilated. Hence, once cannot explore the
"What if?"s of history in Timequest, simply solve the puzzles of what is given.
One might also quibble on some matters of historical detail. It seems highly unlikely to this Ph.D. in Old Testament

Studies that King Tutankhamen's sister
was the pharaoh's daughter who rescued
Moses from the Nile. Most of the archaeological evidence surrounding the Exodus and entrance into the Promised
Land of Israel would indicate that, at the
earliest, Seti I would have been the
pharaoh of the Exodus and, at the latest,
Ramses II (which would agree with references to Per-Atum and Pi-Ramesse
(Pithom and Ramses in Exodus). Also,
biblical scholars would note that Moses
was placed in an "ark" made from bulrushes rather than a popularized
"cradle," as presented in the game.
Nevertheless, the period details related to
Tut in one vignette and Cleopatra in two
others are so rich and the puzzles so distinctive that one needn't worry about
such small details.
Indeed, one of the finest features of the
game is the fact that one can get
thumbnail sketches of all the periods represented in the game. This writer loved

the interludes at the "Academy" in which
the old man explains the philosophy of
the day in simple and elegant terms,
whether it is the philosophy and science
of Plato and Aristotle or the dogma of
Augustine. The philosophy is presented
in a non-intrusive and non-judgmental
way that adds considerable depth to the
game.

Temp us Fugit When Playing
Timequest
As for the mechanics of the game,
Timequest uses the same engine as
Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers Get All The
Girls. The game system still uses a
screen divided into five windows and allows one to approach the parser problem
in several different ways. One can examine a room by placing the cursor
upon objects displayed in the picture window and clicking or one can examine a
room by typing "examine east bedroom."
Further, one can select the direction for

Sneak Preview

to be distinctly male in order to solve certain puzzles (because of both the game
situation and the historical setting), but
does not promote the lechery of which
Spellcasting 101 has been accused.

Panem Et Circenses
The title of this section would be translated "bread and circuses." It was considered to be the motto of some of the
more corrupt Roman leaders, since it indicated their feeling that the masses would
be appeased by having bread to eat and
spectacles to see. It is referred to here because it is indicative of the nature of the
puzzles to be solved in Timequest. When
one's player character reaches the Circus
Maximus in 44 B.C., it is not enough to
solve the chariot race puzzle alone, but
one must also get an object from the
crowd (to be used in another time
period) and solve the Caesar assassination puzzle. The puzzles are typical of the
genre, but the twist in Timequest is that
each puzzle teaches something about the
historical period where it is set. For example, one puzzle is so "zen" that it requires that the player think without acting in order to solve it and another puzzle underlines the prejudice between
Catholics and Protestants during certain
periods. Other puzzles play off superstitions in order to successfully continue
the quest.

traveling from the compass rose window.
The handy feature of the compass rose
is that it highlights the directions in which
there are active locations for the character to explore. This speeds up movement
considerably.
Also, the game uses a reverse parser
that provides two lists in two separate vertical windows (located on the left hand
side of the screen). One list is the verb
list and the other is the noun list. It is possible to select the verb from the list on
the left and a noun for a direct or indirect
object from the list on the right. Should a
preposition be required to manipulate an
indirect object or direct the parser to the
object of the preposition, a preposition
list pops up on the left where the verb list
generally resides. This helps one know
that a preposition is to be desired. These
lists can be manipulated by point and
click or used as guidelines for typing
commands (so that one does not have to
play "guess the verb"). This can be ter-

rifle help, since any object which can be
manipulated will appear on the noun list
(once the player's character has seen it).
In addition to the same kind of "
ease-of-use" that Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers
Get All The Girls offered the player,
Timequest offers a solid portion of
humor. To be sure, it is neither the ribald
nor prolific amount of humor to be discovered in Steve Meretzky's games, but
the game tends to have the appropriate
amount of comic relief to keep the
player coming back for more. One
should never hesitate to save the game
and try something or say something off
the wall in this game. The responses are
not the traditional insults which computer games have historically provided.
Sometimes, the text for weird actions is
better than that for the mainstream plot
line.
Timequest is neither as sexist nor as
naughty as Spellcasting 101. However,
the plotline does require the protagonist

In short, the puzzles are so varied in
both difficulty and subject matter that
they should appeal to the hardcore adventure gamer (especially fans of the classic
Infocom games) and the curious adventure game dabbler as well. Indeed, the
puzzles are so interesting that, in spite of
the King Tut quibble, the game could
well serve as a light, but very interesting,
historical introduction to Western civilization.

That's the Way It Should
Have Been
Timequest is a "bigger" game than
Spellcasting 101. It proves that thoughtprovoking puzzle games do not have to
be enslaved to one type of parser or
another and that adventure games are
"not quite dead yet." Indeed, Bob Bates
may have found a way to turn back the
clock and deliver challenging games
without presenting stories via an archaic
technology. Timequest has plenty to
offer the adventure gamer who does not
need animation to stir his/her imagination. It is a game for mature players who
want more sass than splash, more wit
than gee whiz. Others need not apply.

Review

by Dennis Owens

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
DEVELOPER:
PUBLISHER:

iven the choice of a god-like perspective where one al-

most dispassionately "offs" the inevitable foes as though
throwing thunderbolts from a far-off cloud, or a first-person encounter where fiendish creatures leap out of the darkness
and loom threateningly at eye level, which option would be expected to heighten the tension and exhilaration of combat? The
latter, of course. This personalized combat perspective undoubtedly earned much of the praise for FTL's CGW Hall of Fame
member, Dungeon Master. In a very real sense, Eye of the Beholder (SSI's first entry in the "Legend Series," a new line of
AD&D computer role-playing games) is Dungeon Master meets
veteran storyteller George MacDonald.
Eye of the Beholder is a stunning, brilliantly graphic and
agonizingly tricky foray into the world of 3-D perspective CRPGs.
Now, parties must deal face-to-face with the messy consequences of the zombies, drow, displacer beasts and assorted other
nasties which dwell in the sewers and catacombs beneath Waterdeep. Notwithstanding the plumbing problems such creatures
must create, the hero's-eye view of the action insures that even
lesser creatures will seem formidable and no longer impotent
digressions from the main task.

To Your Health
Helpful, in this regard, is that the game does not allow the party
to ever be able to determine how many hit points an opponent

Eye of the Beholder
IBM
549.95
Phil Gorrow, Eydie Laramore,
Paul S. Mudra, Joe Bostic
George MacDonald
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

has. Indeed, the question of hit points is rendered almost irrelevant in the game. (Although the party's statistics can be set
to be displayed by number, the default display — and that recommended by this reviewer — is by bar graph.) Health, then, becomes more of a question of an overall sense of well-being. Battle, instead of diminishing simply to a race between numbers, becomes, as it should be, a desperate fight to the death.

Watch Out For Those Smoking Black Holes
MacDonald rendered the world of Waterdeep into a rich texture
of satisfying exploration. Far into the game, surprises continue to
abound and inventiveness and discovery pay off. Although seductively easy to begin, the game's graphics, puzzles, NPCs and new
events all serve to make the game constantly exciting and invigorating. Attention must be paid to detail, because the potion
the party does not discover in the early hours of play may very
well turn out to be the one which might have saved the day as
one nears the endgame. The sense that a real world called Waterdeep exists beyond the confines of the game's limits is strong.

Getting Your Rocks
The game's fiction is fairly standard. Evil is plaguing Waterdeep
(read Xanathar the Beholder) and must be found and deterred. In
practical terms, Eye of the Beholder features a quest for seven
stone objects (none necessary to complete the game) which set

Review

up the incredible visual delights, tricky puzzles and realistic interactions that, finally and at long last, begin to create the sense of
a real world in computer AD&D.

Show Some Character, Hold This!
Character generation is a snap. Races, classes (all of which are
familiar to AD&D veterans) and mixed classes are available, and
ability scores and initial hit points can be modified after creation.
Character portraits can also be chosen. As the game progresses,
advances in level occur automatically, but it is up to the mage to
locate any scrolls which might be able to be scribed into a
spellbook.
Items are worn and placed in hands to be used via the characters' equipment screens — accessed by clicking on the portraits
or by pressing the corresponding function key. Although the
game supports both keyboard and mouse interface, this reviewer
found gameplay most practical by using a combination of the
two (point-and-click for character interactions and arrow keys for
movement).
In combat, items are used by clicking on the pictures of them
in the characters' hands with the right mouse button. Combat is
not phased but, as mentioned earlier, occurs in real time (or, at
least, something similar to real time). Recovery time after wielding a weapon/item depends on the item used and the character's
dexterity.

Slamming Sideways Into Walls is Not a Successful Defensive Technique
One of only a few complaints is that it ends immediately after
the final battle with Xanathar the Beholder without giving the
party the chance to go back and re-explore other parts of the
dungeon.
One is also disappointed in the occasional awkward nature of
the combat and movement interfaces. This reviewer understands
and accepts that the characters should be prepared before battle
commences and that, should a character decide to rummage
around in his/her backpack during combat, he/she should expect a few wallops on the back from the battleaxe of a mantis
warrior. However, what this reviewer does not understand is why,
once a cleric's holy symbol of mage's spellbook is clicked on,
the character should continue to be susceptible to damage while
the player has to move the mouse pointer from the book/symbol

Review

to the spell list, which appears on the screen a substantial distance away from that book/symbol. Just a bit of "arcade reflex
frustration" here.
Also, movement via the mouse occurs only if the player clicks
on a relatively small and close-set collection of buttons beneath
the view window. Often, during the speed and frenzy of battle,
one finds his/her party getting pummelled by nasties as it slams,
pell-mell, into walls while frantically sliding the pointer from one
end of the screen to the other. Such a frustrating problem could
easily have been avoided if the game's programmers had seen fit
to allow mouse movement via the view window (a la Dungeon
Master and numerous other games).
Further, this reviewer would have liked, in a game which so obviously has the capacity to create such a strong and believable
fictional world, even more interaction with NPCs and, in the
(newly created) tradition of Death Knights of Krynn, more side
quests and things to do while on the main adventure.
Finally, in such a beautiful and graphically innovative world,
one cannot help but wonder where it is written that all tunnels
must be square, or that tunnels hewn out of rock do not have
jagged edges? Especially in sewers, a few round pipes might
have been expected.
However, such complaints are niggling, and, perhaps, brought
to mind simply because of the success with which Eye of the Beholder captures the imagination.
Although the game supports EGA, CGA and Tandy graphics,
VGA is highly recommended. AdLib and Sound Blaster boards
are also supported to great detail. Zombies' hands swoop
through the air at the party, swords clash, spells chime and blast,
spider's fangs gnash and click.

Conclusion
At long last, IBM owners need no longer complain. They now
have a game like Dungeon Master — a magnificent game that
promises to be only the first in a long (we hope very long) line
of releases.

Game Hints
Warning: major secrets are given away in the following
section. Please read only when very frustrated.
1. By far, Xanathar is the most difficult creature to kill. Standing
and fighting "eye-to-eye" (so to speak) with the beholder will
most likely result in a party of disintegrated characters. Instead,
try moving around the beholder, striking it from the sides and behind it. Also, forcing it back into its own spike trap is highly effective.
2. After the beholder, the Illithids are most dangerous. Protection from evil spells, prayers and constant barrages from frost
wands and fireball wands seem to work well against them.
3. Rust monsters will not affect the armor and weapons held by
characters behind the front rank. Magic missile spells will finish
off these nasties.
4. Examine the portals carefully and consider the
stones/wands/rings/etc. the party finds. Understand that any
place in the game can be returned to (not strictly via saved
games, either). Put those two sentences together and come to
the obvious conclusion.

Review

Flight Simulator 4.0
by Tim Trimble

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

F

light Simulator version 4.0 from
Microsoft is a significant step
closer to the reality it simulates.
Microsoft has demonstrated that they are
serious about making Flight Simulator
the next best thing to sitting in the pilot's
seat.
The first noticeable changes to Flight
Simulator are experienced by means of
the smoothness and greater detail of the
graphics, especially on computers
equipped with a VGA monitor and a
80386 processor. From the addition of
surrounding air traffic ("Where did that
767 come from?"), strobe approach
lights on the runway, detailed ground
scenery and an actual moving propeller,
Microsoft has done a good job of enhancing the realism of the product. With the
addition of the optional Aircraft Scenery
and Design Kit, the armchair pilot can
create environments with intricate detail.

Aeronautical Engineering
For those who like to experiment, the
Cessna 172, the Gates Learjet and a new
Schweizer 2-32 sailplane provide the
basis for creating experimental aircraft by
allowing changes to the flight characteristics of these aircraft. The dihedral,

Microsoft Flight Simulator 4.0
IBM PC and compatibles
$59.95
Bruce Artwick
Microsoft
Redmond, WA

Trackin' on With Tracon
aspect ratio, winglets, stabilizers, weight,
balance, propulsion and aerodynamics
can all be changed. Once changed, the
newly designed plane can be saved for
later use. (Yes, it is possible to design a
rock!) An experimental jet is also
provided for tinkering with the physical
laws of flight.

Sailing With the Clouds
The new Schweizer 2-32 sailplane adds
a new dimension to Flight Simulator
—unpowerdflight."Abvmore
realistic and unpredictable weather systems, thermals have also been added to
allow for the use of the sailplane. Thermal lift can be found by flying over
ridges and dark-colored areas of ground.
Although a tow plane is not provided, it
is quite easy to start out as a Cessna
172 and then change into the sailplane
at the proper altitude, or just start the
simulation at any height desired. However, there are only a few areas in the
Flight Simulator world that have thermals and the use of the sailplane should
be restricted only to those areas (unless,
of course, one wants to design a
propeller for his sailplane).

Ever wonder what to do with the
transponder controls in Flight Simulator
Three? Now, while navigating around controlled airports, Air Traffic Control will
contact the pilot, provide clearance for
landing and assign transponder frequencies. ("Ah, Cessna 172, please squak
ident 1250"). This feature works nicely
with a product called Tracon ll (an air
traffic control simulator from Wesson International). When a computer running
Tracon ll is attached to the computer running Flight Simulator, then the "Air Traffic Controller" can issue course changes
to the Flight Simulator pilot.
The flight characteristics of Flight
Simulator have also been improved to
reflect a more realistic aircraft "feel." This
is particularly noticeable during steep
banks and unusual flight attitudes. High
speed stalls are also a good indication of
this, since one wing tends to dip and
places the aircraft in a spin.

Flying up a Storm
The weather controls for Flight Simulator have been greatly enhanced to provide more realism. Weather can be set

Review

up to be random and dependent on the
date and time of the computer system
clock. So if the armchair pilot starts flying at 5:30 a.m. on a winter morning in
Chicago, it is going to be very dark and
windy with a good chance of rain.
The Approach Lighting Systems in
Flight Simulator have been greatly improved, making approaches to the airport much more realistic. These improvements includes a Visual Approach Slope
Indicator (VASI) that denotes if the pilot
is flying too high or too low on approach
to the runway. The Runway Alignment Indicator Lights (RAIL) show a flashing row
of strobes, pulsating from front to back,
indicating proper alignment to the runway. There is also the Runway End Identifier Lights (REIL) which help to show
the beginning and end of the runway. Although these are visible and usable
during daylight flight, the effect is better
during night flights.

Flying in Tandem
Microsoft has also invested plenty of effort into connectability. The most impressive expression of this effort has to do
with the addition of connective options
with regard to other computers running

Flight Simulator or Tracon II. This can
be done via modem or by attaching a
serial cable between two computers. Playing in conjunction with another person
creates a true interactive environment
where pilots can see each other, fly in formation and do airport pattern flight while
interacting with Air Traffic Control. Subscribers to the CompuServe Information
Service can also interact with other Flight
Simulator pilots and fly together in special "fly-ins."
Overall, Flight Simulator 4.0 is a great
improvement over previous versions and
shows that Microsoft is committed to
creating a "true" flight simulator that is
not only thoroughly enjoyable but also
provides a great education to any
prospective or existing pilot. All that is
needed now is for the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) to stand up, take
notice and allow the use of Flight
Simulator for actual flight simulation
time to be recorded in pilot's logbooks.
With the continued commitment from
Microsoft for enhancement of this
product and the sophistication of its add
on products, could it be said that Flight
Simulator might actually make flying
safer? Time will tell.

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
by Dewey H. Louie
f you want to succeed in Hollywood,
you have to network, network, network. So I was doing lunch with a
director in the studio commissary over at
Disney a couple of weeks ago. The director loves strategy games and wished that
there were more games like Empire. I
figured the best way to make points with
him was to tell him about Mark Baldwin's
new game, The Perfect General. It is a
classic strategy game disguised as a tactical-level wargame with very simple rules.
"It's to be published by Quantum Computer Products, a new company out of
New Jersey." Over angel hair pasta and
peach-flavored iced tea, I told him that
QCP was also publishing a naval combat
game called The Lost Admiral that handled combat reminiscent of Empire.

I

The director spotted a producer he had
to talk to, jumped up, excused himself
and dashed to the other side of the commissary. I was finishing my tea and happened to overhear this producer-type
bragging to some would-be starlets about
something called The Sierra Network.
Now, as a would-be screenwriter and
part-time rumor columnist, I'm usually up
on these kinds of things. Frankly, I didn't
know anything about a new television network in the Sierras or anywhere else. I
had to talk to this Johnny Hotshot. "Excuse me," I started to interrupt when I
overheard him say something about
Leisure Suit Larry. He glared at me as
though I were offering to work for food.
"Do you mean," I queried, "that there's

going to be a Leisure
Suit Larry television
show?"
"No," he intoned with a
velvet vocalization
reminiscent of Orson
Welles, "I do not mean
television. I was simply
talking about the multiplayer Leisure Suit
Larry program to be encountered on Sierra's
new games network.
They already have
bridge, hearts, chess,
cribbage, backgammon and checkers up
and running for their playtest, with SierraLand and LarryLand under development. SierraLand will have paint ball
games, as well as multi-player Red
Baron and Stellar 7. LarryLand, as I
was trying to describe it before you so
rudely interrupted me, will include more
'adult' entertainment, including flirtation
as only Leisure Suit Larry fans would
flirt."
Don't you just hate people who have all
the answers? I tried to save face (or, at
least, what you could see of my face underneath my rumor bag) by describing
the Space Quest comic book that Sierra has authorized. It didn't work. He simply pulled a copy of the first Indiana
Jones and the Fate of Atlantis comic
book from Dark Horse Comics and oneupped me by telling me that it contained
the plot for Lucasfilm Games' upcoming Indiana Jones graphic adventure.
"Don't worry," he continued, "it doesn't
give away any of the puzzles. Your
readers can enjoy both the comic and
the game."
I quickly decided that I needed fresh air
more than I needed to finish the conversation. So, I strolled out of the commissary
and sat out by the pool, looking up at
the statues of the seven dwarves which
adorned one Disney office building much
like statues of the Pharaohs once
dominated Egypt's "Valley of the Kings."
One of the "severe dudes" in "corporate"
was sitting by the reflecting pool, playing
with a hand-held electronic video poker
game. I told him that Villa Crespo
Software had just purchased the rights
to John Cumo's Vegas Johnny's
Dealer's Choice with its 28 varieties of
poker. So, I said, if you really want a
poker challenge, you need to pick up the

next edition of Amarillo
Slim's Dealer's Choice.
He thanked me and asked
me where I was headed. I
told him I was walking
toward the Rocketeer
soundstage. He motioned
toward the back lot and
asked if I knew that Walt Disney Software was publishing a computer game where
the action takes place after
the events in the Rocketeer
movie. I told him I did. After
all, I did now.
I walked down the main
street that had served as the
town square in Something
Wicked This Way Comes
and past the front porch
from a couple of old Fred MacMurray
flicks. Realizing that the back lot was like
a miniature city where almost anything
could be made out of the facades, I
remembered that the Stunt Pilot series
from Walt Disney Software would take
place behind the scenes of a film studio.
Players will get to "perform" aerial
acrobatics as though the game were
strictly a flight simulator. Then, players
will be able to edit and save "films" of
their flights for future playback.
I arrived at the soundstage and observed the crew setting up for the
ballroom fight scene. They had these
wires set up so the Rocketeer could fly
across the ballroom and through a
screen that they were ready to set on
fire. One of my regular sources was
standing to one side. "Hear you were
upstaged in the commissary," he
chuckled. "Don't you have connections
at Sierra anymore?"
The pounding, hammering and shouting that normally fill a working
soundstage when shooting is not in
progress seemed to be non-existent as
the crew burst into laughter at my discomfiture. "Okay, okay," I protested, "I
may have missed The Sierra Network
scoop, but I do know some rumors.
There are two other Leisure Suit Larry
products in the works. One is a sequel to
the adventures in the series and the
other is called The Laffer Utilities. The
utility program will handle office sports
pools, create goofy faxes and generally
provide help for all those time-wasting activities in the office. More efficient waste,
get it, just like film production." The hammering and shouting resumed and I was
grateful I had managed to sustain, at
least, part of my vaunted reputation as a
gossip columnist.

Sneak Preview

A Playtester
Unhoods
Falcon 3.0
by Mike Weksler

[Mike Weksler is a contributing
author for Osborne/McGraw-Hill's upcoming Falcon 3.0 Air Combat book
with Pete Bonanni. A beta tester for
Spectrum Holobyte, Mike is also a
SYSOP on CompuServe in the Modem
Games Forum and the
Modem-to-Modem Lobby, where he is known online as "Moondawg."]
here Falcon AT and Falcon
were acclaimed in their own
right, Falcon 3.0 brings to the
IBM computer jet jock a scaled-down version of the actual ASAT (Advanced Situational Awareness Trainer), the highly
sophisticated simulation of the F-16A
used by the U.S. military and also
manufactured by Sphere, Inc..
Spectrum HoloByte's parent company.
This means that when one selects the
High Fidelity Flight Model from the System Setup screen, one will be flying as
close to an actual F-16A flight model as
declassified information can provide.

"Your Mission, Should You
Choose To Accept It..."
Missions are flown in three theaters:
Panama, Israel and Kuwait, and include
missions similar to those flown by real F16 pilots in Operation: Desert Storm (one
can even fly missions over Baghdad). Fal-

con 3.0 will also be
compatible with
Spectrum Holobyte's EBS (Electronic Battlefield Series). This will allow simulators
of different military equipment to be
linked together for head-to-head play.
The options currently available include
instant action, Red Flag (weapons
school), Campaign, Communications,
TACTS (Tactical Air Combat Training
Simulator) and Configuration. Of these,
only Configuration and Campaign were
available for this preview. Upon selecting
the Campaign portion of the main menu,
the screen fades to the Difficulty Level
menu screen where the choices include
Skill Level (Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced and Custom), Enemy Logic Level
(Drone, Trainee, Cadet, Veteran and
Ace), Fuel Usage, Weapon Efficiency, Intelligence, Limited Arms, Limited
Chaff/Flares, SAMs/AAA, Mid-Air Collisions, Ground Crashes and Redout/
Blackout. The advanced Falcon 3.0 pilot
will see this menu screen as a magnificent palette from which to mix and
match the configuration best suited to
the player's needs and skills.

Unnatural Growling
From this menu screen, one can select
the System Setup screen with the following options selection: Flight Model

(Simplified, Moderate, Complex and High
Fidelity), Flight Control (Keyboard, Joystick, Joystick with Throttle, Dual Joysticks and Mouse), Detail Level (Minimum, Medium, High and Maximum),
Sound (PC Speaker, PC Digitized, Tandy,
Ad Lib, PS/1, SoundBlaster and Roland),
and Sound Settings (All On, All Off,
Sound and Engine and Sound with
Sidewinder Growl). The two items to take
note of here are the High Fidelity flight
model, which requires a math co-processor to run, and the Sound option with the
Sidewinder growl. For those who do not
know, in real fighter jets, the Sidewinder
emits a growling noise as the heat-seeking head of the missile acquires a heat
source. One may have heard fighter
pilots referring to acquiring a target as
achieving "tone." This "tone" is referring
to the Sidewinder's growl.

Campaign Selections
Upon exiting the System Setup menu,
the Campaign portion of the main menu
is selected. The first thing one must do is
to select the patch of a squadron and create 16 rookie pilots from scratch (complete with faces, if desired). Then one
selects the theater of operations
(Panama, Israel or Kuwait) and enters
the briefing menu where one selects a

Sneak Preview

mission. Targets and waypoints are assigned, but can be modified by the
player. One will have the choice of editing Routes, Waypoints, number of F-16s,
Add Waypoint, Delete Waypoint, Altitude,
Speed and Action (Passive, Land, Bombing, S&D, CAS, CAP).
When Report is selected, a menu appears in which one can select such objects to view as friendly or enemy
aircraft. When the Friendly Aircraft icon
is selected, an image of a computer appears and types out the name of the
aircraft on the left, displays a digitized picture of it on the right, and rotates a 3-D
polygon-filled object of the aircraft in the
foreground.

Who Are These Wingmen?
After the appropriate variations are
programmed in, one may then assign
pilots to the flight from the squadron of
sixteen. Upon entering the Assign Pilots
menu, one will see options for assigning
and removing pilots from a given flight
and an option to view the information on
each pilot including Name, Call Sign,
Pilot Abilities, Dogfighting Skills, Bombing Accuracy, Flying Ability and Fatigue.
Each factor will affect the performance of
a particular pilot in a given flight. Other
statistics given for each pilot are the number of enemy aircraft that pilot has shot
down, the total number of ground targets
destroyed, and Medals/Awards.
When finished assigning pilots to the
given flight, one may select the weapons
option in the menu. A digitized head-on
view of the F-16 appears and below it, a
veritable smorgasbord of weapons to
load onto it. The following weapons are
selectable: AIM-9M and AIM-9P
Sidewinders; AIM-120 AMRAAMs; Mk. 82,
83 and 84 iron bombs; GBU-15 smart
bombs; AGM-65 Mavericks; CBU cluster
bombs; LAU rocket pods; AGM-45A
Shrikes; AGM-88A HARMs; GE pods;
LANTIRN pods; 300-pound and 370pound fuel tanks; Durendal anti-runway
bombs; Paveway laser-guided bombs and
ALQ ECM pods. Weapons will affect
such factors as weight, maximum Gs and
drag coefficient.

Scramble!
From the weapons menu, one may
(finally) select Take Off. A digitized
animation of an F-16 squadron briefing
appears followed by another animation
of an F-16 pilot lowering his canopy, taxiing, and taking off. The view is then
switched to a satellite view which rapidly
descends into the cockpit of one's F-16.

This playtester has also learned that Falcon 3.0's air-to-air Gun HUD display will
no longer depict the snapshoot line or
"snake." It will instead use an air-to-air
gun HUD similar to that which has been
incorporated into A-10 Avenger, another
forthcoming Spectrum HoloByte
simulator.
In this test version, the Falcon can fire
the AMRAAM (Advanced Medium-Range
Air-to-Air Missile) which is capable of
BVR (Beyond Visual Range) target acquisition. Previous versions of Falcon
have been more visually oriented.
The first thing that is immediately
noticeable about the cockpit, besides the
256-color VGA graphics, is the radar actively scanning in azimuth and elevation.
The APG-66 radar has been quite accurately modeled. One can scan for
radar contacts in four different ranges:
10, 20, 40 and 80 nm (nautical miles).
Elevation can be adjusted in three settings as well as the azimuth. There is a
Normal Air, Situational Awareness Mode,
Aerial Combat Mode and a Single Target
Track (STT) Boresight Mode. The information blocks on the radar screen are
the same as Falcon AT, except that the
Falcon 3.0 pilot will have the ability to
manually "corral" or lock up a target.
Upon switching the radar CRT to the
Map mode, the Falcon 3.0 pilot will be
able to see his F-16 indicated as a blip
on a huge 300 x 300 mile area! No more
flying off the map when going to zone 5
(full afterburners) as with Falcon AT.

HUDs Up
Other avionics include air-to-air and
air-to-ground HUD modes. So far, in the airto-air mode, once a TD (Target Designator) box appears on the HUD, the pilot
can "uncage" the seeker diamond and
watch it merge with the TD box. That,
combined with the Sidewinder growling,
is extremely realistic.

In Falcon 3.0, since one will have the
ability to acquire a target BVR (up to 18
nm), one will have more time to plot an
intercept. For instance, the Falcon 3.0
pilot will be able to perform a stand-off intercept and smoke MiGs without visually
acquiring them. For more information on
intercept geometry, the Falcon 3.0 pilot
is urged to read Fighter Combat: Tactics
and Maneuvering by Robert Shaw. This
is "the book" on aerial combat maneuvering and should prove to be of extreme interest to the avid Falcon pilot.

Maintaining Control
Of interest to those who will fly in the
game's High-Fidelity flight model will be
the absence of G-blending. This is where
a certain amount of yaw rate is incorporated into roll. An example of this occurs when one rolls from wings level to
45 degrees but maintains a course at
high speed. In other simulators, this roll
would turn into a bank. In Falcon 3.0,
the F-16 will not begin to turn until a certain amount of backpressure is applied
to the joystick.

Hands-on Experience
When actually flying the aircraft, it may
behoove a pilot to look into an aftermarket control item such as the Thrustmaster. This device allows one to experience HOTAS (Hands On Throttle and
Stick) flying. Since there are a myriad of
keyboard commands, taking one's eyes
off the screen for just an instant could
make the difference between an aerial victory or a fiery defeat. The Thrustmaster
allows one to control several functions including throttle, radar modes and many
other flight controls without one having
to touch the keyboard or look down.

Now You (Still) See Him...
Another interesting feature is the "padlock" view. When this view mode is
selected from within the cockpit, the entire field of view will scroll while keeping

Sneak Preview

the target at the center. During a pass,
for example, the field of view will track
the target and remain locked on it. The
pilot will have the illusion of turning his
head to follow the target. One must then
fly the aircraft's HUD into the field of
view of the target.

Connectivity
If one selects the communications portion of the main menu, one will be able
to link up two computers either via direct
link, which may support CompuServe's
MTM (Modem-to-Modem) lobby, a
modem connection or a network connection. Two Falcon 3.0 pilots, in addition to
dogfighting one another, may fly joint airto-air missions in which they can fly in for-

mation and attack bogies in such combinations as two versus one, two versus
two, or two versus many. Falcon 3.0 is
also the first Spectrum Holobyte simulation in their EBS or Electronic Battlefield
Series. Eventually, it will be able to
achieve a connection with their forthcoming A-10 Avenger and AH-64 Apache
simulators.

ing upon one's altitude. Objects in the
simulation are polygon-filled. There are a
number of bitmapped maps and digitized
animations in the package as well.
Graphic flourishes abound, such as the
landing gear retracting and extending in
the outside views and some of the anima
tions sequences — particularly a digitized
twenty-one-gun salute after dying.

Something to Look At
(Again and Again)

3.0, one word comes to this playtester's

The TACTS menu option is the "Black
Box" and a VCR feature. TACTS gives a
3-D wireframe view of the action with exciting visual enhancements. The terrain is
fractal-generated, there is a gradient
horizon and the weather can vary depend-

Reach Out and Crush Someone

In summing up this preview of Falcon
mind—depth. Deeper than Their Finest
Hour, deeper than Red Baron, Falcon
3.0 is not merely a game. It is a complex
modern air combat situational awareness
simulator that may boggle beginners, but
will provide the expert with hours of "topflight," in-the-cockpit excitement!

Scenario

The Battle of Lundy's Lane
A War of 1812 Scenario for SSI's

Battles of Napoleon

by Gilbert Collins

n the quiet farm lane of William Lundy
was fought one of the most vicious
battles of the War of 1812. In the hot
summer evening of July 25, 1814, British
and American forces engaged each other
in hand-to-hand combat on a tract of
ground barely a mile square. When the
fight was over, 2000 men were killed,
wounded or missing in action. Tactically,
the battle was a stalemate, but it turned
out to be a strategic victory for the
British.
For many years, aficionados of the War
of 1812 have waited in vain for titles to
appear on the horizon. Even in the board
game hobby, they were few and far between. In the computer game hobby,
they were nonexistent. Finally, when SSI
produced Battles of Napoleon, complete
with its design-your-own feature, it was a
dream come true. It had finally become
possible to be able to recreate some of
the battles from the War of 1812 on the
computer.
With SSI's design menu, one merely
has to punch in the data and draw the
map utilizing their "draw map" feature.
This is all after meticulous research, of
course. If any particular information

seems missing, one can always fall back
on the default settings. After all, who is
to say what the morale value of the Incorporated Militia at Lundy's Lane was? One
can only read the accounts and make an
intelligent estimate.
The possibility of someone requiring
American units was, alas, not foreseen
(they are absent). Since players can
rename units, however, this is no barrier
to play. Using the Austrians as U.S.
troops will give them the designation
"AU" and one can think of them as
"American Units."
One factor that makes it easier to
model these actions is that the battles of
this war were on a much smaller scale
than the great European battles. The
area of Lundy's Lane, for example, would
fit approximately in the area of the
Hougomont at Waterloo. Also, the size of
the forces involved might seem a little
amusing at first. Drummond's whole
army is about the size of a British
brigade. For those used to playing the
Waterloo scenario, this one is going to
seem very small. It was on such small actions, however, that the War of 1812 was
decided.

One advantage to these smaller
scenarios is that they are good learning
tools for new players. With so few units,
one is forced to preserve his forces carefully. On this scale, the player will find
that it is akin to playing miniatures
without all the time-consuming calculations.

Design Notes for Entering
Data
It is most realistic to set the possibility
of cavalry charges and, consequently, infantry forming square at low. Cavalry
charges were rarely done in North
America at this time, though there were
at least two notable exceptions. Crysler's
Farm and the Battle of Moraviantown
each featured a cavalry charge (but the
infantry did not form square).
The flank companies were often
detached in this war, unlike Wellington's
system of keeping them attached to the
main body. For 1812 scenarios, one
should give these units a favorable OP
modifier and allow them to form 100%
skirmishers. Then, since the light companies were really the skirmish units in
North America, it is a good idea to keep

Scenario

the number of skirmishers
in the line units to a minimum.
Alert designers will also
keep the victory objectives
simple when designing 1812
battles. On this scale, the forces were usually simply fighting for a specific piece of territory.
The leader objective phase
is practically nullified because the armies were so
small. The organization to
be found in the War of 1812
usually consisted of an
Army Commander and a
number of brigades. Thus,
there should be no corps
and, perhaps, only one
division.

Game Survey

Computer Gaming World presents:

Dogfight at the PC Corral
WWI Air Combat Simulators in Review
Starring

Wings, Blue Max, Knights of the Sky

and

Red Baron

by Mike Weksler

A

ll of the following simulations

were flown on Amiga 500 or
33MHz 386.

"They are the knighthood of this war,
without fear and without reproach; and they
recall the legendary days of chivalry, not
merely by the daring of their exploits, but
by the nobility of their spirit."
—David Lloyd-George

Multiple Choice
Currently, there are four major computer
games based on World War One air combat: Wings by Cinemaware, Blue Max by
Three-Sixty, Knights of the Sky by MicroProse and Red Baron by Dynamix. Each
of these games is unique in its own right,
with its own emphasis or set of priorities of
what the game is trying to accomplish.
Therefore, the goal of this article is to inform players as to which of these programs
have appropriate features and appeal to
meet their particular needs.

56th Aerosquadron for a career in the air
service. The period music is extremely effective at evoking the emotions that the words
and pictures on the screen portray. One
feels like a WWI fighter pilot, even if the
"simulation aspect" is so limited it
precludes the player's ability to fly like one.

Flapping Wings

Blue Max: Three Games in One

Before the real comparison begins, an explanation of why Wings will not be pitted
directly against the others in the survey is
definitely in order. Wings was initially
developed for the Amiga platform and approaches its subject matter from an entirely
different perspective than the others. Wings
is analogous to watching the epic WWI
silent motion picture of the same name and
being magically transported into it as the
star. This is what the designers had set out
to accomplish in the beginning — providing
a rich gaming experience rather than a
straight air combat simulator (it is even
described in the documentation as a "personal combat simulator"). The emphasis is,
in Wings, more on advancing the character
than on the plane itself. Indeed, the descriptions of occurrences in the war are actually
kept in a journal by the player's character.

Although Blue Max has many of the earmarks of a sophisticated simulation, it lacks
the historical depth and "realism" of either
Knights of the Sky or Red Baron. One
can play a solo or two-player version of
Blue Max. However, with two players, the
game is only displayed on a split screen
and they must either share the keyboard or
have one player use the joystick and the
other use the keyboard. Interestingly, Blue
Max also offers a tactical game reminiscent
of a strategy board game. It is the only one
in the survey to offer this feature.

Like in previous Cinemaware games, one
must prove adept at several arcade sequences. There is a 3-D flight simulator, but the
simulated flight is choppy and gives more
of an "arcade" feel than that of a simulator.
The player begins his career in flight school
"earning his wings" by completing a random arcade sequence. Once wings are assigned, the player may join up with the

Blue Max's campaign game gives players
the option of flying on either side and, while
the graphics are adequate, the Blue Max
"flight model" does not perform to the
standards set by the remaining two WWI air
combat simulations in that they are
"generic" rather than model-specific.
Graphics can only be labeled adequate because, although Blue Max possesses nicely
drawn cockpits, pilots who desire full instrumentation must choose a partitioned
screen which shrinks the action screen to a
teeny-tiny square! Of course,
seat-of-the-pants flyers can have a larger action screen
with the default setting.

Additionally, it seems that little thought
was given to the layout of the basic "command keys" necessary to pilot the air combat simulator aspect of the game (which is
surprising, since the game positions itself to
be a "simpler alternative" to the next two).
While one can use, for instance, the plus
key to increase throttle, it is only the plus
key on the keypad and not the one on the
keyboard which works. Pressing the plus
key on the keyboard calls up a rear view!
So, in spite of VGA graphics, Sound Blaster
support (including the innovative sound of
enemy planes buzzing by one's cockpit)
and a VCR replay utility, Blue Max is likely
to suffer when compared to the other WWI
air combat simulators for those seeking
flight models with more historical realism.
For that gamer, Knights of the Sky
(KOTS) and Red Baron are both outstanding technical achievements in the genre.
They are well-designed, well-implemented
and full of historical depth. Here, then, is
the showdown of the two heavyweight contenders in the WWI flight sim class.

Clash of the Titans
In Knights of the Sky, one's goal is to become the "Ace of Aces" by defeating
enemy aces in aerial jousts. The player has
the option of flying practice missions with
random aircraft or, if he chooses, mixing it
up with historical aces. The real entertainment (and educational) value of KOTS
comes when one begins a campaign under
the French or British flag.
Sadly, the player may fly any of the German equipment except in the campaign
game. This can be a real hindrance because the two best flying aircraft in the
simulation are both German: the Fokker
DR1 triplane (made famous by the Red
Baron — Mannfred von Richthofen — himself) and the Fokker D.VIII. Both are highly
maneuverable aircraft capable of out-turning the enemy in a close-in dogfight.
Period music and newspaper announcements provide total immersion into
the environment of WWI fighter pilots. One
is informed of pilots' victories and defeats
(on both sides), as well as news concerning
new aircraft under development. Missions
are randomly generated over a historical
battlefield. Two truly forgiving items in the

Game Survey

campaign option are the pilot resurrection capability and the ability to
decline a mission. One is advanced in rank upon completing
successful missions and, if the
player performs in an outstanding
manner, he is rewarded with the appropriate decoration.

ing enemy fighters, the gauntlet
may be hurled by a famous ace
who wishes to stop the player
before he gets any better. When
challenging or accepting the challenge of a famous ace, one can be
treacherously jumped by the
enemy before ever reaching the
designated "field" of honor. After
each mission the player is
debriefed by reading newspaper
clippings full of rumors as to what
equipment a particular pilot is
flying, who has been downing
whom and what new equipment is
due at the aerodrome.

In a typical KOTS campaign, one
has several choices: fly a mission,
challenge a famous ace, scramble
to intercept incoming enemy
aircraft or accept the challenge of
a famous ace. Missions include
escorting scouts, destroying observation balloons, ground attack and
combat air patrol.
En route, one is (more often than
not) bounced by enemy fighters.
Even highly skilled simulator pilots
will have their hands full with three
lead-spitting Eindeckers in pursuit.
Just when the situation looks hopeless, however, even more fighters appear to
finish the player off — but wait... those are
friendly markings! Soon, three friendlies
dive in on the enemy, chasing them away
or shooting them down. Friendly aircraft
can also appear in the distance and, occasionally, are seen in mix-ups fighting "out
yonder." One has the option of returning
the favor (and diving into their fights) or

flying on to complete the mission at hand.
This reviewer found nothing finer than
seeing a flight of friendlies forming on his
wing to escort him back from a mission
deep behind enemy territory. [Ed: These interactions are only in the most recent
upgrade, "Revision 2," of KOTS.]
As one becomes more adept at dispatch-

One's initial impression of Red
Baron is that it is a stunning visual
feast. One may view the various
aircraft available in 360-degree 3D, fly missions, challenge a
famous ace or embark on a campaign. The historical missions are
interesting to fly since one may partake in the event from the perspective of
either side. During a mission, one is given a
bearing and range to find the action. It's
best to have the maps included in the box
handy for this type of navigation. In KOTS,
however, one always has the ability of invoking an overhead map with waypoints
plotted upon it and one's aircraft position

Game Survey

plotted accordingly. Ahistorical, to be
sure, but handy.

In KOTS, experienced pilots and
flight sim jocks will immediately notice
the definitive relationship between energy and maneuvering, which is not as
crisp in Red Baron. Thus, maneuvering the aircraft in KOTS means one
must concentrate more on maintaining
high energy at all times, giving it the
"right feel" to this reviewer. Any computer jet jockey will — after the breaking-in period where he must rethink his
flying — be right at home with the
flight model in KOTS, while the one in
Red Baron might be better for more
casual enthusiasts. Both work fine, but
each has its emphasis.

Campaigning in Red Baron is a
series of the above-mentioned missions strung together to form a "campaign." The player is assigned a plane
to fly and an aerodrome. Upon being
briefed, one begins as a wingman in a
formation. Unlike KOTS, there are
never any friendly flights to rescue the
player, nor is there any true randomness inherent in the campaign missions. Thus, in a campaign mission, it
is always the player's flight against the
world.
Often, the new pilot will become the
flight leader when his former leader is
shot down. One need not hesitate to
shoot upon spotting aircraft, since it is
guaranteed that they are hostiles.
Upon completing the mission's objectives,
one quits the mission (there is no landing
at an aerodrome, per se, as there is in
KOTS). If the player lands behind enemy
lines, he risks internment in a prison camp.
In Red Baron, being shot down causes
death. That's it! One's pilot is dead and the
player must start over.

Flight Models R Us
In this reviewer's opinion, Red Baron has
a less responsive feel than does KOTS,

Friendlies and Enemies

especially when recording a flight using the
VCR utility. Specifically, aircraft in Red
Baron possess a bit of a lag which will
cause jet-reflex trained sim pilots to do
some rethinking of their flight school
maneuvers. Interestingly, even in the expert
level of Red Baron, one doesn't stall in a
Sopwith Snipe, even when it feels as
though it should. Hint: Players should use
this aircraft for Zeppelin raids as it can fly
just above stall speed while almost vertical.
It takes a lot of effort, but it can be kept
from stalling for quite a while.

The "friendlies" in Red Baron are in
your formation and, given the chance,
they will shoot down anything in sight. In
KOTS, as mentioned earlier, one has
wingmen who will randomly chase the bad
guys away. This reviewer does not recall an
experience as intense as flying over the
front and diving into a "furball" (aerial battle) to rescue some friendlies, then ending
up taking on six enemy aircraft all alone!
Fortunately, more friendlies dove from the
clouds and, after a riveting dogfight, the
good guys won.
The enemies in each of these simulators
(Continued on page 94)

Strategy

Managing Sensory Overload
F-16 Combat Pilot Tactical Tips and Techniques

s

the air combat flight simulator
gets more complex and sophisticated, the tactics that computer
fighter pilots ("players") must employ to
engage and destroy enemy aircraft are
becoming more complex as well.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the
modern jet air combat simulators which
are so popular in CGWs games ratings.
However, even though the simulated opponents in air combat simulations are
continually improving, there is still no
way that a computer-generated enemy
can accomplish all of the things that a
real person with a working knowledge of
ACM (Aerial Combat Maneuvering) is
able to do.

A

Fortunately, these simulations of
modern aerial combat are now capable
of establishing a link between two computers, adding a unique "human element" to every engagement. This article
deals with flying and fighting within the
simulated world of Electronic Arts' F-16
Combat Pilot. It is intended to equip
modem-to-modem "pilots" with the
knowledge necessary to be competitive
in every head-to-head engagement.

Modem Connection Etiquette
Note: Experienced modem gamers can
jump to the section called "Thumbs Up,
Take Off." Before rigging for modem
connection, decide which person will initiate the call and which color leader
he/she will select. If both players have
two phone lines, use one to communicate during the initial connection and if
desired, as a "radio" to use in flight
(double your phone bill, double your
fun). As common courtesy, when one person makes the voice call, the other
should initiate the modem connection.
When voice communication is unavailable during flight, use the following standards of non-voice communication:
Pause the simulation three times by
using the pause [P] key when it is necessary to end the game abruptly; pause the
game twice to inform one's opponent of
a brief delay (e.g. doorbell ringing) where
one is expected to return quickly; and
pause the simulation one time to notify
an opponent that the player has returned
to the cockpit.

by Scott West
ample, if one uses US Sprint, dial 1-800877-8000 from the phone and wait for
the tone. Next, dial 0, the area code and
number of the opponent. Finally, select
"Send command to Modem" and (quickly) enter your calling card number.

Thumbs Up, Take Off
Once connected, the player finds himself in the cockpit. The "Enemy Located"
light flashes on the comm display with
range and bearing to target. Note that
this is not a relative bearing but rather
the compass heading to fly to the target.

Rigging Modem Connections
Begin the simulation and enter the Missions Screen. Players must select
"Gladiator Mode" from the missions
screen and access the "Head-to-Head" options menu. Then, it is necessary to set
identical baud rates and select the correct communications port.
If both pilots select the same color (i.e.,
"Red Leader"), the randomly generated
starting distance between the bases will
be greatly reduced. The average starting
distance for bases of different colors is
around 80 nautical miles and only
around 50nms for bases of the same
color. Although the difference of 30nms
may seem insignificant, a closure at a distance of over 50nms can seem like an
eternity — especially when long distance
charges are ticking away.
When engaging via the phone lines,
select the "Modem" option and bring up
the "Modem" options menu. By selecting
the "Auto Answer" option, the computer
may time out waiting for the opponent to
dial the player. It is best to select the
"Manual Answer" after the first ring.
Sometimes this will disconnect you. Be
warned, it may take a few attempts to
finally achieve the connection.
If a player is going to initiate the call,
select either "Tone" or "Pulse." Then,
either enter the phone number in the
space provided by selecting "Dial" or
enter a command to the modem directly
by selecting "Send command to
Modem." Those using a long distance
phone company calling card for their
modem might find this "Send command
to Modem" particularly useful. For ex-

The Basics
If the range indicated is more than 50
nms, it is best to accelerate to full burner
(zone 5) and steer off of the runway.
Note that, eventually, players will end up
at the same air base (provided they both
chose the same color leader to start off
closer). Pull up quickly, or expect a midair collision and, once airborne, fly out
away from each other until a distance of
10 nms is reached, then close and merge
Don't forget to yank the landing gear
up! Nothing is worse than finally getting
everything "tweaked" for a dogfight only
to find that one's gear is damaged from
not retracting it up at high speeds. A
player will then be stuck flying at around
300 knots. If this happens, don't waste
time — snap-roll, auger in and start again!

First Pass Encounters
When flying F-16 Combat Pilot against
another opponent, the first rule is: Do
not smoke the enemy before the first
pass. Learn it, live it!
With the First Pass rule firmly in place,
either achieve the same altitude as the
enemy (horizontal pass) or fly above or
below the enemy and pass in the vertical. After the pass, it will be up to the
player to anticipate his enemy's moves.
Remember, firing at even .2nms out
before the pass is considered beyond
poor sportsmanship and is frowned upon
by most F-16 CP "jocks."

ACM (Aerial Combat
Maneuvering)
The most noticeable difference between
flying against the MiGs in the simulation

Strategy

and a human opponent is that the simulated MiGs do not evade in the vertical.
However, a player will find that even
basic ACM maneuvers can be highly effective when used correctly against a
human enemy.
Look behind right after the initial pass
to see where the opponent's going. If he
pulls a split-S, try a vertical half loop.
If he break turns and does not extend
upward, cut back the throttle a little and
try a high-G yo-yo. In this simulation, it is
to the player's advantage if this maneuver is exaggerated almost into a hammerhead turn, climbing at an attitude of over
80 degrees before initiating one's own
turn. If done correctly, use the rudder to
assist in the turn. This will give one a distinct altitude advantage and, when
diving, will regain any lost energy from
the maneuver. Don't lag around up there
or the enemy will have the player for
lunch coming out of the apex of this turn.
If the enemy extends upward, counter
with a split-S, coming out with full
burner. More speed is thereby available,
setting up the ability to maneuver into
the enemy's elbow (providing he is coming out of an Immelman turn where he
would lose speed).
A great "one shot" offensive (known as
a "one shot" because no one will ever fall
for it twice) is to extend upward at an attitude near 90 degrees immediately after
making the initial pass. Climb until at
least several thousand feet above the
enemy. Then, ease off the throttles and
perform a tight split-S. The enemy will
see the player in his RWR (Radar Warning Receiver) either in front of him or behind him (providing that the player's APG68 is active), but he will not know exactly where the player is in the vertical
plane if executed quickly enough. Fly
him into the firing parameters, lock him
up and scratch one modem enemy. Chances are he was still trying to figure out
where the player went when he was hit.

an eye on the UFCP (Up Front Control
Panel) and it will tell the bearing to, distance from and altitude of the target.
Using this information, one can infer the
enemy's position without painting his
RWR. After the merge, use the other
views to see where he goes and watch
the UFCP to maintain bearing, range and
altitude. Right after the merge, watch the
altitude first. Make sure he is not setting
the player up for the "Boom" turn (i.e.,
the "one shot" described earlier).
Practice this with the MiGs in quick-start
or any of the missions. Once one no
longer relies on his APG-68, he will no
longer give his location away as readily
as he would otherwise. Think of this as a
lesson in stealth fighting.

Engage and Destroy
Upon establishing weapons firing
parameters, type a [D] for dogfight
mode, immediately type [F9] to enter
TWS (Track While Scan) and quickly
type [F10] to invoke the STT (Single Target Track) mode. This will "lock up" the
enemy and enable one to fire once the
parameters are correct — i.e, when pulling a slight lead (Lead Pursuit) and not
too close (within .5nms) for a missile
shot. Fire, but do not fire and forget. The
opponent may "spoor (outfly or use
countermeasures against) one's weapon,
thus requiring another shot to finish the
task. The deciding factor here is one's
ability to enter the keystrokes fast
enough while keeping the enemy within
weapons firing parameters.

Advanced MFD Configuration

This author highly recommends a supplemental text on ACM such as Robert
Shaw's Fighter Combat: Tactics and
Maneuvering to enhance a player's working knowledge of modern dogfighting.
This is "the book" on ACM.

One might find the following MFD (MultiFunction Display) configuration helpful
when in combat: left MFD set to
Weapons Stores function [F1]; center
MFD set to APG-68 (the player's airborne
radar); right MFD set to Flight stats [F3].
This configuration makes it easy to shut
down radar as quickly as possible by hitting the [F2] key until the radar cycles
through air-to-ground mode and then to
another non-radar function such as the artificial horizon instrument. Please notice
that if a [D] is typed, one will switch to
the default Dogfight configuration.

Advanced Topics: Radar Use

Defensive ACM

After flying for awhile, players will
notice that they can infer where the
enemy is even when they do not yet
have a "tally" ("tally ho" or visual contact) on him. The key is not to become
dependent on looking at the RWR only.
Instead, get a bearing on the enemy and
fly to that bearing with radar off. Keep

Once the enemy is on the player's six
o'clock at close range (within 1nm), give
it up — a player may try a scissors or an
extension move like a split-S, but if the
opponent is good enough to get close in
on one's six, he's probably good enough
to finish off the job. One maneuver which
this author seems to have luck with is

the "Defensive Spiral". Basically, one
spirals down in the horizontal, in tight
turns. It will cause the opponent to overshoot the player and may give one the
chance to put some distance between
the two of you so the player can line up
a quick shot.
One can almost guarantee the enemy
will overshoot if suckered in close. Fake
a scissors and then suddenly throw out
the boards. The enemy will most likely
be drawn into missile range. Then, begin
the spiral. Remember to keep the break
turning and keep the radius as tight as
possible so as not to allow the opponent
to shoot back. Of course, the player
should not keep spiraling as the enemy
will figure out what is happening and will
initiate a high-G yo-yo to counter the
maneuver. Just make him overshoot and
then get clear fast.
Players have to watch their Gs, however. A maneuver like this can black a
player out real fast, making him a "1-G
target." If this happens, just hope that
the enemy blacks out trying to pull lead!

Paranoid Jinks
If fired at from a distance, don't wait
until having a tally to jink. It's like playing chicken; judge incoming fire from its
distance and its relative position. Try a
high-G move on it. If it's still following,
then one knows it's far enough away that
it can alter its course and still keep tracking the player. As it gets harder for the
enemy missile to track, it's closer. Just
keep pulling break turns 90 degrees to
the missiles path and use countermeasures (Flare and Chaff) until it is no
longer a threat.
One trick that might be useful is to try
to lure the enemy up into the clouds (Angels 30-35). The reason for this is that
the simulated AIM- (Air Interceptor Missile) 9M's heatseeking head will not acquire the heat signature from a jet in the
clouds. The enemy will see a TD (Target
Designator) box in his HUD, but he will
be unable to lock the player up! This is incredibly advantageous after defeating his
only two AMRAAMs (Advanced MediumRange Air-to-Air Missile). If one is on the
offensive and the enemy runs for the
clouds — this is what radar-guided
AMRAAMs are for!

Final Word
A stand-off encounter where the players
fire at each other from a distance is possible and challenging, but it is hardly as
exciting as a close-range dogfight. Here's
hoping CGW readers never get shot
down on their own dime! Check six.

Opinion

Editor's Choice: The
Hard Drive Retention
by M. Evan Brooks
Prior to his activation for Operation
Desert Storm, LTC M. Evan Brooks took
a look at his hard disk. Here's what he
found....

G

iven the multitude of games

released, I thought it would be
both interesting and elucidating to
note those entertainment products which
the editors of CGW have retained on
their personal hard drives. Such a choice
is, of course, a very personal preference
and may be somewhat unusual compared to what one may have expected
from their prior writings. Even an
editor/reviewer is entitled to the occasional genre difference for relaxation,
however.
In looking over my list of games that
have withstood the test of time, I note
that there is a paucity of "hard-core" wargames and land conflicts. This is due to
the fact that I want a "quick fix" after
working on the more detailed simulations
and the land simulations generally require the most extensive use of playing
time. The games are noted in terms of
chronological age on my hard drive:
Battlehawks 1942 (Lucasfilm): A flight
simulation of the early Pacific air battles,
this game was easy to learn, difficult to
master and capable of multiple replayings. Being able to fly as either the
Japanese or the American aviators offers
a challenge which is still present and a
simple flight can be accomplished in
under ten minutes.
Empire (Interstel): A translation from
the days of the "Hoary Mainframes," this
war (executed over an infinite number of
potential battlefields) still has the power
to mesmerize. Granted that realism is subordinated to playability and that the
graphics are somewhat dated, this
product can still excite interest. Although
playing time can be overly long, it
remains a favorite.
SimCity (Maxis): Urban regional planning — if anyone had predicted that such
a topic would be an outstanding product,
the marketing departments throughout
the industry would have quickly silenced
that "voice crying out in the wilderness."
With additional scenario disks now available and a "textbook" written by a
"Gamer's Philistine," the beauty and

replayability compel a long stay in the
hard drive directory.
Hoyle's Card Games, Vol. 1 (Sierra):
After a hard day at the office or after a
difficult evening reviewing a grognard's
specialty, this grognard likes to try a
quick round or two of hearts or cribbage
— as an enjoyable diversion. The treatment rendered herein justifies my regular
returns to try "just one more round...."

fers an improvement over an already fine
system — graphics and playability have
been enhanced, while a scenario generator and campaign game have been
added for the more historically-minded
players.

Harpoon (Three-Sixty): The "Proustian
memory" of contemporary naval warfare
(detailed and lengthy). Detailed modelling techniques coupled with naval
doctrine yield a long-time player — plus
the additional scenario disks (GIUK,
North Atlantic Convoys, Mediterranean
and the Gulf) keep the program more
than topical.

Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse): Different historical environments
and a detailed economic model coupled
with superb graphics make this a
gamer's delight. Even those who are not
aficionados of railroading must admit
that designer Sid Meier's elegant offering
has gone a long way toward generating a
deeper interest in the "Age of Rails."

Risk (Virgin Mastertronic): A computer
rendition of the famous board game. The
EGA graphics are adequate. Its primary
weakness is the rather limited ability of
the computer artificial intelligence, however, if one is willing to make allowances
and/or start in difficult positions (e.g.
trying to seize Europe or North America
from the beginning), the play value never
seems to die.

Command HQ (MicroPlay): A gameulation of World Wars I, II, Ill and IV. The
modem play option enhances a game
that offers authentic human competition
as opposed to mere human-versus-computer action. The replayability coupled
with the graphics and quick playing
strategy will net a steady place on the
hard drive for this product.

Populous (Electronic Arts): A British import, this "deus ex machina" offers a multitude of scenarios, each of which require
a slightly different strategy. Graphics and
playability combine to make this a
keeper.
Their Finest Hour (Lucasfilm): The follow-on product to Battlehawks, this of-

Stratego (Accolade): An even newer
release, this game is akin to Risk in
terms of difficulty level and appearance.
It reflects a standard board game converted into an elegant computer product
and offers a number of options that were
never available to board gamers (plus
the ability to quickly save your favorite
starting positions).
Copyright 1991 MI Rights Reserved

Game Hints

t seems like only yesterday we were
here among the mail sacks, and now
we're in the back room again. (I really need to get this place enlarged; there's
barely enough room in here for me, not
to mention Fred and everyone else!)

I

Anyway, before we get to the good
stuff, I need to say a few words about
two types of requests that come in from
time to time. One is from readers who
would like to get into the reviewing business and the other is from people who
want to get started as game designers.
Folks, I am a "contributing editor." That
means I don't decide the freelance work
that gets printed or not. Also, I do not: a)
have the contacts necessary to get
someone's game design published or b)
have the time to review such game
designs on a lark (be they on paper or
disk). That's not my function here, and
while I sympathize with people trying to
break into the game market, there isn't
anything I can do for you. So please do
not request editorial comment on reviews
or even game design from me. That's a
service I can't provide.
Whew! Ok, now that we've gotten that
out of the way, let's take a look at what
arrived in the mailbags this month.
Bane Of The Cosmic Forge: Some
people have reached a dead end in the
castle. They've been all over (or at least
as far as they can get), and wonder
where to go next. That's easy: they have
to get underneath the altar of RAMM.
This can only be done by reading (and
understanding) the Book of RAMM,
which, in turn, can be obtained by using
a certain gold key in the right place.
Those who have made it down below
sometimes find themselves stymied by
the chasm, which requires more than a
rope to get across. A visit to the
Captain's Den will take care of that little
problem. Also, a special note to treasure

hunters (you know who you are!): if you
want to pick it up, you're going to have
to be rather bloodthirsty in regard to the
only other person who knows where it is,
or you won't be able to get it.
King's Quest V: A number of adventurers are having trouble with the end
game portion. They've found the
mysterious machine, but realize they are
missing an important item to make it
work. Where can it be? Try looking for
Mordack's library. It's very close to his
bedroom, although the way in may not
be too obvious on the screen. Try going
in all directions and see what happens.
And remember not to let the cat out of
the bag! (heh)
Savage Empire: So you need to do
something about Fabozz, eh? Well, if you
paid attention earlier in the game and did
your lab work, you should be able to
shed a little light on this problem.
Ultima VI: There's no way you're
going to get in to see the Codex until
you've been given the go-ahead at the
Temple of Singularity. So you have to
prove to the Temple that you're ready,
and that means collecting a few new
mantras first. And remember: you only
have thirty days to get everything done!
Elvira: My letters indicate that there
may be a contradiction (so I've heard) in
the hint book with regard to the garden
maze. One part tells you to go to the
pond before the lair, while the map
shows a route that leads through the lair
itself. Well, the only way I know of to
reach the lily pond is to go through the
monsters' lair. If you've been looking for
some route to get around that spot, you
might as well give it up and fight your
way through. Sorry about that.
Quest For Glory II: Some people are
wondering how they can persuade
Rakeesh to give them his neat-o sword.
Well, first of all, he will give it only to a

fighter. If you're a mage or thief, better
hunt around for some other way of dealing with the Earth Elemental. Second,
Rakeesh is a very honorable sort of guy,
and he won't hand it over to just anyone,
even if you are a fighter. So we'll hope
you've been walking the straight and narrow path through the game to this point,
in which case, you shouldn't have too
much trouble getting your hands on that
weapon.
Fool's Errand: The High Priestess' puzzles are giving some people fits. This is
because they are trying to solve them
too soon in the game. You have to do all
the puzzles that give you the Keys of
Thoth before you can complete the High
Priestess section, because what you see
when you get a Key of Thoth (watch carefully!) will help you to solve the enigmas
that come up in the High Priestess section. You don't have to leave the High
Priestess for last, just make sure you
have all the keys first.
Spellcasting 101: The best time to do
the spell simulator is after the university
is deserted. Also, get your spells and
timing down right here, since later in the
game, you will have to do all that stuff
"for real," and you don't want to make
any mistakes then.
Well, that's about it for this look into
the mailbag. Remember, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail: (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Game Developers' Conference

"Cogito Ergo Ludo"
("I Think, Therefore I Play")

O

Highlights from the 1991 Computer
Game Developers' Conference

ver 500 designers, reporters and
"wannabes" attended this year's
conference. The festivities began
with a marvelous reception hosted by
Apple Computer. The significance of
the sponsorship was very quickly
revealed. Apple has rediscovered the
home market! Now, the very company
which refused to put a joystick on their
new line of Macintoshes because it might
be confused with a game machine has
decided to encourage game development. It was a very encouraging start, indicating that computers do not sell based
on spreadsheets and desktop publishing
alone.

Neil Kirby, designer of a multi-player version of Star Fleet Battles that runs under
UNIX and a technician at AT&T Bell
Labs, spoke of the challenge of programming intelligent behavior into computeroperated objects. Kirby shared from his
background of working with three vehicle
simulations that run under UNIX System
V. The major focus of his presentation
was to design behaviors that appear to
be intelligent without having to resort to
the intense and sometimes controversial
discipline of "artificial intelligence."
First, Kirby suggests that the programmer/designer begin with simplistic behavior (i.e. whatever is easiest to code).
He offered an example of such a primitive algorithm in which a unit (in this
case, an armored vehicle) simply
selected the closest enemy unit, turned
to face the enemy, moved to close and
attempted to fire.
Next, one observes the simplistic behavior and notes the problems with the
behavior. Kirby's example noted that his
primitive algorithm caused units to lose

Even at this point, however, Kirby
noted that the maneuver code was too
predictable and human opponents could
easily take advantage of the computer
opponent's inflexibility. Hence, he began
to adjust the maneuver code to reflect
weapon strengths. Kirby used each
weapon's effective range (for both the
attacker's and target's weaponry) as one
of the quantifiers in this revision of the
code (BRG). A branching was established by asking the two questions:
"Where can a unit go?" and "Where does
a unit want to go?" In an ideal situation,
the mobility of the attacking vehicle
would encompass the target, but allow
the attacker to remain outside the
target's effective weapon range. This
state is illustrated by "Figure 1 — Kirby's
Approach."
The basic idea of Kirby's philosophy in
programming artificial opponents is to
keep it simple, relying on observation
and testing to help one develop practical
and efficient solutions. Although Kirby
did not specifically put it this way, the
technique definitely allows designers to
keep the cart (programming) behind the
horse (game design).

"I Think, Therefore I Play" turned out to
be a very useful theme for this year's conference. Conference sessions dealt with
"intelligent" computer opponents,
thought-provoking subject matter for
games, thoughtful game criticism and
theoretical thought.

Intelligent Behavior
Without Al: An Evolutionary Approach

Thus, the process begins again. Kirby
decided that each unit needed to
evaluate its condition prior to movement
and proceeded to develop algorithms for
a self-assessment.

their central forward armor and take unnecessary internal damage while the
flanks were untouched.
These observations should lead to construction of parameters that can in turn
lead to successful behavior. In the case
of Kirby's example, he solved the initial
problem by having the unit move a
shorter distance in order to have "movement points" left at the end of its movement toward the selected target. The
vehicle would use the remaining "movement points" to rotate its strongest armor
toward the closest enemy unit. Hence,
maximum defense was always available.
Second, the parameters established by
observation should be quantified into
new algorithms so that the program is
able to utilize the parameters in evaluating potential behavior. In Kirby's example, the solution was codified into a
basic closure code where relative bearing
and the integer values of forward armor
were the quantified parameters.
Finally, Kirby urges designers to test,
test, test. Repeated observation indicated
that the armored units tended to lose all
three facings of their forward armor, but
would still continue closing on their target until they had taken fatal damage.

A Practical Approach to
Game A.I.
Jon Freeman is a veteran computer
game designer (he founded Automated
Simulations, the computer game company which became Epyx) and science
fiction author. His computer game credits
include the best-selling Archon and the
recent Swords of Twilight. Interestingly
enough, many of Jon's observations
dovetail nicely with Neil Kirby's lecture.
Freeman observed that the problem is
not creating an invincible opponent, but
creating a "good loser" (a challenging opponent who "seems" to make enough
good moves to imply an overarching
strategy). A major problem with programming the artificial opponent, he noted, is
that for most games, human opponents
have not actually played the game. So,
the designer/programmer doesn't really
know how a human is going to proceed.
One method of designing the artificial
opponent, which Freeman shared, is to
analyze the goal of the game, establish
rules for achieving the goal and design
an opponent that follows those rules. As
an example, he took the idea of Monopoly. Since the goal of Monopoly is to
bankrupt the other players by collecting
more rent than they do, an initial goal for

Game Developers' Conference

the artificial opponent would be to establish the most probable properties for
other players to land upon. In Monopoly,
Freeman observed, probabilities are
skewed toward the orange properties because of the likelihood of players rolling
6, 8 or 9 when coming out of "Jail." The
artificial opponent would have rules for
acquiring and developing properties
based on probability and profit margins.
Hence, the computer opponent which
"works toward" the game's goal may
seem to be a better player than the
human players because it follows its own
rules better than humans follow their
rules.

ponent to do, one can create an opponent that "feels" right, even if the com
puter never makes a "good" move.
Perhaps the most practical point which
was presented about designing the artificial opponent was to start with the numbers already available to the designer.
Simple algorithms which consider such
matters as number of targets/opponents
(objective: reduce the number of opponents), distances (the closer target has
priority) and hit points (the biggest is the
priority target) can provide a quick and
dirty outline for the artificial opponent
code.

Next, once the artificial opponent has
an overall goal, one should define "special case" code. For example, an artificial
opponent would not necessarily follow
the same rules in a mid-game turn that it
would use for a near endgame turn. So,
Freeman observed that one should
design an evaluation mechanism so that
"special case" code can be implemented
at appropriate points in the game.

He also added some simple ideas from
Chris Crawford for developing artificial opponents. In the past, Crawford has suggested the use of vast resources (i.e. lots
of dumb or big enemies) to insure "challenge" without necessarily reflecting "intelligence." Other ideas include handicapping enemies and situations using point
systems, spatial relationships (range,
zones of control, etc.) and limiting the information available to human players.

One useful technique Freeman stressed
was to "avoid the unforgivable error." He
noted that, by working backwards from
what one did not want the artificial op-

In conclusion, Freeman suggested the
development of a simple combat
decision matrix that would indicate when

a unit would normally attack and when
that decision would be based on the artificial opponent's "personality" (i.e. "aggressive" or "defensive"). The question
marks in "Figure 2 — Combat Decision
Matrix" reflect the latter.

Death in Computer Games
This year's program was significantly enhanced by two debates. An informal
debate was built on the subject, "Live or
Let Die — The Computer Adventure
Game Question." Ron Gilbert, one of the
major talents in the development of
Lucasfilm Games' graphic adventure engine and designer of The Secret of
Monkey Island asserted that "Death is
Bad Drama." Lori Cole, co-designer of
the Quest for Glory series, proposed
"Death as a Dynamic Plot Element."
Gilbert's main assertion is that the
death of the player's character, the
protagonist, destroys the "suspended disbelief" necessary to make a story believable and engaging. He strongly suggested that where suspension of disbelief
is sufficiently strong, players with characters entering dangerous situations are
scared enough, even if they know they
won't die. To underscore his argument,

Game Developers' Conference

he used the analogy of Luke Skywalker
in the Star Wars trilogy. He was greeted
with a loud, "Irrelevant. We're talking different media!" from Lawrence Schick,
designer of Sword of the Samurai.
Gilbert responded that he did not think
the analogy was irrelevant because both
film and computer games told stories.
Both Lori and Lawrence asserted that the
possibility of making fatal errors was a
vital part of the interactive nature of the
fiction.
Cole suggested that personal involvement is missing whenever the possibility
of death is absent from a computer
game. The game becomes mere amusement, because the player is not committed to performing at that higher plane
where adrenaline flows and there is an
emotional stake in the game.
Interestingly enough, both debaters conceded that their positions were not absolute. Gilbert said he did not object to
death when it serves an integral part of
the drama, but noted that it is not usually
the protagonist who experiences this
death. Cole stated that she disapproves
of death which is so capricious that the

player cannot develop an affinity for
his/her character.

Good Graphics Versus
Good Game Play
A formal debate was built on the
proposition, "Resolved: that the creation
of good graphics should receive higher
priority in the development process than
the creation of good game play." The
"Chris 'n' Chris" barbecue session featured Chris "Wing Commander" Roberts
with the affirmative position and Chris
"Balance of Power" Crawford with the
negative.
Roberts defended the proposition by insisting that graphics both sell games
(after all, what good is a game that no
one buys?) and enhance game play. He
emphasized that value was present in
graphics and noted that the increased
production costs in providing state of the
art graphics (and sound) require more
emphasis on a game's looks.
Chris Crawford countered by suggesting
that such emphasis on graphics was like
trying to emphasize the sizzle instead of
the steak. He also cited the success of
classic Infocom games as examples of

"good games" with no graphics. Of
course, someone in the audience
countered by asking where Infocom is
today? Finally, Crawford admitted the
value of graphics, but insisted that good
gameplay offers replay value.
At the close of the debate, referee Brenda Laurel declared Chris to be the winner
(without specifying which Chris). In summary, however, both sides agreed on the
importance of a "strategic alliance" between graphics and gameplay where
graphics attracts potential customers and
gameplay keeps them. Crawford suggested that a 60:40 ratio between
gameplay and graphics is probably a
defendable proposition.

The Birth of a Medium
Brian Moriarty, designer of Trinity and
Loom, gave a marvelous demonstration
lecture which underlined an assertion
made by fellow Lucasfilm designer Hal
Barwood in another lecture. Barwood
stated that while filmmakers sometimes
play computer games, they do not think
about them much. On the other hand, he
commented, computer gamers (and, of
course, computer game designers) think
about movies all the time. Moriarty's lec-

Game Developers' Conference

ture presented rare film
footage and historical annotations as an instructive
paradigm for computer game
development.
Moriarty began his tour de
force by recounting a wager
between Governor Leland
Stanford and some friends.
Stanford bet that there was a
time during a horse's gait at
which all four feet were off
the ground. To prove it, Edward Mowbridge placed twenty-four cameras in sequence and captured footage to convince Stanford's
friends. By 1879, Mowbridge was projecting similar sequences by means of a
primitive projector.
Perhaps most amazing of all, Moriarty
noted that by 1889, one of Thomas
Edison's employees had developed the
four-hole format that is still standard in
motion picture development. By 1894,
kinetoscopes were showing a standard
fifty feet of film at forty frames per
second (which was later dropped to sixteen frames per second). The unspoken
parallel with the computer game industry
is that after more than a decade, computer game developers still do not have
a universal standard.
The first commercial exhibitor was
probably Andrew Holland. Holland placed
five kinetoscopes in a row and charged
viewers 25 cents to move down the row.
Invention of the Latham loop enabled
films to get longer. On December 28,
1895, Lumiere invented his own projector
and showed ten movies in his basement
to 35 paying customers. Such simple sequences as factory workers leaving a factory at quitting time, the Lyons Express
arriving (people actually stood up and
ran from this image), feeding a baby or
playing cards were popular enough to
gain a clientele of 5,000 people per
week. Later, George Melies became the
first commercial movie director. Melies
produced 500 short films and the first
1,000 foot reel, "A Trip to the Moon."
The unspoken parallel is that, initially,
people will be fascinated by technological
advances that seem to accomplish very
little, but it will take continued sophistication and increasing effort to hold that fascination.
Moriarty moved to the period of Edwin
S. Porter in the United States. Porter
directed films from 1896-1915. Moriarty
displayed short features like Porter's
"Elopement on Horseback," "The Gay
Shoe Clerk" and "The Great Train Robbery" for the group. The latter featured
an early use of the rear projection screen
technique, "special effects" like switching
a dummy for a body, ability to cut be-

tain that their innovations are
going to be worth the financial cost.

Computer Game
Criticism

tween scenes without pure continuity (discovery of the "shot") and movement
away from the proscenium-oriented
(front of the stage view) camera. The unspoken parallel is that an art form does
not really start to mature until it begins
to exploit its differences from other media. In this case, computer games need
to explore approaches to interactivity
that film cannot match, just as film went
beyond what the stage could provide.
By 1907, Lawrence Griffith (D.W.'s
father) was to act in a film that illustrated
something new about film. In "Rescue
from an Eagle's Nest," there was a
response to the audience's demand for
story, as well as action. Prior to '07,
production companies saw themselves
as doing simple, cheap entertainment for
the uneducated. The unspoken parallel
to the computer game industry is that
there are many computer games which
overlook the necessity of story to complement action.
Finally, Moriarty reached the highlight
of his address, a look at the work of D.
W. Griffith. Griffith introduced the concept of the director as star, largely because no one wanted to be a director in
his day. Griffith started with a one-reeler
called, "The Adventures of Dolly." It was
a simple "rescue the heroine" story
about a girl who gets captured by gypsies. He grew aesthetically in the tworeeler, "Enoch Arden" and finally,
reached the high point of his career in
1915. In "Birth of a Nation," a ten-reel
pseudo-history of the U.S., Griffith simultaneously brought "respectability" to the
film industry and made the first film
banned in Boston. New techniques included the opening iris shot and some exterior shots with no outdoor lighting.
"Birth of a Nation" was shot for
$110,000. Unfortunately, his next picture,
"Intolerance," was to break him financially. A la Francis Ford Coppola and "One
From the Heart," Griffith was to spend
the rest of his life paying for "Intolerance". New techniques included
night scenes lit by magnesium flares, but
the film was essentially spectacle over
substance. The unspoken warning was
for computer game developers to be cer-

CGWs editor, Dr. Johnny
L. Wilson, offered an address
called "Pigs at the Pastry
Cart." The lecture presented
a contrast between what Wilson called "bandwagon
reviewing" and the "critical
task." Wilson contended that
"bandwagon reviewers" major on the
minors by asking marketing questions
(i.e. graphics, sound, numbers of disks,
pages in the manual, etc.). Wilson suggested that the critical task is to delve
deeper. His critical manifesto strongly
suggested that:
1) a critic should have some expertise
(i.e. a solid background or well-researched approach to either the fiction or
reality the game presents);
2) a critic must be aware of the intended
audience (i.e. be willing to examine a
work from more than one point of view);
3) a critic must know the medium (i.e.
he should have some idea of the
problems inherent in programming and
marketing a computer game);
4) a critic needs a vision of the future
(i.e. he must have some idea of where
the art form is headed and where it
should be headed;
5) a critic needs empathy with the
creator (i.e. he needs to know what the
designer was trying to accomplish and
be aware of the developer's body of
work); and
6) a critic needs to be willing to hear
other voices (i.e. recognize that his word
may not necessarily be the final word on
a game).
Wilson closed with a favorite quotation
from Oscar Wilde (The Picture of Dorian
Gray), "When critics disagree, the artist
is in accord with himself." Then, Sid
Meier (Pirates, Railroad Tycoon and F15 Strike Eagle) suggested a seventh
tenet to Wilson's manifesto, "A critic
should be entertaining." Judging from
the lively response during the question
and answer session, Wilson was either
entertaining or controversial.

Developing Community
The design community took action at
this year's conference to more formally
align as an association of developers.
Through the years, this conference has
had an important impact on the computer game industry. We believe the new
association will provide for even more effective cooperation in the future.

Computer Gaming World's
The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Strategic Simulations' Eye of the Beholder

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and,
often; controversial perspective.
nce again, it's time to drag out
the old crystal ball and see what
appears in the depths. Looking
through the veils I see... Hey, wait a
minute! What's that big eye looking back
at me???

O

Eye Of The Beholder (EOB), the first
in a new series of AD&D games from
SSI, is a complete departure from the
standard gold box series in terms of:
graphics, sound effects, interface, mode
of play, puzzle orientation and combat.
The graphics are straight-on
you-are-there 3-D perspective throughout the
game, and they are quite beautiful. At
least they are in VGA; I also looked briefly at EGA mode, and it was a very brief
look. There's just no comparison — you
really need VGA to get the most from the
game's visual aspects.
This is an all-dungeon expedition; no

towns, no wilderness. Nevertheless, EOB
avoids visual boredom by giving different
levels different representations:
orange/brown bricks for the sewer levels,
gray stone for the Dwarf country, dark
red for Drow areas, mossy green in
Thri-Kreen territory, and so on.
What really makes it work, however,
what really gives you the feeling of being
in an actual dungeon, is the remarkable
and ingenious use of sound effects (best
results are obtained with a sound card).
Not merely creaking doors and dripping
water, but insidious little noises which indicate that something is out there, and
coming closer every second.
It's a creepy experience to be walking
down a corridor, hearing a faint rustle or
tramp of feet in the distance. Where is it
coming from? The long passage ahead?
That side branch? Or is it, perhaps, a
deadly enemy sneaking up from behind?
Enhancing play further is the fact that
each type of monster has its own "attack
sound" to be made during combat. Few
will forget the deep-throated "waow!" of
the displacer beast, the chilling screech

of the skeleton lords or the nerve-wracking chittering of the poisonous spiders.
Spells also have sounds and special effects associated with them, not all of
which are easy to describe. Magic missiles go off with a bang, Create Food has
a sort of twinkling sound, and Remove
Paralysis is definitely eerie. Overall, the
sound work in the game is top-notch.
So, just why are you in this dungeon,
anyway? Need you ask? As usual, there
are evil doings to be stopped and, as
usual, you just volunteered for the dirty
work. This time around, though, your
party is a little smaller than you're accustomed to having it, at least initially.
Four is the number here, instead of the
typical six of the gold box series. So,
choose wisely. One profession you can
do without is the thief. There is so little
for a thief to do in this game (so few
locks to pick) that having one is like
dragging around useless baggage.
You will most definitely want a cleric,
though. Not only do those healing spells
come in handy, but the Create Food
spell is a necessity. Little packages of

OPINION
food are scattered around here and
there, but they tend to become fewer as
you go further down. Once your cleric
reaches fifth level and has the Create
Food spell, however, your food worries
are over.
Fighters, of course, should also be in
the group. Later in the game, you'll
come across other warriors you can add,
but you have to depend strictly on your
own characters for the first few levels.
So, a little muscle up front doesn't hurt.
It almost goes without saying you want
a mage or two, as well. They don't have
many spells at the start, and you'll have
to do some hunting around to find more
for them, but a magic missile or fireball
at the right moment can be a lifesaver
(and I don't mean candy).
Dual-class characters (
fighter/magic-user, cleric/magic-user, etc), give you
more for your money, although, as always, they advance slower than the pure
classes. On the other hand, advancement
isn't as critical here as it is in most other
games of this type. Fifth level for spellcasters is what you want to reach, since
that's where mages can use fireballs, and
clerics have Create Food and Remove
Paralysis. Anything beyond that is basically gravy.
I recommend using the Modify command at character creation time, especially in regard to dexterity. High dex means
lower armor class, and, sorry to say,
your crew won't be starting with much in
the way of armor. It is strange (I have
stronger words, too) to send a party into
a known hell-hole when they are hardly
wearing more than boots and skivvies.
That's the way of it, however, so protect
your characters as much as possible.
For all that, combat in this game is not
excessive. This isn't your typical gold
box hack'n'slash jaunt through myriads
of encounters. While there is fighting
enough to keep things lively, it doesn't
become tedious, except perhaps on the
Kenku level. The Kenku seem endless,
usually appear in groups of three or four,
and make your life miserable with their
magic missiles.
I have a suspicion they were set up that
way deliberately, to provide an area
where hack'n'slash devotees could fight
to their heart's content. On other levels,
once you've cleaned the place out, encounters are very rare to non-existent.
Then again, Kenku always carry food
with them, so perhaps they're really
meant as a food supply, although by the
time you're ready for them, your cleric
probably has Create Food anyway.

Whichever, do walk carefully when you're
on Kenku turf.
Speaking of combat, those familiar only
with the gold box games will have to adjust to a whole new way of fighting. Only
the two characters in front can engage in
hand-to-hand combat. Those in the rear
must rely on spells and/or missile
weapons. When those are used up, there
isn't much they can do besides stand
and watch the proceedings.
This can be irritating in the early stages
of the game, when missile weapons (they
all have to be found) and spells are few.
Later on, your characters will have more
than enough spells, spears, arrows, daggers and rocks to launch at hostile critters.
What is incredibly annoying, however,
is the fact that you can't do anything
about attacks from the rear or side. This
is a definite weakness in the combat engine. It's ridiculous that people in the
rear can be attacked without any means
of fighting back.
Sometimes, there is room enough to
maneuver your party around and away
so that all monsters are in front. However, when monsters come from in front
and behind when you're standing in a narrow corridor, there isn't much you can
do except hope you can finish off one
group before dealing with the other.
Maneuvering, by the way, is an important tactic in combat. Unlike the gold box
games, you can move away from opponents without taking a shot in the
back. So your party can sidestep to the
left or right, or back up while fighting to
gain room or put some distance between
them and nasty critters like the spiders
and rust monsters (best dealt with from a
distance).
Spellcasting requires having the
spellbook in hand, a requirement that is
not part of the regular AD&D system.
You only memorize spells from the
books, you don't need to hold them. If
you did, why would you need to
memorize in the first place? This is especially detrimental to fighter/magic-users,
who must either forego a shield (if
they're in front), or spellcasting if they're
using a bow. A better way of handling
this is necessary.
In terms of plot, there isn't very much.
This is your standard "Kill Foozle The
Evil Wizard" story, where Foozle in this
case happens to be a rather vicious Beholder. You progress through eleven
levels of dungeon to have it out with Mr.
Eyes in his fancy digs on the twelfth.

There is hardly any interaction with
NPCs beyond fighting. In a few instances
you can talk (or rather, listen) to someone, but your responses are limited to
such simple things as "yes," "no," "attack," "leave," etc.
What sets EOB apart from most other
games of this type is the extensive use of
puzzles. It is meant to be a dungeon exploration game, which is why fighting is
kept to a minimum. Most of the puzzles,
though, are not too hard to figure out,
once you get the hang of things.
You soon learn to pick up every object
you come across, since it could be
handy for holding down pressure plates
on the floor (and other uses, as well).
Walls are examined for disguised buttons
that will open up further areas, or walked
into, in case the wall is a false wall (the
Drow favor false walls, and there are
some in Dwarf country, although these
are usually marked).
It's often not necessary to find every
puzzle on every level to progress through
the game. Some lead to other areas of
the dungeon, while others will reveal
weapons, armor or magical items. The
only puzzles not easy to find/solve are
those involved with the Beholder Bonus
contest.
Each of the twelve levels has a special
hidden puzzle (except level four, where
the bonus is right there in the open and
impossible to miss). These puzzles are additions, and don't have anything to do
with getting on in the game itself; you
can easily complete your mission without
solving a single bonus puzzle.
The interface is built for mouse use, although the keyboard can be used if you
don't have a mouse. Everything is
point-and-click; you position the cursor on an
item to pick it up, drop it, throw it or use
it in combat. Movement is accomplished
by clicking on one of several arrow icons
to go forward, backward, sideways or
turn around. In some tense combats, however, it is better to have one hand on the
keypad for movement, and the mouse
on the character icons for fighting/spellcasting.
Items dropped or used in combat don't
disappear; they stick around to be picked
up later if you want them back. This is
handy for missile weapons, since they
can be used over and over again. The
only drawback is that, after a fight, you
have to pick each one up individually.
Mapping is a necessity beyond the first
three levels (a map of those comes with
the game), particularly in the Drow

OPINION
areas. After going upstairs, downstairs,
into pits and through portals, your exact
location is often in doubt. Good maps
can help to reduce or eliminate confusion, as well as point up areas where
you might want to search for secret
doors or walls.
For all its polish, however, Eye Of The
Beholder has some ragged edges. The
first is in booting up the game: every
time you run it, you must specify what
graphics you want, which sound card,
and whether or not you want to use your
mouse.

off the spell, while the monsters don't
have that problem. They just keep bashing away at your front line.
There is only one save position. It is difficult to understand why a game that
sports so many puzzles, requiring a lot of
experimentation, allows for only one
save. This forces you to exit the game
and copy the relevant save files to a
backup from time to time, simply to be
on the safe side. That should not be
necessary; multiple save positions should
be incorporated in the game.

This is plain silly. A configuration file
should be created (just as they do with
the gold box games) on first boot that
has this information in it for subsequent
play.

Worst by far, though, is the ending. Not
since Sentinel Worlds I has any CRPG
had so abrupt and unrewarding a finish.
You kill the Beholder. You get a text box
of congratulations. You are dropped out
of the program to DOS. End of game.

Spellcasting, especially in real time, is a
bit awkward. First you have to click on
the spellbook, then on the spell level you
want, and finally on the spell itself. That's
three moves to get off a spell, which is
certainly too much, particularly when you
can only handle one character at a time.
No one else in the party can do anything
while you flip through the book and get

This is outrageous! SSI is already hearing about it from other players, and with
good reason. There is no justification for
such a cheap ending. They claim another
disk would have been necessary to put in
a "real" ending. If that's the case, put in
the extra disk. Or else, whittle down the
fancy beginning. That isn't nearly as important as a reward at the end of the

game. No player enjoys slogging through
a dungeon, winning the big battle and
then receiving a slap in the face for all
his/her efforts.
Despite all that, as a first-time effort
with a new engine, EOB has a lot going
for it, especially in the graphics/sound
department. No other game I've played
to date has ever given me such a sense
of really being in a dungeon and that
alone is worth the price of admission.
The interface is simple and fairly intuitive (a good thing, as the manual is poorly designed and put together). Copy
protection is practically nil; only twice
during the entire game was I ever asked
to enter a word from the manual.
So, the bells and whistles are fairly wellestablished. Work needs to be done in
the combat areas, plot has to be
developed, more interaction with NPCs is
needed, and certainly better endings
must be constructed. If that can be accomplished (and there's no reason why
not), the Legend series will become one
of the leaders in the CRPG field.
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

neofth
greatest frustrations that many
computer pilots experience is the proliferation of keyboard combinations necessary to
access weapon systems
and electronic countermeasures. Sometimes
the player gets the idea
he's working with a
typing tutorial instead
of a flight simulation.
With the latest generation of air combat
simulators boasting
more complex features
than their predecessors,
the problem seems to
be getting more acute.
For example, a player
flies his enemy into the
proper weapons firing
perimeter and reaches
for the keyboard to hit
the proper keys necessary to lock his radar
on his opponent. While flying his aircraft with his right hand, he
reaches down with his left, hits the wrong key and either spends
time away from the screen looking for the right key or, possibly
worse, invokes another view. This can mean the difference between winning and losing a dogfight. Thus, one's potential success at winning dogfights increases or decreases in direct proportion to one's proficiency in typing.

Getting Under Control
The "Thrustmaster" Control System

Since, however, these simulations are modeling real aircraft and
real fighter pilots don't use keyboards, it seems clear that a
device is needed to replace the keyboard. With this in mind, the
Thrustmaster was created as a HOTAS (Hands on Throttle and
Stick) device which provides the computer pilot with an independent throttle, a three position rocker switch and six push-button toggles.
The Thrustmaster is not a joystick, but rather a small keyboard
(it utilizes a keyboard PROM chip). It is only capable of output,
however, and is not user-programmable. It plugs into the keyboard input on one's computer and then one plugs the keyboard
directly into the Thrustmaster. The computer fighter pilot selects
a pre-set configuration from one of the DIP switch settings. Although more suited for modern jet combat simulations, it can
also be used for flying in WWI and II aircraft by experimenting
with these settings.
The throttle is comprised of an ergonomically designed handle
that fits in one's hand. All buttons are within easy grasp of one's
fingers. The throttle has a detent, so that the pilot may infer his
throttle setting by feel alone, without having to look down to find
the appropriate key on the keyboard.
There is a three-position rocker switch positioned on the back
of the throttle which can be manipulated with the heel of one's
hand. Depending upon which simulator is being flown, it can
serve different functions. For instance, in Spectrum Holobyte's
Flight of the Intruder, the rocker switch controls the landing
gear in both the F-4 and the A-6. However, in MicroProse's F-15
Strike Eagle II, the same button controls the cycling of air-to-air
and air-to-ground weapons.

by Scott West

Switch Function Function
Function
1 Zoom out
Zoom in
Hares
2 Map/radar
Chaff
Map/radar
3 HUD modes HUD modes HUD modes
4 Bay doors
Bay doors
Bay doors
5 Weapons select Weapons select Weapons select
6 no op
no op
no op
7a On (Nav mode 1)
7b
On (Nav mode 2)
On (Attack mode)
7c

Product:
Use:
Price:
Designer:

Thrustmaster, Mark 1 Weapons Control System
Accessory for IBM Air Combat Simulators
599.95
Bob Carter
Thrustmaster, Inc.
Oswego, OR

The six toggle buttons are strategically placed to be effortlessly
pressed by one's fingers and thumb. They control such functions
as the dispensing of chaff and flares or the extending of one's air
brake. It depends upon which DIP switch setting the
Thrustmaster is set up for.
Following is a list of the simulations which are already compatible with the Thrustmaster:
MicroProse: F-15 Strike Eagle II, F-19 Stealth Fighter
Spectrum Holobyte: Flight of the Intruder, Falcon AT
Dynamix: A-10 Tank Killer
Lucasfilm: Their Finest Hour, Battlehawks 1942
Velocity: Jetfighter
Although Thrustmaster is designed for air combat simulators
depicting jet aircraft, one can use it as a throttle for Dynamix's
Red Baron by utilizing the same DIP switch setting as A-10
Tank Killer. The same setting works for MicroProse's Knights of
the Sky.
The table above illustrates the various functions that the
Thrustmaster can control when one uses it to fly MicroProse's F19 Stealth Fighter:
The Thrustmaster will soon support Falcon 3.0, although this
will require a replacement PROM chip. Also, coming soon is the
Mark l flight control system. It is a replica of the F-15 joystick,
complete with 5 buttons and 7 functions. Current air combat
simulators can only process the information from two-button joysticks. Hopefully more developers will see these innovative new
products and will support them in the near future.
One word of warning may be necessary, however. Players who
absentmindedly play with the Thrustmaster when a program
other than a flight simulator is being accessed may be in for a
nasty surprise. For example, moving the Thrustmaster unnecessarily can change Microsoft Excel into an unwanted "adventure
game" (with absolutely no documentation) in seconds.

Review

Another Lear Forward
Psygnosis' Lemmings
by Allen L. Greenberg
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

T

Lemmings
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
1-2
(IBM, solitaire only)
$49.99
Psygnosis
Liverpool, England

he name "lemming" refers to any one of a number of

small, arctic rodents, several European species of which
have become widely romanticized for their aptitude to
engage in a mass migration which frequently terminates at a
nearby ocean and in a watery death for the community. Having
recently seen an entire country engage in a holy war to achieve
much the same results, is it any wonder we humans feel some
fascination with these cute, furry and largely inept animals?
Lemmings is also the name of a new addiction (aka "game")
from Psygnosis. The challenge is for a human player to subtly intervene in lemming affairs, thereby guiding them to safety and
saving them from extinction. This may well be the best offering
to date from Psygnosis, and it certainly is worth lining up in the
fashion of the game's title characters to obtain a copy.

Lord of the Lemmings
Those who enjoyed the brief glimpse of godhood afforded in
the playing of Electronic Arts' Populous will be treated to yet
another "divine" experience in Lemmings, albeit with a far less
dignified group of (devout) followers. As the exercise begins, a
community of lemmings, appearing more like creations of Dr.
Seuss than actual rodents, plummet one at a time from a trap
door onto a two-dimensional playing field. Immediately, the lovable Lilliputian herd begins to walk across the screen until it
reaches a barrier which forces it to reverse its direction. Should
the creatures encounter a more deadly situation, such as the
edge of a cliff, an ocean or a raging fire, they will casually
proceed to their deaths with only a brief cry to mark their passing. The session ends when the last lemming is gone, or, more
desirably, when the population has been guided to the exit door
by the player's "divine intervention."

The Right Lemming for the Job
For the community to survive the migration, the player must
carefully assign abilities to certain members of the group. A lemming who becomes a "blocker" prevents his comrades from
moving past a certain point. Other lemmings may become
"floaters" who are able to survive long-distance drops by the judicious use of an umbrella. "Climbers" are able to shinny up any
object or terrain, while "diggers" and "miners" are able to drill
beneath most surfaces. "Bridge-builders" perform the task for
which they are named and "bashers" can remove anything from
tree-stumps to entire mountains. Finally, any lemming can be
rigged for self-destruction. The resulting explosion may remove
barriers, but may also prove a traumatic experience as the small
creature turns to the player, shrieks in a high-pitched silicon-accented "Oh no!" and disappears in a haze of confetti.

Of Mice and Lemmings
The player interacts with the lemming population using their distant techno-relative, the mouse. IBM users may, instead, use the
keyboard. The animals are given their assignments by first clicking on one of the icons which line the bottom of the screen and

Review

then clicking on a particular lemming. Each icon and its corresponding ability may only be used a limited number of times.
Split-second timing is important because the creatures have no
capacity for independent judgment and all decisions must be
made for them at the right instant.
Players may choose from one of four categories of play: "fun,"
"tricky," "taxing" or "mayhem." Each category contains 30 different levels of play arranged in ascending complexity which the
player must complete in order to move onto the next level. After
successfully completing a level, the player is given a password
which will allow him to return to that level without first replaying
the earlier exercises at future sessions. The "fun" level is actually
a slow-paced tutorial which allows the player to become familiar
with game play and develop strategies for the remaining 90
levels. The Amiga and Atari versions also feature a two-player
mode for which two mice are necessary. In this mode, each
player has a separate view of the same play field and must attempt to seduce as many lemmings as possible away from his
opponent.

Eyes and Ears for Lemmings
The usual assault of sounds and graphics made on the senses
by Psygnosis programs is present in Lemmings, although these
may be a little more subdued in some cases. The sound effects
are plentiful, realistic and quite useful for keeping track of the
creatures. Players who have stereo speakers connected to their
systems will be able to approximate the position of the source of
a sound based upon which speaker it is heard from. The player

has the option of doing without some of these sound effects in
order to hear some appropriately traditional (nerdy, actually)
music.
The screen conveys less of the lush background detail in Lemmings than one may be used to seeing in other Psygnosis offerings. However, what is present is displayed with that company's
"standard-setting" color, animation and realism. The only difficulty which some players may have is with the lemmings themselves. They are simply so tiny on the screen as to cause occasional frustration in following them.
Each sequence in Lemmings generally takes place across
several horizontally scrolling screens. The scrolling is completely
under control of the player, who will need to follow the action in
more than one place at a time. This control is further enhanced
by the presence of a small "radar" window which not only displays the movements of the lemmings across the entire playing
area, but also allows the player to instantly jump to any spot by
clicking on it in the radar screen. It's a well-conceived system
and it works nicely.

Where Lemmings Go, Fun Follows
Recreational computing may well be the last safe outpost
wherein a company may claim to have an "addicting" product
and not find themselves in danger of attack by a lynch mob. Not
since Tetris has this reviewer been so addicted to, or completely
fascinated with, a series of challenging puzzles. For those who
enjoy fast-moving jousts of logic and creativity, follow the crowd
and get Lemmings.

Industry News

Inside the Industry
if the two companies had been able to
agree on the merger, it would have
created another strong American-based
software company. All things considered,
I would rather have seen them successfully merge than not. We admire both companies and the people involved."

Sierra/Broderbund
Merger Off
Merger talks between publicly-held Sierra On-Line and privately-held Broderbund Software were terminated on
March 27, 1991. Directors of both companies apparently reached a realization
that certain key understandings regarding the consolidation of two distinct
upper management tiers were not likely
to be forthcoming. As Sierra CEO Ken
Williams remarked in an interview with
CGW, one goal of combining two companies is to increase efficiency according
to a new economy of scale. Maintaining
two distinct management structures
would have reduced that efficiency, yet
streamlining the organization would inevitably have meant that individuals who
had invested their careers in one or the
other of the corporations would feasibly
be transferred, demoted or laid off. Williams sympathetically observed that corporate growth becomes secondary when
people are considered.
Both companies expressed the highest
regard for their intended merger partners,
in spite of the decision to end the talks.
Broderbund President Ed Auer stated,
"We have the highest regard for Sierra,
their products and their people. We still
think it would have been a great strategic
fit and regret that the merger was not
possible."
Ken Williams used more informal language to convey the same point, "Both
companies were doing so well and
having so much fun that we looked at
the work that it would have taken to put
the companies together and decided that
it wasn't best."
Even the competition was disappointed
with the unraveling of the merger talks.
Although the merger would have created
a company that would have made
Electronic Arts the second largest
entertainment software publisher in terms
of gross sales, EA Vice-President Bing
Gordon suggested, "It's too bad, because

The net result of the decision to end
merger talks is that both Broderbund
CEO Doug Carlston and Sierra CEO
Ken Williams believe that this is the "last
dance" between their two companies and
they do not expect to entertain merger
considerations again. Williams did stipulate to CGW that Sierra will continue to
investigate possible acquisitions among
software publishers that fit the Sierra formula (i.e. aggressive, efficiently-run companies with a commitment to technological innovation in their product lines).

Game Developer
Awards Unveiled
At the Computer Game Developers'
Conference, held March 9-12, 1991 in
the San Jose Hyatt, the designers
honored distinguished products for the
first time. In the past, the CGDC has only
honored software publishers and individuals. Now, the design community is
becoming more of an "academy" of working professionals in their handling of
awards. Bruce Sterling, whose name is almost synonymous with the cyberpunk
genre (of dark futures where technology
has been put to nefarious social and antisocial uses — much as drug use was formative for much of the counter-culture in
the '60s), gave a stirring address as the
keynote speaker. Sterling urged designers to entertain "dangerous" thoughts
and celebrate their weirdness, nerditude
and geekdom. He even placed the
awards ceremony itself into an interesting perspective by observing that
whereas most art forms look to the past
for their "classics," computer game designers refer to the games which are still in
the future as their classics. He observed
that because the platforms on which we
play and view computer games become
obsolete, we really cannot have the kind
of historical reference that a filmmaker or
author can have. Sterling's point was underscored by the fact that Star Raiders,
a classic Atari game, was nominated for
Best Technical Achievement. Many of
the young designers did not know what
the game was.

Winners of the first Computer Game
Developer Awards devoted to product
were: Best Gameplay: The Secret of
Monkey Island (Ron Gilbert, designer);
Best Interface: Loom (Brian Moriarty,
designer); Best Graphics: Wing Commander (Chris Roberts, designer); Best
Audio: Wing Commander (George Alec
Sanger and Dave Govett, composers);
Most Socially Responsible: SimEarth
(Fred Haslam and Will Wright, designers); Most Innovative: SimCity (Will
Wright) and Best Technical Achievement: Wing Commander (Chris
Roberts, designer). The only individual
award presented was Best Producer.
This year, Greg Hammond of Lucasfilm
Games was honored with this award.

New British Company Establishes Software Beachhead
RAW Entertainment (the acronym
stands for role-playing, adventure and
war games) is a British company that is
moving into the American market with a
unique strategy. Initially, according to the
company's marketing director, John Ingram, the company will publish computer games from small U.S. companies
which did not get the market penetration
they deserved. RAW Entertainment will
release Conflict Analytics' Action Stations (currently undergoing new programming with the original designer, Alan
Zimm, as consultant); Lyric Software's
Worlds At War; and Command
Simulations' Blitzkrieg in the Ardennes, White Death and Suez '73 (currently in the final stages of production).
Next, the company plans to develop
some original titles. The first title expected to be developed in-house will be
Space, Inc.. Two NASA employees used
their colleagues as consultants and
created simulation aspects to reflect a
"best guess" aspect of how space travel
would work in 100 years. The goal is to
create a game that would be science
"fact"ion rather than science fiction.
The company currently employs about
25 programmers working in the U.S. on
various projects. According to Ingram,
"The goal is to be very different from the
rest, yet adopting some of the methods
of the best. We admire Sierra's customer service, MicroProse's documentation and Lucasfilm's products. That's
what we intend to emulate."

Industry Update

Celebrating Software
n March, representatives of the software
industry gathered together in San Francisco, California for reflection, interaction and celebration. Attendees participated in panel discussions, lecture
presentations, workshops, tennis tournaments and award ceremonies in order to
evaluate the recent past and establish a
prognosis for the future.

Fourth, was when Lord British inducted
Russell and myself into the Knights of
Britannia. And fifth, this award is simply the icing on the cake. Thank you very
much.

I

Considering, in particular, that Michael
Rogers of Newsweek won the award for
Best News Reporting and Keith Ferrell of
OMNI won the honors for Best Industry
Analysis/Editorial, CGW is expressly
pleased to have received an award commensurate with writers published in
magazines with much higher circulations. As Wilson noted in his acceptance speech, it is significant for a
computer game reviewer to have
received this honor.

The highlight of the spring symposium
for many of the attendees, and (this year)
especially for CGW, was the presentation
of the Excellence in Software Awards.
Presentations began with a luncheon
where the Critics' Choice, Journalism
and Lifetime Achievement awards
were presented and concluded with
an evening banquet, reminiscent of
the "Academy Awards" and hosted
by comedienne Rosie O'Donnell.

The Lifetime Achievement Award
went to "The Woz," Steve Wozniak
(father of the Apple). It has been a
long journey from the "HomeBrew
Computer Club" and all of us who
use personal computers are expressly
grateful for the vision and determination of pioneers like Steve.

CGW was particularly excited about
the selection of Johnny Wilson as
Best Software Reviewer. In accepting the award, the editor of Computer
Gaming World expressed the following sentiments.

The Critics' Choice Awards
were voted on by members of the
press, including CGW publisher
Russell Sipe, who co-presented the
Best Consumer Program with
Compute's Peter Scisco. GeoWorks Ensemble, a graphic user
interface, won Best Consumer
Program. Microsoft Windows 3.0
was selected Best Business Program and Compton's Multimedia
Encyclopedia won the honors as
Best Education Program.

It is a privilege to accept this
award, not only on behalf of
myself, but on behalf of computer game reviewers
everywhere who do not usually
get much respect. Some may ask
how you can have respect when
you only cover games, but at
Computer Gaming World, we
think games are important. We
think of "play" as being risk options management with nonlethal consequences for
children. We think of computer games as performing
something of the same function for adults.
I stepped into a tradition of
taking computer games
seriously at CGW. Our founder and publisher, Russell Sipe, had a vision for the
magazine and drew it in bold black
lines. My colleagues and I have had the
privilege of coloring that vision in. As a
journalist in this field, there have been
five high points. In chronological order,
they begin with the beautiful and efficient public relations person from a
major publisher that called and asked
me to share with her what she should,
but didn't, know about her company

that day. Second, there was the vice-president of development of an entertainment
software publisher that responded to a
probing question about an unannounced
and eventually cancelled product by stating, "I hate you, Johnny Wilson." Third,
was when we had to fold Computer
Game Forum [Publisher: Which Wilson
edited] into Computer Gaming World in
order to publish twelve times per year
and Russell said that he would be proud
to have any features from CGF in CGW.

During the evening festivities,
Roberta Williams of Sierra and
Jeff Braun of Maxis accepted
two awards each. Roberta was
honored for Best Early Education Program for the multimedia version of Mixed-Up
Mother Goose and for Best
Fantasy Role-Playing/Adventure Program with King's Quest V. The latter won
over impressive competition with Access
Software's Countdown, Interplay
Productions' Lord of the Rings: Volume
1, Lucasfilm Games' The Secret of
Monkey Island and Origin Systems' Ultima VI: The False Prophet as nominees
for the award.
Maxis Software managed to garner two
awards for SimEarth. Not only was Sim-

Industry Update

Earth selected as Best Secondary Education Program, but also as Best Simulation Program. Other nominees in the latter
category were: Accolade's Test Drive III:
The Passion, Broderbund's Stunts,
Strategic Simulations' DragonStrike and
Origin's Wing Commander. [Ed: When
the Best Action/Arcade Program
nominees were printed, CGW had
wondered why Wing Commander was not
included. At the SPA meeting, we were
told that the company wanted the
product to be considered as a simulation
rather than an action game. We disagree.]
Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon topped the
distinguished list of nominees for Best
Strategy Program. Other titles recognized
in this category were: Activision's Shanghai II: Dragon's Eye, Interplay's Battle
Chess II, Spectrum HoloByte's Flight of
the Intruder and Strategic Simulations'
Second Front.
The Best Sports Program award was
hotly contested between two golf games
(Access Software's LINKS and
Accolade's Jack Nicklaus' Unlimited Golf
& Course Design), two football games
(Electronic Arts' John Madden Football
for the SEGA Genesis and SEGA's own
Joe Montana Football) and the new version of a previous winner in this category
(Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 from Bethesda Softworks). The winner was LINKS.
For Best Action/Arcade Program,
Faces... Tris III from Spectrum HoloByte
was selected. The designer of Faces was officially welcomed to the United States
during his acceptance of the award. Other
nominees included: Accolade's Star Control, Cinemaware's Wings, Walt Disney
Software's DuckTales: The Quest for
Gold, SEGA's Castle of Illusion Starring
Mickey Mouse and The Learning
Company's Super Solvers Outnumbered!

State of the Consumer
Software Industry
At the SPA meeting, executives seemed
very concerned about the pending SierraBroderbund merger (See "Inside The Industry" on page 62). Robert Garriott of
Origin Systems observed that mergers are
currently attractive to entertainment
software companies because the larger entities they create establish economies of
scale in product development, marketing
(extra visibility) and access to capital (risk
distribution). Observing the imminent arrival of multimedia, Garriott emphasized the
need for a capital influx in the software industry and predicted that more mergers
and acquisitions would be on the way and
that the industry could go through a two- to
three-year consolidation phase.
Mark Goldstein of Reality Technologies
(developers of CEO for the PRODIGY® Interactive Service) believes that computer
entertainment will reflect a "narrowcasting"
approach meeting special interest needs
(analogous to cable television). As
producer of a popular entertainment

product (as well as consultant for Merrill
Lynch and several insurance companies
with regard to programmed trading),
Goldstein sees more of a confluence between entertainment and educational
products in the future. He punctuated his
remarks with a quotation from Marshall McLuhan, "He who says education is different
than entertainment doesn't know the first
thing about either."
Illustrating the confluence of both educational and entertainment software, publishers in both fields are excited about the
potential for CD-ROM combined with an intuitive interface for both educational and
entertainment products. With one-third of
the adult population in the United States
reported to be functionally illiterate, the
trend toward "ease-of-use," real-voice
tutorials and near-broadcast quality
graphics in CD products could feasibly
have a major impact on the future of
society, analogous to the impact of
television.
With regard to the retail end of the consumer software industry, Glenn Ochsenreiter of Waldensoft observed that his data
showed economic recovery west of the Mississippi as much slower than on the east
coast. He underscored the importance of
the video game category by observing that
during the Persian Gulf Conflict, video
game sales accounted for 10% of
Waldensoft's total sales. All other
categories were softer than expected except
for video games and MS-DOS software
priced between $70 and $200, possibly indicating that both youth and the premium
software buyers have discretionary spending money that is relatively untouched by
economic downturn.
If, indeed, Ochsenreiter's data is correct,
this would forecast a much stronger second
half of 1991 for consumer software than
many have expected. This stronger second
half would be predicated upon the return of
middle income customers who would finally
have discretionary income once again.
Ochsenreiter also observed that Apple II
and IIGS titles declined by 36% in 1990
over their sales of 1989. This means, of
course, less shelf space for Apple II and
IIGS titles and signals an even steeper
decline in development projects for these
venerable systems. On the bright side,
more shelf space is opening up for consumer software oriented toward the Macintosh platforms. In education alone, Ochsenreiter cited the number of Macintosh titles
as being up 23%. He did not comment on
Macintosh trends in entertainment software,
but other discussions at the SPA suggest
that we can probably expect to see more titles on the Macintosh in the near future because of three possibilities: 1) MS-DOS publishers who are pushing the limits of that
platform need another stable platform with
similar capabilities to port their products to;
2) Macintosh is a natural for multimedia
products and may be a significant factor in
the home CD-ROM market; and 3) Apple's
apparent new "commitment" to the home

Industry Update

user may create a healthier atmosphere for
developers. Indeed, John Sculley's keynote
address at the conference underscored
Apple's movement toward what he called
"consumer electronics market principles" in
future Apple products (i.e. decreased
production times, reduced costs, wide
range of choice and ease of use).
Other interesting observations were
presented by Gene Schenberg, a buyer for
Radio Shack. He began by noting that
Radio Shack's mail order business is
proportionately equivalent to the volume
generated by the Sears Roebuck catalog
department in their retail mix. He observed
that adventure games and simulations are
the most successful entertainment products
in his company's shelf mix, but cautioned
that sports programs and fantasy role-playing games do poorly in their mix. Fans of
fantasy role-playing games should probably
not take this comment as an important indicator, however, since Radio Shack has
historically been very conservative in the
fantasy titles they allowed on their shelves.

Video Games — Computer
Entertainment?
The major question during the video
games panel seemed to center around CDROM. The age demographics seem to be

reaching a more mature level as the
machine capabilities of the 16-bit platforms
are increasing, but the real excitement
seems to focus on CD-ROM games in the future. Ken Wirt of the NEC Home Entertainment Division boasted the only CD-ROM
peripheral currently in place. He cited
figures of 750,000 Turbo-Grafx 16 units in
the United States and 500,000 total CDROM drives for the system in use worldwide.
Al Nilsen of SEGA stated that there is a
general trend in the video game market in
which consumers and retailers are becoming more selective. He also cited statistics
which indicated that 30% of SEGA game
players are 18 years of age or older. With
1.2 million units placed in the U.S., SEGA's
goal is to make the CD-ROM drive a true
mass-market product. Though a CD-ROM
drive and at least five titles for the SEGA
will ship in October for the Japanese
market, Nilsen does not envision the drive
entering the U.S. until it can be produced
and sold at a $199.00 price point.
Perhaps the most stunning statement
from the panel came from Bill White of Nintendo of America. Asked by CGW about
the widely-reported announcement that
Sony would be manufacturing a CD-ROM
drive with distinctive standards for the
Super Nintendo, White categorically denied
that there was a deal between Sony and

Nintendo and asserted that the Reuters wire
service story (quoting a major Japanese
financial newspaper) was absolutely fictitious. Yet, White went on to state that he
expected a CD-ROM for the Super Nintendo by 1993. He also stated his estimate
that the Super Nintendo would be priced
at under $200 and have, at least, nine to
ten titles when it is launched onto the
market (with 20-30 new titles by Christmas).

On the Verge
This year's spring symposium seemed to
raise more questions than it answered. The
software industry has proven that it is healthy enough to withstand economic
downturn, yet there are many avenues to
pursue in terms of identifying growing profit
centers and stable platforms. This year's
symposium underscored the diversity in
types of markets the consumer software industry supports. Visions of multimedia and
mass market channels dance in the heads
of software executives. The question is, how
does one get there? One hopes the path is
better delineated by the SPA's Fall Conference, but it may be two or three years
before the results are clear-cut. One thing is
certain: This is an exciting industry to be involved with.

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Moonbase: The Lunar
Colony Simulator
IBM
$49.95
Robert Green, Brett Adams
and Brendan O'Connor
Wesson International
Austin, TX

Moonbase: The Lunar Colony Simulator
by Scott Pelland

F

rom

the day mankind abandoned the trees for a living on
the ground, no landscape has been so forbidding, barren,
hostile or worthless that we haven't tried to inhabit it. Moonbase: The Lunar Colony Simulator from Wesson International takes that ageless urge one great leap further.

The Race for Self-Sufficiency
The simulation begins with a barren patch of randomly
generated lunar terrain, which includes craters, regolith (lunar
soil) and various hidden features mixed with whimsical oddities.
Armed only with a NASA charter and $10,000, the base
commander's task is to create and run an economically self-sustaining base. Since the model is open-ended, the measure of success is left up to the player.
At the heart of Moonbase are icon tiles representing a wide
variety in infrastructure. Habitats, manufacturing facilities, greenhouses, hotels and other assets are placed on the lunar surface.
Then they are hooked up to a power source and thermal
radiators (so nobody gets cooked during the long lunar days)
and connected with roads. Landing pads and communications
centers link the colony to Earth while roving miners scoop up

the regolith for valuable oxygen and helium compounds. Addition
ally, scientific labs and astronomical stations can be set up — all
for a price.
The base commander also staffs the facility and keeps the
"lunies" happy by seeing to it that they aren't overcrowded and
that they have recreational facilities. In turn, the lunar workers
produce commodities such as LLOX or low-G manufactured
materials and electronic components for sale to Earth. Other activities include scientific research, which may lead to surface expeditions to find water ice or tourist attractions like a large black
monolith (what moon would be complete without one?).
As the months and years pass, the commander is faced with
many decisions and problems such as products to produce,
when to sell inventories, number of maintenance sheds necessary to support a moonbase or why all the landers are crashing.
Some of the solutions simply require common sense. Landers,
for instance, crash because there are insufficient landing pads.
Economic problems are not so easily managed and can reduce
an aspiring commander to a blithering maniac if left unchecked.
Luckily, there is help. Graphs accessible from pull-down menus
give valuable information on product price histories and market

Review

demand. Productivity can be checked
and balanced by providing the optimum
number of workers and keeping the
resupply level at 100%. NASA funding is
more or less a mystery (some things
never change), although higher funding
levels may be inspired by building more
science facilities and undertaking exploration of the surface. Another important aid is the Lunar Commodities Exchange that displays current prices in a
continuously updated scroll bar. The
base commander also controls budgeting and resupply.
Keeping the base fully resupplied is
the key to lunar survival and the key to
successfully beating the high cost of Earth products is not to
bring products from Earth. The two highest costs are for water
and hardware. If exploration teams discover water, resupply
costs will be cut almost in half. Hardware resupply can be held in
check by constructing maintenance facilities. Still, no matter how
many maintenance facilities are built, some goods (perhaps golf
balls and the latest issue of CGW) must be imported. Food can
and should be grown on the Moon in greenhouses. Even with periodic infestations of aphids, the savings are enormous.
To put a new moonbase on a firm footing requires a bit of
strategy. Novice commanders are apt to start building and spending from day one and will soon find themselves in a downward

spiral of ever-increasing costs and low
resupply rates, leading eventually to
base paralysis. One way around this is
to spend up to ten years exploring the
lunar surface before building anything.
During that time NASA will fund the nonexistent moonbase at a fairly substantial
rate (up to $50,000 per year). When construction finally begins, the moonbase
will have plenty of cash to build startup
industries like LLOX production that immediately begin to pay off. The truly
savvy commander will go even further,
rejecting all possible lunar sites until one
with water (always found in craters) is
generated. Access to a source of lunar
water almost insures success.
Once the base is producing goods and commodities, the
danger of overproduction arises. By keeping output fairly low,
limiting construction to one or two of each type of production
facility, insuring that demand and prices remain fairly high, and
allowing the base to build a reserve of cash as a hedge against
recessions (which occur on the Moon as they do on Earth — all
too frequently), the base commander can avoid this danger.
Commanders can also cut costs by limiting the construction of
certain facilities. One thermal array, for instance, can service a
substantial lunar base. This is not strictly realistic, but it does
work and save money. Cutting resupply percentages also works,

Review

up to a point. A resupply rate of less
than 50% will be felt, but minor cuts (of
up to 25%) have no long-term effects.
As realistic as the simulation is, there
are a few features that the designers unfortunately left out. For instance, there
is no lunar night. Imagine the distress
of a base powered only by solar arrays
plunged into two weeks of utter darkness! The topography is also limited
and does not in and of itself present a
challenge like the variety of landscapes
generated in SimCity. The fixed position of power and thermal hookups
limits how buildings can be placed with
respect to each other, which impacts
base layout. Even more noticeable by
omission are the various artifacts that can be discovered (but
which seldom actually appear). Some of the finds are so intriguing or just plain nutty, such as a rock formation that looks like
Elvis, that it is a crime they don't show up.
Perhaps the most annoying aspect of the program is the sound,
entirely limited to disaster warnings. Granted, no one can hear
you scream in space, but when the obnoxious warning buzzer
comes on after half an hour of utter lunar silence, the ensuing
outcry is enough to be heard back on Earth.
One must also speak about the lack of a plot in the novella/manual. If a novella is the chosen form of presentation for

game data, it could certainly use more
story. In defense of the book, one
might note that it has some interesting
speculations about day-to-day life on
the moon. Of more value, however, are
the boxes of information scattered
throughout the novella. Fortunately,
there is an index to help one find the
necessary information when needed.
For the most part, Moonbase: The
Lunar Colony Simulator accomplishes
its stated objective. Working with
NASA contractors, the design team at
Wesson International has put
together a realistic simulation that offers a challenge. Coming from a company that designs air traffic control
simulators, the realism is not surprising. What is surprising is that
the designers of such a serious simulation took such pain to add
audio cues, visual spice and a pinch of whimsy to the mix in this
product. The icon graphics are of high quality and the animation
of lunar landers/rovers lend a feeling of life to the lifeless
landscape. Building and sustaining the economy of the Moonbase takes patience and experimentation — both marks of a
good simulation. For anyone who would like a strong dose of
futuristic reality with the pleasant ambiance of strategy and entertainment, Moonbase: The Lunar Colony Simulator is the appropriate prescription.

Review

Life in the Vast Lane
Virgin Mastertronic's Overlord
by Leah Wesolowski

Title:
Systems:
# Players:
Price:
Designers:
Publisher:

T

Overlord
Amiga, Atari ST,
C-64/128 and IBM
Solitaire
$49.95
David Perry
and Nick Bruty
Virgin Mastertronic
Irvine, CA 92714

he inhabitants of the

Epsilon galaxy had
begun to believe
their own propaganda
and, as a result, had
decided that they were totally secure in their
supreme rule of known
space. Leave it to a group
of scientists to muck
things up, though. In their
attempt to find a more efficient means of space
travel, they uncovered four
heretofore unknown dimen sions: Hitotsu, Futatsu, Mittsu and Yottsu. This would
not have been such a disaster had each of the four
new dimensions been
limited to uninhabited
planets, but each dimension had its own peculiar
alien presence. Now, it
will take the exceptional
skill and strategy on behalf of Epsilon's ruler to
protect his people from the
menacing forces of Wotok,
Smine, Krart and Rorn which threaten to write a new chapter of
death and destruction in the history of this civilized empire.

Overlord as Supreme Ruler
This is where the player comes in. In Virgin Mastertronic's Overlord, the player assumes the role of Epsilon's ruler. As "Overlord,"
this ruler must set an efficient and "equitable" tax rate, provide for
the citizenry's nutrition, mobilize space navies for defense and
transportation, construct safe habitats and recruit the armed forces
necessary to defend the galaxy. Epsilon's "Overlord" will need to
demonstrate both organizational skills and extreme composure in the
face of every crisis. This is the player's task and, in the context of
the game, is handled from the command center of one starbase.

Command Economy
Once seated, the player/Overlord will go to the main screen where
a view of the current galaxy and its stars twinkle at him via a special
porthole. It is here that incoming messages are displayed and the
Overlord can issue any necessary commands via the icons located
on the lower left corner of his screen.

The Government icon takes the player to
the screen where the tax rate is set, money
is transferred to starbases and production
can be monitored. The player can also see
how many ships are on or around each
planet and rename the planets to assist
mnemonically (planet names like "Mineral
1" and "Agriculture 4" can be extremely
helpful).
Another icon functions as something of a
"Galactic Accounting Office." It handles
unit purchases in the context of international currency (credits), minerals and energy,
so that the player may monitor expenditures of scarce resources. There is also a
navigation icon for the Overlord to use in
locating his starships within the galaxy and
issuing movement orders.
The next icon is the crucial "format
planet" icon. After the Overlord has taxed
his citizens a substantial amount, he may
purchase the planet formatter (a special
ship which can be sent off to an unformatted planet in order to bring life to a
dead world). Other icons function as: a dispatching function (to fuel, load and unload
ships); a planetary surface manager (to
crew and command mining and horticulture stations); a recruiting depot (players
hold down the recruit button until platoon
manpower reaches two hundred); combat
information screen (to manage manpower,
readiness and disposition of troops); and
an intelligence center (to purchase information on opposition troop numbers).

Looking for a Few Good
Space Marines
It is usually best to wait until all planets are self-sufficient before
breaking the peace treaty with the aliens by recruiting armies. Premature recruiting can be one's downfall in Overlord. However, once a
solid base has been established, the wise ruler provides for a good
army.
Once the troops have been assigned to platoons, they immediately
undergo basic training. Each platoon is ranked by how much of that
training they have received. If the troops are needed right away, the
commander may not rise to a full-fledged five-star general and the
player may have to settle for cadets when equipping the forces.

Formatting Blank Disks (Er, Planets)
Once the Overlord's planet formatter has completed its first mission, the player will then be able to view this new world. The new
planet could be a metropolis (perfect for a large population and its
subsequent high tax base), a desert (great for generating solar energy), a tropical planet (ideal for horticulture stations) or a volcanic
planet (rich with fuel and minerals to be mined). Before putting those
new worlds to use, however, the Overlord is well advised to set his
formatter off to work on another world. Time is of the essence in this

Review

game (the real-time element rides again). If there are no more
planets to format, the best end use for the formatter would be to
trash it. From the docking bay screen the Overlord can choose to
destroy a ship. This results in putting all of the resources it cost to
create the ship back into the planet's holds.

25%. A low aggression (25%) allows troops to fight for a long period
of time, while a high aggression (100%) may kill off troops much
faster, though their strength is increased during the shorter period.
Since battles are determined by which army is strongest, the aggression factor plays a major role in combat.

A Gang of Four

Overlord Overall

There are four aliens to be defeated by the player in order to insure
continued galactic dominion. The first, Wotok, is not much of a challenge. The second, Smine, is relentless (but not selective in his attacks, so not too hard to beat). The third, Krart, is both intelligent
and strong. He does not bother to take the Overlord's weak planets.
Instead, he concentrates his efforts on planets with the most resources and brings plenty of forces when he assaults. One had better
have sufficient reinforcements ready to stave off such an attack!
Last, and most dreadful of all, is Rorn. He attacks from beginning to
end, never ceasing. To make things worse, one has logistics
problems when facing Rorn. During campaigns against Rorn, one's
ability to purchase the items needed to form a successful colony is
somewhat diminished. Rorn's group of evil marauders is not to be
taken lightly.

This game is not for the player who cracks under pressure. It takes
lots of organization and skill to defeat the alien foes. It is definitely
"real-time." Players cannot "pause for the cause" and leave the game
running, lest they return to find that a meteor has crashed into one
of their best planets or Rorn has taken over their starbase.

Space Grunts
The battles themselves are simple enough. The Overlord simply
lands a battlecruiser on the enemy world and clicks the combat icon
to unload them. The center of the screen displays a graph enabling
the Overlord to judge the likelihood of defeating the enemy. It is also
possible to control the aggression of one's troops in increments of

TITLE:
# PLAYERS:
Cost:
Designer:
Publisher:

Estarian Conquest
2-25
$37.50
Bentley C. Griffith
Griffith International
P.O. Box 530703
Birmingham, Al. 35253

If this reviewer were to modify this game, she would find very little
to do. One major change would be to put all of the icons, along with
a suggested new "pause" icon, in a band across the bottom of each
command screen. This would enable one to access any part of the
game from any screen. Second, she would design the recruit function so that troops would be recruited in increments of two hundred
instead of having to wait for the numbers to scroll up that high. Finally, she would add a new field to the navigation screen enabling the
player to see how many troops a battlecruiser is actually carrying.
The game is easy to learn and a delight to play. The sounds are
quite nice throughout (from the rattling sounds of ships docking or
taking off, to the hushed female voice telling the Overlord there is a
"message") and the graphics have plenty to offer even the most
jaded strategy player. Hats (or, in this case, space helmets) off to the
designers of Overlord. Overlord conquered this reviewer's taste.

25-Player Overlord?
Estarian Conquest On-Line

many fleets, the player may not be
guaranteed enough time on the BBS to
give orders to all of those fleets.

Ruling the Estarian Galaxy

E

The galaxy is a square grid whose size
depends on the number of players. A
game with 25 players is played on a 45 X
45 grid. Each box or sector is one lightyear wide and it may or may not contain a planet. The number of
planets is roughly five times the number of players.

After centuries of ruling the galaxy, the race of Estarians has disappeared, leaving their galaxy in a complete state of chaos. Each of
its civilizations is now fighting for supreme rule over the entire
galaxy. To win, a player must defeat all of the 25 opponents or be
declared supreme ruler by his opponents.

Each time the board is "maintained," the turn is completed, the
game updated and a new turn begins. It is during this time that all
moves are calculated and each battle is decided. Battles are fought
and won by the number of ships a player has in his attacking (or
defending) fleet as well as the type of ships the fleet is made up of.
A fleet containing 25 cruisers might not defeat a fleet with only 6
battleships. A player can also use his fleets to bomb a planet, reducing its production and weakening its defences so that the attacking
player can send troops in to take over the world.

Estarian Versus Overlord

Play Time

As in Overlord, the player of Estarian Conquest must tax his empire. Cash is used to purchase terraformers (which bring life to desolate planets), war ships (including troop transports and armed combat ships), scouts (equivalent to the spy icon in Overlord), starbases and ground batteries to defend the player's planets as well as
armies to conquer another player's planet. Each planet is taxed at
the same rate, however.

Estarian Conquest is very time-consuming. It is recommended
that the player plan moves off-line to eliminate lengthy connect time
charges. It is also very helpful to "capture" a map of the galaxy at
the beginning of the game to aid in the organization of the player's
empire.

Welcome to Estaria (Now Go Roam)

In Overlord, the task of landing, fueling and flying ships becomes
tedious. Of all the features in Estarian Conquest, the feature this
reviewer feels would work nicely in Overlord is the ability to assign
ships to fleets and order all ships in the fleet as a single task force,
although the way Overlord is currently set up (with only three docking bays per planet), fleets would be limited to three ships. However
that would still reduce the time a player spends at Overlord's
navigation screen.

by Leah Wesolowski
starian Conquest could
be one of the best "online games of the '90s." In many ways Estarian Conquest is
very similar to Overlord, almost a sequel. In Overlord, the Epsilons
are struggling to maintain their rule; in Estarian Conquest, the
players are scrambling to re-establish their rule. It is as if the Epsilon empire lost the battle against the dreaded aliens and was
rebuilding.

When play begins, each player is given a planet with a potential of
100 production points. Thus, at the tax rate of 65%, the planet will
produce 65 points of production per round. At start, each player is
given four fleets to send on different missions. Each fleet can be
added to as the game progresses or new fleets can be created using
the ships built on a planet's surface. Unlike Overlord, there is no
limit to the number of fleets one can control and no limits are set
on the number of ships in a fleet. However, if a player has too

Fleets: The Added Dimension

For more information, call The Matrix, 2400 baud: (205) 323-2016
(4 lines).

Strategy

Jousting Over
Germany
France
Tips for Knights of the Sky
by Gary C "Mo" Morgan

Before the advent of radar, night
vision goggles, infrared search and
track systems, radar warning receivers
and electro-optical magnified video, tactical fighters had only one primary sensor, the pilot's eyeballs. Return with us
now to those thrilling days of
yesteryear, almost four generations
ago, when air combat was as much a
fantasy concept to people of the new
20th century as space combat may be
to us today. When brave men flew
above the blood-soaked, muddy
trenches of "No Man's Land" in frail
kites driven by tiny engines, armed
with one or two machine guns (which
usually jammed) and fought each
other to the death (since parachuting
from a stricken plane was considered
cowardly).

M

icroProse recently released their
newest air simulation beauty,
Knights of the Sky (KOTS),
which depicts World War I aerial combat
along the Western Front from 1916 to
1918. Russell Sipe reviewed KOTS in
"Jousting over Germany" (sic — actually
"over France") [Pub. Note: It's not my
fault. My editor picked the title.] [Ed.
Note: It's not my fault. My publisher
told me he wanted a snazzy title.

France lacked the assonance.] [Pub.
and Ed. Note: It must be the assistant
editor's fault.] in issue #79 of CGW, so
this article shall supplement it by suggesting some tactical tips for players that
should enhance survivability and add to
the enjoyment of playing the game.
Readers unfamiliar with KOTS may glean
enough information from these tactical
tips to familiarize them with the content
of the game and, it is hoped, stimulate
more investigation into this excellent air
combat simulation.

Using Your Head When
Making "Seat of the Pants"
Decisions
MicroProse offers two players the opportunity to play each other via modem or
direct connect (called "head-to-head"). A
human flying opponent can be far more
unpredictable and challenging than the
computer opponents encountered in
most flying simulations. A player can
also hop into any type of aircraft and fly
a one-on-one air combat against any of
the famous aces, each in his own personal aircraft type and color. To minimize frustration and encourage play of
the game, players can select one of five

different levels of difficulty, the lowest
level being very forgiving (no crashes)
and the highest level providing the maximum challenge (such as enemy aces).
Like most MicroProse simulations, in
the primary play mode the player can
either select a specific mission type or
may enter a "campaign" (series of missions) and be randomly assigned one
mission type at a time. The campaign
game involves an interesting aspect of
role-playing since the player "becomes" a
character. An aviator enters a campaign
in 1916 as an enlisted pilot for either the
French Air Service or the British Royal
Flying Corps.

Selecting a Flying Machine
Whether playing a single mission or a
campaign, one of the most critical
decisions a player can make is selecting
the aircraft he will fly on the next mission. For the Campaign Game, MicroProse has realistically placed only those
aircraft into service that were available at
the time each mission is to have occurred. In the early part of the war
(1916), only the Airco DH2 and the
Nieuport 11 are available. As the war
progresses, newer and more capable

Strategy

airframes appear. The Nieuport 11 is
recommended at first, then the Nieuport
17 when it appears. Once the SPAD 7 appears, select it, and later the SPAD 13. Although the Sopwith Camel is always
touted as the finest Allied fighter of the
war, there are several significant advantages to flying the SPAD (which most
American pilots flew in 1918).
Whether the year is 1917 or 1991, the
most important axiom to remember
about flying fighters is "Speed is Life."
The SPADs are the fastest Allied aircraft
available, with more horsepower and
greater maximum speeds than any other
machines. Speed makes all the difference when trying to run down a fleeing enemy or escape from a pursuer.
The incredible attention to authenticity
is evident during dogfights in KOTS.
When aircraft climb or turn quickly, they
"bleed off energy" or slow down due to
the aerodynamic forces acting on them
(lift and radial G forces). Each type of
aircraft accelerates, turns and climbs
authentically in KOTS, and relationships
between aircraft during combat are extremely believable. It is commonplace in
KOTS to accurately employ energy
maneuverability (speed and turning) to
perform the entire gamut of basic fighter
maneuvers in three dimensions against
multiple adversaries with all aircraft performing realistically.

Enjoying the View
World War I aircraft had no sensors,
like radar, to provide situational awareness to the pilot. Visual lookout was (and
still is) paramount, first for survival
against attack, and secondly to find targets to attack. Continuously scan around
the aircraft. Positions around an aircraft
are based on clock positions, with the
top of the clock facing the direction the
aircraft is flying. Forward is twelve
o'clock, behind is six o'clock, to the right
is three o'clock, and to the left is nine
o'clock.
The 1, 2, 3 and 4 number keys are
used for views from the cockpit (1 = 12
o'clock, 2 = 6 o'clock, 3 = 9 o'clock, and
4 = 3 o'clock). Since parts of the fuselage and wings block part of the view,
one can avoid trouble by using the F5
(from behind looking forward), F8 (from
forward looking aft), F6 (from left looking right) and F7 (from right looking left)
"wingman" views, since a wingman flying
with the player would be able to see
around one's plane. Wingman views
show a player's aircraft from various positions and reveal more sky than the cockpit views may show. The F2 key shows

enemy two-seater, and the high maximum speed of the SPAD 7 or 13 enables
the player to close in on some of the
slower enemy fighters (Fokker Eindekkers and Halberstadts) from behind.
Clearly, the object is to get behind the
enemy aircraft. To accomplish this, one
must first intercept him based on
knowledge of his flight parameters.
Without radar to help, eyes open!

Identification: Friend or Foe

the position of other aircraft relative to
one's aircraft (looking through your aircraft to the other plane), and should be
used sparingly if realism is desired. The
shift-F2 key combination shows the opposite view, from the enemy aircraft to
the player's. This is a useful feature
designed to reduce the tunnel vision
which many players experience in an air
combat simulation. In reality, one has a
full 360o perspective, so one can keep
his eye on the opposing plane without always looking out the forward cockpit.
Some players may object that this is almost cheating (like having an AWACS),
however, since it always reveals the
enemy position(s) and, in reality, enemy
planes can become small specks in that
360 o perspective. So, some believe the
F2 key should only be used when one
wishes to minimize WWI realism, since it
may offer too much information.

The Intercept
All air combat engagements begin with
an "intercept," in which two or more opposing aircraft fly into combat range with
each other. Most intercepts come from
an attacker who is in the forward hemisphere (his three to nine o'clock position) of the target. Intercepts from behind
the three-nine line of a target require a
significant speed advantage from the attacker. It is possible to run down a slow

Enemy aircraft initially appear as dots
with shadow dots below them on the
ground to indicate altitude. The idea is to
watch the dot's movement and try to
determine altitude, range, speed and
heading (which is a lot of information to
gather from a little dot). Altitude and
range are relatively easy to identify; one
simply notes how high above or below
the horizon the dot is and tries to climb
or dive to put the dot somewhere near
the horizon. Climbing early helps considerably, particularly to arrive at a comparable altitude and regain the speed
which will be needed to begin a turning
fight.
As the aircraft close together, the
enemy dot turns into a dash, then gains
more shape and detail. It won't be hard
to quickly identify Halberstadts, Albatroses and two-seaters at long range,
particularly with a VGA display. Heading
and speed are related. A dot that doesn't
move much laterally is either going in
the same direction or the opposite direction. (If the dot stays the same size, he is
heading the same direction; if he grows
quickly, he's coming head-on). Pilots
should never let the enemy come
straight on (see below), lest one face a
succesful head-on attack from the enemy.
If the dot moves laterally, then a crossing geometry is present and the player
will need to fly a leading pursuit profile.
He should move either left or right. If in
doubt, the player should try to put the
dot in the center of the gunsight aiming
ring and fly a level, steady course. If the
target is on a crossing flight path, he will
fly either left or right. If he flies right, an
aggressive pilot should turn in that direction (i.e. bank right and pull to put him
on the left side of the ring). Then, the
clever pilot should fly to a position ahead
of him. Then, when the computer opponent finally crosses the player's flight
path, the player can simply turn to the
enemy's heading and shoot. When one
sees some detail on the enemy aircraft
(i.e., the aircraft is represented on the
screen by more than a mere dot or
dash), it is advisable to put the "bogey"

Strategy

in the center of one's aiming ring and to
continue turning one's aircraft in order to
keep the enemy "dead" center in the
aiming ring. The player should wind up
behind him, heading his direction.
Remember, once spotted by the enemy,
expect him to begin maneuvering.

Losing by a Foot When
Going Toe-to-Toe
Flying directly toward an enemy aircraft
coming head-on is the quickest way to
be shot down. It is important to avoid
straight-on intercepts and be certain to
wait until the enemy aircraft has passed
by before making a hard turn to pursue.
The best method is to keep the enemy
aircraft outside the aiming ring (over the
machine guns) until it is clear that one is
behind him (wait until the plane flies off
the left or right edges of the player's
monitor). Then, one can roll into 60 to
90 degrees of bank and pull back on the
stick, keeping the horizon in the center
of the aiming ring of the gunsight. If one
finds himself above the target, it is
profitable to dive slightly below the
horizon. If below the target, the proper
maneuver is to pull up slightly above the

horizon. Then, one can complete the turn
to the heading the enemy fighter was
originally travelling on. Now, the "bogey"
should be visible to the front of the
player's plane. Of course, it is entirely
possible that the bad guy has, by this
time, spotted the player and started to
turn toward the player's tail for his own
kill. The player will need to keep turning
in order to follow him. Alert pilots will
want to keep checking their "six o'
clock." The enemy pilot just might be
"dragging" the player and setting him up
for a shot by an enemy wingman.

Lining 'Em Up for the Kill
Occasionally, two-seaters will not turn
or maneuver and one need only get behind them and fire. When attacking twoseaters, one must avoid flying at or
above their altitude lest the observer
open fire with his rear-facing gun. It is an
excellent idea to stay below a two-seater
and open up at long range, aiming slightly above the plane so that the tracer
rounds fall into him.
To hit a maneuvering enemy fighter,
one should attempt to get inside the

enemy's turning circle and follow up by
aiming at a position slightly in front of
and slightly higher than the "bad guy"
when firing. This may place the target
just under one's guns or engine. Practice
will refine the amount of lead needed and
optimum range and time to open fire.

Clutching the Throttle
Flying a cutoff geometry (inside his turning circle) will allow for closing the range,
but throttle position is also critical. Flying
at 100% throttle will mean closing the
range too quickly, leaving insufficient
time to settle down, aim and shoot.
Flying at 80-90% is optimum, depending
on the types of planes in the duel. Assuming roughly comparable aircraft (say, the
player's SPAD 13 and an enemy Albatros D3/D5), 90% throttle is best. With
a Nieuport or SPAD 7 against a Halberstadt or Eindekker, 80% works fine.
Less than 70% will create long delays in
attaining shooting parameters and will
force the player into a predictable flight
(making the player vulnerable to enemy
attacks). Conversely, by staying at 90100% throttle, it will be more difficult for
enemy aircraft to sneak up and fire. One

Strategy

should constantly watch for an enemy
plane reversing its turn, particularly in
close. If one is turning left and sees the
enemy coming from left to right, the best
defense is to fire early and hope for a
"snap shot" (in which he flies directly
into the player's bullets). If he keeps flashing past in an opposite turn, the appropriate countermove is to continue
making a hard circle. Then, when he is
visible once again, he will probably be in
a gentle turn at a safe distance from the
player's plane.

Getting the Truck Out of
Dodge
In an outnumbered situation (typically
after attacking an enemy airfield when a
whole squadron has come back to land),
with discretion being the better part of
valor, the best strategy is to climb and
run. One great tactic in a SPAD is to outclimb enemy aircraft (especially Halberstadts), hold the SPAD's nose on the
horizon at 100% throttle and run away at
120-135 knots.
The Halberstadt is slow-moving in climbing, but can turn quickly. One must be

very careful about fighting Halberstadts
at very low altitude (under 1000 feet),
particularly when they attack near the
player's airdrome. They like to drag opponents down to 100 feet and watch
them impact the ground in a tight turning fight.
Eindekkers can't turn or climb very well
and aren't a serious threat when piloting
a Nieuport or SPAD. It is useful to watch
out for the Albatros family since they can
climb and turn well, and are relatively
fast. Fokker Triplanes climb and turn
quickly, but are slow. If a player climbs
against a Triplane, the Triplane will start
slipping back in range. Nothing beats
raw horsepower and maximum speed,
particularly when using the vertical.
One should never continue to try to outmaneuver the enemy when outnumbered. It is best to look behind frequently. Then, if an enemy plane gets close on
one's tail, one can initiate a fresh
maneuver. When not being tailed, one
should put the nose on the horizon and
go to maximum throttle. Discretion is
highly advisable in this situation, so the
wise pilot is continually looking for an ap-

propriate chance to run. Pilots with a
good probability of surviving will constantly remember that fuel is limited and
higher throttle settings consume it more
quickly! A good pilot knows which way
to escape and keeps checking to the
rear with very quick peeks. When one is
in doubt, he should initially head west.
Then, once he is out of imminent danger,
he should tap the spacebar and see
which way to head for home on the map.

Gliding on Home
Regardless of the tactical situation, a
pilot should head for the friendly side of
the front when the fuel gauge indicates
about half full. One might need to fight
for several minutes just to land. If a safe
landing is not made, the mission may
not count as successful and one will miss
out on promotions and decorations. The
farther east of No Man's Land an allied
pilot has flown, the higher his altitude
should be. Thus, the player may be shot
up, but in many cases, will be able to
glide home and make a forced landing.
This should result in survival and enable
the pilot to return to the squadron in
order to fly and fight again.

Review

Magellan in Dire &rails
Broderbund's Galleons of Glory
by Alan Emrich

W

at problems did admirals of old face? If Galleons
of Glory is any indication, it may mean being
marooned without even the company of Ginger or
Mary Ann. Those innovative educators at Broderbund have
transformed what might have been a classroom simulation
into a captivating software package full of history, problemsolving and, in the words of Winston Churchill, "I'll give you
traditions of the Navy — rum, buggery and the lash." (Well,
okay, not much buggery, but just look at those costumes!)

Taking the Low Road
With a title like Galleons of Glory: The Secret Voyage of
Magellan, one would naturally assume that this game has
players setting sail on a stealthy, dangerous excursion
around the world in a daring attempt to return to Europe
alive and prosperous. (Magellan died in an incidental skirmish in the Philippines between warring tribes of natives.)
The journey to the Portuguese "spice islands," the near fleet
action against mutineers and those three unbearable
months across the Pacific are the stuff of legend and would
test the skill and mettle of any would-be admiral of olde.
This, however, is not the scenario. Rather, players set out
only to discover the famous Straits of Magellan. While encompassing the kinds of navigation and bartering skills one
may have developed playing Seven Cities of Gold, the mission is on a much more limited scale. It's irritating when the
straits are finally reached and the "end game" screen pops
up, since it is just at this point that the journey seems full of
history and promise of the adventure ahead. Nevertheless,
the game is over, the victory points are tallied and the
player is left to wonder what he is missing. Sad, one faces
west, watching the sun set on a successfully completed
game of Galleons of Glory.

Face to Interface

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Gilbert and Sullivan could have written "An admiral's life is
not a happy one." Fortunately, his ability to command in
Galleons of Glory is almost absolute. When one wants to
bark out an order, one need only seek out the proper lackey in
the crew (from Captain down to Cook), set him straight and
leave him to carry on. It is important to note that in the 40+ page
manual, there are only three core pages which need to be only
marginally understood in order to effectively play Galleons of
Glory. What this means is that one can be prowling the decks
and cabins like an old salt within seconds after breaking the seal
on the box and booting the game.

It is this "instant assimilation" factor which makes this game a
natural for younger scholars. Any child from the sixth grade on
up will be able to manage the game with Nintendo-like quickness
and, even if the player doesn't find himself starting to win from
the outset, he will start to learn and enjoy from the time the
ships set sail. The simple routines of pacing the prow and standing astride the stern to interact with the crew make for instant ac-

Galleons of Glory
IBM
$44.95
Gene Portwood, Lauren Elliott, Denis Friedman
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA

cess to the simple, menudriven command decision
structure without learning
a great deal of "Okay, so
what am I trying to do
now?"

Too Lively Crew
While at sea, it is very tempting to sing the "Yo Ho" song from
Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean. This is odd, since one is not
a pirate, but some of the crew are real "yo hos" so it all works
out in the end. While in one's cabin (or "office" if one relates better to business games, or "HQ" if one is a wargamer) the player
can access the two most important crew members and vital
tools. The tools include the map (it fills in as the player discovers
the randomly generated eastern coastline of South America) and
the diary (where all the goods, treasure, water supply and other
vital bits of information are listed). One should always keep an
eye on the diary, for it is, to be precise, one's ledger of victory
points.

Review

"Fetch Me a Cabin Boy"
The two crew members who can be summoned to the cabin in
clude the Captain (who gets the general orders for the ship) and
the priest. Outside the cabin, one can stomp over to the quarter
deck where the navigator proves his importance at all times and
the bosun is always there ready to discipline the crew (this is, of
course, the "lash" part of Churchill's statement). Also present on
the quarter deck is the telescope, where one can click and see
the lay of nearby land (hoping to see plenty of green for food
resupplying and natives to trade with).
Other decks and rooms will put the player face to face with the
rest of the crew. The gunner, the carpenter (like the navigator, a
handy guy to keep the expedition moving), the cook (a real
whiner) and the doctor. Two other characters also appear. Pigafetta is the admiral's loyal servant and chronicler of the journey and
often shows up to instruct the player where trouble that must be
attended to is brewing. Ignoring the problem leaves Pigafetta to
handle it. The final crew member is almost the ship's ghost.
Andres de San Martin is the ship's astrologer (no, the admiral's
wife is not Nancy Reagan). He only appears when things look
bad and always seems to offer sage advice.

All Ashore That's Going Ashore
Often, the player will want to find a safe harbor and land (to
deal with food shortages, bad weather, vital repairs or a restless
crew, or just to investigate the promising terrain off the starboard
bow). At this point, the captain and the carpenter are right there
to help manage the resupplying and repair of the ship, but it is

the natives who can really make or break (literally) the expedition. Natives can range from exceedingly friendly (and they
range from useless to very helpful) to outright hostile. Nothing
puts the attrition on the crew like skirmishing with the locals.

This Is Mutiny!
Still, there's something about shore leave that tends to make
the crew mutiny.... No matter how good you are as an admiral,
someone is always unhappy. The trouble is that often a player
can spend more time listening for gossip than commanding his
ship and still have to face down a mutiny (at least this is so at
the most difficult play level). When a mutiny occurs, the player is
confronted by a screen full of potential troublemakers, from
which one must be pointed out and confronted directly. If the
player has deduced (or guessed) correctly who the mutiny leader
is, the mutiny is dealt with. More likely, the player will select one
of the other seven "suspects" and be left stranded while the crew
sails off. Of course, some players will find it easiest to avoid
mutiny by increasing rum rations. (Churchill would understand!)
Broderbund has done a fine job of creating a simple game with
plenty of fascinating history for players to learn quite transparently while they enjoy the game's play. To that end, it is a useful
educational product on every level. For the pure gamer, however, one might wish for more (more animations, more sounds,
but most of all, more story), because finishing a game of Galleons of Glory is a lot like finishing a fourth handful of delicious
hot popcorn. Still hungry for such a treat, one wishes there were
more in the bowl.

Educational Games Survey

Ka ptivating Komputer
Games Katch Kids'
Imagination
(Caitie's Educational Survey)
By Caitlin Ackelson

t's inevitable: kids will always play
games. For children of CGWs
readers, it is probably also inevitable
that kids will play computer games in
one form or another. So CGW plans to
present periodic updates of educational
and entertainment software designed particularly for children. This survey is an attempt to supply adults with information
as to which offerings provide the most
value in a marketplace that is expansive,
varied and rich.

I

The games are grouped by age: games
for little kids (2-8) first, then the
middle-of-the-roaders (the broad range from 5-14),
then older children (9+). listed is each
game's title, manufacturer, machines on
which it can be played, recommended
ages, suggested retail price, a rating of
from one to five stars and a brief description and evaluation. Ratings are based on
educational value, fun, ease of play
(which includes ease of set-up and learning how to play), imaginative scope and
reviewer's unabashed personal bias.

Little Kids
McGee
Lawrence Productions, Inc.
IBM, Amiga, Apple IIGS, Macintosh
ages 2-6+
$39.95
*****
A remarkably imaginative, playerdriven, interactive exploration game in
which the young protagonist, McGee, is

led through his day via a point-and-click
interface. The player chooses every step
he takes: should he play upstairs or go
downstairs? Should he feed the cat, wake
up Mom, play on the tire swing, crawl
under the rug? McGee provides a charming, simple, non-threatening introduction
to computer literacy and interaction. Extremely engaging, non-competitive,
humorous and entertaining, McGee can
be played by even the freshest novice
and requires no reading skills.

Educational Games Survey

Mickey's ABCs: A Day at the Fair
Walt Disney Software
IBM
ages 2-5
$49.95
****
Players explore home and the fair with
Mickey Mouse via the keyboard in this interactive learning game. Mickey responds
to every letter of the alphabet (and there
is more than one possible response to
each letter, for longer play life). There
are special guest appearances by Pluto,
Goofy, Donald, etc. Funny and imaginative, this program provides an excellent
introduction not only to the ABCs, but
also to the computer keyboard.
The Playroom
Broderbund
IBM, Apple, Macintosh
ages 2-7
$39.95
****
Explore every corner of a well-stocked
playroom in this amusing, compelling,
point-and-dick interactive program. Complete with dancing mice, a chalkboard

that talks and a goldfish who does backflips in his bowl, this game is thorough in
detail and very appealing in overall concept. Player-driven, just about every object in the room does something when
selected. There are puzzles, games and
toys that help teach counting, the alphabet and how to tell time. Clever and
engaging.
My Grand Piano
Fisher-Price/GameTek
IBM, Commodore 64, Apple
ages 3-8
$14.95
***
Young players will be introduced to beginner's piano, musical notes and sheet
music in this piano simulator in which
computer keys double for piano keys. Onscreen instructions assist players in
choosing among "player piano," "teach
song," "record" and "playback" functions. Players may either be prompted as
to what keys to strike to play familiar
tunes or make up their own songs.
Mickey's Colors and Shapes:
The Dazzling Magic Show
Walt Disney Software

IBM, Amiga
ages 2-5
$49.95
**
This offering for the preschool set
provides attractive VGA graphics, highquality sound (with Disney's Sound
Source, which retails separately for
$34.95) and of course the immense appeal of Mickey Mouse. Unfortunately, the
game itself is overly simplistic and repetitive and, in places, simply makes no
sense. Sadly lacking in imaginative
scope in its crucial details, this program
offers challenge only to very young and
inexperienced players.

Educational Games Survey

Katie's Farm
Lawrence Productions, Inc.
IBM, Amiga, Apple IIGS, Macintosh
ages 2-6+
$39.95

Players travel through time and create a
dinosaur in this scientific/prehistoric adventure. Perhaps best suited for more experienced players (with parents handy to
help them out at first), this package allows kids to "play scientist" and make
their own creation in the computer
laboratory, then see if their dinosaur can
survive in the primeval world. Featuring
elaborate graphics, this adventure also
has a combat element that may appeal
to fans of arcade games.

*****
McGee goes to visit his cousin Katie for
a day on the farm in this point-and-click
interaction. This package provides playerdriven exploration of a whole new environment for the McGee character. Katie
and McGee can gather eggs in the chicken coop, feed carrots to the horses, play
in the garden, pick raspberries, and
more. Like in McGee, the game provides
an introduction to computer interfacing
and demonstrates the cause and effect of
the player's choices. There are no words,
so even very young children can run the
software all by themselves.
Fun Flyer
Fisher-Price
IBM
ages 3-8
$14.95

Players fly a cartoon plane and "catch"
stars, balloons, snowflakes and kites,
while transporting Fisher-Price "Little
People" by air. Three skill levels to accommodate very inexperienced as well
as more advanced players. On-screen instructions prove useful; some reading
skills needed. Grinding, monotone sound
and flat visuals punctuate this very
limited, beginner-level game.
The Treehouse
Broderbund
IBM, Apple, Macintosh
Soon to be released: Price yet to be determined

*****
Tentatively due to be released for the
IBM in June 1991 and by the end of the
year in other formats, this offering from
Broderbund provides the player with a
treehouse full of games, surprises, puzzles and things to explore. From a telescope to view stars to a chalkboard with
colored chalk for drawing, from pictures

that talk to a synthesizer that simulates
orchestral instruments, it's all just a
point-and-click away. Players may choose a
male or female on-screen character to explore this rich, full environment. Excellent
sound effects.

Middle-of-the-Roaders
Super Solvers' Treasure Mountain
The Learning Company
IBM
ages 5-9
$49.95

****
An easy-to-play, visually appealing, nonviolent arcade-style game for beginners.
The player explores the beautiful, magical setting of Treasure Mountain and enlists the help of elves to find clues to the
treasure. Clues consist of beginner-level
number and letter puzzles, so some reading ability (or the participation of a
parent) is a must. Plenty of time is allowed players who might be frustrated at
more advanced, fast-paced games. New
player hints help kids learn how to play.
Once Upon a Time...
Compu-Teach
IBM, Apple, Macintosh
ages 6-12
$39.95
*****
Now kids can write and illustrate their
own books. For illustrations, a variety of
objects (under the headings Farm, Safari
and Main Street) are available for use in
pictures. Size, color and placement can
be selected or changed via
point-and-click. The finished product appears as a
picture on each page with up to four
lines of text beneath it. This exceptional
software package allows future writers, illustrators and editorial assistants to get
an early start on a career in the exciting
world of publishing.
Designasaurus
Britannica Software
IBM
ages 7-14
$39.95
**

Super Spellicopter
Britannica Software
IBM
ages 7-14
$34.95
**
This spelling/combat game combines
arcade-style action with a spelling component. The player flies the Super Spellicopter and selects letters that appear in
the sky to form words. Within the three
skill levels available, players can also
shoot down enemy aircraft and use strategy skills in this attempt to make spelling fun. Spelling words can be customselected, for the added benefit of personalized relevance.

Older Children
Super Solvers' Challenge
of the Ancient Empires
The Learning Company
IBM
ages 10+
$49.95

***
In the spirit of Nintendo, this game will
keep players on the edge of their seats
with the increased benefit of learning
logic and problem-solving skills. Players
encounter visual logic problems in mazes
that contain lost treasures of the ancient
world as well as a variety of quasi-menacing creatures (watch out for the killer
ladybug). Intricate, colorful VGA graphics
and a jazzy soundtrack provide an upbeat mood for this challenging game.
The clear, useful documentation is ageappropriate.

Educational Games Survey

Adventures in Learning:
The Cell Explorers
Abracadata
Apple II
ages 11-15
Adventures in Learning program $69.95
Cell Explorers learning module $29.95
***
For use in conjunction with classroom
material, this learning module takes the
player on a journey through the human
body with puzzles that quiz the student
on biology information at the junior high
school level. A fun addition to any biology lab (no formaldehyde!) that can be
played individually or in teams.

Galleons of Glory:
The Secret Voyage of Magellan
Broderbund
IBM
ages 10 to adult
$44.95
****
In this historical expedition game that
kids and their parents will find educational„ the player steps into Magellan's boots
and leads the crew of this famous
voyage. Course changes, gunnery practice, ship repairs and more are delegated
to the crew via a simple mouse interface
and each decision impacts the success
of the expedition. The player must contend with the same kinds of situations
and crises that Magellan faced. Based on
historical facts and easy to play.
Dr. Know-It-All's inner Body Works
Tom Snyder Productions
IBM, Apple IIGS, Macintosh
ages 9-18
School price $119.95
(30 day free trial available for educators)
***
This exploration of the human body's

structure and function can be used by
one player, a large group or two teams.
Played as a tour or as a game, the skeletal, muscular, circulatory, respiratory,
digestive, nervous, reproductive, endocrine and lymph systems of either a
male or female are the subject of this
complete package for either junior(grades 4-6) or senior- (grades 7-12)
level biology study. Student maps and indexes as well as a complete teacher's
guide are included.

Grading Curve
The quantity and variety of high-quality
educational software programs available
for children of any age is genuinely impressive. Truly, if one is old enough to
crawl to the keyboard, one can begin an
expedition in learning, adventure,
creativity and entertainment whose boun
daries extend infinitely into the future.
If there are educational games or software packages you would like to see
reviewed in future issues, please drop
CGW a note at P.O. Box 730, Yorba
Linda, CA 92686 or call collect (714) 2833000. We appreciate your suggestions.

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REQUIRES:
#PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PRODUCER:
PUBLISHER:

Road and Car #1 Play Disk
IBM
640K & Test Drive III: The Passion
3 (one at a time, same computer)
$24.95
Tom Loughry
Sam Nelson
Accolade
San Jose, CA 95128

hat could be more pleasant
than a scenic drive through
a New England countryside
bathed in rich autumn colors... at 182
miles per hour?
Accolade's new Road and Car #1
Play Disk supplements Test Drive III:
The Passion to give the avid car
simulation fan the horsepower of
the Acura NSX and Dodge Stealth
R/T Turbo in a computer re-creation of rustic New England terrain.
The trip is a free-wheeling madcap
dash from Cape Cod to Niagara
Falls and in this race there is no
time for clam chowder.

Out of the
Showroom...

Another
Day at
the Races

As with Test Drive II: The Duel,
Accolade is marketing extra cars
and scenery to enhance the race
experience. The add-on faithfully
generates stunning interiors of two
new vehicles. The first, the Acura
NSX, is noted as the world's first
aluminum production sports car.
The Dodge Stealth R/T Turbo is a sleek
muscle car that, unlike its name (which implies something that goes unnoticed), will
do nothing but command attention.

Accolade's Road & Car I

...And onto the Road
The add-on also recreates New England
scenery in attractive and surprisingly
detailed graphics, much like the original
Test Drive Ill's Northern California
landscape. Although the images hardly represent photographic realism, the artists at
Accolade did an excellent job of interpreting New England into colorful polygon-filled
graphics. New to the Test Drive III environment are covered bridges, low-flying
airplanes, steeple-mounted New England
style churches, hot air balloons, horses and
road-hogging buses that appear to carry hordes of gawking tourists.

Driving Deja Vu
For those who play Test Drive III with
sound boards, there are new radio stations
featuring drive-time music inspired by classical and pop styles, but what does the Road
and Car add-on ultimately offer the Test
Drive player? It does give variety to Test
Drive Ill, but little depth. The graphics, although well done, are quite similar to the
original landscape. In fact, one can almost
mentally interchange the autumn colors
with green and see something quite similar
to the original Test Drive 111 scenery. Also,
the action, though exhilarating, is identical
to that of the original.

by Wayne N. Kawamoto
Fortunately, the game allows the player to
combine vehicles and landscapes from both
the original game and the add-on for variety
and players will still have fun looking for
the elusive short cuts in a route. Those who
have tired of racing Test Drive Ill, however,
will probably not find enough in the add-on
to reinvigorate their gameplay.

Adding on Value?
In some ways, extra scenery may not be
all that appropriate for race games when
compared to flight simulators. Since a
player in a flight simulator actually explores
an area looking for landmarks and airports,
the extra scenery enhances the game. In
race games, however, the goal is not to explore, but to sprint to the destination as fast
as possible. With the focus on the action, a
change in scenery, unless it is drastically different, can whiz by virtually unnoticed.

Taking the Wheel
The add-on disk has its own copy protection code wheel that is used in addition to
the one that comes with Test Drive III. This
means there are times when the player
must consult the code wheel(s) more than
once in a session. Since the code wheel is
somewhat ambiguous, this is a nuisance.
Test Drive III: The Passion is one exhilarating and fun game. Overall, the Road
and Car #1 Play Disk provides more of
the same, with a slightly different angle.
Just don't expect a whole new day at the
races.

Reader Input Device

Taking a Peek

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 6)
foray onto the diamond is still an impressive statistics-oriented program. Choices
include 26 classic teams, a variety of
stadiums and the designated hitter option. Plenty of player options for offense
and defense, plus a great statistics compiler made for league play. A must for
computer baseball nuts. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.
Nine Dragons Software
351 Ulloa Street
San Francisco, CA 94127
(415) 664-3474
HONG KONG MAHJONG: Forget Shanghai — this is a real Mahjong game of
competitive placement and point grabbing. Players play the ancient game in an
attempt to make a chow, pong or kong
in the suits of balls, characters, winds,
dragons and flowers. For those with no
background in Mahjong, the game plays
akin to Crazy Eights with oriental characters and "Old Maid" cards. Complete, concise instructions accent the various levels
of graphics provided with the game. IBM.
Circle Reader Service #8.
ReadySoft, Incorporated
20 Wertheim Court #2
Richmond Hill, Ontario L4B 1B9
DRAGON'S LAIR II: Relive the exciting
coin-op laser disc days of yore in this
quality sequel to the original Dragon's
Lair from Sullivan Bluth. This time, the
evil wizard is not the only bad guy,
either. (Beware the Mother-in-Law!) Dutiful Dirk Daring diligently does desperate
deeds, facing doom, death and disease,
to dispatch dirty denizens delving in dungeons defending delectable Daphne. Add
a time machine, the return of Mordroc
and 46 animated scenes full of state-ofthe-art sound and graphics, and you'll be
dodging snakes again, just like in the
"old" days. IBM. Circle Reader Service #9.
Spacewar Simulations Company
1309 5th Avenue
San Rafael, CA 94901
STAR-KING: Another small company's
first effort (like Hong Kong Mahjong),
Star King offers players a strategic level
space game for 1-7 players (at the same
computer). Each player begins on a
single planet, expands and tries to conquer the entire playing area. Many levels
of play abound in this straightforward
space opera game. Again, the level of
graphics is below state-of-the-art, and
there is no sound support, but those who
can handle 3-D gameboards will want to

explore the space provided in this game.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN: The
AD&D "Gold Box" line continues to expand with this game, which takes place a
year after Champions of Krynn left off.
The Ultimate Bad Guy (or "Undead" Bad
Guy, in this case) Sir Karl spoils the victory celebration from Champions just to
swoop down on a Death Dragon and
steal the Dragonlance. The quest is on,
but this time one's characters can keep
their goodies from the previous game.
For eighth through fourteenth level characters, with plenty of new monsters and
spells, this one is right on the money for
you SSI/AD&D RPG fans. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.
Symtus, Ltd
P.O. Box 912
Placios, TX 77465
CYBERGENIC RANGER — THE
SECRET OF THE SEVENTH PLANET: Arcade action on the grandest possible
scale, this is no "quickie finish" se-

quence. The player is the first cybergenically enhanced man (does the figure six
million dollars mean anything to you?)
who must make great discoveries and
boldly venture through space and several
different planetscapes (through a combination of 3-D space flight sim and a bit
of role-playing). There is lots of information for players to acquire as they struggle to reach the end of this long and
winding quest (players might need to purchase a new joystick after wearing theirs
out playing this game). IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.
Ultra Games
Buffalo Grove, IL
METAL GEAR: From Nintendo to the
IBM in one explosive step. This is everything you would expect from an arcade
shoot 'em up... fivee playing levels, lots of
weapons, scrolling maps full of bad guys
to disembowel and plenty of "bang" for
the buck. A fairly straight conversion
from the NES version, Metal Gear sends
the player off to certain death in an attempt to kill "CaTaffy" (you figure out
that pun). IBM ($19.95), C-64 ($14.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
...Of

Cabbages and Kings,
Palaces and Lords
by Paul Rigby

rystals of Arborea (new from the
French company Silmarils and
distributed by Palace Software in
the UK) is a CRPG which tells the tale of
Morgoth, Lord of Chaos. As the "ultimate
bad guy," Morgoth worships nothing but
destruction and has infected the world
with evil. In sorrow and anger, the gods
rather overreact and, in a less than divine
fit of pique, drown all except the land of
Arborea. Apparently, Arborea has been
spared because it is the original home of
the four sacred crystals of harmony,
stolen by Morgoth and his servants. So,
in a race against chaos, Prince Jarel and
a band of trusted companions must find
the crystals and restore them to their
sacred shrines. To fail, of course, is to
lose everything (we are, after all, talking
about a CRPG here). This game would
best be described as a mixture of
strategy and role-playing with about
16,000 locations and a 3-D perspective.
With a promise of "brain-teasing" puzzles, independently controlled characters,
strategic fight sequences and the option
to both choose and customize the playerteam, Crystals of Arborea should be a
popular new product for all garners who
own Amigas and Atari STs (£24.99).

C

From Palace's own programmers
comes a new text/graphic adventure system called "Pure Fiction." The first game
expected to use this system is
Demoniak. Demoniak (the game is
named after the "ultimate bad guy") has
torn a hole in the fabric of the universe.
Through it pour his evil hoards, bent on
conquest and gratuitous violence.
Fortunately, civilization has a hope. The
inventor of the protoplasmic space drive
and probably the cleverest man in the
universe, Doc Cortex (Doctor Who?), has
a cunning plan. Cortex has gathered
around him a bevy of Superheroes:
Johnny Sirius, the famous human-alien
hybrid (and superstar?); Madlock, wizard
and serial-killer; Sondra, the feminist
psychic (able to detect a sexist thought
within a parsec?); and Flame, the human
torch. Together, the team boards
Proteus, the living spaceship, and finds itself bound for the ice planet of Freezyassov. In the frozen wastes of the planet,
the team tries to locate the first component of a super bomb which Doc Cortex hopes will seal Demoniak's fate.
Demoniak attempts to be a combination
of text adventure and "simulated reality."
Featuring more than 50 independent, ar-

tificially intelligent characters, the player
has the opportunity to become any one
of them, while the other characters continue their lives offscreen. Demoniak was
written by Alan Grant, a comic writer
responsible for titles such as Batman,
Judge Dredd, Strontium Dog and
Robocop. Demoniak should be available
now for Amiga/ST for £29.99 with the
IBM version to follow.
In a different vein, Feudal Lords is a
relatively simple medieval strategy game
for one to four players. It is very similar
to the old CRL game Legend, in which
the player selects one of four feudal
lords. This time, the game takes place on
the map of Euthrania, which is, in turn,
divided into small sections. The winner is
decided when one of the lords takes possession of all of the territories. A player
loses when his home territory, the one
containing the player's castle, is taken by
another lord.
There are many detail factors that are
supposed to govern the player's strategy,
for example, the economy, which includes such subjects as trade, taxation
and so on. The idea, of course, is to
"skin" the peasants for as much cash as
possible without being kicked out of office for being a greedy royal. Further,
diplomacy is encouraged. Non-aggression pacts can be made with the three
neighbors for varying lengths of time or
plots and assassination attempts can be
sponsored against fellow lords. Out now
for the Amiga at £19.99, other formats
should follow soon.
The one utility that the Amiga has been
crying out for is a decent adventure writing utility. There are one or two halfhearted attempts out there but nothing
that makes one's heart beat faster. Enter
Heyley Software's attempt — Hatrack II.
Arriving on one disk, contained in a sturdy wallet plus a nicely printed and bound
106-page manual, this utility is very
BASIC-like in use. It uses lots of
IF-THENs and FOR... NEXT loops, etc.
Anybody with a smattering of programming experience or anyone who has
used AMOS will have no problems with
Hatrack II.

Foreign Correspondence

Another nice feature is the ability to link
objects. For example, one can say "GIVE
BALL, BAT AND MOUSE TO JIM." Containers are also supported, as well as the
handy OOPS feature that takes one back
a move. Brief/Verbose location descriptions can be ordered and an on-screen
compass can be placed upon the screen
to be activated by the mouse.
Creating an adventure is done via a
number of thoughtfully designed windows, accessed via a menu and displaying all of the necessary prompts and edit
options. Every edit window (messages,
words, variables and puzzles) follows a
similar "feel" which gives a friendly look
to the utility. It is a pity that graphics are
not available, but it is hoped that this will
be solved with the next update. Heyley
Software, 27 Winnington Road, Marple,
Stockport, England, SK6 6PD. The price
should be around £29.99.
Games written specifically for the C-64
are as rare as gold dust nowadays. However, Big Sky Software in Scotland has
released Time Thief, a pure text adventure that has a real Infocom feel about
it. It offers lots of text and lots of atmos-

phere, but one major difference between
Time Thief and many adventure games
is that this adventure loads into memory
with only one disk access! The plot surrounds a company who deal in what they
call "Timeshare Travel." Actually the
theory is a fascinating tale in itself. Imagine tripping off with a bunch of friends,
aged around 18, on vacation. The operation follows that an individual takes time
off their years of old age (when they
would assume they would be old and
feeble and not able to enjoy themselves
as much). In effect, they could "use"
their 77th year, for example, when they
are 18 or whatever! Neat, eh? So, they
would die at a younger age (say, 40) but,
by the wonders of Timeshare would still
have "lived" their full life span (say 80
years).
Although many people used the Time
Portals successfully, things began to turn
sour when some people began to return
crippled and maimed from their time
travel. Jocasta, a top academic, travels
to a place and time from which the
trouble appears to originate. It appears
that someone is "stealing" time and,
therefore, causing mucho problems. She

disappears, though, so the player must
follow her to see what happened and,
possibly, catch the time thief. The cost is
£5.00 plus £1.00 P+P from Big Sky
Software, 35 Old Evanton Road,
Dingwall, Ross-Shire, Scotland, IV15 9RB.
Note that the above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD.
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80.
Fax: 01144-543-466-579
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766. Fax: 01144-268-590076
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international
operator.

Game Survey

Dogfight at the...
(Continued from page 33)
behave differently. Red Baron and KOTS
both depict famous aces with their own unique combat intelligence. Max Immelman,
for example, will fly against the player in a
green Eindecker. However, there are two distinct ways of dealing with this threat, based
on which simulator the player is flying. In
Red Baron, there is less "ramping" of the
enemies (in other words, the enemies appear and then immediately grow bigger,
leaving less time for targeting). In KOTS,
the enemy aircraft can be seen from a considerable distance (as a dot) and gradually
become larger. Also, there are standard
enemies who fly different aircraft depending
upon their skill level. For example, in KOTS
at the higher skill levels, if one flames three
Eindeckers in a row, he can bet that a flight
of Halberstadt D2s are en route for his six
o'clock. (Call them "the equalizers").

Dogfighting Tips (A New Leash
on Life)
The following are air combat hints picked
up after countless hours with both games.
MicroProse recommends the use of the
CH Flightstick for optimum results with
KOTS. The keyboard driver seems the most
responsive in Red Baron.
In Red Baron, one can dispatch any of
the aces — even in the Expert Mode with
the difficulty set at 100% — if he flies in the
Sopwith Snipe. The trick is to begin a descending spiral immediately following the
first pass and then bring the nose up above
the horizon while continuing to maintain
that position throughout the duration of a
hard turn. This decreases one's turning
radius and, if properly done, will find the
player in the optimum firing position to
bring his opponent down in a timely manner. In a mission, it's important to maintain
altitude and speed. Never forget that simple
rule of thumb!
KOTS is very different to fly. First, in a
tight turning dogfight, one may be better off
throttling back to 80 percent (with a hand
close to the plus key), since the object is to
turn tighter than the enemy.
Altitude is not everything. This reviewer
has, on many occasions, brought the fight
down to under three hundred feet and lived
to tell about it. The advantage of this lowlevel maneuvering is that the enemy can no
longer turn under the player and the fight
goes from both the vertical and horizontal
planes to only the horizontal plane. By throttling back to around 70 percent, one will
have the fight of one's life by dodging trees
and buildings while chasing his opponent.
It's quite an experience.

Straight Out of the Air Museum
Red Baron holds the upper hand as far
as the graphics are concerned, and how!
The interface and blending of digitized images is quite impressive and the aircraft are
simply fantastic 3-D polygon-filled objects.

The outside views are incredible — especially when the player flies close to another
aircraft. The cockpits, too, are very well
done and possess an incredible array of instruments. In KOTS, the graphic "look" of
the game is adequate. It is not as visually
stunning as Red Baron, but works nonetheless. Those looking for "bang" for their
bucks might like to know that the explosions are better in Red Baron (an area
where, in fact, KOTS is really lacking). In
KOTS, doomed aircraft perform dramatic
downward spirals, but there are no fireballs
like there are in Red Baron.
Both simulators have a replay feature, although the one in KOTS is quite Spartan
when compared to Red Baron's. The KOTS
feature is merely an "instant replay" and
clips cannot be saved to disk. In Red
Baron, however, there is a complete editing
utility. Not only can the player review a mission, but he can view it from a plethora of
angles and, if he so desires, reenter into the
simulation at any point during playback!
The one minor drawback to this otherwise
fine feature is the length of time required to
fast-forward through a "video."
There is less terrain to look at in Red
Baron than in KOTS. In KOTS, pilots performing air-to-ground missions can navigate
by rivers and roads and have a clearly
defined front, featuring a huge trench-line
with flak batteries, combined with
aerodromes which are readily perceived
from the air (and the player may land at
any one of them). By contrast, Red Baron
lacks the detail of ground targets to strafe
and has less distinct terrain. When one
looks at one's own plane in combat, however, Red Baron shows the splintering of
struts when damaged and blurring of one's
vision into red when wounded (features not
found in KOTS).
In KOTS, there is not as much variation in
the weather, but the clouds are somewhat
remarkable. This reviewer has never had
the sensation of flying through cloud layers
before in any air combat simulation. Red
Baron also has nice cloud effects and the
player may additionally adjust the wind factor, haze and the amount of daylight. The
gradient horizon in KOTS is superb and enhances the feeling of weather along with the
clouds (Red Baron has no gradient horizon
unless one switches to an outside view).
One nice feature in Red Baron is that the
sun gives an opponent a distinct and very
realistic advantage if he is flying out of it!
Red Baron includes two types of bullets:
incendiaries (best for balloon-busting missions) and standard. There is a terrific
animation of the machine gun's bolt action
recoiling when shots are fired. One must
set up his target with a deflection shot by
leading his opponent considerably in order
to achieve a hit. KOTS, on the other hand,
only has one type of bullet, no firing animation and requires a bit less lead (both the
noun and the verb) on the target. A nice
feature about KOTS, however, is that one is
equipped with three bombs to use as one
pleases. Red Baron does not provide for
bombs and bombing.

Red Baron does not support any kind of
connection between machines (until one
has access to the rumored Sierra Network,
where multi-player dogfights between real
human opponents will be a matter of
course). KOTS, on the other hand, in addition to supporting a direct link, supports
modem play. The modem dogfighting in
KOTS is highly entertaining, due primarily
to the human element involved. One can
dial an opponent directly, or play
head-to-head via a direct link supported by CompuServe in their new MTM (Modem-to-Modem)
Lobby (type: GO MTMLOBBY). Unfortunately, one cannot fly formation with other
human pilots or play varied scenarios in the
head-to-head game.
Currently, KOTS has an upgrade entitled
"Revision 2" (as previously mentioned)
which, in addition to providing for friendly
patrols of aircraft, allows one to sustain multiple bullet hits. This is a significant improvement over the first version where one hit is
fatal. Now, when one is being shot at, a
message will flash if one gets hit — to wit,
the message "You've been hit — but it's not
serious" will appear if a round passes harmlessly through the fabric of the aircraft. However, if one sustains damage such as
aileron damage, the appropriate message
will appear and one's aircraft will fly at a
reduced capacity according to the damage.
Additionally, one shot will no longer bring
down an opponent in the head-to-head
mode. This upgrade is available by writing
to MicroProse and simply requesting it.
They will mail you an update disk free.
For owners of Blue Max, the latest
revision adds a new flight simulator model
that is less jet-like than the original and
fixes the sorting of 3-D objects. More importantly, the game now supports two joysticks in head-to-head play. This upgrade is
available free upon request to registered
users only. Simply contact Three-Sixty.
While Red Baron has no form of copy
protection, in KOTS one must identify the
various insignia of different Squadrons and
Escadrilles in a pre-game history lesson.

Three-Point Landings
Wings from Cinemaware is most suited
for role-playing and arcade garners who
would enjoy the cursory depth of the
product as an intriguing introduction to the
subject of WWI aerial combat. For the
novice who is trying to learn how to fly his
computer, Blue Max might be just the ticket. Red Baron is suitable for air combat
simulation fans of all kinds due to its excellence in graphics and gameplay. It will
serve as a standard for a long time to
come. Finally, in this reviewer's opinion,
Knights of the Sky is the most realistic
and best suited for the advanced air combat simulation jocks who don't mind a few
less frills in order to get more technical
flight characteristics and details of WWI air
combat. One thing is certain: one cannot
lose when selecting a winner from this dogfight.

Editorial

S

tate of the Magazine: The recent
conflict in the Persian Gulf sent
sales of flight simulations "flying."
Combine the renewed interest caused by
the war news with some of the hot new
features in flight simulators that have already reached or are just about to reach
the market and one can just about sum
up the hottest portion of today's computer game market.

If I Only Had A Brain Department:
The editor of Computer Gaming World
profusely apologizes for the cover line on
the May issue of CGW (#82) which
stated that Life Or Death II: The Brain
was included in the issue. A logistical
problem was caused by the fact that the
publisher only sent one review copy of
the game and it was immediately
shipped to the reviewer. This meant that,
as the issue was nearing completion, the
art department did not have a copy of
the game in order to take a photo of the
cover or to process screen shots. We had
a similar logistical problem with Cybergenic Ranger, an advertised game, and
coverage of that product was also
delayed, but it was not mentioned on the
cover.

This issue, Computer Gaming World's
editorial staff received clearance from the
tower to present a special flight simulation issue. We've included tactical tips,
previews, reviews and product comparisons. We think it is an exciting issue
and perfectly fits our current
demographics. According to those
readers who fill in the "Reader Input
Device," CGWs readership has obtained,
on the average, 31 years of age. He is
usually male, has a "yuppie" level of income, above average education (at least
a B.A.), young children and, probably, a
very understanding wife. The fact that
flight simulations and action games involving air combat perpetually score well
when rated by our readers also lends support to the idea that this issue should be
well-received.

May also seemed to be our issue for
Murphy's Law on other fronts. "The
Rumor Bag" was modemed from the San
Francisco Bay area just prior to press
time in order to convey the latest breaking rumors. Unfortunately, the CGW spelling checker felt like Sid Meier's name
should be changed to "Ember." We did
not see it in print until the magazine was
already off the press. The rumor guy was
so embarrassed he painted his bag red.

However, whenever a disproportionate
amount of coverage is provided for one
genre as opposed to another, we invariably receive a considerable amount of negative mail. Therefore, we would like to encourage all of our readers to use the positive feedback instrument provided on
page 90 to indicate their likes and dislikes with regard to computer games and
this issue.

CGWs expanded number of pages in
six out of the last seven issues has led to
a few of these irritating, but relatively
minor, errors cropping up from time to
time. We are trying to do better, however. We want to be more responsive to
our readers and continue to improve our
batting average on the typographical errors. So, until next issue, take off, you
readers!

