March 1988
Number 45

FEATURES
Space Quest

9

Scorpion's Tale In Space / Scorpia

The Best Starfighter

10

A Comparison of Space Arcade Games / David M. Wilson

Ready or Not, Here They Come!

14

Computer Games In 1988

The Future of Computer Games

22

Science Fiction Writers Predict / Charles Ardai

Halls of Montezuma

24

SSG's U.S. Marines Wargame Reviewed / Johnny L. Wilson

Wasteland

26

A Sneak Preview

Scorpion's Mail

28

Adventure Game Tips / Scorpia

Skyfox II

31

EA's New Action Game Reviewed / Yung Min Choi

Breach

32

Sci-Fi Wargame Reviewed / Joseph S. McMaster

Titans of the Computer Gaming World

36

Strategic Simulations Company Report / Bob Proctor

Expulsion of the Terrorpods
British Action Game Reviewed / Hosea Battles

39

CGW Hall of Fame

44

A New Feature

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Letters

6

Reader Input Device

44

Boot Hill (Classifieds)

55

Game Ratings

56

Accolade
20813 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
CARD SHARKS: As described in
"The Rumor Bag" of CGW
#44, this game allows the
player to play against five
different computer opponents at blackjack,
hearts, or three different
kinds of poker. Ever
wondered what it would
be like to play cards with
three world leaders (Gorb,
Maggie, and Ronnie) and be part of
the table talk? This game offers a
very tongue-in-cheek version of that

scenario. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #1.
THE GRAPHICS STUDIO: In addition to what users expect from paint

programs and graphics editors, this
productivity tool allows the ability to
"pick up" any portion of the artwork
and alter the size, flip it, rotate it,

change the color palette, generate a
graduated color spread, capture an
8 x 8 pixel pattern, as well as edit
and store it, and use mirror symmetry effects. Amiga
($49.95), Apple IIGS with
768K ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #2.
PLASMATRON: A suicide
mission is one thing, but
this sci-fi arcade game features the dirtiest doublecross since Rambo Part II.
The player is allegedly supposed to pilot his Plasmatron craft to
an deserted colony, but it turns out
that the planet is overtly hostile.

Players must locate the alien colony
and neutralize all life forms if they
want to survive. C-64/128 ($14.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #3.
THE TRAIN: Injured Resistance
fighter, Le Duc, and heroic leader,
Pierre Le Feu, are the principals in
this action/adventure hybrid dealing
with the theft of a train full of art
treasures. Challenges involve operation of the train (stoking the boiler,
setting switches and keeping correct
pressure in the boilers), avoidance
and damage control with regard to
enemy traps and sabotage, and fighting out of ambushes with the front
and rear mounted machine guns or
mid-train 50 mm cannon. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#4.
Aegis Development Inc.
2210 Wilshire Blvd. Suite #277
Santa Monica, CA 90403
PORTS OF CALL: Worried about
the trade deficit? This game offers a
simulated chance to help reduce it,
contribute to it, or, more profitably,
work both sides of the ocean. In this
clever economic game with stunning
graphics, one to four players establish their own shipping companies,

buy ships, choose cargo and ports,
establish the most efficient travelling
speed, and cast off. With "Beginner,"
"Expert," and "Genius" levels to compete at, this "Software with Hard
Facts" should be challenging for a
long time. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #5.
Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214

fare game was listed in the top five.
The plotline reminds us of
"Apocalypse Now," but players who
demand fast action and colorful effects will enjoy facing the enemy
guerilla fighters in this game while
equipped with gun and hand
grenades. It is even possible to find
additional weaponry or use a tank at
various points in the game. Apple II
($34.95), IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #7.

WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN: If
you liked the board version of this
game or enjoy miniatures rules for
American Revolutionary War to
Napoleonic eras ("Don't Give Up The
Ship" for example), you will enjoy this
program which offers a referee, opponent, construction set, and 25 preset scenarios. The game has kept
the miniatures/boardgame look and
feel, while streamlining play. C64/128 ($35.00). Circle Reader Service Card #6.

KID NIKI: Like this totally radical
warrior ninja is truly committed to
happily ever altering with this princess who really knocks you out with
her awesome do, a totally terrific
spike for miles and miles. So, like if
you really, really want to get physical
with seven totally rad levels of warriors, dragons (lizards for scales and
scales), and monsters to gag you fer
sure, this is really, really the arcade
game fer you. Apple II ($34.95), C64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card #8.

Data East
470 Needles Drive
San Jose, CA 95112

SPEED BUGGY: A fast-moving conversion of the coin-op arcade hit,
based loosely on dune buggy racing.
Sound effects, colorful graphics, and
five different courses make this

IKARI WARRIORS: For eleven consecutive months, the coin-op version
of this action-oriented guerilla war-

Continued on pg. 52

The review claims that
"neither fatigue levels .
.nor troop quality . .
.nor supply state is
stated." Menu 13
(Select Korps/Army)
provides Experience,
Fatigue, and overall
Status for each Korps.
These levels are in
clear and irreducible
English. Page 32 of
the manual explains
each of the sections of
the Korps/Army display. Supply (and
Admin) is given as a
number out of 7 (not
a single word status)
in the bottom section
of the display. Clearly Mr. Brooks is confused, but I'm not sure why. The information is there.

"Steppe"ing On Our Toes
("Russia" Revisited)
In the October issue of CGW, Mr. M.
Evan Brooks made a number of complaints about Russia in a review of the
game. Most of these were in a section
headed "Documentation and Other
Problems." As far as I can determine, the
main problem was that Mr. Brooks has
not read the documentation. The points
are listed below.

The review alleges that "the documentation is silent as to the effect (of the loss
of important objectives). Page 55 lists
the effects of the capture of a capital
city. Page 56 explains Regions. "LAST
RESORT" is, in fact, a region attached
to Moscow.
However, we didn't tell you that
Siberians are purple (although it seems
an obvious color for people who reputedly slept in snowdrifts).

The review states that "terrain effects are
not delineated" and that "fortified cities
are not mentioned." Page 43 of the
manual states under Combat
Mechanics: "A terrain effect is
generated by evaluating the defender's
hex, the six hexes adjacent to it and the
intervening hex sides. Rivers and cities
add to the defensive value . .". [Ed.
Note: It is true that terrain effects are
described on page 43. However, it
seems to us that the description of terrain effects is important enough in a wargame to warrant giving at least a section
heading to it. It is easy to overlook the
above description as presented (i.e. a
comment in the fifth paragraph of the
section on combat mechanics)] While
page 46 states, under Fortifications:,
that "the fixed fortifications associated
with cities are the same as level 3 fortifications."

There are a few other points which are
more philosophical in nature. The most
contentious of these is the Supply/Rail
lines. Mr. Brooks wants to know when
they will arrive. Let me put this in what I
hope is an American perspective. If
Amtrak had to build three separate
transcontinental railroads in the face of
poor terrain and decidedly hostile natives, how much faith would you put in
their schedules? After one campaign
game of Russia, you will know as much
as we do about the mysteries of railway
construction.

The review states that "hits are simply
undefined." Page 43 of the manual explains losses and hits in some detail and
concludes: "In summary, a total combat
factor is calculated, compared with a
combat effectiveness value to produce a
number of hits which are then related to
a terrain effect to decide how many of
the hits become actual casualties." Hits
are your unmodified striking power,
losses represent how much of that power
was actually felt after all defensive
benefits had been calculated. The actual
combat routines take four pages to
describe so there is no simplistic formula
to trot out. However, Mr. Brooks may
safely take hits as ultimately being representative of bullets.

The manual in Russia is already 64
pages long. A manual written to accommodate Mr. Brooks' reflexive requirements for total information would be so
large as to be useless. One of
humanities strongest talents is the ability
to make informed decisions on the basis
of incomplete and contradictory information. If that isn't a description of the job
of a military commander, I don't know
what is. If Mr. Brooks took his own advice and was "willing and able to think in
new concepts," he (and we) would be a
lot happier.

However, you should look at the design
routines to obtain the supply allowances
of the different Korps/Army types, which
we didn't tell you. This, together with the
information in the manual on page 42
and the communications values printed
on the map will enable you to determine
Korps/Army LOS.

Gregor Whiley
General Manager, SSG
Drummoyne, NSW, Australia

We welcome such responses, especially
if we have overlooked something. In
spite of these particular disagreements,
we at CGW agree with our readers who
rate "Russia" in our top ten strategy
games, that the game is (using M. Evan
Brooks' own words) "a 'player' and one
to be seriously considered for
inclusion in the 'Wargamer's Essential Library."
Joust Wondering
In Defender of the Crown, we all get disgusted with the jousting. What's the
catch?

Chuck Sullens
Spokane, WA

Kellyn Beeck gave some pointers on
this in the August-September, 1987
issue of COW (#39). In summary, you
should pay attention to your
opponent's joust ratings and make certain that the tip of your lance hits the
small black target (box) on your
opponent's shield. In the Amiga version, the target is smaller if your opponent is a proficient jouster. In the
other versions, the target is larger if the
player's character is a proficient jouster.
"Forum" Rejection Letter
Admit it. Computer Game Forum is
nothing more than Computer Gaming
World on the off months. It might as
well have the same name.
Chris Ciccarello
Norcross, GA

Okay, we will admit it. Now that CGW
is monthly, CGF is nothing more than
CGW during the off months. We hope
you will admit that we tried some different kinds of articles in CGF, though.
We also hope you will like the inclusion of those articles in COW.
The Fact Patrol
Just got number 40 of CGW containing
your review on Rommel At Gazala.
There are two errors of fact in the review
that I feel are worth comment.
First, though you are most correct that
we do not wish to have the player aware
of exact supply paths to maintain viewpoint, you are not correct about being
unable to relieve units that have been
cut off and become out of supply and/or
out of command. Clearing the area between the units so positioned and their
upper level HQs wilt bring them back
under control. But this clear line must
be to the HQ in command of those
units and from that HQ to its higher
HQ, etc. If the HQ for the units has
been sent elsewhere or completely
destroyed (most unlikely) or the HQ is

(Continued on page 54)

For those who
were unable to
solve the
original adventure before the
sequel was
released, Scorpia offers her
walk-through
of the original
Space Quest.

S

Spring is in the air, the time when
a young grue's fancy turns to.
. . . . hmmm, well, maybe we'd better not go into that (this part of the
year, I have to keep a close eye on
Fred, but don't let it worry you.. .
he's really harmless! Really!).
Anyway, the nights are still a bit
chilly, so draw your chair up close
to the fire, and we'll take a look at
an out-of-this-world excursion tour.

Thus, the first task is to get off the
ship, which will soon blow up, leaving behind no evidence of the
Sariens' nefarious handiwork. This is
easier said than done, because the
place is crawling with the aliens, any
of whom will shoot you dead on
sight. Since you have no weapons
of your own, it is best to remain out
of sight if you possibly can. The
Sariens' shooting is both fast and accurate.
Expect to do a lot of restoring as

SPACE QUEST

Play begins on the starship Arcada,
which has just been boarded by the
Sariens, in search of the Star
Generator. As the lowly janitor, who
would rather nap than mop, you
manage to sleep through most of
the action. This is probably a good
thing, too, as the Sariens have killed
just about everyone else on board
the vessel.

Once you're sure you have everything there is to be found, it's time
to leave the doomed Arcada via the
escape pod. This will take you to the
planet Kerona, where you survive
(just barely) a crash-landing in the
desert. Be certain to look around
here carefully before moving on.
As to where you should move on to,
a little trial and error should show
you which direction is the only safe
, one. This brings you to a rocky
area, where sooner or later a nasty
Sarien spider droid will appear.
Guess who it's looking for?
You'll have to deal with the Spider
before going any further. Unfortunately, you still have no
weapons. Perhaps, however,
Mother Nature will provide for you,
if you can find the right spot. This
is one of the arcade-type sequences, so be sure to save the game
before you do anything.

Space Quest sends players on a
journey to track down and destroy
the Star Generator so that it cannot be used by the Sariens, evil
alien invaders. The game has 3-D
graphics, and both joystick and
keyboard input. It is also a very
linear adventure: adventurers move
along from location to location,
solving all puzzles in one area
before moving on to the next.
Once a person has left a location,
there is no going back, so it's very
important to solve all the puzzles
and pick up all the necessary objects, before going on to the next
step.
Frequent saving of the game is a
necessity. Not only are there many
ways of dying quickly, but portions
of the adventure are semi-arcade
in style and will probably take
players several tries to get through
them. Fortunately, the save disk allows up to 26 positions, and the
save itself is very fast (restoring,
however, is another matter, which
we'll come to later).

and no one is there at the time, you
could easily miss something essential to completing the quest.

Once the spider is disposed of,
you can continue on your merry
way, until you find yourself in a
series of caves. The first one isn't
much, but the second one has a
live geyser and a grate in the floor.
I wouldn't get too close to that
grate if I were you.

by Scorpia
you move your animated figure
around the ship, finding out where
things are and how to work them.
Remember to look at everything, not
only now, but later on, as there are
no text descriptions in the game.
Careful attention to the graphics will
often mean the difference between
life and death. Take everything that
isn't nailed down, since all the objects have a purpose.
In this portion of the adventure,
there is one location where you will
have to wait awhile for someone to
show up. There are no indications
of this in the game. If you happen to
walk through the particular room

As you look around, you notice
that there doesn't seem to be any
other way out of this cave. Of
course, looks can be deceiving.
There's probably an exit somewhere, but most likely it will require
a little action on your part before
you can see it.
The next cave is a bit nasty. The
pool is pretty, but deadly. However,
the real trick here is finding the exit.
You have to position yourself just
right, and this may take several tries.
Keep at it, though, and you should
be able to get out.
Then again, maybe you won't be too
thrilled at reaching the cave beyond,
as some laser beams are blocking
your path. You won't be able to
move or climb around them, and
you certainly can't jump over them.
Still, there is a way to deal with this
(Continued on page 49)

THE BEST STARFIGHTER
A Comparison of Space Arcade Games
by David M. Wilson

I

n the depths of all of our beings, there is a portion
of our personalities that we refuse to acknowledge.
There is, in the pit of each of our souls, a passion for
violence, destruction, and ruin . Civilization, as we
know it, shuns this inborn quirk. Nevertheless, those
who will admit their "killer" instincts may find some
delight in wreaking havoc throughout an imaginary future universe. For those so inclined, there are a
wealth of arcade-style space games available.

Uridium

U

ridium focuses on a lone "Manta" fighter which
continues to fight the deadly onslaught of the
relentless "Super-Dreadnoughts," huge crafts which
carry fighters in much the same fashion that today's
ocean-going
aircraft carriers
transport fighter
jets. The Manta
fighter skims
along the surface of the
Super-Dreadnoughts, fighting enemy
"bogies" and
trying to destroy
all of the fighters
that remain

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Uridium
C-64/128
$29.95
Andrew Braybrook
Mindscape
Northbrook, IL

docked. Finally, the Manta lands on the surface of the
ship and initiates the destruct sequence. If the player
is fortunate, the larger ship is destroyed. Of course,
this battle is only preliminary to conflict with another
Super-Dreadnought.
(Uridium offers high-quality graphics which reflect
depth of field on the surface of the Dreadnought.

Players must complete 15 levels of play
in order to win the game. Perhaps the
most outstanding factor in the game,
however, is the ease with which the
Manta handles. Many games allow
players to move up and down on the
screen, but (iridium allows the player to
move vertically or even, to make a quick
full-reverse roll. The fighter's handling
characteristics make this game a joystick
jockey's dream.

Mini-briefing: Players should avoid the
temptation to become so missionoriented that they avoid the fighter squadrons and
concentrate on destroying the "mother ship." It is
quite simple to avoid the fighter squadrons, but it is
detrimental to the mission efficiency rating (score) because the program awards bonuses for fighter
squadrons which are completely eliminated.

Delta Patrol

D elta

Patrol, on the other hand, does not
maneuver nearly as well. In this game, imported
by Electronic Arts for their Amazing Software line,
the Delta Sector is billed as though it were the "baddest neighborhood in space." The sector is filled with
derelict ships and alien bandits, as well as mysterious
destructive forces. The graphics are not especially exciting and the game reminds this reviewer of the old
Atari 2600 game, Megamania. The theme revolves
around blasting space junk and alien fighter
squadrons. Players are space cops with a license to
disintegrate.
There are some enhancements that make Delta Patrol
interesting, however. As players fly through the sector,
they gain credits for destroying formations, though
they may, in turn, be attacked by some formations
and experience a decrease in credits as a result. While
players must avoid gray icons or face obliteration,
players who fly through the blue icons can pick up
special weapons. Weapon enhancements include:
extra speed, increased rate of fire, multiple fire (which
enables fighters to fire from rear, port, and starboard),
a protector (a weapon which looks like a spinning ball
of shrapnel), a warper (the ability to slow down the
enemy while maintaining one's own speed at a constant rate), and the Supa Shield (the ultimate protection versus enemy fire). Unfortunately, players encounter these icons randomly and it is difficult to
decipher the symbols as they appear on the screen.
Nevertheless, all of the blue icons are worth having if
the player can manage to maneuver over them.
Mini-briefing: Players should note the easily discernible pattern with regard to enemy waves of attack.
Waves of enemy fighters generally alternate between
the top and bottom of the screen, although there are
some pinwheels and spiral formations to offset the
monotony. The secret is obvious, however, simply get
in front of the enemy column and they will follow their
leader into your laser beam like lemmings to the sea.

Magnetron

M

agnetron, Broderbund's latest release, offers a

different challenge. In this game, the fighter
pilot (player) must destroy fortresses in the Magnetron
Galaxy. The handling of the Photon fighter is a bit
more complex than that of the other games mentioned because it reacts realistically in zero gravity and
must be controlled through the use of thruster rockets
The fortresses consist of four different walls that the
player must navigate. There are solid walls that cannot be destroyed regardless of the amount of
firepower directed at them. Contact with solid walls
will destroy the player's craft. Then there are permeable walls that both weapon fire and fighter craft can
easily pass through. Brittle walls can be destroyed by
weapon fire, but trying to fly through them will destroy
both wall and fighter. Elastic walls are those which
both fighter and weapon fire bounce off. This can be
helpful when one desires to place a strategic burst of
cannon fire into an otherwise inaccessible target. The
only procedure for determining which properties a
wall has is firing at them and watching the reaction of
the weapon fire.
Destroying all of the cannons shorts out the fortresses
Magnetron Generators, but players will first want to
pass over the fuel cells with their shields on, which
causes the fuel to be drawn up into the ship. If players
fail to take on fuel their ship will explode.
A unique quality of the Magnetron is the "Galaxy
Editor." This option allows players the ability to design
their own Galaxy and build their own fortress. By
using this mode players can create more challenging
fortresses to destroy. By designing their own fortresses, players have the pleasure of playing the evil
genius designer of the fortress, as well as being the
liberator of the sector.
Mini-briefing: The secret to success in Magnetron
has to do with learning to control both the ship and
its shield. Pulling back on the joystick activates the
shield which protects players from enemy cannon fire
(but not from solid walls). Players should practice the
game using the "Holographic Simulator" (a practice
mode which can simulate 49 of the 50 fortresses) in
order to master the mechanics of the game, as well as
pick out the nuances of each fortress design.

ture game of sorts. Players must attack enemy
fighters, land their fighters, and proceed to the
nearest hangar.
Inside the hangar, they will
find either a
mad scientist or
a security robot.
Players must
stun the scientists or destroy
the robots,
depending on
which they encounter.
Stunned scientists will yield
I.D. cards. Inserting cards
into the com-

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Magnetron
C-64/128
$24.95
Randy Wilson
Brian Wilson
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA

puter will give a portion of the
password which is needed in order to get into the
next zone.
When the final
password is
entered into the
correct terminal
of the Epsilon
zone (the other
zones are
Alpha, Beta,
Gamma, and
Delta), the corn
puter is
automatically
destroyed.

Parallax

I

n Parallax, distributed by Mindscape, the player
and his fellow astronauts are assigned to explore
the surface of a planet which is inhabited by aliens.
The planet is divided into five separate sections and
one of those sections houses a central computer
which is engaged in a plan to attack the earth. The
player and his allies must attempt to destroy the corn
puter in order to foil the attack.
One of the cleverest aspects of this game is that it is
not strictly a space combat game, but also, an adven-

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Mini-briefing: One of the hardest mechanics to

Magnetron
C-64/128
$24.95
Randy Wilson
Brian Wilson
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA

master in this game is getting the landing gear up or
down and verifying the appropriate position. If the gear
is not in the
proper position,
it can damage
the ship. Since
the computer
view does not
picture the
gear, players
must rely on
the computer to
tell them the

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Parallax
C-64/128
$29.95
Chris Yates
Jon Hale
Mindscape
Northbrook, IL

position of the gear. If the player is concentrating on
something else on the viewscreen, he could be in
trouble.

Sanxion
anxion seems similar to the classic coin-op ar-

S

cade feature, Defender. Sanxion pilots are required to exterminate the alien invaders in their sectors. That task accomplished, pilots must pass a training course which consists of: shooting drones, colliding with drones, or picking up drones while avoiding
other barriers.

Sanxion has its own "Fastloader". When compared
with the
loading
time of
most
C64128
games,
the
speed
with
which
Sanxion
loads is
very

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Sanxion
C-64/128
$19.95
Stavros Fasoulas
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

much appreciated. Further, even though its sister
game, Delta Patrol, did not have a fastloader, the fact
that the game booted automatically on the C-128 is
also appreciated.
Mini-briefing: Controlling one's speed is the key to
this game. There are times when discretion is the better part of valor and the player is advised to speed
past enemy ships. At other times, the player must be
careful not to be disoriented by the dual view of his
ship's progress shown on the screen.

The Challenge

Lo

oking for something to appease those deep
violent urges you have been sublimating? Wanting to try your hand at challenging those "bad guys"
from another universe? Well, now that you bloodthirsty earthlings know something about those space
games floating about your time continuum, go buy
the game of your choice and boot up your computer
with your lasers blasting! The allure of digitized space
debris beckons you.

T he

Alexis Park Hotel in Las Vegas,
Nevada is usually known for being
more restful, dignified, and sedate than
the typical "Vegas Hotel." There are no
gaudy lights adorning its exterior and
there is no casino to clutter its interior.
On the first night of the Consumer
Electronics Show, however, it was the

are going to find it affecting their lives.
The effect of many events at the show
will be felt by consumers all over the
globe throughout the coming year. With
software sales for home computer systems expected to reach the $2 billion
range in 1988 (Electronic Industries Association estimate), there should be plen-

Ready or Not,
Here They Come!

Computer Games In 1988
A Report on the Winter Consumer Electronics Show
site of Electronic Arts' fifth anniversary
party. There was plenty of flash and
color inside the party location. From displays from each of the company's five
years of existence (which featured
promotional items, packaging and display art, promotional video-tapes,etc.) to the colorful
sushi bar with its corporate symbol ice
sculpture, this was a celebration for the
entertainment software industry comparable to a movie premiere. Game
designers, producers, corporate presidents, and the press networked together
in an informal atmosphere of banter and
badinage.
At the conclusion of that party a bouquet of helium balloons (from the party
decorations) was launched into the night
sky. It landed in Panhandle, Texas where
Ken and Glenda Ware found it while
feeding their cattle (see sidebar). Those
balloons symbolize the fact that people
who do not even know what a WCES is,

ty of turbulence, innovation, and excitement that will touch us all.

Turbulence: When
Superpowers Divide
W
With the emphasis on marketing
trumpeted throughout the industry, there seems to be a polarization
into two large "camps" with numerous
satellites. It used to be that one thought
simultaneously of Electronic Arts with
the idea of Affiliated Labels, but Activision seems to be aggressively pursuing Affiliated Publishers as a major
portion of their strategy for 1988. Even
though several major entertainment
software companies (like Broderbund,
Mindscape, and Microprose) have their
own distribution networks, and other
publishers prefer to deal directly with
traditional distributors (such as Computer Software Service, SoftSel, and

SoftKat), notice how many publishers
line up with each of the big two.
Activision lists the following companies as "Affiliate Publishers": System
3 (The I Last Ninja, and World Karate
Championships in Europe); Sierra
(King's Quest); New World Computing
(Might and Magic); Lucasfilm Games
(Maniac Mansion); Absolute Entertainment (Atari 2600 games); Microillusions (Faery Tale Adventure); Access
(Tenth Frame, Echelon); Firebird (Guild
of Thieves, U.M.S.).
Electronic Arts delineates the following as "Affiliate Labels": Alturas
(producers of the MAXX Steering Yoke);
Arcadia (Aaargh and Rockford);
Datasoft (Alternate Reality and
Tomahawk); Game Designers
Workshop (Road to Moscow); Interstel (Star Fleet I and Empire); Quantumlink (support system for the on-line
service); Paragon (Alien Fires 2400
A.D.); Reality Technologies (What
They Don't Teach You At Harvard Business School); Sierra (Leisure Suit Larry
and Thexder); Software Toolworks
(Chessmaster 2000); Strategic Studies
Group (Battlefront); Virgin Games
(Scruples and Monopoly); First Byte
and Design Software (producers of
utility and productivity tools).
Note that Sierra has agreements with
both companies. And, though not listed
separately by EA, Lucasfilm Games
also has agreements with both companies.
Even the published financial data on
the two "camps" looks similar. Activision reported net revenue of $26.6
million in fiscal 1987, while Electronic
Arts reported revenues of $30 million in
fiscal 1987. [Ed.: Note that the same fiscal year may not follow the same calendar months in both corporations.]
Bruce Davis, President of Activision,
cheerfully opened his remarks to the
press with a look at his record and a
quip which obliquely referred to James
Levy's resignation. "We've been making
money and we plan to continue it .. .
forever . . . and if we don't, you can talk
to the next guy." Trip Hawkins, president
and founder of Electronic Arts
couched his printed remarks in terms of
economic conquest. "Now that
Electronic Arts has achieved a leadership
position in the United States, we plan to
replicate that success worldwide by creating effective international distribution organizations and attracting local talent for
program development." Although Ac-

tivision is currently the largest licensor
of United States' entertainment software
to Japan and Microprose has been
developing a strong world-wide distribution network, EA has recently formed
wholly owned subsidiaries in Japan and
the United Kingdom, while purchasing
Entertainment and Computer
Products (ECP) in Australia.

Innovation: Dotting the CD-I

The

leading edge of technology and this
means research and, consequently,
risk." This relates closely to Gordon's
response when asked why the company
supported the expensive GenLock
device in the Deluxe Video series. "We
saw a prototype that blew us away. We
thought it would come down in price
and become a consumer item. We're
still a sucker for neat stuff." According to
Gordon, "People here at EA just want
more audio-visual horsepower in order
to milk it creatively, so when something
new on the horizon promises the extra

plot lines. The stories follow a classic
comic book style format. But the actual
"viewing" of the story (we can't really say
"playing of the game") feels more like
using a VCR to move around a video
taped movie. Users can observe a story
unfolding and read the descriptions at
three different speeds (slow, default, and
fast). At fast speed, this may even work
as a tachistoscope to improve reading
speeds. Lane Mastodon vs. The Blubbermen is the first release in the series and
features Steve Meretzky's '30s era
spaceman from Leather Goddesses of

most intriguing advance in enterPhobos. ZorkQuest:
tainment technolAssault on Egreth
ogy may be the adCastle and Gamma
vent of Compact
Force: Pit of a
Disc Interactive.
Thousand Screams
With the capacity to
will be the next
store 660 MB on a
by Russell Sipe
releases. Priced at
disk, use sixteen chanAt
the
conclusion
of
the
Electronic
Arts
5th Anniversary Party (held during the WCES show in
$12, these stories
nels of audio, and
Las Vegas) I was given one of the helium balloon bouquets to take "home". Can you imagine
(which run 3-5 hours
offer broadcast quality
how I felt standing in a taxi cue line, balloons in hand, watching someone in front of me trying to
animation more than
long) are not intended
stuff their 12 balloon bouquet into the cab for the ride to their hotel? It looked pretty silly! Now, I
to compete with
100 times the present
don't mind being silly. It's one of the things I do best. But I like to be silly on my own terms! So
rather than face the inevitable look of incredulity on the face of a cab driver, I took my business
traditional interactive
68000 machine
card, tied it to my festive bouquet, stepped out under the midnight sky, and while a dozen folks
games, but should
capabilities, the potencheered me on, released my calling card into the night. We all had a good laugh, and returned to
prove popular in their
tial is awesome. With
our hotel rooms.
own right. Infocom
CD-I players expected
The following week, having forgotten about the incident, I got a letter in the mail from Glenda
plans to release
to hit the scene in the
and Ken Ware of Panhandle, Texas which read, in part, "My husband and I were feeding cattle
several series of titles
next eighteen months
near our home this past weekend when we came across a deflated balloon with your business
card attached. We live in a rural area thirty miles east of Amarillo, Texas. Thank you for taking
within the lnfocomics
or so, CGW wondered
the time to attach your card to the balloon, we find it interesting to find such."
line. At the $12 price
what the major
level Infocom is betsoftware producers
After speaking with the Wares by phone, just to rule out the possibly of a practical joke, I checked it out on the map. Assuming a steady easterly wind that night, the balloons would have
ting that users will
are doing to prepare
traveled eastward out of Las Vegas, passed over Lake Mead, the Grand Canyon, at least two
want to collect each
for the next leap in
military restricted air spaces, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, the other Las Vegas (ie. NM),
new "serialized" adventechnology. Sir-Tech
and Amarillo, TX before coming to rest in a field outside Panhandle, some 750 miles later.
ture as it comes out.
Software is willing to
I was so impressed that I considered using this technique to deliver subscriber copies in the fugo on record and
ture. However our circulation department shot down the idea.
state that the cornCinemaware has
. .
pany aggressiv
ely
long been noted for
horsepower, we get pretty excited."
pursuing the software possibilities with
its designs which put the user in a
regard to CD-I. Rob Sirotek was so exEven though Riker demonstrated a
movie setting. The Three Stooges may
cited about the work being acdevelopment system (with potential CD-I
be the most successful, yet. Instead of
complished by Macrocom, Inc. (desiggame elements) to a San Franciscopresenting a generic story as in
ners of The Seven Spirits of RA) that he
based CD-I interest group, Gordon
Defender of the Crown or King of
suggested some of the Seven Spirits
likened the new technology to the "preChicago, the designers have built the
screens were like " . . . videodisc simulablack box" stage on the Amiga. He went
game around actual movie sequences.
tions of CD-I." Those in the IBM world
on to suggest that while current
The arcade sequences are derived from
who have never seen sixteen colors supprojects, as well as research and
famous "Stooges" bits. For example,
ported by a CGA card will want to take a
development, will eventually dovetail into CD-I
Curly had trouble eating oyster soup in
look at the sophisticated action/advenproducts, there are no specific CD-I
Crackers. Players will have the same
ture game recently released by Sir-Tech
products currently in development.
problem in the arcade sequence where
(see upcoming review).
"live" oysters try to eat the crackers
Electronic Arts is the most vocal
before the player can spoon them. In
Imagination: Cinemaglare
about their interest in the technology,
"Tapper," their catering service
but outside of having Greg Riker on staff
degenerated into a food fight that
ne of the most consistent apas Director of CD-I development, they
preceded Animal House by generations.
proaches to enhancing entertainhaven't affirmed that they have any
The arcade sequence is a pie throwing
ment software's ability to tell stories was
software projects on the drawing board.
competition based on that scene. As if
to use cinematic approaches. Infocom
Bing Gordon, vice-president of the
the design wasn't enough of a tribute to
and Tom Snyder Productions have
company's entertainment division,
the "Stooges," the game uses 160
put together a storytelling system called
likened their interest in CD-I to "missiondigitized sounds from the movie
lnfocomics. Using the idea of an interacary work" in the new technology. "One
tive camera, the product allows users to
soundtracks (They had to compress a
of the things EA tries to do is be on the
change between the various character
full megabyte of sound to accomplish

Unidentified Aircraft Over Los Alamos,
Please Identify Yourself!

O

it.). The other first quarter offering from
Cinemaware will be Rocket Ranger, a
tribute to those "Rocketeer" type serials.
The cinematic enhancement for this adventure (in an alternative future where
the Nazis won World War II) is the use of
"Real Talk" by actors and actresses to
carry the dialogue. This means that
professionals speak the lines and then,
the sounds are synthesized, compressed
and stored on the disk to be played
during the game. [ Ed. Note: At
press time CGW learned that

Imagination: The Angler
Zone and Other Virgin Territory
Another general observation surrounding the industry is that there
seems to be broadening subject matter
with regard to games. Interstel is about
to release a bass fishing simulation for
the Atari ST. Designed by Roger
Damon, Gone Fishin' requires the player
to simulate casting to the best spots and

Cinemaware will set up their
own distribution channel, ending
Mindscape.]
their relationship with

I

n addition, Strategic Simulations, Inc. has confirmed that
they are working on an interactive
movie product to be set in the
"Forgotten Realms" environs of
their Advanced Dungeons and
Dragons license. Sierra will
release Manhunter, a science fiction story by the authors of Ancient Art of War, later this year.
This animated adventure, surrounding a detective in an alienoccupied New York City, will use
split-screen animation and advanced windowing effects to offer
a cinematic perspective. Epyx is
using camera angle tricks from
television to enhance their new
The Games—Winter Edition. The
design team has studied lots of videotape in order to portray a feel of network
television coverage by adding point of
view camera angles. The company also
uses the perspective of video surveillance to spice up their detective game,
L.A. Crackdown, where the player acts
as senior detective in gathering evidence
against a major drug ring. Mindscape is
expected to release a fantasy role-playing game, entitled Citadel, during March
which not only offers the most unique
character creation scheme that we have
seen, but offers different person and
time perspectives. How does the product
accomplish the latter? It is made possible by allowing more than one player
to play in the same adventure at different times. How does it accomplish the
former? It does so by allowing the
character to choose his/her parents and
even decide how he/she spent their time
in adolescence. In addition, the threedimensional viewpoints and digitized
sounds reflect cinematic influences.

choosing the right lures in order to
catch the fish.
A new company called First Row is
releasing a game about television network programming. In Prime Time, one
to three players become network
programming directors a la "Fred Silverfish" and attempt to develop strategies
which will cause their networks to win
the ratings wars. This game can be as
simple as buying programs and dropping them into time-slots or as complex
as developing network promotional
spots to hype the new shows. In addition, the company is releasing Dr.
Dumont's Wild PARTI., a science-fiction adventure from Michael and Muffy
Berlin (Cyborg, Infidel). In this adventure, a fictional scientist named Dr.
Dumont turns the player into a "Subonaut," the first human to experience
sub-atomic life. The game fictionalizes
some of the biolink problems associated
with a true Al and human brain interlink.
Sierra's new Gold Rush adventure is a
natural for a company located in the

heart of California's gold country. It is
also a natural for a company that is unafraid to risk new approaches to educational software. Mixed-Up Mother
Goose, a successful adventure for very
young children, has sold almost 25,000
units in its first two months. Gold Rush
is historically accurate according to
Sierra's John Williams. They plan to
promote the product as a suitable teaching tool in the secondary education
market.
Cosmi plans to tap the success
of Inside Trader with a similar approach to the world of megamergers, Corporate Raider. The
game is supposed to involve everything from "junk bonds" to "green
mail." Another economic simulation with a different angle is First
Row's The Financial Time
Machine. This product covers
stock market environments from
1930 to the 1980s and also
enables players to use four
separate and continuously updated portfolios to test out different investment strategies in the
same market environment.
Another angle is presented in
Reality Technologies' What
They Don't Teach You At Harvard
Business School. Based on the
1986 bestseller, players attempt to
learn the secrets of networking,
negotiation, and management by
developing a simulated sports management agency.
Computerization of familiar games
from other formats continues, but certain twists have been added. Accolade
has added a new dimension to computerized card games by spicing the
table with distinctive opponents in Card
Sharks (see "Rumor Bag" in CGW #44,
p. 48). Virgin Games has accomplished
a similar feat by programming colorful
personality profiles into the computer
version of the popular Scruples board
game. The latter company is also releasing a computer version of Monopoly.
Unlike the public domain versions of the
popular board game, however, this one
includes a built-in banker/referee, options for a full or short game, time clock,
and complete musical score to go with
the familiar Atlantic City real estate.
In the realm of challenging puzzles on
computers, Spectrum Holobyte already has players of Solitaire Royale
and Soko-Ban burning the midnight
kilowatts. At this show, the company was

demonstrating a Russian puzzle game
involving fast moving shapes which have
to be organized to fill up a limited space.
Finally, previous games have touched
on the uncomfortable subject of terrorism, but Cosmi and Paragon are
taking the risk of focusing upon the subject in two major releases. The former is
offering an adventure game entitled The
President Is Missing in which players will
discover and evaluate clues to not
one, but two intricate plot lines.
The latter is offering an action/adventure hybrid entitled Twilight's
Ransom and containing enough
gun runners and Latin
revolutionaries to keep Ollie North
and and Dick Secord busy for

Strategic Simulations, Inc. stated that
newer IBM products from that company
would be EGA available. It certainly appears that there will be less magenta
and blue to kick around in the future.

Superb Performance: Ulti-mates

O

ne handy feature for fantasy
gamers which will be appearing
with increasing frequency throughout

Superb Performance:
Look and Squeal

I

t is also obvious that products
are looking better. Bill Fisher,
who heads a conversion group
which does IBM translations for
Data East, feels that most action
programs for the IBM run too
slowly and look inferior to other
machines. In the translation of
Lock-On, a dogfight style arcade
game, Bill's Quicksilver conversion group managed to speed up the
game by using four bits per pixel and enhancing the frame rate to 5-15 frames
per second (depending on how fast the
machine's processor actually works).
This enables the screens to look nice
and scroll fast, as well. The soon-to-be
released version of Lock-On supports
either EGA or CGA, but Data East is
currently holding off on VGA.
Sierra seems to be leading the pack
in VGA support by means of their
Japanese action imports like last year's
Thexder and this year's Silpheed, a threedimensional space extravaganza with
super deluxe dogfighting. In fact, this
show reflects the heavy swing toward
EGA support in recreational software
products. Sir-Tech's Seven Spirits of Ra
supports both CGA and EGA, as does
Datasoft's Tomahawk conversion,
Accolade's recent Test Drive port,
Origin Systems' Ultima IV translation,
and EA's exciting new Futuremagic.
Firebird's Guild of Thieves port requires
EGA card if one wants more than a text
only game. In addition, Three-Sixty's exciting Harpoon, a simulation of modern
naval warfare, is expected to require an
EGA card. Finally, Joel Billings of

1988 is automapping. Although
programs like Phantasie and Beyond
Zork have offered this in the past, the
feature will appear in SSI's Questron
and EA's The Bard's Tale III: The Thief
of Fate. This feature should be a
welcome standard in the field.
Fantasy garners will want to watch for
a plethora of titles in early '88. Microillusions is ready to release Land of
Legend, a beautifully crafted fantasy setting which will allow players to use their
Bard's Tale or Ultima characters. In addition, there will be a dungeon construction set based on the game to allow
players to create their own dungeons
after they have finished Land of Legend.
This will be a separate product to be
released, later.
The Bard's Tale III: The Thief of Fate
from Electronic Arts will have more of
a storyline than its prequels. Written by
Michael Stackpole of pen/paper RPG
renown, this game involves adventuring
in seven different dimensions of war and
exploration of the ruined city of Skara
Brae (demolished by the mad god, Tarjan!). With almost 240 spells (including
two new spell classes to discover),
puzzles that are more fair and semi-linear in

nature, and an altered maze style, this
one promises to be interesting. In addition, there are no VZGL surprises. One's
character must learn the spells and the
new bard songs. No player can give the
other player an answer.
Strategic Simulations, Inc. plans an
entire line of Advanced Dungeons and
Dragons products based on the DragonLance and Forgotten Realms worlds.
The first release will be the computer role playing game based on
the Forgotten Realms world. Many
of the screens have that Bard's
Tale look, but other screens will
emphasize peripheral vision, as well
as depth when characters approach the player's party. The
program will use AD & D tactical
combat rules and will guarantee
role-playing by providing nonplayer characters with honest reaction rolls. The parties which include
NPCs will be liquid in the sense
that an NPC may decide to leave at
any given moment because of
what a player character has done.
Other products in this line will include: a utility program for
DungeonMasters, an action game
based on the DragonLance world,
an interactive movie game set in
the Forgotten Realms environment
(with a possible link-in to the CRPG),
another Forgotten Realms CRPG, a
DragonLance CRPG, and, provided the
first utility program sells, another utility
program.
New World Computing is expected to
release the second chapter of Might and
Magic during the latter part of the year,
but were not ready to release specifics
about the new product. Omnitrend,
however, has taken the look and feel of
their Breach game and translated that
into a fantasy campaign entitled
Paladin. The action is smooth and colorful, but the digitized sound effects are
really top-notch. This adventure will
stress some role-playing elements which
the designers feel have been missing in
other games.
Science Fantasy will also be well represented in 1988. Electronic Arts will
release the long publicized Return to Atlantis with its ten interrelated scenarios.
However, the company is extremely
proud of its Futuremagic release. Joe
Ybarra, Vice President of the Interactive
Stories Division, believes that this
release will out-Starflight Starflight.
Ybarra suggested, "Starflight showed that

characters in a fantasy game could be
as rich as characters in a novel, and
that's even more true in Futuremagic."
The key to this, according to Ybarra, is
the ability to have "context-sensitive" conversations with characters where the
program keeps track of what players
know and takes into account what they
have already accomplished. On top of
that feature, the graphics are remarkable.

Speed Buggy, a translation of its arcade
hit which is available for both the C-64
and Atari ST, as well as the previously
mentioned Lock-On and the soon-to-be
available Karnov conversion. Activision
is touting the home computer version of
Rampage, while Arcadia believes it has
gone them one better with Aaargh and
its three dimensional graphics on the
Amiga. Datasoft has entered the
robotics War zone with Battle Droidz, a

Imagination: War
Powers Rap

A Reaction for Every Action

P

erhaps, a side effect of the

Two

Nintendo boom or a result of
cross-pollenization with the
European marketplace, there is a
resurgence of action titles slated
for 1988. Action designer Steve
Cartwright has joined Accolade in
order to continue that company's
tradition of excellence with regard
to action games. In the meantime,
the company will soon release Bubble Ghost, a maze game with a
cute twist. The very different look
of this game relies on a ghost blowing a bubble through the maze. It
certainly sounds easier than it is.
Epyx will not only be releasing its
own action titles, but will distribute
six of U. S. Gold's and some of
Palace Software's, as well. From U.S.
Gold, Dive Bomber puts the player in
the pilot's seat of a torpedo bomber on
a mission to sink the Bismarck; Street
Cat is an urban obstacle course for alley
cats, a tongue-in-cheek "Games" approach with cartoon characters; and
Metrocross is a real time urban obstacle
course where players avoid rats,
negotiate hurdles, hurdle potholes and
evade green slime tiles. From Palace,
the number one bestseller in Europe
(known there as Barbarian) appears as
Death Sword. Smooth graphics and excellent sound effects ornament this action/adventure where the player faces
screen after screen of guards in order to
rescue a princess from an evil sorcerer.
Of Epyx' own titles, Street Sports Soccer is expected to be distinctive from the
first two games in the series in that it will
be a "joystick buster" in addition to the
familiar features of the Street Sports
line. One great looking new game is
4x4 Off-Road Racing which will feature
a strategic set-up, four different courses,
ability to customize one's own vehicle
and purchase supplies, plenty of off-road
terrain challenges, and a "demon truck"
to defeat. Data East is excited about

ful) editors to create one's own arcade
game (Actor Editor - for characters/monsters, Sound Editor - for sound
effects and tunes, Level Editor - for special effects and map building blocks,
and Environment Editor - for the interfacing). This product will let users design
their own "shoot-'em-ups," "maze
chases," and "climbing/jumping games"
for their friends (no master disk required)
with no programming skill needed.

science fiction game where the player's
mining droids fight against the
computer's droids with a dazzling array
of different weapon types. Further, The
Rubicon Alliance offers another space
fighter simulation. Sierra's Silpheed dogfighter and popular 3-D Helicopter
Simulator will soon be accompanied by
a 3-D Tank Simulator.
Flight simulations continue to
proliferate. Mindscape has repackaged
their High Roller product as a Harrier
simulator and tweaked it up for the
Amiga. EA has a flight and combat
simulation for the Amiga which is
modeled after the F-18 Hornet and the
F-16 Falcon (as seen on CGW #44's
cover, courtesy of General Dynamics
Corporation). This program allows takeoffs and landings on a carrier and offers
six different missions armed with
Sidewinder missiles, Sparrows, and unlimited cannon fire. In addition, Cosmi
has recently released Super Huey II.
Perhaps, the most important release in
the action category is the Arcade Game
Construction Kit from Broderbund.
This product will combine seven sample
arcade games derived from different arcade types and four different (and power-

of the products gendering
the most excited comments
were war games, even though
neither product looks like a traditional wargame. Larry Bond, a
former U.S. Naval officer, defense
consultant, and regular NATO wargames referee, has an interest in
both projects. As godfather to Tom
Clancy's youngest child and collaborator on the best-selling Red
Storm Rising, he is interested in
the success of Microprose's
licensed product by the same
name. As the designer of GDW's
board/miniatures game, Harpoon,
' he is intricately involved in ThreeSixty's computer version of Harpoon.
Bond demonstrated the game-indevelopment to CGW. The first release
of the game will include the program,
basic data, documentation, and a
scenario disk entitled, Showdown in the
North Atlantic. The strategic screen
looks fabulous in EGA mode and uses
actual U.S. Navy symbology. In addition,
the game is designed to make the player
take on the role of fleet commander. Difficulty levels will reflect actual United
States Naval Policy. In "Weapons Free"
mode, the Staff Assistant (X.O.) will perform necessary actions for combat/defense; in "Weapons Hold" mode,
the S.A. will ask for confirmation before
performing necessary actions; and in
"Weapons Tight" mode, the S.A. will
have to be specifically ordered to perform necessary actions. Asked why certain naval authorities downplayed the
readiness of surface fleets, Bond referred
to the fact that there are no pay incentives for surface ship duties and that
naval aviation and submarine duty is
both flashier and more operational than
surface duty. Nevertheless, he offered a
rationale for the game and his interest in
the subject by stating, "I happen to think
surface ships are sexy. Maybe I'm weird."

(Continued on overleaf)

Certainly those who play Harpoon will
not think so.
Microprose is excited about Red

Storm Rising. Clancy, who
talked to four or five different companies before
settling on Microprose, is
also excited, "After seeing
the product, I am convinced that we picked the
right company. The Navy
will be using this product!"
Although Clancy would like
to see an X-Ray Alpha
game based on the ASW
portion of the book, the
first release will deal strictly
with the nuclear submarine, U.S.S. Chicago.
Familiar scenes from the
novel form a wrapping for
the main portion of the
game, the submarine-to-submarine combat. Blade
counts, noisemakers, torpedoes, active/passive sonar, and the
other tricks of the trade are included.
Datasoft is marketing another Clancy
title, The Hunt for Red October. This
first person oriented strategy game puts
the player in the role of Captain First
Rank, Marko Ramius.
Marko must evade both
NATO and Warsaw Pact
vessels in order to successfully defect to the Western
Bloc in this icon-driven
game of stealth, strategy,
and speed which simulates
command of Red October.
In addition to these titles,
more traditional wargames
are still expected.
Strategic Studies Group
has adapted the Battlefront
system for American Civil
War battles. New wrinkles
include profiles of various
headquarters units as
"Heroic," "Bold," and
"Cautious," (the latter is according to Greg Whiley, " .
. a nice word for not being very adventurous."); the ability to recover cohesion
(combat efficiency) when not under fire;
and an ahistorical "Radio Option" to
allow users to familiarize themselves with
the game mechanics before submitting
to command restraints. Strategic
Simulations, Inc. may have a
breakthrough game in its new Panzer
Strike. Joel Billings III, president of the
company, likens it to "Kampfgruppe

done right on the Squad Leader scale."
Further, the company is pleased with
Sons of Liberty, the American Revolutionary War release, but even more excited about the oft-discussed Napoleonics
game due to be released
before mid-year. The game
will feature less direct control than previous games.
The player will set the initial objective and all other
command procedures will
be affected through expenditure of operation points.
Those who are ready to
take on opponents via
modem in a more abstract
conflict will eagerly await
EA's Sport of War. With
millions of maps, symmetrical for both sides, the
game should have a long
shelf-life. Playing pieces,
somewhat reminiscent of
Cytron Masters include spies, grunts
(tanks), boomers (artillery), and riders
(cavalry) with which players attempt to invade their opponent's portion of the
map and kill the communications center. Cosmi will build on its "computercomputer simulation" approach with
Navcom 6, a defense of
- the Persian Gulf simulated
by Paul Norman. Datasoft
recently released Tobruk, a
hybrid strategy/first person
game on North Africa, but
promises to offer a more
interesting concept in
Global Commander The
latter game will make the
player into an omniscient
diplomat/tactician who
must use his communications network, S.D.I.
defense, "killer" satellites,
standing army, and spy organization to forge
worldwide peace. Another
promising game with interesting overtones for war" gamers will come from
Cinemaware. Imagine a map of Japan
akin to the strategic map in Defender of
the Crown. That will be the centerpiece
of this "Shogun era" game of feudal conquest and diplomacy.

Innovation: Far From
The Madden Crowd
Sports simulations also figure
prominently in the WCES news.

Electronic Arts unveiled John Madden
Football and announced the next title in
the Sports Legends Series as Michael
Jordan Basketball. The football game is
impressive on the 64K Apple with joystick. The game is sophisticated enough
that it requires three manuals and allows
players to build their own playbook disk
with up to 81 offensive and 81 defensive
plays for each game. The game comes
with 200 pre-built plays from Madden's
actual Raider playbook and allows
players to design their own. Every player
on the field is rated from 0-9 in a number of categories (e. g. fumble
avoidance, tackle breaking, quickness,
blocking for pass or run, speed,
durability, etc.) and the match-ups are
exceedingly important. From the original
seven-on-seven scrimmage concept, this
game has evolved into the most sophisticated football product, yet. In addition to
The Games—Winter Edition (with
slalom adorned with camera angles,
figure skating and its constructability in
creating routines, luge on four different
tracks, speed skating with strategy
decisions, etc.), Epyx is collaborating
with The Sporting News in creating a
new baseball game. It is an arcademodified statistics game, but the designers have assured both The Sporting
News and CGW that the arcade elements could only change a batting
average by 30 or 40 points (enough to
be significant, but not enough to ruin a
team).

Turbulence: Where Are We Going?

A

fter a long and impressive show, we
were only too glad to board our
flight home (even if it was crowded). We
were not even nervous when a pilot with
a different airline's employee identification badge entered the cockpit. After all,
courtesy among airlines often allows
pilots to "deadhead" back to their home
base. We did get nervous when the pilot
came on the speaker and said, "We are
travelling at 23,000 feet, the temperature is 62 degrees, and in approximately
17 minutes, we will be landing
in.(pause),uh (pause), uh (pause), Ontario!" We leaned back in our seats,
prayed that he meant California rather
than Canada, and smugly realized that
we had a better handle on where our industry was going than he appeared in
that moment to have on his destination.

sophisticated graphics as the key to
the

VOICES OF THE
FUTURE
Science fiction pundits from A-Z predict
the future of computer games
by Charles Ardai

I

t hasn't been long since Pac-Man
started making headlines, yet if
one reckons by milestone developments, computer games have a
lengthy and intricate history.
Though born less than two decades
ago, computer gaming has endured
more rapid and thorough change
than any other entertainment field.
In addition to new tastes and technologies, we constantly see new approaches to the display of information on the game screen and to the
incorporation of elaborate sound
and graphics into what was once a
rather spartan medium. It was only a
question of time before someone
tried to mimic the conventions of
film in software; today, examples
such as Karateka and the
Cinemaware line break new
ground in finding a unique voice for
the medium.

is equally natural not to want to accept the fact that no one can make
projections with any but the most
tangential accuracy. As a result,
projections are made by the score,
fancifully and seriously, and if they
are not all to come to pass, they are
at least interesting to contemplate.
Science fiction writers have long
considered the question and some

Of course, computer games are not
interactive movies any more than
movies are filmed plays, and it is likely that it will take about as long for
software to separate itself from what
has come before as it did for directors to stop turning their cameras
on at the footlights and sitting back
for two hours. The change will
come, however, the evolution has already begun—and when it does,
computer games will be as radically
different from what we currently
enjoy as Starflight is from Space Invaders. Here, too, there is a parallel
to the evolution of cinema. "If you
had shown a modern movie to
someone a few decades ago," says
Douglas (The Hitchhiker's Guide to
the Galaxy) Adams, "he would have
been completely bewildered as to
what was going on."

What does the future hold for computer entertainment? Though the
outspoken Harlan Ellison (The
Glass Teat, Approaching Oblivion,
Dangerous Visions) says that "Computer entertainment is an
oxymoron," other science fiction
writers have more positive projections. Games will be increasingly
"multimedia," says Adams. "Sound
will become an important component, I would almost think more
important than graphics [as an] imagination stimulus."

It is only natural to be curious about
the coming generations of games. It

Alan Dean (Spellsinger, Shadowkeep) Foster disagrees. He sees

of the best were quite outspoken
when I contacted them.

entertainment of the future. "One of
the great advantages you have with
computer animation," says Foster,
"comes when you achieve a
semblance of reality, because you
can do all sorts of things a camera
can't. Imagine seeing Bugs Bunny
in 3-D! With computer controlled,
three-dimensional animated characters, you could put real people into
[animated scenes], like the sequence from The Twilight Zone,
where the bad kid sends the girl into
the cartoon world. One of these
days you'll be able to buy something
like an expanded version of a flight
simulator, for the home, and you'll
get your little piece of software and
slam it into the simulator, and you'll
be on Trichon IV or 20,000 Leagues
Under the Sea with Captain Nemo,
or wherever you want. The entire environment will be simulated for you:
sight, sound, smell and everything
else."
Isaac Asimov, creator of the
"Three Laws of Robotics" and the
Foundation series, isn't certain he
likes the idea of artificial realities. "It
may not be a possibility," he says,
"[and] I don't approve . . . . We already do that in a small way. People
get drunk so that they can live in a
world which is a little different from
what they must face when they're
sober . . . Anything which offers you
a more exciting life, but then forces
you to return to your own, is going
to leave you more dissatisfied than
before."
Steven (Jhreg) Brust sides with Dr.
Asimov, but for different reasons: "I
would venture to guess that 95+%
of our fantasies we would not care
to live. I've done it when I've been
on trips, wandering around an airport with my briefcase and my threepiece suit, bored out of my skull,
and I pretend I'm a spy. I wouldn't
want to be a spy; I can't think of anything more boring. And when it isn't
boring, it scares the [bleep] out of
you. You simulate reality until you
have someone shooting at you and
you can smell the smoke, and hear
the bullet go by your ear, and at that
point it becomes too real."
For better or worse, however, simulated realities may well be the direction in which we're headed. Douglas
Adams suggests that for artificial environments to be effective, "we'll
have to wait for the advent of usable
artificial intelligence, whereby the
machine is really able to understand

what you intend and what you
mean."
Roger (Nine Princes In Amber)
Zelazny sees the necessary technol

you got back on the same ride,
something different happened."
Foster also predicts that future
movies will use more computer
animated characters. "To completely
simulate an artificial environment
the people in Hollywood want to do
it for real."

fect on the game, and therefore you
must simulate each fan. What did he
have for breakfast? Maybe that guy
in the third row has an upset
stomach, so he isn't shouting today."

Asimov thinks that robots may be
the way to go instead. "It may be
that we will be using real robots as
comedians in movies. Think of the
pratfalls they could take!"
"With all due respect to Isaac,"
Foster replies, "he's prejudiced on
behalf of his robots. With computer
animation you have no expense in
the sense of building anything."
As usual, however, Asimov has the
last word: "A robot in a movie might
not be as funny as a human being,
but he'd be funnier than a cartoon
character."

ogy on the horizon. " . . . an upcoming generation of devices of the CAP
scan variety (Computerized
Automated Psychophysiological) will
hit it big within the next decade," he
says, "combining gaming with computerized electroencephalography
and biofeedback, both for pleasure
and educational purposes."

There are still other possibilities. Of
interactive fiction, Brust says, "Adventure games can be a lot of fun
until you 'get it'; then you've 'got it."
Traditional fiction, however, is
another story. "You'd carry around
Jerry (Lucifer's Hammer) Pournelle sees this expansion moving
towards controlling complex battle
scenarios. "It seems to me," he says,
"that some clever person is going to
come up with a way of using the
computer to make some sort of
monster wargame."

The result? What Harry (The Stainless Steel Rat) Harrison calls the
'living wall.' "In the home, it's incredible to see! You're right in the
screen there . . . And they'll tie that
in with molecular memories and
everything will get smaller and
smaller . . . You'll never leave your
[bleep] house! [You'll have] interactive games played by a number of
people across the country, like Dungeons & Dragons, maybe with
graphics from videodisc. The
hardware isn't there yet, but it will
be. And all these things will get
cheaper."
There is also no doubt but that computer entertainment will branch out
into other fields as well. "I can see
all kinds of possibilities for interaction," says Foster. "At Disneyland,
for instance. We're all so used to
going on pre-programmed rides:
you go on a ride, it starts and it
ends, you get back on it and it does
the same thing again. . . [now] there
could be a system that would
provide variable rides, so that when

Of today's software he says, "most
of the games for home machines
are not very good; the pictures
aren't good enough that you feel
very involved. The ones that interest
me are the ones in which you'd really be looking at a computer screen.
In a real spaceship, you wouldn't
look out the window; you'd only be
looking at a computer. Of course,"
he admits, "I don t know how big the
market for that would be."

what looks like an Etch-A-Sketch . .
. and you'd just plug in wherever
you are—or maybe you don't even
plug in, maybe it would be over the
airwaves—and there you'd have access [to a library]."
Brust also sees simulations expanding in terms of their scope. "A good
two-user football program . . . In
order to do it right, we have to simulate life with football as the central
node. After all, the fans have an ef-

Foster is convinced that simulating
computer screens wouldn't work.
"The future for computer entertainment lies, as it always has, in entertainment, in new and startling
things."
Hold on a minute! I can see you
smirking out there. On-line libraries?
Fully simulated realities? Thoughtcontrolled games? Are these guys
for real? "One of my favorite
quotes," says Alan Dean Foster, "I
think it was in 1896, the Director of
the Smithsonian Institute insisted
that powered flight was impossible."

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

section on scenarios even offers more than one variant
for each scenario. Frankly, SSG has put together an outstanding rulebook.

Halls of Montezuma
Apple II, C-64/128
1-2
$40.00
Roger Keating
Ian Trout
StraegicudsGop,In.
Walnut Creek, CA

It

was a glorious moment in a proud tradition. On
February 23, 1945, the fifth
day of the invasion of Iwo
Jima, a contingent of United
States Marines from the 28/5th
Regiment raised the "Stars and
Stripes" over Mount Suribachi
in the face of heavy enemy fire.
It is an image oft sculpted,
etched, painted, and recreated.
Strategic Studies Group's
Halls of Montezuma (HOM)
does not allow players to view
the actual flag-raising, but the
feeling of accomplishment is
an ample reward when the final
Japanese unit is driven from
the southern portion of the island and the Fifth Regiment
can advance northward along
the western coast to new objectives.

HOM offers a unique opportunity to study the contribuPUBLISHER:
tions of the United States Marine Corps experientially. Personally, this reviewer has always felt slightly put off by the
Marine Corps' image of super soldier and elite fighting
unit a la John Wayne. Fighting
for a toe-hold on the beaches,
clearing out enough territory to
have a safe place for reserves,
trudging across the volcanic
sand between Iwo Jima's two
airfields, forcing the Japanese
back into Shuri Castle on
Okinawa, clearing the city center of Seoul following the invasion of the Inchon Peninsula,
or neutralizing a TET offensive
in Hue can certainly change
one's perspective. One finds it
difficult to access Menu 5 (Unit
Status) and examine those
casualty reports without feeling
that the Marines earned their
vaunted reputation at an extremely high price. Further, this
writer had never really thought
about the role of the Marines
during World War I until playing the Belleau Wood scenario.
Not only was this action unfamiliar to the reviewer (hence,
a history lesson), but it also offered an extremely rare gaming
experience—a playable and
balanced World War I simulation.

A PROUD
TRADITION

Tell It to the Marines

H

OM is an impressive

product. It builds upon its
sister games (Battlefront and
Battles in Normandy) with
refinements like: a) a brittleness
rating, b) units capable of combat during night turns, c)
longer scenarios (up to 99
turns), d) special minefield and
Except for the Mexico City
fortification rules, e) divisional
scenario (from whence the
objectives, f) a Warpaint
Marines' Hymn lyric "From the
graphics editor that allows
halls of Montezuma" hails), the
players to doctor the graphics
scenarios are well-written, wellof older scenarios, and more.
balanced, challenging, and
of
Yet, the game remains fully
suitable for the modified Batcompatible with scenarios from
tlefront system employed in the
by Johnny L. Wilson
the earlier games. Further, the
game. Note, however, that the
production quality of the
documentation itself points out
manual and the maps is, as usual, outstanding. The
the modifications to the historical circumstances necesdocumentation walks the player through the Mexico City
sary to have the Mexico City scenario fit into the system.
scenario step-by-step. Then, because the later scenarios
Even this scenario is worth playing, if one is willing to batare more complicated, it offers menu-by-menu explanatle for three simulated days in order to win a battle which
tions of each possible action.
only took one day to complete in history.

Strategic Studies Group's
"Halls Montezuma"

Another important feature of the manual offers a three
page discussion of tactical considerations. Then, it continues with a historical synopsis of each scenario and
specific suggestions for each side in each scenario
(Players who ignore these do so at their own peril). The

Lowering the Red Flags
Alert readers may have noticed mixed signals with
regard to SSG games in earlier CGW editorial

coverage. The present writer would like to offer some additional perceptions for the ongoing discussion.
First of all, the Al which controls the subordinate commanders has been disparaged. Evan Brooks complained
about the lost battalion syndrome and Bob Proctor suggested that the subordinate commanders only used their
initiative against the player, as it were. This reviewer
resonates with both predecessors. It
does seem like the Al does not maximize attacks on enemy units. It is
frustrating to order a regiment to commit to an all-out attack against an
enemy force and discover that only
two battalions out of three closed into
combat range.
Nevertheless, it is part of the reality
being simulated that it is impossible to
have a fully synchronized attack.
Some units will be pinned down by
defensive fire, others will have to cross
more difficult terrain than their allied
units, some will be held up by logistics
problems, and others will
misunderstand or be slow to execute
the orders. Further, it is disconcerting
to order a battalion to take an objective, follow up successful execution of that order with an
order to defend the objective, and watch that battalion
pull out of (or off) the objective a couple of turns later at
the first hint of enemy resistance. Why should a unit give
up a city or mountain location which adds to its ability to
defend itself in order to retreat back to a less defensible
position? Fortunately, this problem did not occur in Russia, an earlier SSG game with a modified implementation
of the system, because units could be ordered to hold
their positions. The difficulty remains in HOM, however.
Second, one must confess that the bulk of frustration
with the handling of the subordinate commanders is
probably a result of previous experiences with games
where the player controls every decision point in the game
(i.e. choosing the targets for every unit, moving every unit
to the exact point desired, etc.). The Battlefront system
used in HOM never pretends to be that kind of gaming experience. The player's role is to be the Corps Commander
(with all its attendant limitations) and not the "god of the
battlefield." As the manual notes, "From your lofty height
in the chain of command, you have little direct control
over the location of individual battalions." (p. 5). Therefore, the key to winning the game depends on a sound
strategic gameplan and optimal resource management instead of tactical movement and finesse. As Corps Commander, one must be more concerned about fatigue,
casualty levels (and their attendant effect upon morale),
and supply state than one can be about considerations
like the best route to an objective or use of covering terrain. This is certainly a more realistic perspective than the
traditional approach.

In addition, HOM is unforgivingly realistic in its approach
to repeated assaults on the same objective without a
breakthrough. Most boardgames and some computer wargames allow the player to keep ordering attacks on a critical position turn after turn or phase after phase until a significant result occurs. HOM's simulation of this situation
takes into consideration the fact that every attempted
breakthrough takes its toll in fatigue,
supply, and morale, even if combat losses seem insignificant. HOM is more
realistic than others in requiring one to
rotate a stalemated unit out of contact
and a fresh unit into the engagement if
one is to achieve a breakthrough in
such a situation.
Third, previous experiences with other
systems may cause one to be
frustrated with SSG's ubiquitous "No
losses" combat result when it appears
on both sides of an engagement. It is
possible to go through a full turn
without having significant losses on
either side of a combat action. This is
irritating to those who are used to combat results where something happens
. in every engagement. Nevertheless,
logic dictates that one must concede this "no-result" result
to be a frequent combat resolution, especially in jungle,
woods, or broken terrain.
A Game with Seoul

B eyond

the fact that the "battle history" approach offers a broader scope than most products (one
scenario each from the Mexican War, World War I, and
Vietnam, two scenarios from the Korean Conflict, and
three scenarios from the Pacific Theatre of World War II
are offered), the scenarios also offer a variety of command
problems. Mexico City, Iwo Jima, both Okinawa scenarios,
and both Korean scenarios are Allied advances and Axis
defenses. Belleau Wood forces the Allied player to defend
initially, then change into offensive mode after the Marines
reinforce. Hue allows the NVA to create havoc and cause
maximum casualties rather than hold objectives as the
Marines and their ARVN allies seek to neutralize assigned
locations. In addition, Iwo Jima is distinctive because of
the value of its defensive fortifications and hence, all terrain is handled by the computer as more resistant to attack. Both this scenario and the Shuri line scenario for
Okinawa involve the use of suicide defenses. Many
Japanese units in these scenarios have zero movement
points to simulate this last ditch defense. Also, from Iwo
Jima onward, the use of the new minefield and fortification rules makes a big difference. Moving onto either type
of hex puts an immediate halt to movement. Further, the
minefield must be cleared before the unit can move on.
(Continued on page 46)

SNEAK PREVIEW:

WASTELAND
In January of 1987, Wasteland was described as a
potential Mad Max type adventure game to be written by Michael Stackpole (author of the Mercenaries,
Spies and Private Eyes roleplaying system and
Mayfair Games' sourcebook on Batman for their DC
Heroes roleplaying game) and programmed by the
CRPG experts at Interplay Productions. As this article is being written, Wasteland has just passed its first
week in "Quality Assurance" at Electronic
Arts with no major
problems encountered.
This should mean [Ed.:
Anyone who has observed
this industry very long
knows why we put a
"weasel word" in this sentence!] that the game is on

the shelves by the time this
preview hits the stands.
Nevertheless, the game is certainly superior to the
original concept. Instead of being a "Mad Max" role
playing game presented on the computer, this postholocaust game has a unique plotline all its own.
Players want to find out what the "Servants of the
Mushroom Cloud" are up
to, among other matters. In
fact, the game contains
250K of text to present this
plotline. However, at least
100K of the text which is
vital for successfully completing the adventure is "offline" in a book which
comes with the game and
serves as a non-technological copy protection. The
story itself is so huge that there are many possibilities
which the player may not find, while still able to win
the game. The story-line is non-linear and there are always, at least, two ways to get around a problem.
Interplay insists that the game should be rated PG-13
because of the personalized violence in the adventure,
as well as the sexual hints. We must agree that there is
an undeniable visceral response when the description
window describes someone as being turned into
"blood sausage," reduced to a "fine red mist," or pulverized into "unrecognizable gore." However, it seems
to fit the model of a post-holocaust society gone rabid
with barbarism.

At first glance, the game looks like the Bard's Tale
products (which should be no surprise since both
produced are designed by Interplay). There is an
animated "window" for viewing in the upper left hand
corner of the screen and a description "window" on
the right. The lower portion of the screen is devoted to
a quick reference sheet on the adventuring party itself.
like its sister products, the game boasts crisp graphics
and limited, but effective, animation. The graphics "window" has over seventy different pictures.
Yet, the game is improved over its sister products. The
game system in Wasteland is dynamic. Once something on the map is changed, it is changed. Further,
an old role-playing concept enters into the picture
when players can "hire" non-player characters to fill
out the party. Of course, they do not always do what
they are ordered. Also, a new feature enables players
to "Disband Party" into four different active parties.
This option enables ranged combat to occur and helps
in the solution of some puzzles, but also means that
each party can have up to four encounters at a time.
Finally, this game features only one "Save Game" instead of the ability to have multiple saves.

Aha!

I knew it! You look a little bewildered. Scorpion's Mail? You
turn back to the front cover . . . yep,
this is Computer Gaming World. So,
how did you get into the little back
room of adventuredom's most
famous tavern? Well, there's no
need to be nervous! By now,
you probably know that CGW
has gone monthly and Computer Game Forum, alas, has
gone away. However, there was
such a positive response to the
Mail column, we decided to put
in two or three of them a year,
to keep you all happy. So,
every once in awhile, you may
find a Mail along with the Tale
(heh), or a Mail instead of a
Tale, or. . . who knows? (we
like to keep you guessing!
Remember: no one expects. .
.The Span. . . err, The
Scorpion's Mail! grin).

was reduced from 10,000 gold
pieces to a mere 2,500. Money was
originally very hard to come by (as
was Mron). It was actually possible
to go through the whole dungeon

Having been a beta-tester of the
game and one of the few who have
made it through to all the endings,
I've given my promise to Roe and
Robert not to hand out answers to
ANYONE on any of the puzzles.
Hints, yes. Gentle nudges in
the right direction, yes.
Answers, no. So please, don't
ask for them.

Scorpion's Mail

Return of Werdna (a toothsome truffle of not-so-trifling
hints): Not surprisingly, letters
on this game have been showing up recently. Can't imagine
why (hehe). Most people seem
to have little trouble (or so they
think), until they get up to the
ziggurat (or pyramid) level. A
number of them keep falling
off. Tch! You shouldn't be out
there trying to climb the thing;
you'll only break your neck. Far
better to do it from the inside.
Much easier on the old bones.
Oh, about that mystery area
that some of you can't get into:
remember, not everything you
may need on a level will be
found on that level, so if you
can't solve a puzzle, keep going.
Also, remember to check your inventory from time to time, just in case,
and don't be afraid to experiment.
Some of you have also noted that
Mron's clues are not as expensive as
mentioned in the article (Nov. '87),
and that the disk access is not as
bad. This is true. Between the time
the beta test ended (September) and
the article appeared (November), a
few tweaks were made to the game.
None of the puzzles were changed,
but the price of a hint from Mron

Beyond Zork (an aperitif of advice for amulet-adorned adventurers): Plenty of mail is coming
in on this game, too, and many
seem to be stuck in the same
places. Take the cellar, for instance. Who'd have thought it
would be so difficult to get out
of a cellar? There are a number
of ways to leave, but the best is
the one connected with the
amulet. That item is worth
some serious attention. The
monkey-grinder has also been
responsible for a few gray hairs.
It is (with great determination,
and even greater luck) occasionally possible to kill him,
but why go through all that trial
and effort (and likely death),
when there's a much easier
way? Be generous, and remember his limitations. Finally, a
word for all you onion pushers
out there. No, you really can't
get the onion into the jungle
and it wouldn't help you if you
could.

and exit with half the clues or legs
(even with the charge card). So, the
price was dropped and Mron's appearances were made more frequent
Robert (Woodhead, of course) also
did some nice work in cleaning up
the access problem. On a 128K
machine, the game will use the extra
memory to cache frequently-used
routines. This has made for a
dramatic reduction in disk access
during combat, and improves play
greatly.
One more thing about Werdna:

Bard's Tale I (a piquant port
of prudent counsel for drymouthed bards): Many tales of
woe have come from players
who are having a hard time in
Mangar's Tower, level three. They
say they answer the magic mouth,
but still, no stairs appear leading upward. Well, that's because the stairs
appear somewhere else on the level
and they have to go find them
(remember to look after answering,
not before!). Adventurers who have
the SCSI spell on should not take
too long to locate them.
Ultima IV (the ultimate recipe for
mandrake root souffle and other
salubrious visions): A number of
people have made it all the way

through the Abyss, the Codex Door,
and the first eleven questions, only
to find themselves stopped cold by
the last one. Do you remember
those visions in the shrines? They
were shown to you for a purpose. I
hope you made note of them all, because you only see them when you
achieve avatarhood in a virtue (was
that a faraway scream I just heard?).
Mandrake searchers: you must look
not only in the right place, but also
at the right time. Keep an eye on
those moons.
Might and Magic (a delectable
drumstick of decipherment): The
dungeon with the spinning polygons
seems to have a few people
stumped. It's actually not all that
hard. This is a magic square you're
dealing with, and any good math
book can tell you all you need to
know about them.
Lurking Horror (a warning about
innutritious and uncongenial

seafood): For those who have been
frustrated in their attempts to do anything with the Alchemy lab computer, there is nothing to be done.
There is no disk to find and no way
to log in to the system. This is just a
little red herring in the game.
Mea Culpa Dep't: There were two
errors in my column on 2400 AD
(Feb '88), which Origin Systems
was kind enough to point out to me.
First, I confused Joe's Bar with
Johnnie's Corner. Joe's is only
ground level; Johnnie's has a
second floor (so if you've been
wondering how to get to the second
floor of Joe's, you can stop trying:
there ain't none). The second has to
do with the transporters. I originally
wrote that there was no way beyond
trial and error to figure out the destination codes, but this turns out to
be incorrect. If you open the door to
a transporter, stand on the open
door spot, and then issue the read
command, you'll get the ID number

of that transporter (I, on the other
hand, kept trying to read the closed
doors, which have nothing on them,
after which I'd open them and walk
right into the transporter, which only
displays the serial number. . . SIGH).
That's about it for this glimpse into
the mailbag. In the meantime, if you
need help with an adventure game,
you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG,
under the Groups and Clubs menu.
On GEnie: visit the Games
Roundtable (type: Scorpia to get
there). On The Source: send SMail
to ST1030. By US Mail (remember
to enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

TITLE:
# PLAYERS:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Skyfox II
Solitaire
C-64
$29.95
Jeff Tunnel!
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

available in Skyfox 11: The Cygnus
Conflict. They range from "simple"
escort missions to "more difficult" allout war scenarios. Players also have
the option of choosing a level of
play from Cadet to Ace-of-the-Base.
The level really only determines

T he

Skyfox II warp fighter's
shields were failing fast. The
warpwarrior reached up
and wiped tiny beads of
sweat from his brow.
Suddenly, there was an
influx of enemy fire. All
screens were clear.
Where was the fire coming from? Heads up display suggested a possible target to the left.
Spinning the fighter
madly to the left, the
warpwarrior centered a
Xenomorph fighter in
his sights. The enemy
fighter burst into a ball
of flame as the Skyfox
ll's photon pulse bomb
impacted it.

MIND OVER
ANTI-MATTER

The package to this
game reads, "The fox is
back . . . at Warp
Speed!" In this sequel to
the successful Skyfox,
battle is waged in outer
space as opposed to
the skies of a colonized
planet in the earlier
release.
Warp fighters are
equipped with three
major weapons: nuclear
disrupters, photon pulse
bombs, and mines. Disruptors are analogous
to lasers and offer vast
amounts of firepower.
Photon pulse bombs are powerful
energy torpedoes used to destroy
enemy starbases, fighters, and
asteroids. These are limited and the
number available changes in accordance with the individual mission and
its requirements. Anti-matter mines
are dropped from the rear of the
fighter and timed to explode. They
also explode upon contact with an
enemy vessel.
There are ten different missions

of "wormholes." These by-products
of black holes are located in various
places throughout the system and
allow the player to quickly navigate
between different points. The
"wormholes" allow players to cross
the system in mere seconds,
. however, Xenomorphs
- frequently lurk near the
egress points of these
"wormholes" in order to
ambush unsuspecting
warpwarriors.

by Yung Min Choi
speed and rate of fire of enemy vessels.
The first matter to be dealt with is
navigation. The easiest method of
navigation is by automatic pilot.
Note, however, that the automatic
pilot will not guide the ship through
the asteroid belt. Players will have to
pilot their ships manually in order to
keep from being battered to bits.
Perhaps, the most efficient travel in
the Cygnus star system is by means

Once the player
reaches the battle zone,
he will find himself
using a Heads-Up-Display targeting system
(HUD). This system
automatically locks onto
the nearest ship or starbase within medium
range. The designated
object will flash on the
scan monitor. As long
as the target is in
medium range, HUD
remains locked on and
indicates with an arrow
the direction in which
the warp fighter needs
to turn in order to bring
the target within
weapon range. Unfortunately, the HUD is
usually one of the first
of the warp fighter's systems to be damaged in
battle situations. Observant players will find
that toggling fore and
aft views on their shipboard screen (by
depressing Fl) will assist targeting until
repairs can be made.

Repairs are made by reducing
speed to 1,000 kilometers per
second and approaching starbases
(The keyboard's numerals [1-9] act
as speed controls with each number
representing 1,000 kilometers per
second). One must type in the docking command. Then, the ship's onboard computer will show and overview the map of the galaxy with a
(Continued on page 55)

TITLE:

Breach

Once More Into
The "Breach"
"A Playtester's View of
Breach" appeared in the
Winter 1987 issue of Computer Game Forum. Now we
give you, complete and uncensored, the review!

Scenarios and
Construction

The

game comes with seven
scenarios of varying difficulty. Like its adventure game
cousins, Breach shares the
shortcoming that once the game
(or in this case, scenario) has
been successfully completed and
all of the terrain, traps, and
treasures discovered, the enjoyment of playing is diminished.

S

Sometime in the distant future, squads of heroic
marines venture forth to brave
the dangers of a brutal universe.
From fending off man-eating
beasts on some forsaken jungle
world to blasting the awesome
battle robots of some alien installation, the threats and excitement never end. Their goal? To
salvage, save, search and
destroy. The cost? Sometimes,
their very lives. Semper Fi,
buddy!

Omnitrend's latest offering to
the computer gaming community represents a brilliant marriage of two classic game genres: wargame and adventure
game. It has a similarity to SSI's
Computer Ambush, but adds
the exploration of territory and
discovery of treasures and traps
so common to the sword and
sorcery adventure games. There
is a strong role-playing flavor
due not only to the individualized characteristics of the
marines in your squad, but also
due to the fact that your squad
leader must be developed from
relative weakness to relative strength by
his active participation in a series of
scenarios.
The Sound and the Fury
(Mechanics)

T he

sound and graphics of the game
are as superb as we have come to
expect from the 68000 machines. On
the ST and Amiga, there is a huge burst
of red when a grenade explodes. Afterwards, only rubble is left. When a
marine fires his gun, the brilliant, blue
laser beam travels out and splashes
against the target. If it destroys its victim,
the target explodes in a burst of blue. In
addition, the game is fast-paced due to
the point-and-click simplicity of the
mouse-driven mechanics.

"wideview" display. This replaces
the battlefield display and simply
represents an area 21 x 21
squares around the current
marine rather than the standard
9 x 9. However, only areas that
have been previously explored
will show up on wideview.

Omnitrend's Sci-Fi
Game Explored
by Joseph S. McMaster

The screen itself is divided into three
major parts. The largest portion of the
screen is devoted to the battlefield display. This is centered on the player's currently active soldier, who stands on the
central square of the nine by nine
square of the display. To the right of the
battlefield display is the status display,
showing the current vital statistics for
the active marine (how tired he is, how
healthy, how much ammo remains,
etc.). Below these two displays is the
icon display. One simply points and
clicks in order to perform various tasks
such as picking up/dropping items,
using items, opening doors, using
elevators, and firing one's gun.
There are also a few other display
types that can be activated. For example, any marine can call up a

On the other hand, the game
includes a powerful construction
program for creating new
scenarios or modifying old ones.
This does not alleviate the
problem of "knowing where
everything is," but does allow
you to make scenarios so tough
that it does not matter if you
know where everything is! Ideally,
however, one should have a
friend with the same computer
so that you can create scenarios
for each other. Further, Omnitrend promises to release future scenario disks. The first one,
The Serayachi Campaign, is already in the stores.

The Good

T he

several classes of
marines are described by
means of Movement point allowance per turn (MV), Gun power (GP),
Suit armor protection (SP), and Encumbrance (EN). MV is given as a
range, because marines can be
designed to have greater or lessor
amounts. Gun power and suit armor
protection are given as percentages.
Thus, if a soldier with a gun power of
55% fires and hits an enemy with a suit
protection of 30%, the victim's health
will drop from 100% to 75% (55 - 30 =
25% loss). Encumbrance measures carry
ing power. Since each item "weighs" a
given amount in terms of EN (e.g. a
Gravbelt weighs 6 EN and a Rocket
Launcher weighs 7 EN). As a soldier is
loaded down with EN, he will have less
MV available.
Finally, individual soldiers are rated by
percentage for firing Accuracy, Detect-

ing ability (ability to successfully operate
a Detector), and Cracking ability (ability
to successfully operate a Crack unit).
Since each of these values may vary
from 0-100% and are not class-dependent, I have not given their values.
Marauders (MA): MV [29-44], GP
[55%], SP [30%], EN [15]. Marauders
form the bulk of any squad. With
generally high-range Accuracies (usually
50%-85%), they are the main
fighters and should be used
as such. On the minus side,
they have low MVs and are
usually poor at Detecting and
Cracking.
Scouts (SC): MV [36-66],
GP [55%], SP [15%], EN [10].
There are several differences
between Mks and SCs. SCs
are much more mobile and
should be employed as their
name implies. This is also true
because spotted enemy units
will be marked on the SC's
wideview display. SCs also
make excellent couriers. In
Scenarios which take place on
a large map (such as the
Depot Scenario), SCs can be
used to ferry medical kits,
grenades, ammo cartridges, or
whatever back and forth to
wherever they are needed.
Finally, SCs usually have the
highest Detecting values and
should be used to run a Detector (assuming you have one). This
device, when successfully operated,
reveals a 17 x 17 area, centered on the
operating marine, and shows the locations of all enemy units within that area.
The Detector will also reveal enemy locations on all additional territory that has
been explored by your marines.
Weaknesses? SCs are certainly not the
best fighters. They generally have only
mediocre Accuracies (35% to 55%). The
real killer, however, is their poor SP
rating. They are quick kills, so be careful
with them.
Psionic Talents (PT): MV [36-54], GP
[0%], SP [15%], EN [5]. Except for their
ample MV, PTs appear to be rather ugly
ducklings. Like SCs, they share
mediocre Accuracies and low SP. Their
guns do not do any damage (except kill
an opponent who is already extremely injured). To top it off, their EN value is so
low that they are even poor prospects as
couriers. Nevertheless, the PT is the
most valuable team member other than
the Squad Leader. The PTs talent is the
ability to issue stun attacks and render
an enemy unit immobile for the next
computer turn. Teamed with a Marauder

with high Accuracy, they can make short
work of an entire group of enemies.
This is particularly true in enclosed areas
where the PT can stun an enemy in a
doorway and block any other enemies in
the same room. The stun attack costs
10 movement points, so only two or
three per turn are possible.
Also, there is a discrepancy in the
manual involving PTs and their stun at-

tacks. The instructions state that a PT's
success rate in making stun attacks will
be the same as his gun Accuracy.
However, this reviewer became suspicious after watching a 55% Accuracy PT
make nothing but successful attempts
over a long period. After entering the
game editor and lowering his Accuracy
to 0%, he continued to meet with success. It turns out that the stun attack
success rate is actually keyed to the PT's
current Vitality (Vitality Per Cent = Stun
Success Per Cent).
Also, the rules never mention that a PT
loses the remainder of his MV upon a
failed stun attempt. This can be fatal if
the player is ever so foolish as to send a
PT out on his own.
Infiltrators (IF); MV [36-44], GP [45%],
SP [15%], EN [10]. The statistics
demonstrate that the IF is not intended
to be a fighter. His strength is his
generally high rating for using Crack
Units, those tools placed adjacent to an
enemy computer or terminal which display the entire floor plan of the level the
squad is on (if operated successfully).
This operation is even more useful in
conjunction with a Detector. After the

enemy computer has been cracked, a
Detector will reveal the location of every
enemy unit on that floor plan. Be
cautious, however. The Crack Unit
reveals only interior areas and not exterior terrain (grass, dirt, etc.). Likewise,
enemy units in these unexplored, outside areas will not be exposed upon the
subsequent use of the Detector.
Squad Leader (SL): MV 132-?1, GP
[75%], SP [40%], EN [25].
The SL's values allow him
to fulfill a variety of roles. Although his starting Accuracy
is a paltry 20%, this will be
increased one per cent for
each kill the SL makes in a
successful mission. As his
Accuracy increases, the SL
becomes a force to be reckoned with. With a gun that
packs a wallop and suit
armor second to none, the
SL can become a real juggernaut.
The SL's Detecting and
Cracking skills may also be
honed. If you are playing a
scenario where those
devices are available, wait
until the main Detecting
and/or Cracking marines
have done their work. Then,
give the device to the SL
and allow him to spend
some time working with it.
Each successful use raises
the SL's rating in that skill by 5% (up
to an apparent maximum of 25%).
Again, however, your squad must
win in the scenario for these improvements to go into effect.
Therefore, until the SL develops, one
must use him with care. Before development, the SL often fills the role of squad
pack horse because of the high EN
rating. Remember, though, enemies
tend to attack those marines who are
carrying the most.
Remember, it is the long-term goal of
the game to improve the SL. Welldeveloped SLs receive advanced training
at special STAR training schools. It is
only with such training that an SL may
attempt a STAR level scenario.

The Bag (Tools and Other Items)

E ach

scenario provides the player's
squad with some combination of
items to aid them in reaching the objective. Additional equipment can also be
pilfered from enemy stores. The uses of
most objects are obvious from their
names. GravBelts allow one to fly over

impassable terrain. MediKits restore
Health and Stimulants restore Vitality.
Grenades, Rockets, and Demo Charges
are three varieties of explosives. Ammo
Clips, Launchers, Shields, Crack Units,
and Detectors round out the potential inventory.

The Deadly

T

he villains in Breach range from the
merely annoying to the truly deadly.

Beasts: MV [36-44], GP [45%], SP
[15%], EN [0]. Although beasts have a
GP rating, they do not use guns. This
measures the creature's biting power
and it isn't very high. A beast must be
adjacent to you to attack and they are
fairly easy kills.
Aliens: MV [36-51], GP [45%], SP
[15%], EN [0-10]. Although only slightly
more mobile than beasts and with equal
GP and SP ratings, aliens should be
treated with much more caution. First,
aliens are equipped with guns and can
attack from farther away. Second, aliens
are usually capable of issuing psionic
stuns (all enemy units can have psionic
capability activated, but only two types

usually do). Alien guns may not be
powerful, but they can kill a marine who
has been immobilized for several turns.
Third, note the alien EN figures. An
alien with an EN of 1 could be carrying
(and using) a grenade. An alien with an
EN of 10 is capable of employing a rocket launcher.
Enemy Marines: MV [32-44], GP
[55%], SP [30%], EN [0-20]. These are
just like your own marauders—and just
as bad news.
Overlords: MV [29-36], GP [55%], SP
[40%], EN [0-15]. Overlords are armed
with "vibroswords" rather than guns.
Thus, they must be adjacent to you in
order to attack. They also tend to have
high Accuracies, so they can be quite
dangerous. Worse than all of this,
however, this is the other enemy unit
that is usually psionic capable.
Battle Robots: MV [44-51], GP [75%],
SP [40%], EN [0]. Speed, power, and
heavy armor combine to create a
marine's worst nightmare. Generally
high Accuracies yield an awesomely
lethal killing machine.

Autoguns: MV [0], GP [75%], SP
[40%], EN [0]. Notice the MV rating.
Autoguns are immobile (actually, they
do have some movement points, but
they are strictly used for firing). They are
a stationary version of the battle robot,
but are much less dangerous for that
very reason. Since weapons in Breach
fire only along the vertical or horizontal,
marines need only stay on the diagonal
in order to avoid the blasts of autoguns.

Objective Gained

I

n spite of occasional problems with
the documentation, Breach must be
considered a top-notch game. Even
though the game has some roots in adventure-type games, it avoids their chief
shortcoming (i.e. low replay value) by including a scenario builder. I have heard
that Breach is achieving something of a
cult status. I believe it. [Ed: Omnitrend

has information about one local BBS
that offers over 100 Breach scenarios
for downloading and the game has
generated plenty of excitement on the
larger networks like Compuserve and
Genie.]

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World

80. Soon he met Trip Hawkins who worked for a company
with the unlikely name of Apple Computer and who convinced Joel that the newly-introduced Apple II would make
the best platform for strategy games because of its color
capability.

Any recounting of the history of computer gaming must
save a special place for Strategic Simulations Inc.
Every reader of CGW knows them as the publisher of award
winning games like Kampfgruppe, Gettysburg, Phantasie,
and Wizard's Crown, but that is not the reason. They were,
believe it or not, the very
Strategic Simulations Inc. (SSI) first company to publish a
serious wargame for a
micro-computer! This was
back in the dawn of the Information Age, February of
1980 to be exact.
Now, I fully expect that
this claim will draw fire.
Somebody will write in
(Continuing a Series begun
from Albuquerque to say
by Charles Ardai)
that they sold 3 copies of a
version of Little Big Horn
by Bob Proctor
for the Altair back in '76.
My only comment is that
SSI published Computer Bismarck with a typeset rulebook,
reference cards, plastic-coated maps, grease pencils, and
even, packaged it in a box! Now that's a serious wargame!
Before SSI, the ziploc bag
was standard packaging
and the term "computer
game" meant an inferior
version of Space Invaders
or PacMan. Finally, we
had a company that took
the subject seriously!

The Ghost of Games
Past

The

story of SSI's
beginnings is, like so
many other companies in
the personal computer industry, the story of a single
person. In 1979, Joel Billings was working a summer job at Amdahl to fill in
the time between college
and postgraduate study in
Business Administration.
He met a programmer who worked for IBM and they got to
talking about computers. Joel, who had been playing board
wargames for years, immediately saw the possibilities and
proposed a company to produce historical simulations for
home computers. Joel knew about the Radio Shack TRS-

Well, the acquaintance at IBM found other pursuits but
the urge to run his own computer game company was harder to shake. Joel posted notes on the bulletin boards
(these were the cork kind, you understand) at hobby stores
in the Santa Clara valley in an effort to find programmers
with an interest in wargames. One of those who responded
was John Lyon. He was working on a game for the Apple
about the hunt for the German battleship Bismarck in
1941. The two talked and SSI was born. The next few
months saw the completion of the program, the design and
printing of the rules and cards and the duplication of disks.
At one point, Joel slept in a bed surrounded by ceiling-high
stacks of empty Computer Bismarck boxes. By early 1980,
the game was ready.
Now Joel had a company and a product but in order to
have a future, he needed a market. In February, he sent
30,000 flyers to owners of Apple II's. Orders trickled in. In
March, the first Applefest was held in San Francisco and
thousands saw an SSI game for the first time. Orders
flooded in. More important than the money though, was the
recognition of SSI as a company that tried to "do things
right". This brought unsolicited submissions of new games
and put SSI on the path that has made it the successful
publisher of strategy computer games it is today.
These submissions came from people with the same
vision as Joel Billings. People with an interest in strategy
games, an interest in small computers and a belief that the
former were meant to be played on the latter. The list reads
like a Who's Who of computer game design: Dan Bunten
(Computer Quarterback), Roger Keating (Computer Conflict), Charles Merrow and Jack Avery (Computer Air Combat
and Computer Baseball), Chuck Kroegel and David Landrey
(The Battle of Shiloh and Tigers in the Snow). These four
designers (or design teams) plus John Lyon accounted for
18 of the 28 games that SSI published during the first three
years.

The Plethora of Games Present

W

here is SSI now, eight years later? Doing fine, of
course! Joel Billings is still CEO and still very much a
hands-on manager. He's not quite as rich as Bill Gates or
Steve Jobs but SSI had over $5 million in sales during fiscal
1987 which makes it the biggest year ever. There are 50 fulltime employees and there is plenty of room to grow in their
new Mountain View, CA offices.
In eight years, SSI has published almost 90 titles (see the
list accompanying this article). Many, in both the wargame
and fantasy categories, have won awards. The most recent
catalog (Fall '87/Winter '88) shows that 57 of these titles are
still available from SSI. There are almost three times this
many individual products since all titles (except for a few
early ones) are reprogrammed for different types of computers.
In the beginning, most of the sales were for Apple II
games. Apple II games continue to sell well but a few years
ago they were surpassed by Commodore 64 sales. More
recently, the IBM compatible market has been the fastest

(Continued on page 48)

EXPULSION
OF THE
TERRORPODS

must be accomplished from the threedimensional view. Further, the player
must use all of the input devices available on the computer (keyboard, joystick, and mouse) in order to succeed at
the game.
As mentioned earlier, the graphics are
outstanding. Each facility is very detailed
and easy to recognize. Even the enemy
are artistically depicted with care, including the jagged edges of destroyed Terrorpods. Further, every color and shade
which the ST can display is used in this
program. The graphics even depict
movement smoothly.

For Poor Eyes Only

T he

brief manual, however, is misleading at times. According to the
documentation, forward movement (the
Z axis) is limited to about 8,000 units in
the DSV. This is simply not true. It is
limited to 7,750 in the three-dimensional
viewscreen and 7,950 in the map mode.
This limitation makes it difficult to judge
what Z position a facility is on after one
reaches the 8,000 mark and this makes
it nearly impossible to finish one's partial
map. Facilities themselves extend to the
Z position of 16,000 and must be
reached via the trading drover. Nevertheless, this doesn't help with the player's
mapping.

by Hosea Battles, Jr.
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Terrorpods
Amiga, Atari ST
$29.95
Ian Hetherington
Colin Rushby
Psygnosis Ltd.
Liverpool, U.K.

Live and Let Spy
You cannot help but think that this
is the last place a patriotic citizen of
the Federation ought to be. There may
be ten colonies in the main crater of the
planet Colina, but it's been a dangerous
place to be ever since that Empire
Mother Ship arrived in orbit, occupied
the planet, and enslaved the inhabitants. Now the inhabitants are
forced to build the Empire's deadly
Terrorpods. The Federation has
chosen you to discover the secrets of
Terrorpod manufacturing. Your mission is to collect the components to
build a Terrorpod and make certain
that the Federation gets them.

Detonite Blasts Forever

In

initiating play, the player sees a
three-dimensional view of the crater
as though he were seeing it through the
viewscreen of his Defense Strategy
Vehicle. Surrounding this "viewscreen"
are status boxes for fuel, detonite, num-

The Man With A Golden
Tongue

T rading,

Lest you have entertained thoughts
that this is going to be little more
than a sophisticated scavenger hunt,
however, you suddenly realize that the
Empire has been tipped off as to your
presence. Naturally, opposition awaits
you.
This is the opening situation in Terrorpods, a game with arcade action, adventure, and strategy. Set in an outer space
environment, this is not your typical arcade or adventure game. In fact, it offers
the best graphics this reviewer has yet
viewed on an Atari ST.

Players will want to be alert to three extremely useful radio commands. They
are mentioned in the documentation,
but may not be clear. The INDE command (Installation Indestructible) makes
any building impervious to Terrorpod
fire. The DMTO command (Defensively
Mine The Object) enables players to
mine a facility so that it will explode
upon contact with the enemy. The
RACO (Re-activate Current Object) allows players to bring an object back to
full functionality, even after it has been
destroyed. All three commands are object specific and can only be used a
limited number of times.

ber of armed missiles, DSV damage,
points, scored, Terrorpod components
collected, and position (on the X axis for
horizontal position and the Z axis for
depth). There is also a map mode available, but most of the play (trading with
colonies and destroying the enemy)

however, is the primary
key to the game. Players will not
be able to survive without trading with
the ten colonies. Players must trade
for fuel, minerals, and Terrorpod components. Each of the colonies has a
Resource Center and these usually
have a good supply of everything.
Each center places different values on
the commodities and finding out what to
trade at each colony is critical to winning the game. Those who would like to
have an edge in trading should check

(Continued on page 42)

8. Selectively
mine fuel and
detonite mines.
Spoilers love to
raid these
facilities.
9. Rebuild
damaged shuttles. Shuttles
transport critical
supplies.

(Continued from page 39)
the table which accompanies this article
and note the values assigned to commodities at each colony's location.
These values do not change from game
to game. Note that it is also possible,
however, to trade directly at any of the
facilities (mines, plants, and manufacturing centers), as well as the colonies. Observe in particular that manufacturing
centers offer the best opportunity to find
Terrorpod components and that they
also have a large quantity of fuel rods
on hand at all times.

From Hosea
With Love

H

ere are some hints to help players

survive.
1. Terrorpods can only be destroyed
with a missile. Terrorpods and Spoilers
can be forced to retreat back to the
Mother Ship with phaser fire.
2. Use the INDE command on Manufac-

10. Recognize
that Spoilers
cannot be
destroyed, even
if hit by missiles.
Don't waste missiles on them.
turing Centers as many times as possible.
3. Learn the locations of all six Manufacturing Centers.
4. Complete the map.
5. Save games frequently, especially if a
component is obtained.
6. Components are completed at different times during the game. Note that
the time varies from game to game.
7. Missiles can be destroyed with phaser
fire.

Dr. Yes

This

is definitely one of the best action, strategy, and adventure games
ever marketed for the ST, a game that
will have players coming back to it time
and time again. If anyone wants to show
off the graphic capabilities of the ST,
this is the game to use. In this reviewer's
opinion, Terrorpods is a sure fire hit.

Reader Input Device #45
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. For
each game which you have played or each article which you
have read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number.

Welcome to a new CGW feature! The Computer Gaming World Hall of Fame has been
formed to honor those games that over the course of time have proven themselves to be
long term top rated games by the readers of CGW. Inductees into the CGW Hall of Fame
are chosen by the staff of CGW. Once inducted into the Hall, the game will be retired
from the current Game Ratings List. As a consumer you can be assured that any game in
the CGW Hall Of Fame is an all-time favorite.
And without further ado, here are the charter inductees into the CGW Hall of Fame.
The top rated Adventure Game in history, and the first inductee into the CGW Hall Of
Fame (Adventure Division) is Origin System's Ultima IV with a 7.80 average rating over
the course of eleven separate ratings of the game. The second inductee is Sir-Tech's
Wizardry: Proving Ground of the Mad Overload (7.69, 20 ratings). Next is Origin System's
Ultima III (7.55, 14 ratings). The Final charter inductee into the CGW Hall of Fame (Adventure Division) is Electronic Arts' Bard's Tale (7.49, 11 ratings).
The first inductee into the CGW Hall of Fame (Strategy Division) is Strategic
Simulation's Kampfgruppe (7.66, 11 ratings). Second is Electronic Art's M.U.L.E. (7.44,
18 ratings).Third is SSI's Mech Brigade (7.28, 11 ratings); Then we have Software
Toolwork's Chessmaster 2000 (distributed by EA) with a 7.25 rating over 10 rating
periods. The final charter inductee into the CGW Hall of Fame is SSI's War In Russia
(7.20, 11 ratings).

Halls of Montezuma
(Continued from page 25)
The final Okinawa scenario involves higher movement
costs due to the soggy ground. This is because the main
Japanese forces withdrew from the island under cover of
a heavy storm. The Korean scenarios are night action intensive, due to the North Korean People's Army's
preference for night attacks. It is occasionally advantageous to activate regiments for nocturnal actions in
the other scenarios, but it is absolutely vital in these two.
Finally, the Hue scenario forces the Allies to fight against
an enemy that is not territorially-oriented while attempting
to achieve
divisional objectives rather than
the standard
regimental objectives.
In short, there is
much to commend HOM. Many
players will appreciate the command structure
which allows experienced SSG
garners to zip
through the
menus and play
any scenario in
two hours or less.
Others will appreciate the fact
that one can use
the menu approach to monitor
details as closely
or loosely as one
desires. Some will
continue to revel
in the infinite constructability and variability of the system.
Still others will become obsessed with the command
problems of a particular scenario.
Whatever one's reason for playing the game, it is impossible to play the game without learning something. Finally,
a word to those who have just started playing SSG games.
Do not give up. This reviewer once thought the games impossible to win, but observing when regiments were almost out of supply or about to weaken through fatigue
and casualties, learning how to coordinate off board support, and rotating unsuccessful units into reserve and
away from failed breakthroughs have been significant keys
to victory. HOM does not allow players to be the "god of
the battlefield," but it sure offers an Olympian challenge.

I

Obviously, all this activity anticipates a huge market for
AD&D software. If it is successful, it may well transform the
public image of SSI into a "D&D company" instead of a
"strategy game company". Joel wants to reassure all of you,
however, that SSI will not forget its roots! He plans to continue the current practice of releasing 11 or 12 titles per
year. Five or six of those will be wargames.

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World

The obvious conclusion then is that there will be far fewer
SSI fantasy games that are not AD&D-related. As Joel puts
it, they'll always be looking for a few "really outstanding
games." To prove the point, there will be a couple of
science fiction games released later this year. One will be a
role-playing game and the other a strategy game of galactic
conquest.

(Continued from page 37)
growing. SSI expects that in fiscal 1988, for the first time,
sales in IBM format will exceed all others. The upshot of this
is that more and more games will be released in IBM format
first. You can also expect to see games that need memory
well beyond the 64K limit imposed by the Apple and C64
market. The times, they are, indeed, changing.
Compared to IBM, C64 and Apple II, the sales of games in
formats for newer computers are disappointing. The Amiga,
the Atari ST and the Mac offer exciting possibilities for game
designers but little reward for their publishers. SSI will continue to release titles to all of these
markets. After all, the IBM PC was
introduced in 1981 and has taken
seven years to become the largest
segment of the strategy game
market. At the least, some of these
newer systems will also achieve respectable markets in the next few
years.

The Promise of Games
Future

T he

staff at SSI, from Joel Billings down to the mail room, is
excited about the deal with TSR.
SSI will market a line of computer
products under TSR's Advanced
Dragons & Dungeons (AD&D)
trademark. The first of these—Pool
of Radiants—is a solitaire role-playing gameset in TSR's Forgotten
Realms. It is being developed jointly by SSI and TSR and is due out
this summer. Another program due
in 1988 is a sort of Dungeon
Master's Assistant to be used by
the DM in a conventional multiplayer game of D&D. Another
project already under development
is a D&D action/arcade game set in
TSR's Dragonlance world. It should
be ready in late Summer or Fall.
There will certainly be more
solitaire role-playing games and SSI
is looking into the possibility of an
"interactive movie" type game with
a D&D theme.

As for future trends, the SSI team is excited by the
popularity of the IBM format and plans to emphasize it
more. "An IBM-compatible system with EGA graphics is a
very good game machine!," Joel says. He's right! The
hardware is cheap and seemingly ubiquitous. The Enhanced Graphics Adapter (EGA), with 16 colors and 640 by
350 resolution, is superior to Apple II and C64 systems. We
had a good laugh about the irony of cheap clones making
IBM's business-oriented PC into the preferred game
machine of 1988! Listening, however, to Joel describe Gary
Grigsby's forthcoming monster game — a global WWII
game for IBM only (at least at first)—I know I will have to
have one!

'
Scorpion s
Tale
(Continued from page 9)
obstacle, if you looked all around
before leaving the crash site.
After that, it's simply a matter of
going on (carefully) until you find
you can't go any further. That's because you're being held in a forcefield by some kind of alien
presence. The alien has a bargain to
make with you, providing you can
understand what he says (if you
can't, tch! you missed something
back on the Arcada).
Shortly afterwards, you're back on
the surface again, scouting around
for the lair of a rather unpleasant
creature. You still have no weapons,
but if you could improvise before,
you can do it now, too. A careful examination of your inventory is in
order. Just remember that once you
enter the lair, you'll only have time
for one move, so it had better be
the right one (if not, at least you
remembered to save before going in
. . . I hope).
When you've satisfied the alien's request, you get some transportation
in return. Do look around before
you take off, just so that you don't
miss anything. You should also save
the game, because another arcadetype sequence is coming up.
This one is a seemingly-endless trip
across the desert to the town of Uhlence Flats. Along the way, you'll
pass quite a number of boulders,
which you must avoid, or they will
damage your skimmer. If it takes too
much damage, well, let's not think
about that. There are no tricks here,
it's simply a matter of accurate joystick manipulation, to keep your skimmer (and yourself) in one piece.
Save after you make it through, so
you won't have to do it again.
Ah, civilization (of sorts) at last! Stroll
around town a bit, to see what's
there (not much). Tiny's Used
Spaceships will probably catch your
attention. However, while you may
wish fervently to get off this sandchoked planet, you won't get very
far without money, something you
don't have very much of at the mo-

ment. Not to mention, you don't
have much idea of where to go,
either.

it's best to be prepared. Again,
remember to look at everything you
come across.

After all that travelling through the
desert, you're probably thirsty, and
what luck! there's a bar in town. It
may remind you of a certain cantina
in a certain movie, but the
resemblance is probably imaginary
(grin).

One other thing you must find is a
way off the ship after your work is
done. You won't be able to leave the
way you came in, so make sure you
know where to head for. There
won't be much time as the Star
Generator counts down to selfdestruction.

One item you'll want to check out is
the slot machine. You can make
some money here, and you can also
die trying. The slots are controlled
by the program, so you just make

your bet and wait to see what turns
up. Save before you start, and save
every so often when you've accumulated some cash. It will be a matter
of time (perhaps a long time), but
eventually you'll have just enough
money to buy everything you need.
Once you have your ship and your
navigator droid, it's off to the Sarien
vessel for the final act in this little
comedy-drama. Getting there is no
problem; the droid knows its business, and you'll find yourself
"parked" in space by the Sarien ship
in practically no time.
After that, however, you're on your
own. First, you have to get inside
the ship. Then you need to find a
way of moving around without being
seen. One human in a vessel full of
aliens is, well, a bit noticeable. Still,
you haven't come all this way just to
give up now.
When you can walk around the ship
without being detected, you need to
find the location of the Star
Generator. You will also want some
weapons. Sooner or later (probably
sooner), you'll be discovered and
since there's no way to avoid that,

Once off the ship (which explodes
nicely behind you), the rest is
automatic, including the great
celebration in your honor. Try not to
let it go to your head, but don't
worry: your admirers will make certain that it doesn't (hehe).
Space Quest is a game of moderate
difficulty in terms of the puzzles and
their solutions, but may seem harder
for two reasons. One is the complete lack of any descriptive texts in
the various locations. You really, absolutely, must look very carefully at
the screen, and then use the "Look"
(or "examine") command frequently.
Keep in mind that "Look" by itself
will not tell you anything. It is always
necessary to "Look" at something,
such as "Look cave" or "Look
panel". If you forget to do this, you
may well miss something, and in a
linear game such as this one, that
could mean a lot of restoring to
much earlier positions in the adventure.
The second reason is the game's antiquated, and occasionally picky, parser. Don't expect anything sophisticated from it. Think of it as something from an old Scott Adams adventure and you shouldn't have too
much trouble. As an example, at
one point in the game I typed
"Throw X at Y" (never mind what X
and Y were). The program couldn't
understand this at all. However, the
command "Throw X" worked. So
remember that simple is usually better in this game.
Graphics on the Apple //e, although
double hi-res, are not spectacular.
Most of the backgrounds looked
good, but the figure you manipulate
seemed a little smeary and not welldefined in sideways views. However,
the real minus is the long wait while
a new screen is loaded in. Each
time you move to a new location (by
(Continued on page 51)

1

Scorpion's
Tale
(Continued from page 49)
walking off the end of the current
screen), the program goes to disk to
get the next room, and this is very
slow. Combined with having to
move the figure from one end of the
screen to the other, playing the
game can at times seem a very
drawn-out procedure. In the 16-bit
versions this may not be a problem,
but Apple owners will need some
patience.
The arcade sequences depend more
on timing than anything else. Still,
one error in any of them will force a
restore, and this drags out the
game. Probably the most tedious of
them is crossing the desert in the
skimmer. Movement of the vehicle
(at least on the Apple) is slow and a
bit jerky. Many of the boulders can
be avoided without moving at all,
but you will have to do some dodging around, and it's likely the skimmer will take a few hits before you
reach your destination.
Why designers want to put things
like this in an adventure game is a
mystery. Typically, adventure games
are mental puzzles which require
thought and reflection, not hand-eye
coordination. There are plenty of
games on the market for those who
want fast action and dexterity exercises. These don't really belong in
an adventure game.
Another mystery is the slot machine.
It is the only way to acquire the
money needed to buy the spaceship
and the droid. However, all you do is
place bets and wait to see what
comes up. As the results appear to
be totally random, it can take quite
awhile before you have the money
you need. There really ought to have
been another way of obtaining the
necessary cash, besides the slots.
While the adventure comes on four
double-sided disks (Apple), most of
the space seems to be given over to
the graphics, since there are really
only four major locations in the
game: the interior of the Arcada, the
Keronian desert, the town, and the
interior of the Sarien ship. Each of
these, in turn, has a number of

areas within it, but not very many.
Therefore, mapping, at least, is no
problem. The game just seems
larger, because of the full-width
screen and the necessity for moving
a character figure across it.
The game works with one or two
drives. On a two-drive system, you
can put your save disk in the
second one, which is very handy.
Saving, as noted earlier, is quick, although the restores, which require
loading in of screens, are slow.
There are pre-defined commands
for the number keys, such as saving
and restoring games, repeating a
just-given command, and so forth. If
you want to restore a game after
meeting an untimely end, you must
use the number key for the restore,
as the program will not accept any
other keyboard input. The ESCape
key functions as a game pause,
which can be helpful in some situations.
The manual is thin. It contains only
some background information on

the plot and a few hints on playing
the game. A separate command
card is included with instructions for
your particular computer, along with
a list of the special command keys
and what they do. While this is not a
lot of information, it's more than sufficient to get you started and see
you through the adventure.
Overall, Space Quest is a middle-ofthe-road game. While it's not likely
to stump veteran adventurers for
long, novice and intermediate
players will probably find it challenging enough, as long as they don't
mind having arcade sequences in
the adventure.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock
on the wall it's that time again. If
you need help with an adventure
game, see the bottom of my other
column in this issue (check the table
of contents) for information on how
to get in touch with me. Until next
time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

Do Arcade Sequences
Have a Place in
Adventure Games?
An Editorial Comment
by Scorpia
Why some designers feel the need to put arcade sequences in adventure
games is a mystery. Typically, adventure games are mental puzzles which require thought and reflection, not hand-eye coordination. There are plenty of
games on the market for those who want fast action and dexterity exercises.
These do not really belong in an adventure game.
Of course, this is nothing new. A few games over the years have had some
action parts to them, but fortunately, only a few. Generally, these arcade sequences add nothing to the game but frustration. One of the more notorious
was the lava-jumping in an old adventure called Mask Of The Sun. It was
necessary to hop onto a rock that popped up and down in the lava. This was
the only means of getting across. Failure meant restoring the game and with
only one chance to get onto the rock, that usually meant a lot of restoring.
Things like this do nothing to advance the game, they merely slow progress
down by placing unnecessary obstacles in the player's path. Having to unravel the puzzles in an adventure is usually quite enough for most people.
They do not need the aggravation of live-action sequences on top of that.
There is nothing wrong with arcade action in the proper place, a game that
features arcade as the main action. Sticking it into the middle of an adventure game (any adventure game) only makes for an irritating intrusion that
most adventure players can do without.

Taking A Peek
Continued from pg. 5
tremendous fun for arcade-style
racing fans. C-64/128 ($29.95), ST
($44.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#9.
FTL Games
P. 0. Box 112489
San Diego, CA 92111
DUNGEON MASTER: Role-playing
enthusiasts who find the title pretentious will have all doubts removed
when they boot up this incredible
graphic representation of dungeoneering. Characters must use
combat tactics and cast spells wisely
in order to survive, as well as solve
difficult puzzles and avoid nasty
traps. Amiga, Apple IIGS, ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#10.
OIDS: How many OIDS will have to
spill their oil before the tyranny of
the fiendish Biocretes can be
brought to an end. The player's mission is to rescue the OIDS by facing
enemy hell jets, heat-seekers, and
burst orbs, as well as gravity traps
and teleport puzzles. Cute graphics

and built-in constructability make
this arcade game with reminiscences
of "Choplifter" and "Lunar Leeper"
an interesting product. ST Circle
Reader Service Card #11.
Infocom
125 Cambridge Park Dr.
Cambridge, MA 02140
SHERLOCK: RIDDLE OF THE
CROWN JEWELS: "Not so elementary, my dear Watson," should be the
synopsis of this new Infocom adventure and initial entry in the "Immortal
Legends" series. Players have Holmes at their side, but they are the
ones who, as Watson, have to actually solve the mystery by solving
Moriarty's riddles. As in other recent
Infocom games, this one comes with
the on-screen hint utility. Many
machines ($39.95, C-64/128
$34.95). Circle Card #12.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
MISL SOCCER: Like its sister game,
"Superstar Ice Hockey," this game offers fast-paced on-field action, an extensive league database, clear
graphics, smooth animation, and the
capacity to act as player, coach, and
general manager. Fortunately, players
will not have to worry about rioting
soccer fans when simulating the
Major Indoor Soccer League. C64/128 ($34.95), Apple II, Amiga,
Amiga ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #13.
TRUST AND BETRAYAL: THE
LEGACY OF SIBOOT: Those who
are anxiously awaiting Chris
Crawford's latest design should
breathe a sigh of relief. This is potentially the most multi-faceted adventure game to date. Players find themselves on the moon, Kira, in this
science fiction adventure which requires players to learn an alien language in order to interact in negotiation and/or social intercourse. Fortunately, all seven species on Kira
communicate in one common language, eeyal. Eeyal is an imagebased telepathic language which the

player must learn if he wishes to become the next Shepherd of Kira, the
secular and spiritual leader of both
Kira and the planet, Lamina. Mac
($49.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#14.
Spectrum HoloByte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
DONDRA - A NEW BEGINNING: A
graphic adventure with sequels to follow, "Dondra" puts the player in the
role of the last surviving Tellasien, a
race pledged to defend the peaceful
Elders of Dondra. As the sole
defender of these wise and peaceful
people, players must defeat the
demonic Colnar by finding the Crystal Prism of Heheutotol. Players will
gain experience points throughout
the adventure which will help them
in future Questmaster releases.
Apple II ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #15.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
PANZER STRIKE: This may be the
quintessential Gary Grigsby design.
This construction set version which
SSI calls, "Kampfgruppe done right
on a Squad Leader scale" is a tactical wargamer's dream. Players will
be able to design scenarios from
both the Eastern and Western
Fronts, as well as North Africa. The
beauty of this is that they can be
small to large group actions, built
from individual tanks and squad
units. Apple II ($49.95), C-64
($44.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#16.
SONS OF LIBERTY: Imagine the
award-winning American Civil War
series with American Revolutionary
War battles and you will have the feel
of this extremely playable game. Of
course, the ranges are shorter and

the morale more volatile, but those
who like the ACW series will
undoubtebly like this release. Apple II, Atari 8bit, IBM ($39.95), C-64/128 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #17.
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Court
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE
AMERICAN CIVIL WAR: VOLUME I:
Antietam, Bull Run (First and
Second), Chancellorsville, Fredericksburg, and Shiloh are the battles
(scenarios) in this volume. Ian Trout
and Roger Keating are masters at
designing the command perspective
and they have introduced a tiered approach to command in the ACW.
Players can view the battle as Army
Commander of Corps, Divisions, and
Brigades. Each level has its own Al
structure to act as subordinates.
Apple II, C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #18.

(Continued from page 6)
and free speech. I also
generally enjoyed the
series. Sierra markets
many fine products
and shouldn't be targeted for retribution
for their choice to sell
a particular product to
a particular group. Let
the market decide.
John Coombs
Salem, OR

not in command from its upper level
HQ, command and supply cannot be
returned. In brief, one must operate
with, rather than against, the chain of
command.
The second error revolves around how
the computer resolves attacks. Though
each unit does resolve individually, the
attack system takes into account the
time and direction of other attacks on
the same defender and alters the odds
to represent the massing of force. There
are advantages and disadvantages to
such massing, however. Though each
subsequent attack during the same time
period has additives, these can be
mitigated, or even produce an overall
degradation of the attack, if too much
comes in from the same attack axis.
This is to account for simple flow and
massing problems. Traffic jams! If you
are trying to time a massed assault,
bringing it in from two or more axis will
normally give better results since the
defender will not be as able to move
reserves to cover the attacks. Also, one
should not underestimate the advantages of sequenced attacks staged to
hit the enemy as they just come out of a
battle and are not yet back into position
or, better yet, are starting to retreat. The
rather novel system that allows players
to specify the day and time of day for actions allows remarkable flexibility in planning, though something almost always
goes wrong . . . Otherwise, I found the
review very reflective of the game.
Traffic jams?! Give us the D.A.K. and a
secure supply line and we could even
solve Los Angeles' "massing problems."
Seriously, thanks for the insights. Wilson notes that the HQ's had indeed
been moved on most of the occasions
when units had apparently been
relieved and the program still considered them out of the line of command/supply.

Land of the Lounge Letters
Thanks for having the guts to print an
article containing criticism of you [Ed.:
Part III of "Goodbye 'G' Ratings" in
CGW #43."]. That shows the highest
journalistic values in terms of tolerance

I, personally, have not
purchased Leisure
Suit Larry and do not
plan to. However, my
reasons for not purchasing Larry have
nothing to do with the
subject matter. Rather, I have, for the
most part, lost interest in adventure
games, because their re-playability tends
to be low. But, the fact that I don't plan
to purchase the game has no influence
on the content, subject, or execution of
the game. I have seen another of
Sierra's adventure games (Space Quest
I) and was very impressed by the crispness of the game. It's almost enough to
get me back to adventures.
I think that Sierra has taken the first tentative step toward making computer
games appeal to a wider range of
people. The subject matter is adult and
this fact is clearly displayed on the packaging. In an age when children can go
to the nearest newsstand and purchase
any of the various semi-pornographic
magazines available, it is surprising that
a reasonably innocuous game has been
chosen as the scapegoat.
In closing, let me say that I applaud Sierra for being willing to attempt something a little less "ordinary." I think that
your three articles in CGW present exactly the points that need to be made.
People don't have to purchase anything
that they don't want, so let's let the consumers decide.
Benjamin M. Cohen
Jersey City, NJ
I read with interest John Williams' article
on "Adult oriented" software. Beyond the
obvious self-serving purpose of promoting one of Sierra's products, I found the
article to be very interesting, but I
believe Mr. Williams missed perhaps the
most salient point that needs to be
made about current software—much of
it is already "pornographic" in that it
either glorifies or makes light of violence
and death. (One has to look no further
than the Konami ad on page 15 of
CGW #43). I find it ironic in the extreme
that parents would object to their
children playing Leisure Suit Larry but
would not mind them playing Rush'n Attack or Contra. For myself (I have a 10
year old and a 17 year old), I would certainly rather they be exposed to silly sex
than violence.
I am not hopeful that this situation will
change (indeed it is symptomatic of our

culture that we allow exposure of our
children to violence but insulate them
from sexual love), but it sure seems to
me that the Emperor has no clothes and
the fact needed to be stated.
Bob Toole
Louisville, KY

In addition to these letters which seem
more concerned about censorship than
the content of the games discussed in
the "Goodbye `G' Ratings" series, we
also received mail which reflected almost an exact 50/50 split and stated
that the sender was either for or
against adult software in general. Our
position has always been that the
choice of appropriate games should be
made by informed individuals. We help
to inform those individuals, but the
packaging should warn about potentially controversial contents, as well.

No Bugs on the Sloop,
"High Seas"
In the January issue of CGW (#43), I
used the word "bug" in my review of
Garde's High Seas. The word "bug" implies some sort of mistake or oversight
in the coding of the program and the allegation that some exist is, quite naturally, taken seriously by all ethical programmers. Ralph Bosson, the author of High
Seas, has convinced me that the events
I described are not bugs but "features".
That is to say, the program was intentionally designed to behave this way.
Ralph's explanation was that when a
ship does not perform the maneuver
that you've ordered, it's because the
ship doesn't have enough speed to do
that and the crew has performed a different maneuver instead (to cover up
the Captain's incompetence?). As for
shooting at ships that appear hidden behind others, the assumption is made
that since the ships are moving, each
gun will have a clear shot either ahead
or behind the obstructing vessel at some
point during a two-minute "turn". The
target ship is drawn in front of the
obstructing ship on the screen during
the act of firing so that you can more
easily identify which one is the target.
The game does reduce the number of
hits you get when you fire at an
obstructed target to reflect the greater
difficulty in aiming.
Using the label "feature" instead of "bug"
does not change my opinion of High
Seas or my somewhat limited recommendation of it. I do feel Ralph is right and
want to correct my scurrilous use of the
word "bug". I've learned my lesson. I will
never use the word again without first
checking with the author of the program!
Bob Proctor
San Rafael

(Continued from page 31)

starbase outlined. Players must use
the map of Cygnus provided in the
documentation to find the selected
starbase and type in the first four letters of that starbase's name. The
map is printed on navy blue paper
with navy blue ink. This makes the
map hard to photocopy. Thus is serves as part of the copy protection of
the product.
Once docked, starbase crews immediately begin recharging the
nuclear cells and reloading photon
bombs. Players may use the repair
command in order to view a
schematic diagram of the warp
fighter.
Players should direct repair crews
to the most critical damages as a
priority. This is important because
Xenomorphs may attack the starbase and force an emergency
defense launch before all repairs are
complete.
The graphics are attractive and efficient; the game offers plenty of action, regardless of what level players
choose to play at; and the weapon
system offers enough diversity to
keep players from becoming bored
with simply pushing the joystick button. In addition, players will need to
use 28 command keys, as well as
the joystick, in order to gain any real
competence. Those who enjoyed
Arcticfox and the original Skyfox will
enjoy Skyfox ll even more. But one
does not need to play the earlier
games to enjoy this one. If you appreciate cockpit oriented space war
games, this could be your cup of
neutron disrupters, sweetened with
a little photon jolt juice.

Whisking all those venerable classics off into the CGW Hall of Fame certainly opened up the Top 10 titles on both sides of the ratings. "Stealth
Fighter" was on target for the number one spot in the Action/Adventure
category before "Starflight" could even pick it up on sensors. Microprose
has to be happy with having three out of the top five games in this
category and Sir-Tech must be commended for having all three sequels to
Hall of Fame Member 'Wizardry I" in the top ten.

"Gettysburg" continues to fortify its position as number one in the Strategy
category, but the would-be alien conquerors from "Empire" are reconnoitering that position by means of an initial rating of 7.59. Meanwhile, "Earl
Weaver Baseball" has caught pennant fever and reached the top ten. That
rarified air in the top ten has seldom been breathed by a sports simulation.
SSI has three titles in the top five and SSG has all six of its titles in the top
15.

