.

,

June 1989

Number 60

Features
Abrams Battle Tank

10

EA Treads Across Western Europe / Evan Brooks

The Battle of Eylau: A New Scenario

12

Game Developers' Conference

44

CGW Treks Up the West Coast to Sunnyvale

18

An Experienced Designer Tells All / Steve Estvanik

Data East's "Batman: The Caped Crusader"

39

"Plagiarism" from the Journal of Computer Game Design

Napoleon Treads Over Western Europe / Omar DeWitt

Design Notes for Game Saves

Game Design Abstracts

Fantastic Voyages IV

48

CGW Treks Cross-Country from Lucasfilm to Microprose

20

Batman Treads On Two Arch-Villains / David M. Wilson

Scorpion's Mail

23

Departments

Hints on "Battletech," "Sentinel Worlds," "Wizardry V" et. al.

Hidden Agenda

24

Springboard's Manuel Noriega Simulator / Dave Arneson

Presumed Guilty

26

The "Falcon" Treads On Civil Rights / Scorpia

Journey
Infocom Treks Across Mysterious Realms / Roe R. Adams III

32

Letters
Taking a Peek
Game Ratings
The Rumor Bag
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame

4
6
28
40
50
56
56

Letters

150-200 pieces of software, none pirated. Yes,
there are programs out there I would like to get,
but who wouldn't want to own a Rolls Royce?
Does that justify stealing it?
Martin J. Hrovat
Slidell, LA
Ed: Thanks for the concurring opinion, Martin. We thought the statistics cited by Gilman
Louie regarding the highly organized Atari ST
pirates spoke quite eloquently to the problem
on that machine, as well as piracy in the
mainstream. As the next writer shows, however, there are "pirates" sailing other than the
Atari's seas.

Not A Revolting
Development
In the Developers' Conference article in CGW
#56, I noted the statement, "multi-player
games have not ... been great commercial successes." I think this is because most multiplayer games have long individual turns. Most
of M.U.L.E., by contrast, involves all players
with the individual turns themselves being short.
I suspect this is the key. My three sons and I
have enjoyed this game for over two years and
still play it.
Paul Tenney
Hernoon, VA
Ed: You have a good point, Paul, but the article also notes that M.U.L.E. was more of a
critical success than commercial success.
30,000 units in sales is not equivalent to a
"Gold Record."

I very much resent the accusation that ST
users are more tolerant than others of piracy.
On the contrary, because of circumstances, ST
users tend to be less tolerant (on the whole).
The people I know who are tolerant of piracy
are Apple, MS-DOS, and Macintosh users. But,
the ST is the sort of affordable high-powered
computer that does attract the mostly young
men who organize piracy through BBS systems. What this means in lost software sales is
arguable, of course.
Ruth Coy
Laurel, MD
Ed: Mr. Louie's point was not to say that
Atari ST users are the only ones who tolerate
piracy. He was lamenting the loss of viability
in publishing for the ST because of: a) small
user base and b) organized piracy. Fortunately, some companies are still publishing for the
ST in the U.S. as an addendum to successful
ST sales in Europe. Now, even though you are
probably right that "mostly young men" organize piracy, we want to go on record as
stating that "Piracy is not manly!"

Articles of Enumeration
In rating articles for the R.I.D.questionnaire, is
the standard absolute or relative? Since all CGW
articles are above average to begin with, I assume you want a relative rating, i.e. compared
to other CGW articles.
Bruce Bernard
Erie. PA
Ed: Thanks, Bruce. You are exactly right. We
need to know how each of you readers react
to each article, because we consider your
ratings when planning future issues. Try to
rate the articles on the basis of interest in the
subject matter (not necessarily how good the
game itself is), the reviewer's style and approach, and whether you learned anything
from it.

David Hicks
Erie, PA
P.S. You do a good job.
Ed: Let me get this right. You graded the
magazine down because the games
covered were not ones you would like to purchase? To paraphrase Red Skelton's line whenever his gags didn't work, "We just review 'em.
We don't publish 'em." ('We just do 'em. We
don't explain 'em.") Of course, we like the next
grade better.
CGW Rates A++!
Robert Panchuk
Vancouver, B.C. CANADA
Ed: You're all right, Robert. Even though you
probably root for the "Canucks!"

Ratings Game
Another great issue, keep it going! The ratings
list is a great idea. It helps me decide what
games to buy. It is usually my final decision
maker.
Mark F. Leone
Southwick, MA
I don't like the new letter (A-F) grades system.
Bring back 1-9!!
Carl Lund
Bruno, MN
Rerating games A-F is a great idea!
David Bove
Merrick, NY
Much better R.I.D. system. It's just like school!
Adrian Williams
Alva, FL

Strategic Error
The best strategic game I've ever come
across has never been mentioned in your
magazine. It is Strategic Conquest on the Mac.
Essentially, it is Empire with many refinements
that raise it way beyond the "clunky" but adequate Interstel implementation.
Bob White
Frederick, MD
Ed: Actually, Bob. We think the "Empire" implementation is rather elegant, as do a large
number of our readers. As for your assumption
that "Strategic Conquest" has never been mentioned in our magazine, you might read the
review in CGW #35 (p. 53) and note its mention in R.I.D. #35. As the song goes, "Never,
say never, say never again." You never know
when you might be corrected in print.

Aye, Aye, Gilman!
Concerning his letter in the April issue of
CGW, I want to thank Gilman Louie for hitting
the nail squarely on the head on the issue of
piracy. Pirates can roll their excuses any way
they like, but they and those who own the same
hardware are the ultimate losers. What software
developer in his right mind is going to develop a
product over a one to two year period, only to
have it given away? I personally own between

slash and speed aren't for me.

I would find the games ratings more meaningful if they were divided into broad age groups.
Also, have you ever considered making the
rating data available on an online service?
Bob Wentzel
St. Louis, MO
Ed: We like the new R.I.D. ratings a lot! We
want to hear from the rest of you, though.
Also, we are experimenting with a couple of
online ratings devices (Compuserve and
PCLink). We hope to add others, if these work
out.

We Move Our Tale For You
II just read your latest airline anecdote in the
February C.E.S. Report./ What airline do you
guys fly, anyway? Ever consider the train? Or
bus?
Jeff Petraska
New Boston, MI

"B"ing Selective
The April issue (CGW #58) gets a "B." I would
only purchase a couple of the games mentioned. Sports doesn't interest me. While faster
and better graphics are nice, it seems that
game makers have forgotten the storyline. Hack

Ed: Our well-chronicled airline "disasters"
(which usually begin or end our C.E.S. reports)
have occurred on a variety of airlines. Thanks
for your concern for our safety. Of course, if
Major Bill (Stealey) will continue our flight lessons (see Fantastic Voyages IV), we may not
have to worry.

Taking A Peek

Nels Anderson
92 Bishop Drive
Framingham, MA 01701
MAH JONGG: It is rare for CGW to
"peek" a shareware game, but this version of the famous tile game is getting
play time in our office. Players match
and remove pairs of similar tiles, while
trying to reduce the total number of
remaining blocks to zero. Points are
scored for matched tile sets. The attractive graphics require an EGA or Hercules graphics adaptor. IBM ($10.00).
Circle Reader Service #1.

Activision
3885 Bohannon Drive
Menlo Park, CA 94025
LAST NINJA 2: This sequel to The
I a st Ninja requires players to fight their
way through seven more levels of play,
armed with the usual assortment of
weaponry - swords, staffs, nunchuckas
and shurikens. Players do battle in the
streets of New York with cops, samurai,
alligators (flushed down the sewers),
and even a ferocious leopard. C-64
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #2.

Bullseye Software
P.O. Drawer 7900
Incline Village, NV 89450
P51 MUSTANG FLIGHT
SIMULATOR: Fly in the European
theatre during summer, 1944. Players
practice flights in England, then cross
the channel to fight Mel 09's, strafe
ground targets, and even buzz the Eiffel
tower. There are 13 different camera
angles for watching replays of the wireframe graphic action, and the game can
be played solo or between two, cablelinked Macs. Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #3.

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.,
Westlake Village, CA 91362
LORDS OF THE RISING SUN:
Twelfth century Japan becomes a bat-

tleground as the player attempts to conquer all of the castles in the land and become Shogun. Great music, gorgeous
graphics and tricky action sequences all
flesh out the overall strategic problems
inherent in conquering a medieval land.
The player will invade and defend
castles, control troop maneuvers in battle, pursue and destroy vanquished
daimyos and fight off ninja assassins.
This one is well worth the wait! Amiga
with 1 meg ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

Cosmi
431 N. Figueroa St.
Wilmington, CA 90744
CHOMP!: It's a 'dog eat dog' ... err
...'fish eat fish' world in this cute, aquatic
action game. Players control a stir-crazy
goldfish who escapes his pet store bowl
and progresses through tropical fish
tanks, gobbling up food and other fish,

Infocom
125 Cambridge Park Drive
Cambridge, MA 02140
JOURNEY: Look for a feature review
elsewhere in this issue.
SHOGUN: The player takes the part
of English sea pilot John Blackthorne in
the 16th century. Shipwrecked in a
mysterious land, he must make his way
through the exotic, war-torn landscape,
to ??? Based on the book, the player's
success will be determined by how well
he thinks and acts as compared to the
fictional Blackthorne. Amiga pictured
and Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service
#8.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
ACTION FIGHTER: This arcade hit is
transformed to the home computer with
ultra-smooth scrolling and fast-paced action. Players must carry out five air and
ground battles to succeed. Starting out
on a motorcycle, it's possible to find and
assemble spare parts that ultimately
transform the two-wheeler into a supercharged aircraft. Amiga pictured
($39.95), and C-64 ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.
POLE POSITION II: "Prepare to
qualify!" Players get to pilot Formula 1
racecars over four challenging courses
in the home version of the arcade racing
game. Qualifying runs determine the
player's pole position for the big race. Accelerate, shift, and weave your way to
the checkered flag. IBM pictured, and C64 ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
while avoiding capture by the pesky pet
store cat. The restless goldfish can eventually escape the pet store and brave the
unknown waters without. Be careful!
One slip of the fin and you'll receive a
burial at sea ! C-64 pictured ($24.95),
IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #5.

Digitek Software
8910 N. Dale Mabry
Executive Center, Suite
#37
Tampa, Florida 33614
WESTERN GAMES: Players compete
against each other or the computer in
six mini-games with a western theme.
There's armwrestlin', shootin', quid
spittin', dancin', milkin' and eatin'. The
game features cute graphics, digitized
sound, and uses keyboard or joystick. Is

this really how the West was won?
Amiga ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
#6.

Free Spirit Software
P.O. Box 128
58 Noble Street
Kutztown, PA 19530
THE LAST INCA: Graphics and text
combine in this adventure game set in
the land of the Incas. The player must
find the Crown of Power before the evil
wizard Zulphosi gets it and destroys the
Incan people. Along the way the player
will encounter the Greate Condor, the
forgotten civilization of the megaterras,
and the emerald of Xiahuxi. Keep those
pronunciation dictionaries handy! Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #7.

THUNDER BLADE: The ultimate attack helicopter comes to the home in
this version of the best-selling arcade
game. The player will fly over
skyscrapers, mountains, deserts and sea
to defeat the enemy, lurking in an offsite refinery in the middle of the ocean.
Excellent graphics, scrolling and sound.
Amiga pictured and ST ($49.95), C-64
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #11.

Melbourne House
711 W. 17th St., Suite G9
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
MAGIC JOHNSON'S BASKETBALL: The mystical moves of the 'Magic
Man' come to the computer in this coinop conversion of "Magic Johnson's
Fastbreak Basketball." One or two
(Continued on page 46)

Review

brams Battle Tank (Tank) is a simulation of
modern armored conflict at the individual tank level.
The player has a myriad of mission choices (or a
grand campaign) in the European (Central Front) environ-

A

High Powered
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Abrams Battle Tank
IBM
$49.95
Damon Slye
Dynamix
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Electronic Arts'
"Abrams Battle
Tank"

of appearance; thus, the "T-72" first appeared in 1972,
while the "T-80" appeared in 1980. The newest Soviet
tank, the FST-1, is simply a military acronym for "Future
Soviet Tank." Very little is known about this tank and its
appearance constitutes the designers' "best guesstimate."
Weapons Systems: The Abrams Tank has two
weapons systems—the main gun and a coaxial machine
gun. The latter is of limited use, since its range is sufficiently short (c. 1000 m.) that one can generally crush the
enemy PBI (poor bloody infantry) by tread before achieving
target acquisition. The main gun fires HEAT (High Explosive -- Anti-Tank), SABOT (literally "boot", a shell within
a shell that is the most effective tank-killer today), and AX
(an experimental anti-armor, anti-aircraft wire-guided shell).
AX is noted as experimental, although it is available in the
game. From the documentation, it would appear that AX
is a main gun-TOW missile. Such weapons are still in testing stages and have not been field issued. Also, certain ammunition types have been omitted: HEP (high
explosive -- plastic) [anti-armor], APERS ("Beehive")
[anti-personnel], AP (armor piercing) and HE (high explosive). The game requires the use of HEAT against
"soft" targets (i.e. infantry and/or improved structures),
which is not overly accurate.

Pilbox

Graphics
Graphics are well-defined, although there are certain
deficiencies. Internal instrumentation panels are minimal,
while external terrain features are much better defined
(This is the exact opposite of Accolade's Steel Thunder).
Different views are available (from the perspective of the
driver, gunner or tank commander). Also, informational
screens are available which yield current status and/or
damage conditions. Zoom views are available on a toggle
which yields a 3 or 10 times perspective. This feature is
well-executed and one can often find and fix a threat at a
great distance through such features. However, remember
that utilizing the zoom feature restricts one's total arc of
view and use it accordingly.

By M. Evan Brooks
ment of World War III. Although Tank is described as a
simulation, as will be seen, it is really much more of a
game and should be considered as such.
Tank portrays an individual Abrams Main Battle Tank.
The doctrinal problem is that a single tank in a combat environment has four uses: (1) in a hull defilade position
(dug-in), it serves as an adequate pillbox (defensive); (2) it
allows one to withdraw quicker than on foot (retrograde);
(3) it serves as a coffin (offensive); (4) it serves as an excellent protective shelter in an NBC (nuclear-biological-chemical) environment). The use of armor, in single elements
and without infantry support, is simply not militarily acceptable.

Documentation
The documentation is brief, but adequate. All weapons
systems and scenarios are delineated and this, in turn, serves as part of the protection scheme. Because of this approach, the program may be easily loaded onto a hard
disk, substantially enhancing access performance.
Concerning threat vehicles, tanks are noted by the year

The most serious deficiency concerning the terrain is
that hills and slopes are visible on screen, but until one actually attempts to traverse such terrain, it is virtually impossible to determine whether or not the steepness of slope
would prohibit successful movement. In reality, a tank
commander would be able to determine by experience
and eye-ball the potential of terrain traversability. Since
such terrain is not visible on the hard copy map, it does
present an overly artificial constraint on the user.

Game Play
Military Professionalism: The briefing and mission
recap is done by one's superior officer, Colonel Wilson.
However, Colonel Wilson does not resemble any military officer this reviewer has ever encountered. His comments to
kill "scum-sucking Commies" or his threats to have one executed because of mission failure may furnish some mild
entertainment, but such attitudes are not "military" in any
sense of the word. As an officer in the U.S. Army Reserve
(Infantry), this reviewer felt personally affronted and the
"game" reinforces the civilian world's worst fears about
military officers.
Here to There and Back Again: In order to succeed
with Tank, study the mission carefully and execute it slowly; in most missions, time is not of the essence (the Mossel
Intercept is the exception). Therefore, although the vehicle
can achieve rapid speeds, such usage will merely throw

one into the midst of an enemy ambuscade. The best tactic is a slow but methodical advance. Whenever substantial
damage is received, a return to the motor park for repairs
and rearmament is most urgent. One may not fulfill his
dreams of a hell-for-leather advance, but the slow march
to victory is a better gaming decision.
Input is via keyboard or joystick. This reviewer cannot
speak as to the joystick option (since a 20-mhz card is not
available), but the keyboard did have certain drawbacks.
Steering laterally (left/right) is easy with arrow keys, however, maintaining a steady speed after a turn is difficult, as
one's speed tends to increase when resuming a forward
vector. This reviewer has been told that the game runs
rather slowly on the older 8088 chip, which may well
detract from play value.
One may switch between turret control and vehicle control. This is quite useful when one wishes to fire at an
angle, but keep moving in a certain direction. Just remember which control function one is currently using; in a combat situation, turret access may prevent one from realizing
that he cannot quickly move out of harm's way.

Weapons of Choice: To insure operational readiness,
make sure that the weapons systems are loaded. This
reviewer's preference is for the AX; it allows maximum
stand-off but when used with the zoom feature, it permits
optimal destruction. The disadvantage of the AX is that it
requires a minimum range of 770 meters. If an enemy
vehicle is able to penetrate that distance, one must quickly
reload with either HEAT or Sabot. Also, although one can
lock onto a target, practice will reveal that one can often
achieve significant kill ratios merely by target acquisition
and not target lock.
View from Afar: Given the fact that there are four view-

ing positions, only two
have any real use. The
tank commander's station
allows one to determine
his ground position, while
the gunner's station allows one to fix and
destroy the enemy. This
reviewer recommends
maximum use of the
gunner's station. Only
here can the weapons systems be accessed. The
commander's position
should be used to orient
one geographically, but
remember to return to the
gunner station when contact is imminent!

CONCLUSIONS
Tank is entertaining as a
game. It offers excitement
and a chance to destroy
the nefarious enemy hordes. However, a simulation, it is not. Doctrine,
professionalism and employment of armor are all lacking.
As long as one recognizes that this is a game, there is no
harm done. Nevertheless, do not think that one can
achieve viable insights into armor tactics in the contemporary combat environment. Abrams Battle Tank succeeds as something more than an arcade-type game. It
does require planning and careful execution; however, it is
not a simulation and should not be treated as such.

one could almost be sipping coffee
and not spill
a drop. The
smoothness
of the ride is
astonishing,
almost Mercedes-like.
The main difference is
the cost

M. Evan Brooks
rides The Abrams
How does one prepare to review a simulation on Abrams
Battle Tank—obviously, by taking a ride! Now, this reviewer
recognizes that it is quite difficult to drop down to your local
tank shop and take a test drive, but there are ways .. .
While spending annual training at Fort McClellan, Alabama,
this reviewer was given the opportunity to take a tour of the
nearby Anniston Army Depot. This depot is the main tank
repair facility in the United States. If you happen to "total"
your tank, Anniston is the place to go. The Anniston Depot
rebuilds the vehicle from virtual scratch. Stretching for acres,
the facility is a fascinating experience in technology. The factory interior is larger than several football fields and watching
a tank come together from disparate parts is unforgettable.
Currently, the Depot rebuilds 4 tanks per week. In a "surge"
(mobilization), output could increase to over 40 tanks per
week.
After seeing the re-construction of an Abrams, this reviewer
was given a test ride. The most interesting facet about riding
the Abrams is the smoothness of the ride. Thinking that the
average speed seemed to be c. 20 miles per hour, this
reviewer was quite surprised to discover that the actual speed
was c. 48 mph. Roaring around a test track, we passed over
a series of "inverted v's" which test the shocks and stability,

(several million dollars) and mileage (low).
The second time around the track covered the "v's"again,
only this time at a speed of c. 15 mph. This time, one could
feel each jolt and bump extremely well. Continued such experiences could lead to internal jellification. Overall, the
Abrams is a superb vehicle. Having been trained on the
armor vehicles of an earlier age (the M114 Armored Reconnaissance Vehicle and the M60A1 tank), this reviewer was extremely impressed by the capabilities of the contemporary
main battle tank.
The Anniston Army Depot is closed to civilians, but if the
reader ever has the opportunity to take the tour, this reviewer
strongly encourages it. I would like to thank Mr. Benny McCain and the staff at the Depot for their kindness and courtesies.

Scenario

Your Scenario
(The System)
There are several steps
in creating your own
scenarios. I would suggest that you do not use
the "Generate a New
Scenario" option. When I
tried to increase the unit
count beyond the 47 in
the Quatre Bras model,
my Apple version
chopped the excess off—
on two occasions. Test
your version by adding a
few imaginary units and
asking the computer to
Reorganize before you
spend a lot of time creating your army. The safe
choice is to Edit the
Waterloo Scenario
("WAT" to the computer).

he

Battles of Napoleon construction kit allows the designer to go
into great detail, but it also has its
limitations. The box copy says "any"
Napoleonic battle can be reconstructed.
However, it is not easy to fit large battles
into the format. The ideal battle size is
about two corps per side, fighting over
terrain covering five square miles. Since
the largest individual unit in the computer menu is the regiment, any battle
with division-sized units will be misnamed
when referred to on the screen. This may
be no big deal, but it is a limitation.

L'epoque T
du
Francais
Empire
A Scenario of
The Battle
of Eylau
for SSI's
"Battles of
Napoleon"
by Omar DeWitt

The ideal size of each square is 100
yards on a side. If the square is to cover
more area, the range of the weapons can
be altered and the OP cost for entering a
square can be changed. However, the
road movement rate cannot be changed,
the length of a turn is always 30 minutes,
and stacking limitations cannot be altered. Whether the square covers 10,000
square yards or 40,000 square yards, the
maximum number of men that can be
placed in a given square is 1,800. This
limit can be artificially evaded by scaling
down the unit size so that the number of
men listed for each unit is one-tenth its
actual size. That way, 18,000 men would
fit on a square. Frankly, this writer
suspects that changing the size to any
great degree beyond 100 yards per side
may actually affect the computer
opponent's play. Whenever I expanded
the size of the squares, I had French artillery units unlimbering several squares
away.

The first step in creating your own scenario is
army creation. It is also the most time
consuming. Filling in the Leader Organization Table, the first phase, is quite
straightforward. This establishes a line of
command. How far down it can go
depends on the number of corps in the
battle. In the Unit Organization phase,
each unit must be assigned to one of the
leaders listed in the Leader Organization
Table and each of those leaders must be
assigned to be present in one of the
units. After one of my army leaders was
wounded while in a frontline unit, I
thought it would be more realistic to create a "Staff' unit of 50-60 men. I would
put the army leader with that unit and he
would stay out of the way. Initially, I made
this a cavalry unit. Unfortunately, even
though I kept my leader behind the lines,
the computer opponent puts its cavalry
to use. Napoleon and his 50 men
charged on the first turn and, in turn, he
was wounded. The "Staff' concept may
have to be limited to games where you
face a human opponent, although the
computer was considerably more conservative when I made the "Staff' into an infantry unit and armed them with sabres.
Next, the Unit Editor phase lets you
determine the details of each unit. The
number of men, guns, and skirmishers is
entered, along with type of unit,
nationality, and weapon. Some subjective
decisions have to be made when unit efficiency is entered. Except when a unit
did unusually well or poorly in a battle,
there is unlikely to be much comment on
it in any written account, especially on
(Continued on page 14)

the brigade level. An educated guess is needed, too, when an OP
modifier and a melee value are chosen. Later in the process, when
the units are deployed on the map, decisions can be made on
facing, skirmishers, road mode, formation, and frontline status. How
ever, that information should be entered at this time if the unit
comes into the game as a reinforcement. If a scenario is being
revised, make sure that all units not in your scenario have the number of men and guns set to zero, or else these units will appear in
your scenario. Each army can be saved to a separate disk and/or
you can continue to the next step in the creation process.
Map creation is the next step and it is easily accomplished. It is a
good idea to draw the map on graph paper first. The program will
construct a winding road (or ridge or stream) by following the cursor
across the map. An "Auto Terrain" option makes it easy to add
clumps of woods or fields. Pay attention to the elevation of the terrain being added or strange things will happen during play. The
map, too, can be saved to a separate disk.
The units that start the game on the map have to be deployed.
The computer will stack them on the map edges that you choose,
but you must move them to their starting positions on the map.
Units not initially presented can be called up if you know their numbers. In one case, the computer changed the reinforcement turn of
a unit, repeatedly, but it could be put on the map by using the
"Add" option. Units not deleted from the scenario you are revising
may appear on the map. They can be eliminated here. Objective
squares are chosen and point values assigned. These are important
because they affect the computer opponent's strategy. Defensive
lines for each army are determined; note that the third defensive
line is actually the one farthest forward and the first is the rear-most.
All of these special squares, plus artillery-objective squares will be
set by the computer if you do not do so.
The final step is the revision of "Tables." Items that can be
changed include victory points for casualties; weapon name, range,
and destructiveness; terrain cost; combat effectiveness in relation to
formation and terrain; and probability of cavalry charging.
Although there may be some other factors we wish we could
change, there is enough rich detail here to keep us more than satisfied.

"Artillerie, Pointer!" (Historical Notes)
The battle at Preussisch-Eylau, Poland in 1807 was unusual in
that it was one of the few major battles of the time that was fought
in winter. The entire field of battle was snow covered and bodies of
water were both frozen and invisible.
The conflict came about when the Russian force under General
Bennigsen moved westward to drive back the weak French left and

establish the Russians on the Vistula, in good position for a spring
campaign. Napoleon countered by maneuvering his columns in an
attempt to trap the Russians. Only at the last moment did Bennigsen
become aware of his danger and withdraw.
The main column, under Napoleon, came upon the Russians at Eylau
toward the end of the day (Feb. 6). There was a contained, but vicious,
fight for the town of Eylau; the intensity of the fight was, no doubt, due
to the fact that the winner would be able to spend the night in the
town, rather than the frozen countryside. The French prevailed.
The next morning, the battle began in earnest. The Russian artillery,
which outnumbered the French almost 2-1, started a bombardment
about 8 A.M. Since the corps of Ney and Davout were still on the road,
the French were outnumbered. To disguise this fact, Napoleon put the
Guard, usually kept in reserve, in the center of the front lines. Soult
probed the Russian right, but was roughly handled and pushed back
easily. Napoleon knew that Bennigsen would realize his weakness and
counter-attack Soult. He decided on a pre-preemptive attack with
Augereau's corps on the Russian left. The result was a disaster.
Augereau's corps started off in good order, but a snow squall came
up that blinded and disoriented the entire corps. When visibility improved, the French found themselves marching 90 degrees off course
with their flanks near the muzzles of masses of cannon. The cannon, followed by the Russian infantry, all but demolished the corps.
The French were now in a very bad position. To try and save the day,
Murat's cavalry corps was ordered to charge the center of the Russian
line. What followed was one of the great cavalry charges of all time. The
cavalry sliced through the entire Russian army, turned around, and
slashed back through it again. The attack paralyzed the Russians long
enough so that Davout had time to join the fight.
Davout's corps deployed on the French right. Soon after contact, they
were rolling up the Russian left flank. Just as it appeared that the Russians would be trapped in a pincher, Lestocq's Prussian corps appeared. Lestocq had been keeping Napoleon's other column under Ney
occupied. The Prussians had been able to slip away from Ney and now,
they appeared to save the day for the Allies. Lestocq smashed into
Davout's now-tired troops and drove them back.
As night fell, Ney joined the battle. He did some damage to the Russian right, then fell back to secure the French left.
Both armies had been badly mauled. It is unlikely that either side
wanted to continue the fight. Napoleon "won" the Battle of Eylau when
Bennigsen withdrew during the night (probably due to the fact that
Napoleon had two relatively fresh corps: Ney's and the Guard).
Napoleon stayed in place for a couple of days so that he could claim a
victory, but no one who knew the facts could be fooled. The French
lost close to one-third of their force and the Russians about one-fifth.
No general could afford many such victories.
(Continued on page 34)

Design Notes

Steve is the designer of RAM and The
Civil War for Avalon Hill Microcomputer
Games, as well as the programmer of
TSR's Sniper! for play on Compuserve.

T

here's more to 'user friendly' than

rodents, fast- dropping menus, and
cute trash icons. It's
probably more important in
less showy areas like letting a
player begin and end the
game when s/he wishes. An
amazing number of games ignore this simple concept.
Despite a designer's imposition of an authoritarian, singlesave system, I can still save my
game, then quit and rename
the save file. Or I can
copy it to another
disk, then resume
the game and play
on. If I die, I just go
back to my copy.
Now, though, I curse
the programmer's
user-hostile attitude
that makes me work
so hard to do what I
want. (My first article
for CGW, in fact, was
a description of a
disk swapping system to circumvent
Wizardry's early failings in this area.)

games adds an additional task for the
programmer. You must have a simple
method for displaying available saved
games and letting the player choose
which one to save or restore. However,
the additional code is minimal. Using
Basic and the alternate screen pages on
the IBM, you can produce clever displays

the same whether it's the first time
through or the last.
It's important to remember, too, that
the type of game will determine the type
of saves that are possible. For an RPG
type of game, the main program is a fairly simple loop, alternately executing
player commands and events.
A save facility can thus be
called from almost anywhere
(Figure 1). A wargame poses
additional problems, since
there are many distinct phases.
Saving a game here is no harder, but restarting is tougher.
Most wargames solve the problem by allowing saves only at
certain logical places like the
end of a cycle of movement and combat. (Figure 2) Usually this is
no handicap, since any
cycle takes only a few
minutes to perform (As
long as you can make
multiple saves!).

HAVE YOU
BEEN SAVED?

From a designer's
point of view, if you
want people to play
your game more
than a few times,
you need to make it
easy to explore and
try different things.
Not everyone has the
time to play each
game from the beginning. In addition, few
games have any
provisions for experienced players, so even after you solve
all the early problems, you have to go
back and do them over each time you
want to play, unless there is a way to
save 'advanced' positions.
Some programmers consider it cheating
to not replay their game from the start
each time your character is killed. As a
game designer, one of my guiding principles has been to let the players decide
what's cheating and what's not. It's incredibly frustrating to play a game in
which you can die with a wrong
keystroke after many hours of careful
play. It's more frustrating when you can't
reload a game saved from shortly before
the fatal error to try again.
Naturally, the ability to save multiple

by Steve Estvanik

with a few lines of code, using just the
FILES command and the SCREEN() function.
Early sections of a game often become
tiresome, even tedious. Most players
would prefer to save a game after they've
done the boring and repetitive parts and
start right in with the interesting stuff on
subsequent plays. This also says something about current game design. In a
space game that requires you to repetitively explore, map and mine planets, for
example, it would be nice if after the Nth
play, you could let the computer take
care of that in the form of an automated
ship to do the fiddly bits while you concentrate on the more interesting aspects.
Nevertheless, most games treat the player

One place where multiple saves within a
turn is important is
when we start to
design play by mail
(PBM) or play by
electronic mail features
into games. Now,
players need to exchange disks or files
during a turn. Figure 3
outlines the processing
of a turn of PBM
Wooden Ships & Iron
Men as I'm currently
designing it for the
IBM version. The exact
sequence of phases is
modified, giving a
slight asymmetry to the
phases. This minimizes
the number of times a
disk changes hands in
the course of a round,
but the logical sequence of events
remains the same.
The exchange required by the grappling/ungrappling routines can
eliminated. If the autograppling feature is
enabled, the computer will decide when
and who to grapple. This will be most
useful in the early stages when there are
few grappling choices anyway, and most
possibilities are your own ships.
So, you can start to see that some of
the most friendly aspects of a game may
be nearly invisible to players. The idea is
to make the game as easy to play in as
many ways as the player desires.
Flexibility in saving games is a major help
to learning, experimenting with, and ultimately, enjoying a game.

Gotham Gazette

Special Edition
June 1,1989

All the News That Fits, We Print!

CAPED CRUSADER
COMBATS CRIME
Commissioner
Gordon
Summons
Batman!
Penguin, Joker
Create Crime Wave!
The clouds reflected the
famous Bat-signal as it
shone brightly over
Gotham City last night! "I
had no choice but to summon Batman," Police Commissioner James Gordon
told reporters in a press conference held today on the
steps of police Headquarters.
"The Joker and the Penguin
are loose again and no one
can handle those two except
Batman!" Commissioner Gor
don advised the public that
the "cute" little robot penguins that are roaming the
streets of Gotham City are
part of the Penguin's hideous
plan to take over the world.
"Saints preserve us!" exclaimed Police Chief O'Hara
when the commissioner admitted to reporters that
Batman's arch enemy, the
Joker had kidnapped Robin,
the Boy Wonder. "The fiend
even planted bombs in the
city's sewer system."
Batman is up to the challenge in Batman, the Caped
Crusader, a new computer
game offered by Data East
for the C-64/128 and the
Atari ST computer systems.
Data East wisely planned the
release of this game to roughly coincide with the longawaited Batman movie star-

ring Michael Keaton which is
scheduled for release this
summer.
There are two
scenarios offered in
this game;Batman
Vs. The Penguin
and Batman
vs. The
Joker.
The

Joker scenario is the simpler
and more interesting of the
two. This reporter personally
never cared much for the
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Batman, The Caped Crusader
C-64/128, Atari ST
$24.95 (C-64), $39.95 (ST)
Ocean, Ltd.
Data East, USA, Inc.
San Jose, CA

by David M. Wilson

Price: 64K
Penguin (Waugh! Waugh!
Waugh!) as a villain anyway!

MUSIC AND
ART NOTES:
GOTHAM
PHILHARMONIC TO
OFFER
"BATMAN"
THEME
The Gotham Philharmonic
orchestra will play the Batman theme made popular in
the television series of
the 1960's. Tickets
may be purchased by
calling the Gotham
Civic center.
The ST version of
the Batman theme
is a fairly
reasonable rendition of the familiar
tune. The C64's
version is completely different. It's as if
the conversion
people didn't care,
but just took a
generic adventure
tune and slammed
it on the program.
The C64 has the
capability to play
the Batman theme,
so why didn't the
programmers use
it?
The graphics of
both games are of
high quality, especially the ST version. The
programs operate
via a series of
comic book frame
"windows" that give
the game the look
and feel of a Bat-

man comic book that players
can manipulate.

sion is $1.00 for adults and
$4.00 for children. Paid admission entitles access to all
exhibits and all rides.

BATMAN
LOSES
FALSE
TEETH

The discriminating Batman
fan will want to know why
there is more than one Joker
beating up on Batman in the
funhouse. The Joker is a
tough nut to crack, even
when there's only one of
him. But he is especially
tough in this game. Every
manifestation of the clown
prince of crime carries a bowling pin to clobber Batman
with. The failure of the
documentation to explain the
presence of multiple Jokers is
unfortunate.

A small group of
pedestrians were confused
yesterday when they observed Batman pulling a set
of false teeth from his utility
belt. "I guess they were his
Bat-teeth," one observer commented.
The game will require
players to guide Batman
through a search for useful
objects. For instance, in the
Joker scenario, I picked up a
fish and found I couldn't use
it until I'd first used the false
teeth. The fish and all foods
restore a portion of Batman's
life/courage/strength etc.
which is slowly ebbing away.
Some objects are no help at
all. Don't bother putting on
the Clogs (wooden shoes), because they will only slow Batman down. On the opposite
end of the spectrum, the tennis shoes speed Batman up.
Further, if Batman gets in a
particularly hairy situation he
can put on the false nose.
Surprisingly, nobody seems
to recognize him with the
simple disguise on. Puzzling
out the use of these and
other objects keeps interest
from flagging too quickly.
Players will have to stand
right over the objects to pick
them up. One quick hint: Batman does not need to stand
directly over the bombs to disarm them. Just use the wire
cutters from anywhere in the
room.

GOTHAM
CITY FAIR
OPENS
The annual Gotham City
Fair opened today at the
Gotham Fairgrounds. Admis-

BUSINESS
BOOMS FOR
GOTHAM
UMBRELLA
FACTORY
If the booming factory
which just opened in the garment section of the city is
any sign, the umbrella business is booming in rainy
Gotham. According to inside
sources, the new factory is
operating around the clock.
In the Penguin scenario,
Batman will have a hard time
finding the Penguin's master
computer. It is obviously at
the umbrella factory, but the
Penguin's henchmen will run
our hero ragged as he tries
to locate it. Batman's goal is
to find the computer and
destroy it. Don't forget to use
the lift key to go downstairs.

EDITORIAL:
IS BATMAN
SLOWING
DOWN?
None of us really knows exactly how old Batman is.
We are sure of one thing,
though, he's been around a

long time. That may be the
reason that simple
henchmen are able to stand
toe to toe in combat with the
taped crusader lately.
Part of the thrill of "being"
Batman is being able to do
the extra-ordinary. Batman,
the Caped Crusader is a
wonderful maze game that
keeps players searching for
the correct objects and using
them in the right places, but
the game doesn't let the
players experience the "feel"
of being Batman. Our hero is
not permitted to swing onto
the scene of the crime with
the Bat-rope and he spends
more time running from the
crooks than bashing them.
The idea of the game isn't
to beat the crooks, it's to
solve the puzzles. In fact,
there is little advantage to be
gained in slugging it out with
henchmen. If Batman beats
up a bad guy in the ST version, he wins a small morsel
of food which he can eat for
extra strength. In the

C64/128 version, there is no
advantage (no free lunch) to
winning a fight. Therefore,
it's usually best for Batman
to stun his opponents and
run before they revive and
shoot him. Often it is an excellent strategy to duck into
the next room and quickly
duck back. The villains are almost always gone when you
return. Does that sound like
the Batman we know and
love? There is also no appearance of the batmobile or
the batplane, even though
players do begin the game in
the familiar surroundings of
the Batcave, and get to use
the bat-computer.
All in all, though, true
batophiles will probably like
this game even though it
fails, in some aspects, to
reproduce the crime-fighting/crook-stomping Batman
that we expect. There is certainly enough "Pow!" and
"Socko!" for most.
—David M. Wilson

Game Hints

y

es, we're here in the backroom
again (I think I'll have to have the
place enlarged; the crowd is getting
bigger all the time). Before we get to the
mailbag, however, a word (or several)
about SASE's (self-addressed stamped envelopes). At the end of each column, I always make it quite clear that if you live in
U.S., you must enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope.
However, every month, without fail, in
come 2-3 letters that do not include a
SASE, or sometimes the envelope is
there but no stamp. Please folks, before
you send your questions off, make sure
you have that SASE in there so you'll get
a reply. Now, on to the games!

Scorpion's Mail

Battletech:
A lot of people are having trouble in
the map room at the end of the game.
As long as you have the manual, getting
the password is easy. Take a look at the
star map in there. You should notice that
there is something that sets several of the
planets apart from the others. Once you
know what that is, you should have no
trouble figuring out the password.

King's Quest IV
Quite a few folks have been struggling
with the whale's tongue. It is a tough
climb, especially if you don't start from
the right spot, which is the far left. From
there you want to go mainly on a
diagonal until you reach top center. It
just takes a lot of perseverance (and
maybe a little luck, but it can be done).
I've heard it's supposed to be easier with
a mouse, but not having one myself, I
can't confirm this. Also, several people
have been wondering when, if ever, night
will come. Well, you can wait around for
it, but that does take quite awhile. It's
much better to get the fruit for daddy
(remember, that's why you're here in the
first place?). Once you do that, nighttime
will come right along.

Bard's Tale III
The death's-head names in Tarmitia
have been giving some folks a little difficulty. You get the first name in Berlin
(just walk all around the place and you'll
hear it). Then, you go through the
various portals to the other time periods
until you find the place where the name
works. That gets you another name. You
find where that belongs, you get another
name, and so on, until you end up back
in Berlin again with the last name. There
is, of course, a lot of going back and
forth until you have found all the names.
On the other hand, if you are up on your
mythology, you can bypass all that if you
happen to know the name of the death's
head in Berlin (Hint: all the gods are
gods of war).

Wasteland:
A number of adventurers have arrived
at Base Cochise and found themselves
unable to go any further. Don't bother
about the computer inside. You can't do
anything to it, or anything else you see
there. What you really want to do is make
a careful and thorough check of all the
walls inside the base. That should help
you on your way.

Wizardry V:
There is no need at all to go into the
Mystery Playhouse at Manfretti's. Disappointing, especially since you have to pay
to get in there, but true. You won't find
anything important inside and you could
very well end up with your party wiped
Continued on page 42)

Review

Dave Arneson is the co-designer of Dungeons & Dragons
and a regular contributor to COW.
oyais, Chimerica (World Press International) -- Today
marked the third anniversary of El Hefe's (The
Chief's) rise to power in this small Central American
Republic. Whether El Hefe and his communist allies will be
in power a year from now is questionable. The state of
emergency he declared early in his rule quickly became a

Hidden

Agenda
Springboard Software's
"Banana Republic"
Simulator
by Dave Arneson

Hidden Agenda
TITLE:
IBM, Macintosh
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED ON: Macintosh
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Jim Gasperini
PUBLISHER:
Springboard Software, Inc.
Minneapolis, MN

,

state of siege. Today, Chimerica is a ravaged nation, torn
by factionalism, debt, and war. The alliance that threw out
the Farsantes is now at war with itself.

Viva El Presidente!
Opening Hidden Agenda brought dreams of again becoming El Presidente. Instead of the humorous board game
Junta or Coup D'Etat-style Banana Republic approach I was
expecting, I found something far more intriguing.
A lot of work and hard research is evident in this game.
The portraits of some 30 'significant' personalities can appear during the course of the game. Each one of these
NPCs comes with a full biography, as well as their own ideas
of what should be done. From a pool of nine characters,
three from each party, you pick your ministers and twentyone other leading citizens offer opinions on various courses
of action. Such actions will determine how successful your
term of office will be.
You begin with a three party coalition and a mandate to
rule by decree for three years. Your ministers reflect the different factions that divide the country. Since there is no possible way to keep everyone happy, you cannot simply steer
the middle road and expect to succeed. Of course, there is
no way to keep everyone happy in the "real" world.

Affairs of State (Game Mechanics)
The game is very straightforward. The rulebooks are helpful, but rarely needed after the first couple of games. A game
can be played in just under two hours (Of course, it's even
shorter if there is a coup!). You begin by answering three

questions from a group of reporters. Your answers define
your goals in the game, your "agenda" as it were. After your
press conference, you enter the Presidential Palace.
Your office, an environment of windows and menus, is
your world. Here, the first order of business is to review the
nine candidates for cabinet positions and appoint four of
these as Ministers of: Agriculture, Defense, Internal Affairs,
and External Affairs. Each "candidate" delivers a comment
and play proceeds.
Next, the program allows considerable flexibility. I usually
begin by reviewing the nine
progress charts that depict the
state of the country. Then, I
refer to the newspaper reports
from the four different
newspapers. Note that it is possible to begin with the "Newest
News" and page backward.
Since there is generally more
than one report from each
paper, it is a good idea to
page back and study the background of the most current
events. At this point, I usually
consult with each minister and
go over, at least, one matter.
Also, sooner or later, you will
experience some Encounters.
These dialogues represent the
"heartbeat" of the people. Who
you end up talking to is a matter of personal choice and intuition. In each encounter,
one of your ministers will also
be present. When the NPC
presents his/her complaint,
you can either: agree with them, refuse their request, or ask
your minister for advice. You must then decide who to listen
to. Sometimes, you can put the item on the agenda and
consult with your entire cabinet,
A Crisis is similar to an encounter, except the NPC comes
uninvited into your presence. As in an encounter, you have
a minister in attendance, but unlike the previous activity, you
cannot "put the item on a future agenda." You must decide
what to do. Later, you may try to go back and revise the
situation, if necessary.
In a Coup situation, you must decide whether to resist or
not. Rarely will you really have much choice in the matter. I
once had a right wing and left wing coup back-to-back. Fortunately, the army and people backed me up. My advice? Be
nice to some part of the army. You will need them. The trick
is not to become controlled by them.

The Middle of the Muddle (Strategic Note)
I found that taking any sort of extreme measures led quickly to problems. Further, treading the middle way is hard. The
only times I survived in power were when I leaned toward the
"pink" side of politics. Of the three parties, the NLF seems to
have a definite edge. On the other hand, a Liberal position
will also take its lumps. Such a government seems to
prevent any right wing coups most of the time. Usually, this
government sees an elections result with the NLF taking
power.

Meanwhile On The Right (Strategic Note)
The Popular Stability party and the Christian Reform move-

ment are both pretty reactionary. Run the country their way
and the National Liberation Front (guerrilla warfare) will be at
your throat, Pronto!

• Encounters with some individuals always have the same
results. The leader of the landless laborers always says the
same thing, no matter what you do!

My experiment in "Right Wing" political oppression ended
in early coups and nasty judgments from history (the evaluation at the end of the game). U.S. backed "reactionary" efforts never seem to amount to much. So, an army run by
the NLF seems to be a "good" choice.

• Relations with the U.S. almost always go bad quite early.
The worst part about not "toeing the line" with the U.S. is
that U.S. aid goes down the gutter. This aid being cut off is
shortly followed by any IMF aid being cut off, as well.
Without outside funds coming in, the bills pile up quickly
and the U.S.S.R. will not effectively take up the slack.

The NLF's Gloria Jimenez Fleming seems to work well as
the Minister of External Affairs. Her major problem is a real
desire to get involved with the Eastern Bloc. Do this too
early, however, and money will dry up from both Uncle Sam
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Using her, I
found myself able to get economic aid from both the Eastern and Western blocs. It didn't last long, though.
The ministries of Agriculture and Internal affairs call for a
moderate. You shouldn't use either a Right- or Left-wing
NPC as Internal Affairs Minister when the game is early. No
one needs Revolutionary Tribunals or Death Squads any earlier than absolutely necessary.

Talk Is Cheap (Game Hints)
When you talk to your cabinet, the ministers will generally
want to talk about what they want to. Often the topics they
raise will have nothing to do with their position in the
cabinet. An NLF leader may be in charge of Agriculture, for
example, but will want to talk about the army all the time. Be
certain to only choose topics that you want to deal with.
Everyone has advice. Most advice supports a given NPC's
personal position. In fact, some of the advice given by ministers seems designed to undercut a "weak" president. This
"Bad" advice usually comes from ministers whose advice has
been scorned in the past. Often, a minister who has had his
advice repeatedly rejected will resign. They will never serve
again and their faction becomes unhappy with you. Of
course, simply following everyone's advice also gets you kicked out of office mucho pronto.
Whatever you actually decide to do, it is very important to
remember that your decisions are not always followed. To
find out what is really happening on an important decision,
you will need to access the papers, talk to people outside the
cabinet, or .. .

We Interrupt This Turn For A Potential Crisis!
The first few times I saw the message which indicates a
potential crisis, I almost jumped through the ceiling. It is
usually important, but not always. Some people always
think anything they have to say is important. They are absolutely positive that they would make a better leader than
you. Watch them!
A crisis means limited ability to make decisions. Often, you
only have two choices and sometimes none. What you
decide may quickly lead to another crisis. After a few games,
you can see trouble coming and learn how to avoid some of
the storms.

Revolutionary Limitations (Game Problems)
• The NPCs' biographies and secret agendas never
change. The nine persons available for appointment as ministers are always the same and even their reactions can be
predicted after a few games. The game could use more variation in these areas.
• Certain decisions seem to be set. For example, there
will be price controls, no matter what, and cracking down
en the right-wing Death Squads always leads to an attempted right-wing coup.

This final consideration brings up an important thought. Is
Hidden Agenda a simulation or a game with political statements? It is, of
course, a political
simulation, but it was
also designed by
people who made
decisions somewhat
subjectively about the
game's play. It still
stands well as a
simulation. Of course,
such set behaviors
can be an advantage.
As El Presidente, you
do not place anything
on the agenda by
yourself. You need someone else to bring it up. Say, isn't
the Rights Activist always in favor of getting rid of the Death
Squads? Quick, have my secretary set up a meeting.

The "Hidden" Agenda
Technically, these are called NPC motivators. Some ministers will vote one way in council and act in their own interests, anyway. Thus, the NLF and the "Old" Army are always
at each other's throats. In fact, some cabinet ministers will
perform a three-sixty during a crisis and refuse to back you.
Some crises have only one answer. For example, if price
controls are not instituted, it will cause up to 300% inflation
and have angry workers marching in the streets. If you do institute controls, the "poor" people will riot and demand the
controls be removed. This leaves you with the choice of calling out the army (not real useful in terms of building
popularity) or agreeing. Then, comes the next "Crisis" and
the trade union workers come into the streets demanding
that the controls be re-imposed! To add insult to injury, the
"Judgment of History" at the end of the game will say that
you waffle a lot. This tends to make you feel manipulated by
the game and that isn't good.

The Judgment Of History (Victory)
There is no clear-cut victory at the end of the game. After
some twenty-odd games, I have been elected president twice
and had my tenure extended once. Nevertheless, what you
get at the end of the game is an analysis, written in the future, which examines your three years in office. It may not
sound exciting, but everyone I know who has played the
game has kept going back and trying to "do better."

The Judgment of the Reviewer
In my opinion, the game too often goes the way of
Nicaragua. Personally, I think that the U.S. always coming
across as a "heavy" is a bit much. To me, the game should
be more than a political litmus test. Still, if you want a good
(and deep) simulation game that will keep you coming back
for more, you will definitely like Hidden Agenda.

Review

"Presumed
Guilty"
Cosmi's Game of
Real Time Intrigue

P

by Scorpia

resumed Guilty is a sort of quasi-adventure set in the
near future; 1996 to be exact. However, before you
get around to playing the game, you have to make
your way through some confusing instructions and an installation utility that
doesn't work very
well. If you intend to
play on floppies, there
is no problem. You
simply follow the instructions in the
manual. However, the
procedure for installing the game on hard
disk isn't quite what
the book says.

Hard
Driving Game
(Technical
Difficulties)
What you should do
is ignore the manual
and proceed as follows: put disk 1 in the
A drive and type
SETUPH c: (or
whatever your hard drive is if it
Presumed Guilty
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
isn't c). This will begin the inC-64, IBM
IBM
REVIEWED:
stallation, but you will probably
PRICE:
$29.95 (IBM), $24.95 (C-64)
encounter a difficulty when it
DESIGNER:
Carrie Carroll
Ray Hogue, George Johnson,
asks for the second disk. Mainand Paul Norman
ly, it will look at the second disk
PUBLISHER:
Cosmi Corporation
briefly, then ask for the disk
Wilmington, CA
"with the batch files". That is
disk 1, as there are no batch files on disk 2.
So, put disk 1 back in the drive (or, you could just leave
the first disk in after it asks for disk 2). When it has finished
re-copying the files, put disk 2 back in your A drive and do a
COPY A:*.* to get all the files from the second disk onto
your hard disk. Note also that the directory created is called
PG, not SIS as the manual states. You can't get around this
by just using manual copy to get the files onto your hard
disk. The setup does other things as well, and you have to
go through the entire procedure outlined above to get the
game properly on your hard drive.
There are further technical difficulties when it comes to restoring. There is no in-game save feature. In order to make a
backup of your position, you first exit the game with the
"logoff' command, which updates the relevant play files.
Then you run a utility called BACKUPPG which creates a sub-

directory (with the name of your choice) and copies the play
files into it. To restore a position, you are supposed to run
GOBACKPG (and the sub-directory name), which is supposed to copy the files back out. Unfortunately, GOBACKPG
has incorrect syntax and the files don't get copied back to
the play files. You can edit the GOBACKPG.BAT file to correct this, or you can just do a COPY SUBDIRNAME\*.* to restore the files (which is what I did).

The Falcon Has Landed (The Story)
With the technical part taken care of, we can proceed to
the story. The year is 1996. A new, world-wide computer
police network, Copnet, has just been installed. You are a
recently hired investigator for Copnet, waiting for your first assignment. Your initial task is to investigate the death of one
Ray Lamonte, who was working on a very hush-hush assignment related to "Star Wars" weaponry. Poor Ray died in a car
crash the previous evening, soon after receiving an award for
his work in satellite laser weapons.
As the investigation continues, it becomes obvious that
there is more to Lamonte's demise than was first apparent.
You might say there is a conspiracy here (and you'd be
right!). In fact, Falcon pops up to confirm the idea. Who is
Falcon? Good question, because you don't know and you'd
better find out. Falcon doesn't like Copnet. So, he frames
you for murder. Of course, you'll eventually be found innocent, but the damage resulting from your conviction will
be enough to cause Copnet to be taken down due to adverse public opinion.
It's nothing personal, of course. Falcon doesn't hate you.
You just happen to be in the right (wrong?) place at the right
time. Thus, while you're working on Lamonte's case, you are
also trying to piece together Falcon's identity from clues Falcon gives you.
Every so often, Falcon interrupts proceedings to send you
a little "lovenote" and show you that another letter in your
logon password has been discovered (there are 20 letters in
your password). If he gets all 20 letters before you finish your
investigation, it's all over for you.
All your work is done from a computer terminal and is accomplished by the "Feedback" method. Basically, you feed
back into the computer a lot of the information you get so
you can obtain more information.
It is essentially a matter of being thorough and persistent,
as well as patient, since some results take awhile to come
back. There are also a number of photographs to look at.
Make sure you always read the captions. On occasion, the
important information is in the caption, not the picture.
A cassette tape comes with the game and contains fictional
conversations obtained through wiretaps, satellite pickups,
etc. It's a good idea to listen to the tape once or twice. If
there are some things you can't make out, don't worry. You
can always review transcripts in the game itself. The conversations on the tape are not in chronological order, so you
may want to make notations concerning time and date in
order to determine the flow of events.
You also get to play around with DNA imprinting. Eventually, your anonymous agents will obtain DNA samples from
just about every suspect. These can be used to make forensic comparisons. For instance, scrapings taken from under
Lamonte's fingernails might be matched up with the DNA
samples from likely suspects.
(Continued on page 31)

Game Ratings Chart

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG): Simulations
of historical or futuristic warfare
from a command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

(Continued from page 26)

The best way to learn how to use the DNA comparison is
to match a sample against itself. Move one strip until you
get a positive match. Then move both strips together and
see if they continue to coincide (you want the counter to
show a .95 correspondence). If not, stop, move one strip
again until you get a match and try again.
One thing you want to be careful about is not to investigate yourself too soon. When your name turns up as a
suspect, there is a case file number with it. Entering that
number shows you the evidence against you. This also triggers Falcon to start hacking your password. You don't want
that to happen too soon, so hold off on looking at your own
file for awhile. You must do that eventually, however, in
order to set off new events that keep the game moving.
Then, there is UMBRA, the top security clearance available.
Some information in the computer's data base requires the
UMBRA password before it can be accessed. Make note
when you receive a message stating "UMBRA clearance required," so you can enter the clues again later.
As you might expect, you don't know this password. No
one is going to give it to you outright. You have to figure it
out yourself. Falcon will drop a hint about it, but not until 19
letters of your password have been determined. That is a
good place to save the game. Then, restore to an earlier
position so you have some time to try breaking into UMBRA.
You only get three attempts at the password before a message comes in deactivating your terminal for attempting illegal entry. However, there is a way around this. Don't read

the message. So long as you don't read the message, you
can continue to work on getting into UMBRA. Once you
have the password, you can return to your most recent save
and enter it to read the top-secret stuff.
The problem is that
the hint is rather ambiguous. There are a
lot of associations
with the final clue you
get and you can
spend quite a bit of
time trying them all.
To help reduce the
possibilities, pay close
attention to the news
bulletin announcing
the meeting between
the president and the
new Soviet First
Secretary.
Overall, Presumed Guilty is a very unevenly-paced game. At
the start, you have a lot of names to enter into the computer, and things seem to zip along. Then, you hit a dry
spell and waste a lot of time waiting for results (real-time
dead time). The most telling point against the game, however, is the fact that it does not seem to have been
playtested through to the end. Having finally tracked down
the Falcon's lair, and transmitted an arrest warrant, I sat
back to await results. They weren't what I expected.
(Continued on page 54)

Review

Roe is co-designer of Wizardry IV: Return of Werdna and
contributed to the design of Ultima IV.

A

shadow of evil has fallen over the land. No, this is
not the beginning of Lord of the Rings, but of
Infocom's marvelous new game, Journey. The game
does pay an acknowledged homage to J.R.R. Tolkien's clas-

Long Play's

Journey
Into Light

ready in place as the game begins. If, however, any character's name is truly offensive to the player, he may be given a
new one. Bergon is the big fighter, a good fellow to have in
a fracas. Praxix, the novice Wizard, has a pouch of reagents
for casting spells. Esher is the physician whose powers of observation provide timely insights at crucial moments. The narrator of the story is Tag, an apprentice food merchant, who
keeps track of inventory for the party. Nowhere are Tag's features or
talents really
discussed,
but you just
know from
the feel of
the character
that he has
Hobbit blood
in him somewhere.

The jumpoff point for
the journey is
the small
town of
Lavos. The
town boasts
a general
store, run by
by Roe R. Adams, III
a jolly fellow
named
Webba, and
the obligatory
tavern. Be
TITLE:
Journey
sic epic throughout the story, though.
sure to thoroughly peruse Webba's store,
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Macintosh
noting any travel posters hanging on the
REVIEWED ON: Macintosh
A black evil has arisen, threatening to cancel
walls.
It should be observed that, unlike many
PRICE:
$49.95
out the world. Four stalwart adventurers leave
DESIGNER:
Marc Blank
other adventure games, Journey, has no exto save civilization. Along the way they must
PUBLISHER:
Infocom
cess items. Every item that is not nailed down
Cambridge, MA
find four stones held by each of the nonin this game (and an occasional item that is
human races: blue for Nymphs, green for
nailed down) is essential to solving a puzzle somewhere
Elves, brown for Dwarves, and, naturally, red
along the line. The tavern is full of the usual small town beer
for Wizards (We have always suspected that they were a race
guzzlers who are very suspicious of outsiders. The party has
apart from mankind). The four stones lead to the two other
to nose around a bit to find anyone who will talk to them.
stones which, in turn, reveal the secret hiding place of the

Infocom's Tolkienesque
Adventure Game

"one stone that rules them all!" Trees talk to you, orcs want
your body parts, and dwarves lead you through an underground citadel where an unspeakable ancient horror lies
awaiting in the depths. The only items missing are the drums!
All the time, the party is coaxed on by the master Wizard,
Astrix, who prods, cajoles, and provides hints about what the
party should do next. He also dies spectacularly whenever
the party makes a major mistake and allows evil to win. Now,
that is motivation to restore the game and try again!
Note, though, that only the veneer of Journey is
Tolkienish, for this game heralds the long awaited return of
Zork impresario, Marc Blank, to what should be the best
seller list. (Gaming Historians will please note that after much
heated debate, a panel of experts has finally determined that
Border Zone was actually written by Sir Francis Bacon). Journey is full of delightful puzzles, superb prose, and finely
honed legends that will be a challenge to all levels of players.
The flavor of the puzzles harkens back to the Golden Age of
Infocom Adventures, and reflects Marc's long standing
status as a Master Designer. Ah, the Mill mines, the underwater pools of the Nymphs, and the entire town of Zan, all
await those players who love fine puzzles.
The game begins with our party of four adventurers, al-

Outside of Lavos, the road forks. Here is the first challenge
of the game, for without an experienced guide, members of
the party start dying like flies. Were you one of the clever
players who secured the services of the disreputable guide,
Minar, back in Lavos? If you could not decide whether to
hire such an obvious rogue or not, consult the back of the
game box (whoever reads the back of boxes!), where it plainly states, "You'll share the adventures of Tag, Praxix, Bergon,
Esher, and Minar as they solve puzzles . . . "
I his might be an Infocom first, printed hints on the back of
the box.
The fork in the road is where decisions begin and it is appropriately named as Journey's storyline is constantly forking
into different bewildering arrays of "what ifs." The player is
strongly advised to keep a very large collection of well
notated Save Games. These will come into numerous uses
as the story unfolds and the player frequently slaps himself
on the forehead while exclaiming, "Oh no, so I was supposed to keep track of [fill in the blank]." Only judiciously
placed Save Games will avoid the frustration of having to
replay Journey all over again to reread a special legend or
note a particular event in detail. Any player who has a printer
is highly encouraged to print out all of the rather lengthy,

but interesting, legends. A piece here and a subtle piece
there is often needed much later to solve a puzzle.
Journey would be a good text adventure game, but what
elevates it to the dizzying heights of a major work is Marc's innovative command structure. No longer is the player
chained to yet-another-clever-parser. In this game, almost
everything is a Mac-like point and click. Each location brings
up a fresh series of options for the player. Choosing one option may negate other possible choices or open up a whole
new set of options. Sometimes, an important option will be
in bold type, other times it won't. It is really important that
the "Look Around," "Examine," and "Scout" options be
chosen whenever available, although please note that sometimes Scouts get captured and don't return! Such occasions
are good spots to Save Game before venturing onward, just
so the many flavors of paths can be checked out thoroughly.
"Get Advice" can solicit all sorts of interesting comments and
further options.
Other games have tried icon clicking before, so what
makes Journey so innovative? The answer lies in the manner in which the different options light up and go away as
the game flows along. There is a very subtle, almost hypnotic effect that sweeps the player along. You notice yourself
staring intently at the command screen every time you select
an option, because you have no idea what new options your
action might cause to spring forth. If you are not careful,
you will lose control to the game. In fact, you will probably
plunge down some clever dead end and Astrix will, yet again,
die flamboyantly.
A word about "Dead Ends" is necessary. Amusingly
enough, the manual emphatically states, "There are no 'dead
ends' in Journey." Actually, the game has many erroneous
paths that lead to the victory of Evil and Astrix taking the big
plunge from his high tower. Certainly, each of these paths
may be construed as a "Dead End"!
No game is perfect and there are three cautionary notes
about this one. First, really watch what spells you use to
solve a puzzle. The quantities of each reagent (earth, fire, air,
and water) are very limited, and new sources appear at rare
intervals. Several of the puzzles allow solutions utilizing any
of several spells. If the player does not consult his pouch's in.
ventory to see the current levels of each reagent before casting the spell, the players may box themselves into a corner
later on in the game. The Second area concerns the puzzle
of how one speaks Elvish. The solution to this puzzle practically necessitates either an eidetic memory or printouts of
the legends. Even then, the player must make a fairly long
leap into the realms of logic to come up with the composite
answer that is needed. Third, and last, is the puzzle of the
Wizard's Runes over the door. This puzzle is at least several
orders of magnitude below the calibre of every other puzzle
in the game. The player's should just type in singularly each
word in the rune phrase until they hit upon the correct one,
and ignore any thought about figuring out why, the effort
would be greatly wasted.
Graphically, the game excels. Unlike previous Infocom efforts that dipped their toes into the graphic waters, Journey
takes the plunge. Propelled by Donald Langosy's superbly
sensitive graphics, the game lives and takes on three dimensionality. The graphics do not need the gimmick of animation to be impressive. Every new scene has a totally new
graphic and some areas where action occurs have multiple
graphics. For those elite who have access to a Mac II, there
is an extra diskette just for Mac II color graphics. The
graphics fairly leap off the screen at you. Breathtaking, indeed!

Unlike Bilbo Baggin's journal, Tag's story can not be called
"There and Back Again," because it does not end with this
game. In the finest gaming tradition, this release is only Part
One of the "Golden Age Trilogy."
In this reviewer's opinion, Journey is the best effort to date
of any game designer struggling to find a new way for the
game to interface with the player. It goes a long way to
breaking
down traditional preconceived notions about
how games
should be
structured.
However, because it is so
totally innovative,
Mediagenic's
marketing
division
(Infocom's
-parent company) was apparently hard pressed as to what
label to apply to the game, so they coined yet another new
one: Role-Play Chronicles. While it is doubtful whether any
consumer will be able to remember the fine distinctions that
separate all these adventure game marketing slogans from
one another, players should ignore the hype and buy "The
Beer.

(Continued from page 15)

The Battle
of Eylau
"Artillerie, Faire Feu!"
(The Scenario)
Type
lnf
Cav
Art

French
65,864
13,250
262

Allies
66,010
11,130
508

There was no way to simulate the snow
squalls that periodically showed up
during the battle. Except for the absence
of lakes and streams, then, this scenario
might be taking place during the summer. To simulate the highly successful
cavalry charge, the melee factor was
made high for the cavalry, as was their
chance-to-charge factor. The infantry is
less likely to form squares, as well. Apparently, the snow and hard ground
made it more difficult for infantry to
defend themselves against cavalry.
Whether the game is a board game or
computer game, it is difficult for the designer to force the player to use the Guard
historically. In fact, Napoleon rarely used
the Guard. It was always there as a
threat, but its use was usually either as a
last resort (Waterloo) or as a coup de

grace (Ligny). The gamer wants to use
these powerful units early and often, but
that is ahistorical.
I experimented with activating the Russian forces more slowly, which would
have not only simulated history better,
but would have allowed for a more seesaw battle. The French chewed up the
pieces, however. The computer general
has no sense of marshalling forces and
will send units in against impossible
odds. Keep in mind when designing
scenarios that the computer forces
should be pretty much intact and not
have to do any fancy maneuvering.

Design Notes

Abstracts from
the Journal of
Computer
Game Design
Pac-Man™ = Zork™
by Chris Crawford (Balance of
Power: 1990 and Guns & Butter)
In this article, Chris described the possible actions which could take place in a
game as a "gametree." This series of
branching points corresponding to actions was previously called a "storynet" by
Chris. The thesis point of the article is
that the structure of a story is linear, but
the structure of a game is more complex.
He notes that a single playing of a game
constitutes a traversal of the game tree,
hence it is structurally identical to a story.
Indeed, a game might be called a "storygenerator," since it creates a linear story
in the playing. Further, he observes that
the number of possible stories (i.e. possibilities of replay) depends on the complexity of the gametree. A scrawny tree
structure generates very few replays, while
a bushy tree structure generates an abundance of replays.
There are two primary approaches to
creating gametrees: the "hard-wired" and
"soft-wired" approaches. The former uses
a tree structure where each node specifies
the situation in which the player's character finds himself, as well as the
graphic/sound environment, options open
to the player, and the consequences of
choosing each option. Assuming that
each node provides the player with exactly
three options and no two options lead to
the same consequent node, a gametree
with 1,000 hard-wired nodes would only
last six turns and offer only 729 possible
results.
The soft-wired approach uses a maze approach to spatially track the player's character through the gametree, but assigns
enough state variables to a given situation that a single maze junction can
generate an exceptional amount of
choices. Using Pac-Man as an example,
the state variables would be: eaten or uneaten food dots, position of the ghosts,
used or unused power pills, and whether
the player character is empowered or not
empowered. Because of these variables,

there can be numerous situations to be
encountered each time the Pac-Man character reaches a given location. Any of
these variables can be relevant at any
point in the maze.
Crawford compares Zork to Pac-Man by
noting that each room is a node with the
range of possibilities open to the player's
character being dependent on the state
variables (i.e. does he have the book, the
candle, or whatever?). Nevertheless, Crawford observes that whereas any variable
may be relevant to any point in the PacMan maze, some variables are completely
irrelevant to some of the rooms in Zork.
To avoid the irrelevance limitation, Crawford suggests that designers try to make
as many of the state variables function significantly at each juncture in the game.
In conclusion, the article suggests that a
maze structure, whether in an adventure
or arcade game, provides a useful sensory
format for reducing the options available
to a player to a manageable number and
gives visual form to the number of state
variables available. Hence, the effort put
into establishing state variables will have a
mathematically significant effect on the
gametree itself. The more relevant the variables (in terms of both effect and presentation to the player), the richer the game
experience.

Culture, Idealism,
and the Real World
by Jim Gasperini (Star Trek: The
Promethean Prophecy and Hidden
Agenda)
Picking up on the themes of past issues
(which stated that the key to the future of
computer games would be the creation of
interesting, engaging characters and that
game results should be crafted in such a
way that they expand the significance of
the conclusion), Gasperini noted that Hidden Agenda was completely driven by
character interaction. He suggested that it
was possible to have characters which

exist in a believable culture in Hidden
Agenda because he did not have to
develop the culture from scratch. Rather,
he attempted to model a real-world culture. Therefore, there is plenty to "talk"
about with the NPCs, as well as a shared
understanding of the environment being
modeled.
In addition, Hidden Agenda uses
dramatic conflict to shape the game (as
opposed to combat, spending, and puzzlesolving). The player doesn't initiate events
as much as he reacts to them. Further,
the game utilizes a non-linear plot where
making the same choices may lead to different results depending on the ministers
in the cabinet or the mood of the
populace.
Finally, the expanded ending for the
game where the 'Verdict of History" prints
out a record of the player's decisions/actions in an encyclopedia format expands
the ending. As Gasperini notes: "It is largely up to the player to decide if he or she
won. . . . Thus, we present a text compilation that you must interpret for yourself. .
.. Though many people will likely feel
that they 'win' if they are elected to stay in
power and that they 'lose' if they are voted
out, the Verdict may make them wonder if
such a conclusion is always warranted."

How to Expedite
Conversions
by Gregg Tavares (Gregg is a programmer at Cinemaware and worked on
Gunship for Microprose.)
Asserting that "It has been my experience that converters and conversion
houses will always do the minimum
amount of work required to get the
product finished," Tavares presents a set
of recommendations for expediting and
improving future conversions. First,
developers should write clean code with
the machine-dependent code separated
from the machine-independent. Second,
every keypress should call a function.
Then, the programmer needs only to
replace that function rather than searching through the entire program for every
time that key is accessed. Third,
developers should set aside special
routines for drawing to the screen. This
will enable converters to easily see what
variables get passed where. Fourth, comment the code. Each routine should be
commented with a description of purpose,
variables used, inputs utilized, and variables produced or changed. Using these
techniques, converters can be assured of
doing the best possible job on the target
machine with a minimal amount of
guesswork.

Industry News

was told with emphatic certainty that I
was visiting the only supermarket in
the United States where a bag of
chips would cost hundreds of dollars. So,
there I was, standing in the middle of a
Frye's Electronics Store, surrounded
by large screen televisions, circuit
boards, PC compatibles, modems,
software, potato chips, soft drinks,
panty hose, candy, and
magazines. Yes, you read the list
correctly. I had been tipped to this
unique blend of consumer
electronics and consumables by a
top game designer.

I

This Silicon Valley-based chain
would surely be frequented by industry insiders . . . I thought. So, I
lurked about the aisles, seeing
and hearing all. I was not to be
disappointed. One well-known
computer "nerd" was picking up
the last 2400 baud modem on
the shelf. "I'll need it for playing
Dan Bunten's new game from
Microprose," he said. "They
haven't even announced the title,
but it's sure to be multi-player
and played via modem. Besides, I want to
be ready for the network version of
Maxis Software's SimCity." He probably
didn't realize that there is no firm deal, as
yet, but the network version with a map
of the United States on the network is
being discussed between Maxis and a
major player in the consumer telecommunications field. Players would design
their cities off-line, then upload the basic
design to the map. There, the cities
would interact on the county, state,
regional, and federal levels. Current
events would even come into play. Mississippi flooding, tornadoes, droughts, and
blizzards would affect all cities in the
geographical region.
Suddenly, a horrendous wall of sound
impacted my eardrums. Someone was
testing the maximum decibel delivery of a
stereo system and the sounds of "There's
a Barbarian in the Back of My Car" filled
the store. This reminded an Epyx
employee I know to talk about a distributor in Canada who has refused to
stock their new Axe of Rage game because the packaging is perceived as offensive. He said the campy barbarian (an
actual model who was "made-up" for the
photo session by a Lucasfilm make-up
wizard) apparently presented a screaming
berserker with homicidal tendencies all
too well for the Canadian wholesaler.
I passed by an aisle that looked like a
massive electronic Erector Set, idly
wondering what could be constructed
out of all those assorted circuit boards
and chips. Talk about a puzzle! It's
probably something like the new puzzle
series from Cliff Johnson, creator of The
Fool's Errand. The first disk is called At

The Carnival and all the puzzles revolve
around that theme. To me, though, assembling all those components would be
something akin to the creation of the
world. Speaking of creation, Electronic
Arts is finally about to release Populous

Space seems to be a popular subject
these days. Atomic Entertainment has
a space opera style RPG in the works;
most of the coding on Origin's Space
Rogue is completed; and Mindscape is
hard at work on their StarTrek title. Shift
gears a bit and the science fiction
fans will be stimulated by
Interplay's Mean Time, the working title of the time warrior game
described in April's "Rumor Bag,"
and Origin has changed the
name of T.A.N.C., the cybertank
game where players pit customized nuclear tanks against
each other's vehicles, to Omega.

The
Rumor
Bag
by Garth Fitzmorris,
Esquire
in the U.S. Populous is a real-time
strategy game hit from Europe where the
players fight cosmic battles from a quasidivine perspective.
As I reached the computer section, I
noticed suspicious activity around a PC
compatible. I don't know where security
was, but a fellow pulled a 3 and 1/2 inch
diskette and asked if I wanted to see
some screens from Robot in the 21st
Century. It is a pure shoot-'em-up built
around a berserk robot theme which features VGA graphics and extremely fast
sprite-driven graphics. The game is being
developed by Atomic Entertainment for
release later this year. This could be a big
year for VGA graphics with Questmaster 1
(formerly called Dondra) and
F-15 Strike Eagle II also supporting the
VGA technology.
We were disturbed in our viewing by an
irate IBM owner who had cornered the
saleswoman near the software shelf and
was demanding to know why the store
had Amiga and Atari ST copies of Empire and didn't have any IBM versions. "It
was CGW's Game of the Year fer gosh
sakes!" he complained. She explained
that it was sold out and there would be
more by the next week. He didn't seem
satisfied, so I stepped between then and
explained that not only would the store
have Empire in IBM format, but that the
C-64/128 version was almost ready to
ship. In fact, Interstel claims that
Dragon Force and Star Fleet ll will actually ship by Fall of 1989. In addition, I informed him, Interstel has acquired the
license to several works by Andre Norton,
including Witch World and Space Queen.

Unfortunately, I had forgotten to
check my briefcase at the door,
so it had to be searched. I guess I
wouldn't make a very good spy.
Apparently, Ivan and Carol Manley
do make good spies because their
real-time Espionage game set
around the Berlin Tunnel and the
Roman aqueducts nearby sounds
very interesting. Accolade will entitle it The Third Courier.

I felt like a real spy, however, when
I left the store following behind two
fellows talking in guarded whispers about
Sandy Peterson's move to Microprose.
"If he worked on horror modules at
Chaosium, you can bet he's working on
a horror game at Microprose," one said.
The other said, "Yeah, and I bet plenty of
companies want to talk to Chaosium
about the Chthulhu license." "It would
make sense, wouldn't it?" the first one
said, "After all, pen and paper games do
seem to translate well to the computer." I
snickered to myself. One thing is for
sure. Sandy won't tell them.
I followed them for a little while and
figured out that one of them must have
something to do with Electronic Arts,
since he referred to the upcoming RPG,
Keef the Thief, along with Knight School
and the Thieves' Guild license. The other
one was probably from Sierra, since he
knew that the name of Roberta Williams'
new game is now The Colonel's Bequest
and the latest Al Lowe product has been
renamed Passionate Patty. He said that
the company didn't think Polyester Patty
would communicate as well as Leisure
Suit Larry.
Well, I'm obviously not a very good spy,
because the one from EA stopped,
turned around and asked, "Aren't you
Garth Fitzmorris?" I admitted that I was
and asked how they had discovered me,
"Was it my flawless British accent?" They
laughed and shook their heads. "You
were the only one in the store with a bag
over your head." Maybe I'll use that Ninja
mask Activision sent, next time.

Scorpion's Mail
out. If you do happen to be stuck in there, you have to look for
the way out. Make sure you search in the small room at the end
of the corridor. One of the four rooms has a wire you can trip to
get your party out of this deathtrap. Since there's no way to tell
where you are, you just have to keep searching until you find it.
On the other hand, the Ballroom is important, so don't overlook
that place.

Manhunter:
Some folks have been stumped by Trinity Church. Yes, it is
very important in the game (for more reasons than one). However, until you have been completely through the museum, it's
not likely that going to church will be of much use to you.
Remember to look at everything carefully in the last room of the
museum. Also, for those who are losing their heads at the pawn
shop, the secret of Trinity should provide some relief.

Ultima V:
Getting past the first room of dungeon Shame has been a
problem for quite a few people. This is one place where throwing
things at the walls won't do anything for you. To find the secret
trigger, you're going to have to push with your own little hands
until you find the right spot. Don't be afraid to climb over the
rocks. Be persistent, and you'll soon be on your way. Also, in the
final dungeon, the true path to Lord British begins in the room
with the sandtraps. Of course, you'll have to wipe out everything
in the room before you can find the ladder (heh).

Future Magic:
I've heard from a number of people who have been having
problems getting past the guard with the thermocaster in the battlestation. This one is a bit tricky, but if you time it right, you can
remove the guard with no danger to your party. What you need
to do is use your "erase skill" ability as soon as you see the guard
appearing on your screen (just make sure the guard is targeted
first or it won't work!). It may take a few tries until you get it just
right, but it can be done.

Leisure Larry H
There are some folks who are having a little trouble getting out
of the airplane, since the door is locked. That's probably because
they didn't chow down back at the airport.
That's it for this look in the mailbag. Remember if you need
help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable (type Scorpia to
reach the Games RT). On The Source: Send SMail to ST1030.
By US Mail (remember the SASE if you live in the US!): Scorpia,
PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Game Developers' Conference

an Bunten closed
his presentation
which reminisced
about the "Golden Days of
Computer Games" by stating, "The golden days are
not what's behind us. They
are yet to come." It may be
true, but the Computer
Game Developers' Conference held in Sunnyvale
on May 7-8 demonstrated
that there was not quite
the unanimity in design
philosophy that the earlier
and more intimate gatherings seemed to indicate. At
this conference, pen and paper designers
contended that programmers should not
be designers; developers debated art vs.
profitability; publishers and developers
hotly discussed an inevitable schism between dedicated game machines and
disk-based systems; and a software
publishing executive candidly noted
during a panel on marketing, "You guys
probably think of marketing people as
the Darth Vaders of this industry, anyway."

D

Ars Gratia
Pecuniae

space tougher to acquire,
SSG has three possible
solutions. First, the company is revamping the IBM
graphics for all future conversions. The first
American Civil War release
on the PC has the best
scrolling we've ever seen in
a wargame, crisply defined
unit icons, extremely representative terrain (that not
only looks like a map, but
can be adapted via a more
powerful Warpaint or
Deluxe Paint II to make
other terrain) that is
dynamic (shows snowy weather in IBM
Russia and destruction when a city or
building is destroyed).

(Art for Money's Sake)

In spite of divergent opinions, this conference is still the most fecund and
stimulating environment in the history of
an infant industry. It is not surprising that
an industry which is zealously attempting
to accelerate consumer acceptance
would have widely disparate visions of the
future.

Game Machine vs. Computer
The battle for the consumer's loyalty will
largely be fought on the battleground of
the hardware platform to be used. Kelly
Flock of Mediagenic insisted that the
idea of a dedicated game machine would
not go away. It may change, but he
believes that there will be both a "home
mainframe" (traditional computer which
can be programmed for productivity) and
game machine (platform strictly for entertainment). He does not believe visions of
a "New Hollywood" (computer entertainment with the cultural impact of film and
recorded music) will reach fruition until a
dedicated game machine is widely accepted. Greg Riker of Electronic Arts
believes that, as early as 1991, "The
seeds from the split of dedicated game
machines and the home computer will
bear fruit." He projects a machine where
optical media will be the storage of
choice and dedicated co-processors for
video and audio will accomplish the work.
Many developers and publishers see
these machines as the salvation of the
entertainment software industry after the
recent downturn.
Stuart Alsop, respected industry pundit,
takes a different tack. He says that

Art vs. Profit in
Computer Game Design
videogames are not the problem in the
current profitability malaise. What
developers need to realize, plan for, and
use to their advantage is that computer
entertainment is a different business than
videogames. Personal computer based
entertainment will always be a niche
market rather than a mass market. He
stated in the keynote address that consumer electronic companies (i.e. companies focused on mass-market acceptance of electronic products) will never
understand the personal computer business and that computer companies will
never understand consumers. The challenge, according to Alsop is to live between the two worlds. His analysis is that
the big hardware companies are about to
do just the right thing for all the wrong
reasons. IBM's endorsement of DV-I (see
CGW's "Inside The Industry" for May,
1989) portends a machine with CD-ROM
(CD-ROM with extended architecture to
be standard), Windows interface, improved graphics, and a digital signal
processor. "One hot box," he notes, to be
sold at $2,500-$3,000 when the price stabilizes. He also projects a low-cost Macintosh at half the cost of the projected IBM
home computer.
The projected split between dedicated
and open game machines brought no
summary evaluation as to whether
products designed on future game
machines would really be able to offer
the depth and sophistication of games on
the current hardware. Lord British noted
one constant that will continue to plague
the industry for a time, whichever way the
hardware goes, "The cost of production
[of computer games] is going up, while
the profitability is going down."

The Art of
Designing War
Ian Trout and Roger Keating from
Strategic Studies Group chaired
several conferences. Perhaps the most interesting was the discussion about designing wargames. With wargame sales dropping dramatically in recent days and shelf

Second, the company has taken a leap
in artificial intelligence during the work
on the Napoleonic series. The concept to
be utilized is a "Staff Card," roughly
analogous to a "Hypercard" stack. The
card will contain about 250 possibilities
for the unit it is assigned to. At each
"hour" in the game, the artificial intelligence will decide what the Corp will do
and will look at the condition of the entire Army, the condition of the Corp, and
the "Staff Card." With this data in hand,
the unit will evaluate the 15-16 possibilities that would be possible (out of
the 250 total) in a given circumstance. A
value is added to each decision so that
the intelligence will prioritize on the basis
of what has gone before and a randomizer is added to keep matters from becoming too predictable. Then, the intelligence re-evaluates.
Third, the company is about to distribute its first non-strategy game, Fire
King, with an aside that it does not use
the SSG command routines. Nevertheless, Trout demonstrated that the command structure could easily be used in
non-war games, leading one to believe
that consideration has been given to
doing just that. Nothing definite has been
confirmed with regard to such products,
however.

Interactivity
Salvation or Seduction?
Once again, Chris Crawford evangelistically extolled the virtues of interactivity
with regard to computer games. Those
who have read the abstracts from The
Journal of Computer Game Design occasionally printed in CGW will be familiar
with the basic tenets of Crawford's interactive gospel: the need for a robust language for the player to communicate
with the program and related problem of
context, as well as the necessity of
(Continued on page 55)

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 7)

players can pick n' roll, alley-oop, and
slam dunk their way through this fast
paced, two-on-two game. Features include officials, quarterly stats (to keep
track of your triple-doubles), and a training sequence where players receive instruction from Magic and the chance to
practice his moves. IBM ($39.99). Circle
Reader Service #12.

Medalist International
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, Maryland
21030
KEITH VAN ERON'S PRO SOCCER: Indoor and outdoor soccer comes
to the home computer with this good
looking action game. Overhead 3-D
views give the game a sophisticated
look. Smooth horizontal and vertical
scrolling keeps the ball constantly in
view. Players have a variety of shots to
use, and the indoor version provides
rebounds off the boards. The outdoor
version comes with a weather option. Up
to 16 can control their own teams, so a
World Cup Tournament can be organized. Handicapping and instant
replays are also part of the package.
This looks like the best soccer game yet!
One or two players, joystick(s) required.
C-64 ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
#13.

Mastertronic
711 W. 17th St., Suite G9
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
RAW RECRUIT: Elite basic training is
the order of the day as players must survive six challenging tests. Desert Terrain
Rifle Shooting, Cross Country Obstacle
Course, Fitness Training, Commando
Assault Course, Pistol Range, and Tug
of War stand in the way of graduation.
Joystick required. C-64 ($9.99). Circle
Reader Service #14

SKATE CRAZY: Gaining the admiration of your roller-skating peers is the
goal in this joystick driven action game.
Players increase their "Street Cred" by
performing dare-devil stunts and free
wheeling tricks while skating through increasingly difficult levels. Players can
also pick up trash along the way which
can be recycled for cash. See, roller-skating is not a crime! C-64 ($9.99). Circle
Reader Service # 15.

STREET FIGHTING MAN: The Crips
and the Bloods aren't anything compared to the street-wise thugs you'll

meet in this sock em' up action game.
Players control Nick "The Hammer" who,
armed only with his fists and an overblown sense of machismo, must fight
his way through the alleys, bars, and
loading docks of the five most
dangerous cities in America, in order to
rescue his girlfriend from the hands of
the gang lords. IBM ($14.99). Circle
Reader Service #16.
TURBO CHAMPION: Another game
in the road racing genre, players
maneuver their high-performance sports
car through 8 different raceways, avoiding crack-ups with other cars and the
typical assortment of oil slicks and roadside obstacles. A special feature allows
players to construct their own tracks
with the included Course Designer
which works in conjunction with Deluxe
Paint II. IBM ($9.99). Circle Reader Service #17 .

Origin
136 Harvey Road
Building B
Londonderry, NH 03053
TANGLED TALES: A rich and
humorous storyline coupled with an
elegant interface marks this beginner/intermediate level adventure game. The
player leads a wizard's apprentice
through a series of quests in which
he/she gets involved with a number of
odd-ball characters. The adventure's interface sports a unique blend of both
the first person, 'dungeon' view and the
Ultima-like overhead viewpoint. Apple II
pictured and C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #18.
(Continued on page 50)

Field Trip

Fantastic Voyages

IV

The Whirlwind Tour Inside the
Entertainment Industry Continues

part of a fictitious "history." The "stable"
houses the Lucasfilm Games division;
the "winery" is actually the technical building; and the "egg ranch" functions as the
archives, while George Lucas' office, the
library, private viewing room, and company dining room are all located in the
main house. The rich oral tradition which
provides the story behind the house is as
elaborate as any screenplay Lucasfilm
has brought to the screen.
For example, the original Lucasfilm
property (Industrial Light & Magic's initial headquarters) was located in a building which once housed an egg company.
One architectural feature of that building
was a catacomb of cool tunnels where
eggs had been stored. When Lucas built
the ranch, he wanted something that tied
the origins of the company into its
present locale. That is why the corporate
archives recreate that look with its own
tunnels.
Yet, the reality subtly impinges upon
the fantasy. If one is observant enough, it
is possible to see an ethernet plug inset
in the magnificent Victorian window seat
located in the main house. If one enters
the "winery," one finds the technical
facilities necessary for foley shots (overdubbing) and a sound stage so perfect
that singers often rehearse their concert
tours at the facility (Mick Jagger was
rehearsing a tour during one CGW visit
and Linda Rondstat was cutting an
album during another visit). Most Victorian mansions wouldn't have a private
theater constructed out of recycled wine
casks either, but the main house has one
where the bouquet of a historic wine
aromatically fills the air on humid afternoons.

he
o

peripatetic editorial staff o f
CGW continues its whirlwind tour
f many of the software companies. The purpose of these visits and
reports is to share the human story of
the work environment and people behind the scenes that produce the games
and creativity tools we all enjoy. This
issue, the story continues . . .

T

Interactive Light & Magic
Lucas Valley Road weaves through the
forested hills outside San Rafael like a
skimmer bobbing through the forests of

Endor. As we cruised through the valley
(named for another and unrelated
Lucas), we wondered if the beautiful
scenery may have inspired the famed
forest chase in Return of the Jedi. Our
car paused briefly before the inauspicious
ranch gates (who would guess that an
entertainment empire rested in the hills
beyond?) and our pulses accelerated as
the gates opened and the car advanced
into the magic realm known as Skywalker
Ranch.
We drove by the oft-pictured
ranch house and parked under the
"stable." Each building at the ranch is

It is not difficult to indulge in the fantasy when one enters the library, however. The library not only houses an N.
C. Wyeth original, but an impressive Maxfield Parrish, as well. In fact, PBS viewers
would recognize the stained glass window
in the library as the background for the
late Joseph Campbell during the The
Power of Myth series. Not only does the
library contain enough resources to keep
the film division busy, but it serves as a
seminal resource for the games division
and Industrial Light and Magic (the
special effects division), as well. Noah
Falstein, designer of P.H.M. Pegasus,
remembers that he was doing some
general reading in the ranch library when
he conceived of the hydrofoil simulation.
In general, the working environment at
Lucasfilm Games is as quiet, creative,
and productive as George Lucas himself.
The atmosphere is so close to nature
that it is not uncommon to have king
snakes sliding under the doors from the
hillsides which the complex is nestled

against. As we paused over a quiet lunch in the Solarium, Doug
Glenn, the Director of Marketing for the games division who left
the high-pressure world of advertising to join the Lucasfilm
team, suggests that "Working in an environment like this could
work two ways. You could become so laid-back you don't accomplish anything or, what usually happens, is that you love it so
much you don't want to take a chance on blowing this one.
Here, you can put in 12-14 hour days and not feel it."
As for George Lucas' paternal presence over the game division,
it is the founder's intent that the company focus on four quality
titles per year (ideally, one per quarter). Lucas is involved with the
games division in three ways. First, he regularly looks at product
and offers his opinion as to when they are "good enough."
Second, he personally oversees the licenses of the film products
(Lucasfilm doesn't always publish the games based on the hit
films.). Third, he participates in the game division's "Blue Sky
Conferences" where future products and innovations are discussed.
In 1989, Lucasfilm Games is expected to publish a follow-up
game to Battlehawks: 1942, the computer game version of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (where Indy undergoes his
own quest for the "Holy Grail"), and an adventure game by ex-Infocomer Brian Moriarity (tentatively entitled, Loom). The over-all
impression of visiting the ranch is that the company is serious
about attempting to shape story and technology together without
being "seduced by the dark side of the force," whether that be
marketing forces or technical expedience.
Whether intentionally or not, George Lucas is building an entertainment empire. As Cindy Williams reminisced at a recent

awards dinner honoring Lucas, "After we finished filming
American Graffiti, I remember loaning George the fare to take
the ferry back to his home in Marin County. The next time I saw
George, he owned Marin County." Whatever the future of this
company, it is likely to expand the definition of entertainment,
whether focused through computer software or film.

Samurai War Hero (Cheatin' Death with Major Bill)
Although the company was almost called Smuggers Software
(for Sid Meier Users Group Software), the identity of Microprose
as a company is almost as completely tied up with super salesman/CEO Bill Stealey as it is with designer/programmer extraordinaire Sid Meier. Appropriately enough, both founders of the
company met over a video game, the coin-op Red Baron. It is appropriate because Microprose not only publishes games, but
has a houseful of dedicated gamers. Designers, programmers,
Major Bill, and staffers from any part of the company take part in
after hours role-playing games, play-by-phone war games, and
computer games. Some designers, like Arnold Hendrick, arrived
at Microprose via the boardgaming route.
In addition, the meeting of Meier and Stealey over a Red Baron
game was extremely appropriate because "flight" is the keystone
of Microprose and flying is in Stealey's blood. Everyone at Martin
State Airport knows the brightly emblazoned T-28 named, "Miss
Microprose," and nearly everyone stops what they are doing to
watch her taxi down the runway. CGW's editor-in-chief, Russell
Sipe, performed his first aileron roll in the plane during one trip,
while associate editor Wilson opted for more rudimentary flight
training during the same outing. The CGW editors both agreed
that "flying" computer simulations helped them in handling the
(Continued on page 53)

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 46)

SJP Enterprises
P.O. Box 246
McHenry, IL 60050
THE DESERT WAR: Players fight the
WWII North African Campaign in this
computer wargame for the Mac. The
game features four scenarios, (including
a campaign game), armor, infantry, artillery, and hidden movement. This game
is designed for two players (no computer
opponent is available). Mac ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #19.

Spinnaker Software
One Kendall Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
THE SCOOP: The player gets an opportunity to be a top reporter in 1930's
London, in this graphic and text adventure game based on a murder mystery
by Agatha Christie and other members
of the famous London Detection Club.
The player must question witnesses, follow suspects and search for clues as he
races against other reporters from a rival
paper. An easy to use interface makes
this game play smoothly. Apple 128K
pictured and IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #20.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View. CA 94043
HILLSFAR: The latest Advanced Dungeon & Dragons action adventure game
has the player questing for increased
skill, gold and magical items. The action
events include Archery, Maze Exploration, Arena Combat, Lockpicking, and
Equestrian Challenges. Characters are
transferable between this game, Pool of
Radiance, and Curse of the Azure
Bonds. C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #21.
OVERRUN!: This is a modern land
warfare simulation based on the game
system developed for Panzer Strike! and
Typhoon of Steel. Set in 1992, the
game has new and near-future weapon
systems, eight scenarios and a construction kit. Also included are larger sized
maps, new armor types, increased accuracy of fire-control, and counter-battery fire. Apple II pictured and C-64
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #22.

subLogic Corp.
501 Kenyon Road
Champaign, IL 61820
THUNDERCHOPPER: Not to be con-

fused with the ActionSoft C-64 title, this
new product is completely compatible
with the entire line of SubLogic scenery
disks. The player gets to pilot a highperformance rescue/attack helicopter in
this flight simulator. Pilots fly training
missions before going into action on
land or at sea. Missions include: Armed
Escort, where the player guides his
troops through enemy territory; and
even a Rescue at Sea, which requires
finding and recovering survivors of a
major naval engagement. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #23.

Abracadata
P.O. Box 2440
Eugene, OR 97402
RUN YOUR OWN TRAIN: Last
month, by mistake, we ran a photo from
Run Your Own Train, and mislabeled it
as Design Your Own Train. We

apologize for the confusion. As always,
mass firings will follow.

Conversions Received
Combat Course (Mindscape)
IBM & C-64
Demon's Winter (SS/) IBM & C-64
Double Dragon (Arcadia) ST
First Over Germany (SS/) IBM
Heavy Metal (Access) IBM
Hole-In-One Miniature Golf
(Digitek) C-64
Honeymooners (First Row) C-64
Indiana Jones $ Temple of Doom
(Mindscape) IBM & Amiga
John Elway's QB (Melbourne
House) Apple Ile/IIC
Out Run (Mindscape) IBM
Powerstyx (Magic Bytes) Amiga
Red Storm Rising (Microprose) IBM
Twilight Zone (First Row) Amiga
Zork Zero (Infocom) Amiga

Fantastic Voyages
(Continued from page 49)

real plane. "You learn to do things deliberately and not over-compensate by moving too fast," offered Sipe. Wilson confessed that
he had put enough simulated planes into spins to respect the
controls when he climbed into the T-28's cockpit.
The company slogan, "The action is simulated, the excitement
is real," is more than the the insignia painted on Miss
Microprose's fuselage and imprinted on the pilot's patches on the
company's flight suits. It is an ideal which is taken seriously. As
an experienced pilot, Major Stealey continually insists on details
and features to make the products "feel" right. Even when it
comes to products which are not based on flight, Major Bill has
an impact. When we praised the design team of M-1 Tank
Platoon because all the buildings were "live" (i.e. able to be
blown up), we were told that Stealey had insisted. When we commented on the secondary explosions displayed when armored
vehicles were destroyed (a nice touch!), we were told that Major
Bill had wanted them.
Authenticity is a hallmark of the company's products. In terms
of research, the company encourages book purchases. According to Arnold Hendrick, the company has more than $1,000
worth of Janes' Fighting Ships and Janes' Fighting Aircraft
alone. When their own resources fail, Arnold notes that the
Library of Congress is a short drive away. For Sword of the
Samurai, the design team took time out to visit the Smithsonian
in order to research the tapestries from the particular time period.
For M-1 Tank Platoon, Arnold has utilized the "Freedom of Information Act" to request government materials and secured used
manuals from friends who have served in the vehicles. Research
is vital to the design concept.
Another Microprose characteristic is the company's Quality Assurance program. Since the company relies so heavily on inhouse testing, we were curious as to how Microprose avoids tun
nel vision (i.e. becoming so close to the product that they cannot
find the problems). According to Al Roireau, they make certain
that there are personnel that are hands-off on a given project
until late in the design process. Then, the "hands-off" people try
to do quirky things to the products they haven't worked on. On
the next product, there will often be a flip-flop so that everybody
ends up testing everyone else's products.
Asked how the company deals with testing IBM products,
Roireau noted that they use 12 or 13 different IBM clones and 12

or 13 different graphic card configurations to test out their
products. "Of course, there are always configurations we don't expect. We never dreamed anyone would run a VGA card in monomode, for instance, but it happens."
We left the Microprose premises with an impression that the
corporate team really is comprised of Micro(computer) Pro(fessional)s. We also left with another distinct impression. After watching "Miss Microprose" take off under a rapid rate of climb, we
know that, like Bill Stealey himself, this company intends to keep
flying.

reboot the system. This happened several times, with the
lock-up sometimes occurring
even before the bulletin came in.
Finally, on about the sixth or
seventh attempt, using a save
game just prior to the most
recent one, I was able to get
through to the finish. I suspect
the problem was caused by
several timed events trying to go
off at once, jamming the game
completely at that point.
Whatever the cause, it made for
a very aggravating experience.
The final wrap-up at the end
was also not very satisfying.
While the final details of the plot
are revealed, there are still
several loose ends left over that
are not explained.

Presumed Guilty
(Continued from page 31)

As a news bulletin came in, the screen began to blink and flash
and everything locked up. No key would work, nothing I tried
would bring the screen back to normal. My only recourse was to

The sloppiness in this game
shows throughout, from the errors in the manual through the
utilities that don't work properly to the numerous typos and
misspellings in the text, the incessant noise of the game (no way
to turn off the sound), and the final crash at the end. What might
have been a reasonably good game is made frustrating and unenjoyable by the lack of adequate quality control.
Bottom line: It is impossible to recommend such a game in any
way until the mess is cleaned up.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Game Developers' Conference (cont.)

process intensity (i.e. the program does a
lot with the player's input). He went on to
state that even though technology makes
it possible to have prettier graphics and
more effective sound, interactivity is the
basis of the designer's competitive advantage. Posters and film offer prettier images. Compact Discs offer more intense
audio experiences. But, you cannot truly
interact with these media.
"Your mind is not a passive agent." said
Crawford as he flamboyantly affirmed that
Interactivity is to human communication
what the theory of relativity is to weaponry—a historical divide. The ex-college
professor reached critical mass as he
shouted, "We are the Manhatten Project
of Communications. We have it within
our grasp. Seize it!"

As the conference's futurist of choice,
Greg Riker went on record with a list of
probable, hopeful, and visionary advances for the computer entertainment industry. In five years, Riker predicts a wallet-sized 68030 computer with optical
storage standard and digitized a-v on a
256 color imagery base. He perceives arcades where a consumer will be able to

test games in an arcade box before
buying and can download the games to
his pocket computer if he decides to purchase them.
By the year 2000, he believes that digital video will be a reality with HDTV standard. In addition, he projects increased
density of optical storage and stereo
eyephones with full 3-D (analogous to
current use of headphones). Further, a
bold prediction features the beginning
steps of neural I/O (BI/O).
Twenty years down the line, the vision
is more wildly speculative. Riker posits a
neural I/O standard. He notes that in
Czechoslovakia, scientists have experienced with electrodes on the side of
the head and neck, which send low-level
electrical impulses to fool the inner ear
into experiencing movement. Prior to a
more advanced neural standard, he anticipates advancements in forced feedback
controllers. Jet Propulsion Laboratories already uses controllers to simulate resistance to the user in order to control real
robots in a remote environment. Can
consumer applications be far behind?
In closing, Riker reminded his audience
of the primacy of the game by playing a
portion of the "Elementary, My Dear

Data" episode from StarTrek: The Next
Generation. Data asks the doctor, "Do
you mean to say there is some value in
losing?" The doctor replies, "Of course.
It's the great teacher." The game is still
afoot, no matter what the technology.

Who Ya' Gonna' Call?
The assembled designers would call the
following publishers in each category:
Best Technical Support: Electronic Arts
(Runner Up: Microprose); Best Quality
Assurance: Sierra (Runners Up:
Electronic Arts, Origin); Most Innovative
Publisher: Cinemaware (Runners Up:
Electronic Arts, Microprose); Best
Producer: Shelley Day (Accolade) and
Richard Hillemann (Electronic Arts) (Runners Up: Mark Johnson (Activision), Sam
Nelson (Accolade)); Best Publisher: Accolade (Runners Up: Microprose, Origin)

Verdict of History
Though it would be impossible to
describe all the sessions or to measure
the impact which they will have on future
products, it is certain that no one can experience this quality of "interaction"
without the results contributing positively
to one's work and vision.

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been well
spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they have been
enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all

