"ZD ZIFF-DAVIS The #1 Computer Game Magazine nue To Its Roots Zork Returns Scoop! World FEBRUARY 1997 NO.151 $3.99 USA, $4.99 Canada Exclusive! Build A P200 Powerhouse Under $2500 Sole Survivor Special Report! The Making of MechWarrior 3 Insane Combai Hi-Res Graphics Up To 50 Players PLUS 1001 am ICHEATS & TIPS | FOR DOZENS OF GAMES "


"Meditation is the way to the beart... "


"It's a heart..it's a weapon...it's Shadow Illarriar. The creators of DUKE NUKEM are back. Bigger. Better. Berserker. Shadow Warrior is coming to the belly of the East spreading ninja charisma like napalm. Undead sumos must be uzied. Satanic samurai must be shurikenned. Bulldozers must be boarded. Freaks must be 'flattened. Geishas must be goosed. Enemies must be disemboweled and gore weapons must be gotten. Enter the world's most advanced 3-0 environment...and make yourself some sushi. Shadow Warrior. Take the gure into your sun hands! 100 100 000 000 1842 Os 1001 100 000 000 3309 0 051 6 4 barrel rampage in rooms-uver-tuum. 100 075 ca, 100 075 0,00 Tanks. Joride 'em or trasli 'em! This one's a no-brainer. "


"FRESH FROM THE CREATORS OF DUKE NUKEM 3D COMES LOODY BARREL OF FUN UISIT US ONLINE .Shadouwarrior.COM FOR MORE GAMING INFO PC CD-ROM Shadow Warrior says go straight through the rib cage. developed by TE REARS Genete REALMS GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com www.ten.net www.3drealms.com 100 000 100 000 LET 015 1007 Shadow Warrior  1997 3D Realms Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved, Published and distributed by GT Interactive Soltware Corp. TENT and the TEN\" logo are trademarks of the T.E. Nelwork, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Go uzi an kamikaze hell-freaks. Sticky situations call for sticky bumlis. "


"WARRIOR CIRCLE READER SERVICE #365 "


"Featuring TVT Recording Artis Hot Soundtrack Gravity Kills Hummer Jeep Wrangler This rugged and mighty off-road behemoth can conquer any terrain. Well balanced off-road ability and on-road handling keep the Jeep in every race. Land Rover Defender 90 Chevrolet K1500 Z71 CHEVROLET SI Quick and agile, this V8-powered import can negotiate the tightest spots due to its compact stature, Extraordinarily powerful and surprisingly controllable-a true off-road monster! "


"Conquer The World's Most Wicked Terrain! SILOS Three unique environments: Desert, Snow, and Forest affect the way your car handles and maximize gameplay. Four ways to race: SINGLE RACE, FULL-SEASON. CLASS LEAGUES, and MIXED LEAGUES. tracks test your off-road skills. egotiate treacherous terrain as you ttle for the checkered flag! View the action from any of 9 camera views selectable on the fly! Engage in wild MULTI-PLAYER ACTION via network, modem, or split-screen racing. ...like Need For Speed in an off-road environment\" -Computer Gaming World TEST DRIVE OFF-ROAD o order direct call: 1-800-245-7744 KIDS TO ADULTS PCLI BOM COL-DE Test Drive is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. 1996 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. Developed by Elite Systems. The Land Rover name and logo are trademarks of Rover Group Limited used under license. Hummer and Humvee are the registered trademarks of A.M. General Corporation. JEEP and Jeep grille design are registered trademarks of Chrysler Corporation, U.S.A. and are used under license. OCHRYSLER CORPORATION 1996, Chevrolet K-1500 Z71 and Body Design are trademarks of Chevrolet Motor Division, General Motors Corporation, used under license by Accolade, Inc. The Need For Speed is a trademark of Electronic Arts. PlayStation CONTENT RATED BY ESRB J. WINDOWS 95 www.accolade.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #360 "


"FOR A FREE DEMONSTRATION OF OUR 3-D GAMING EXPERIENCE, SLAM THIS MAGAZINE INTO YOUR FACE. AS "


"INTRODUCING THE ULTIMATE, NO-COMPROMISE, GAMER PC. At NEC, our gaming PCs have just taken on a whole new dimension. The third, to be exact. With two dedicated 3-D graphic accelerators, the NEC Power Player 200 MHz Pentium Processor sucks you right into Diamond Monster 3-D and ATI 3-D Rage the action. graphic accelerators And don't worry, 32 MB RAM/3.2 Gigabyte HD NEC MultiSpin 6x4 you'll be armed with CD-ROM changer everything a serious gamer could ask for. A 200 MHz Pentium processor, 6 MB of video memory, and a 50-watt Advent surround sound system with subwoofer. We've also thrown in a Gravis gamepad, Thrustmaster joystick, and Logitech 3-button Mouseman mouse. As well as a bunch of today's hottest games, all reconfigured to take advantage of our unique 3-D technology. You can even head out into cyberspace and play in real time against anyone else on the net. For more information, call 1-800-NEC-INFO. Or, R for a slightly more conventional demonstration, visit your local retailer. Available at Circuit City, Comp USA, Future Shop and Fry's. SEE, HEAR AND FEEL THE DIFFERENCE NEC Visit our web site at http://www.nec.com 01996 Padard Bol NEC, Inc PowerPayer is a trademark of Packard Bel NEC, Inc. Sce. Her and Feel the Difference is a trademark and MutSon is a registered trademark of NEC Technologies. re. The resda ogo and Portum are registered trademarks and the Pertun Processor ogo is a trademark of Intel Corporation Key + 20036 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #260 pentium "


"The #1 Computer Game Magazine COVER STORY TAU COVER STO C&C: Sole Survivor Killer Maybe you're already U feasting on the gourmet gameplay in RED ALERT, but if you like multiplayer gaming and you're not on a LAN, check out Westwood's new C&C battlefest on the 'Net. It lets you play COMMAND & CONQUER with up to 50 other mani. acs, and it should be live now. COVER ILLUSTRATION: CHRIS DEMERS FEATURE 00/20 119/20 Win at any cost with this 16. page guide to \"special features in computer games. Games of almost every category are included, and there are plenty of noncheats, too, for those who disdain dirty tricks Destruction Derby Virtua Fighter PC And CHEATS & TIPS Dozens More! Hexen HARDWARE 100 The Ultimate Gaming Machine Part 4 hinking about buying a computer? How about a screaming Pentium 200 with 32MB of RAM, a 12x CDROM drive, and a 15-inch monitor for under $2500? And that price even includes speak. ers and a joystick. We show you how. 200 Under $2500 FEBRUARY 1997 "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS 126 Callahan's Crosstime Saloon REVIEWS ADVENTURE/ROLE-PLAYING 123 Wizardry Nemesis 130 Rama 134 Circle of Blood 140 Azreal's Tear 144 Spider-Man ACTION 157 Syndicate Wars 162 Eradicator 168 Hunter Hunted STRATEGY & TIPS Nas 148 Toonstruck 198 Hind 226 Close Combat 230 Wooden Ships TONG CLASSICS/PUZZLES 171 You Don't Know Jack You Don't Know Jack Sports 174 Smart Games: Word Puzzles 171 Which of the following would be the best title for the scene? 1. \"Laboratory Limbo Contest 2. Albert Beer Stein Hall 3.\"Last Tango in Manhattan 4. TMCand Dec COLUMNS Favorite things: Loyd Case does Julie Andrews The Making of MechWarrior 3 97 Hardware 113 Game Design Yorgat $2,000 113 The Making Of MechWarrior 3 SPORTS 179 NCAA Championship Basketball 182 Trophy Bass II 123 157 178 185 213 250 Adventure/RPG Scorpia reviews Wizardry Nemesis Action Peter Olafson reviews Syndicate Wars Classics/Puzzles Charles Ardai Knows Jack-two of them, in fact Sports Dennis McCauley reviews NCAA Championship Basketball Simulations US Navy Rghters '97 includes Vietnam missions Strategy/War Red Alert: Terry Coleman does John Dvorak Martin Cirulis What's The Deal With...Getting Excited? SIMULATION 185 USNF '97 188 Flashpoint Korea 182 Flight Sim Win 95 208 Battlecruiser 3000 Horosco DE Bdrie DEPARTMENTS 12 Just the FAQS 20 Editorial 26 Letters 36 READ.ME 48 Game Track 246 Hall of Fame 247 Patches 248 Top 100 A nswers to frequently asked questions You won't find DVD hype here Our readers speak out News, views and the latest releases Cool games in the pipeline Great games of all time Game files to kill bugs dead Subscribers rate the top games STRATEGYI WARGAMES 216 Heroes of Might and Magic II 218 Steel Panthers II 220 Destiny 1300 BELIEBT Scoop! Zork Returns To Its Roots see page 36 FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"Run Like HELL "


"COMPETE FREE OVER THE INTERNET TM DIABLO JS LOOSE WARCRAFT Run to your local retailer or call 800-953-SNOW BIZZARE ENTERTAINMENT D) 1 6 2 2 O) www.BLIZZARD.COM 1996 Blizzard Entertainment * Free Oes to battle.nel requires access to the Internet. Poyer is responsible for all oppleoble Internet lees. Diablo and Brzard Entertainment are trademarks of Davidson & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #264 "


"WAS AT WORK. com yang DO DO 90 90000 1995 Hornion International In all the places great sound is essential, you'll find the world's finest audio equipm Living room Home theater Car Studio Stadiu Computer "


"harman/kardon JBL Infinity EVERYWHE A WA He listens for a living.. Mr. Don Was. Winner, 1995 Grammy for Producer of the Year. Here, he listens to his new favorite band Orquestra Was on JBL Pro Premium speakers and subwoofer, part of his Compaq Presario 8712 personal computer (which he also uses to fine-tune his liner notes). Harman International Srought to you by JBL, Harman Kardon and Infinity-the brands of Harman International, Concert hall Arena Stage Movie theater Nightclub www.harman.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #382 "


"JUST THE FAQS helll computerLenn Mingala computer Gaminy T hat's on the demo disc and how do I use it? What can I do if I have a CD sub and I didn't receive a disc? Where's the justice in this world? Is anybody listening? What's coming next month? PUBLISHER Dale Strang Fais le 319 B ILO What's Up Online? You don't have to undergo years of boring programming classes to edit your own Quake levels. Check out our Web site for a detailed guide to using the Worldcraft edi. tor covered in this EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Managing Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Alkin (Simulations) Reviews Editor Terry Coleman (Wargames, Classics Puzzle Games) Technical Editor Dave Salvator (Hardware) CD-ROM Editor Jill M. Anderson Associate Editors Jeff Green (Adventure, Sports) Ellott Chin (Action, Strategy) On-Line Editor/AOL Kale Hedstrom Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Editorial Assistant Charlotte Panther Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games) Charles Ardai (Interactive Fiction Loyd Case Technology) Martin Cirulis (Science Ficlion) Peter Olatson (Action Games) Paul Schuylema (Game Design) Rusel DeMaria (Online Editor-at-Large) Founder Russell Sipe ON LERIE 12 WORLDCRAFT in this G LINE QUAKE CON UNC month's http://www .zdnet.com /gaming QUAKE COumn. Plus: sneak previews, reviews, strate. gies and more. person shooters, irreverent adventures, mech wars, and much, much more. And, as usual, we'll be back next month with a completely new line-up, all on the original CG-ROM. DESIGN Graphic Artist Dan Fitzpatrick Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues What's On The CD? If you've ever wondered what it would be ne designer, this month's CG ROM gives you the tools to build your own games. You can create your own playing PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Assistant Production Mgr. Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Michele Kellogg Tami Gargus Woon CCM Irati Lutk the Mecha Cantik HousWGUBA CA elisks die Caming with Mpya Prachat De How Do I Use It? If you have Windows 95, installation is simple: The CD is autoplay enabled-just lock-nload. Otherwise, from Windows 3.x, select Run from the Program Manager menu, and type D:\\RUN-ME (where D is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) to run it straight from the CD. Then type D:\\INSTALL to create a CGW pro. gram group on your Windows desktop. If you have installed previous versions of the CGROM, this disc will use the program group already on your desktop. HOW TO CONTACT THE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to CG Editorial, 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via: Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 CompuServe: (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Web site: http://www.zd.com/gaming Paches Brex .. fields with Accolade's JACK NICKLAS 4: GOLF COURSE DESIGNER or design your own tables with 21st Century's PINBALL BUILDER. Who knows, maybe you'll be discovered as the next premier game designer. Imagine your name splashed everywhere in big, red neon bitmaps. In fact, this month CGW and New World Computing pay homage to aspiring designers across the country and present the winners and runners-up of the HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC World Builder contest. As for the rest of the disc, Crypt-keeper Sire Johnny slips into the darkness of the medieval era to bring you our regular demo line-up. Look out for sports games, action games, fighting games, mindt Teasers, first Where Are The CDs I Paid For? If you subscribe to the CD version but you have not received a disc with your magazine, you can now e-mail the company responsible for fulfilling your order. Send your com plaint along with your name, address, phone number and subscriber number to cgw@neodata.com. Neodata is a magazine fulfillment house that is not owned or operated by Ziff-Davis. If you have repeatedly contacted Neodata either by telephone or e-mail and have not ADVERTISING SALES Associate Publisher Lee Uniacke (415) 357-4915 East Coast District Sales Manager Laura Salerno (212) 503-48510 East Coast Sales Assistant Audrey DeJesus (212) 503-3926 North West Territory Sales Manager Cathy Conway (415) 357-4925 SouthWest Territory Sales Manager Pat Walsh (714) 851 2566 Senior Account Executive Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Linda Philapil (415) 357-4930 Sales Assistant Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address Inquiries to CGW Advertising, 135 Main St, 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105; or call (415) 357-5425, fax (415) 357-4999. SUBSCRIPTION INQUIRIES/ADDRESS CHANGES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering Information, call (303) 665-8930 or fax (303) 604 7455 within the US and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-7445 or fax (303) 604 0540, or write to Computer Gaming, P.O. Box 57167 Boulder, CO 80322-3131. The subscription rate is $27.94 for one year (12 issues). Additional postage for orders outside the U.S. add USS 16 per year for surface mail. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. BACK ISSUES For back issues send 57 per issue ($8 outside the United States) by check of money order 1o Back Issues Depl. Zit-Davis Publishing Co.PO Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131 CC FEBRUARY 1997 "


"If you play only one real RPG this year, it will have to be... Fallout A GURPS Postnuclear Adventure \"Fallout has everything necessary to be the best roleplaying game of all time\" — Next Generation RATING PENDING MALFLAY Coming Soon for Win 95/DOS, and Mac BATING BOARD CO-OH BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS.\" www.Interplay.com O 1996 Interplay Productions. Fallout: A GURPS Postnuclear Adventure and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. GURPS is a registered trademark of Steve Jackson Games Incorporaled. Used under license by Interplay. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #354 "


"JUST THE FAQS Jack Nicklaus 4 GOLF COURSE DESIGNER Then click on the title of interest. Each demo has its own instructions for installation. demo version COURSE DESIGNER How Do I Get The CG-ROM? Newsstand issues come in two flavors: with and without the CD. Each type is clearly marked. If you can't find the version you want in the store you frequent, encourage your retailer to carry it (or subscribe to ensure that you get a CD every month). To subscribe, simply call (303) 665-8930, and specify that you want the CD-ROM version. Jack Nicklaus 7 received missing CDs, or you wish to register a complaint concerning Neodata, please e-mail Charles Mast at cmast@zd.com. Include your name, address, telephone number and subscriber number. Mr. Mast is the subscription director for Ziff-Davis Publications. How Do I SSPORT Get The Patch Files? Click on Patches under the CGW Features, and then read the text window that has instructions on copying the files to your hard drive. You can also access the patches from a DOS prompt by typing D:\\PATCHES (where D: is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) and copying them directly from there to your hard drive. We strongly recommend that you back up any previously saved games before installing a patch, as this may overwrite your existing program. How Do I Play The Demos? To view the demos, first click on Editors' Hot Picks or Product Demos. Next click on your favorite genre: Action, Adventure, Simulations, Sports or Strategy. Disclosure As a matter of record, CGW voluntarily maintains a list of companies in which SoftBank, the parent company of Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., has an interest. It is available online at http://www.zdnet.com/ gaming/disclaim.html and is updated when we become aware of such investments. GAMES AND GOODIES ON THE CG-ROM DEMOS AND STUFF PLATFORM DIRECTORY EXECUTABLE Alien Trilogy Battle Tech: Solaris Birthright Callahan's Crosstime Saloon Fork in the Tale Heroes: World Builder Contest Jack Nicklaus 4 MDK MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Mind Grind Mplayer NCAA Championship Basketball Patches (for various games) Pinball Builder Power F1 Sacred Mirror of Kofun Soccer Soul Trap Tomb Raider Virtua Squad DOS/Win 95 Win 95 Win 95 DOS Win 95 via CD interface Win 95 Win/95 DOS/Win 95 Win 95 Win 95 DOS nla Win/95 Win/DOS Win 95 95 Win 95 DOS/Win 95 Win 95 demos/alien demos/mpbt demo/birthrt demos/ccs_demo demos/fork demos/maps demosljack demos/mdk demos/mech2 demos/minddemo demos/mplayer ncaa patches builder demos/f1demo demos/kofun demolsoccer demo/stdemo demos/tombraid vsquad install.exe btech.exe setup.exe install.exe setup.exe none setup.exe mdk.mov setup.exe setup.exe setup.exe install.bat none setup.exe install.bat setup.exe socdemox.exe stsetup.exe setup.exe setup.exe CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"You've been waiting for this sequel. L. He's been waiting for you. MASTER OF ORIONI BATTLE AT ANTARES HEUCILION Remu les 1227B **** ** How coulserug Doosa Trio Prank Troy Demand Ofert Exchange Decorar Seder Weedle The groot nalamandalar om together for at another important moment in history lehetett MICROPROSE RRI In your strategic quest for galactic supremacy, the Antarians eagerly await to exact their vengeance. Play it solitaire. Play it with friends over LAN. Play a hot seat game or via modem. Just play it.\" Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours: 1-800-695-GAME (US. and Canada). CIRCLE READER SERVICE #192 CIRCLE READER'SRVÇE #192 'www.microprose.com Available on PC CD-ROM 1996 MicroProse Software, Inc. MASTER OF ORION and BATTLE AT ANTARES are trademarks and MICROPROSE is a registered trademark of MicroProse Software. Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Call 1-800-771-3772 for information on Game Ratings "


"JUST THE FAQS COMING NEXT MONTH Gamer's Edge Is Back! vou asked for it, you got it. We're bringing back our Gamer's Edge section and making it better than ever. You'll find game beating strategies, tips, and cheats in CGW's Gamer's Edge every month starting in March. Don't miss it! THE ULTIMATE GAME MACHINE PART In-Depth Strategy Articles Next Month Diablo SkyNet GAMER'S Red Alert EDGE War Wind Syndicate Wars jechno-wizard Loyd Case concludes our Ultimate Gaming Machine series with five pages of advice and information about upgrading your PC. Whether you want to gut your machine and replace everything or just swap out your CD-ROM with a faster drive, you'll learn the issues behind replacing components. HOW DO WE RATE?  March Review Madness Diablo Red Alert Tomb Raider FPS Football '97 Phantasmagoria 2 Lords of the Realm II Master of Orion II Jet Fighter III HyberBlade SSN Outstanding: Very Good: A Average: A The rare game high-quality game mixed bag. Can that gets it all that succeeds in be a game that right. The graph many areas. May reaches for the ics, sound, and have minor prob stars, but falls gameplay come lems, but is still short in several together to form a Transcendent worth your money. ways. Can also be Gaming especially if i a game that does Experience. Our you're interested what it does well, strongest buying in the subject but lacks flair or recommendation. I matter or genre. originality. Weak: A game with serious prob lems. Usually buggy, seriously lacking in play value, or just a poorly conceived game designyou should think long and hard before buying it. Abysmal: The rare game that gets it all wrong. This is reserved for those products so buggy, ill-conceived or value less that you won der why they were ever released in the first place. Risk Battleship NASCAR 2 Age Of Sail Daytona USA Virtua Squad A-10 Cuba SkyNet Noir (Subject to change If somebody dies or gets a girlfriend.) CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"BEEN SEARCHING FOR A GREAT ACTION GAME WITH A REAL STORY? BUNGIE WWW.BUNGIE.COM For a limited time, get the award-winning Marathon 2 for just $29 through our secure web store, plus have a chance to win free t-shirts, just for paying a visit! CIRCLE READER SERVICE #75 "


"TIME TO BURN! POWER "


"THE FORMULA ONE RACING GAME! POWER F1 is the latest heart-thumping, record-breaking, speed demon Formula One game to hit the circuit. Based on 1995 season data, Power F1 features the official cars, drivers and tracks to strap you into a visually entertaining and exciting racing game with an arcade feel that puts the emphasis on fun! FEATURING:  Multi-player and 2 Player split screen mode.  Statistics based on 1995 season data.  All 17 of the 1995 Formula One tracks modelled to great detail.  Single race, championship or shoot out game modes.  Workshop facility to allow total control on car set up and build.  Realistic pitstops, fuel consumption and car damage.  Tactical options for car set up, to counter all weather conditions. CATACHLPAT utuliger litter 2 E OFOSTER'S SES FOSTER'S ITPTOS POWER F1 ST FORMULAI WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP ISLANCING GAN EIDOS MULTI-PLAYER AND SPLIT SCREEN OPTIONS EIDOS INTERACTIVE Eidos Interactive. 303 Sacramento Street, San Francisco, California 941 Check out POWER F1 at: www.eidosinteractive.com An official product of the fia formula one championship. Licensed by loca to fuji television, copyright & published 1997 Eidos interactive Itd. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #274 "


"JOHNNY WILSON editou na What To Expect From DVD DVD's Huge Storage Capacity Is No Panacea For Gamers VD is nei ther a savior nor a curse. It's an advance. ment that will both benefit and beleaguer computer gamers. Over the next six months or so, you'll read lots of cheerleading about this most recent storage technology. You won't read it here. Why? Let's just say we've learned from our earlier impetuosity. (C You'll read lots of cheerleading about DVD. You won't read drives lit here. GABRIEL KNIGHT II: THE BEAST WITHIN and WING COMMANDER IV could now be contained on one CD. Further, most DVD-ROM equipped computers will ship with MPEG-2 compatibility. This is vital to the DVD manufacturers because one of the uses to which computer owners will want to place the DVD drives will be in playing back movies on DVD. The units will need MPEG-2 capability or the dig. itized film footage won't look good enough to watch. add CD quality audio. The use of these technologies alone would expand the scope of computer games. All publishers had to worry about was filling up the discs. Some pundits even suggested that it would be too expensive to fill up the discs. Although the changes we envisioned didn't really occur until the '90s, almost everything happened except for the expansion of the scope of computer games and the publishers having trouble filling up the discs. Computer games are still based on the same subjects on which they've always been based. They are still primarily games where the plot or score advances more by mechanical applications of artificial puzzle solutions, bullets and biceps, or resource management than by human applications in conversation, diplomacy and empathy. The anticipated revolution didn't occur. Beyond that, digitized video didn't win over the masses and, contrary compressed data). Prices didn't really go down as a result, but they didn't go up substantially, either. CD-ROM technology was, in gener. al, good for gaming, but it took considerably longer to take hold than expected and didn't offer all of the promised benefits. THE ADVENT OF CD-ROM In the mid-to-late '80s, Computer Gaming World looked forward to a new era of possibility in gaming with the advent of CD. ROM. At that time, the ability to produce compact discs with more than 600 MB of data seemed phe. nomenal. After all, many comput ers were then being sold with 40 MB hard drives. The idea of each new game having more than 15 times the amount of data as you could store (without compression) on your hard drive was, as the kidnapper suggested in The Princess Bride, \"Inconceivable!\" With the advent of CD-ROM, such pundits as yours truly reasoned, computer games would undergo revolution ary changes. Publishers would be able to upgrade their graphics, use digitized film technology, and/or WHAT YOU CAN EXPECT But don't hold your breath waiting for games that take advantage of the technology. PCs will start shipping with DVD-ROM drives in mid-to-late '97, but there won't be enough of an established base of DVD-capable PCs for game pub. lishers to serve until at least one year later. Even then, we expect a few deluxe DVD editions of popular games to lead the way rather than a wholesale adoption of DVD as the anticipated storage medium. So, what's the advantage of DVD adoption for gamers? First, the greatly increased storage capacity will, once again, reduce the cost of goods for the average game and, in the short run, reduce piracy. As with CD-ROM, it is unlikely that the technology will reduce prices, but it may keep them stable through the end of the millennium. THE NEW DVD DRIVES The new computer-based DVD. ROM drives will allow you to view movies on your PC, listen to audio CD recordings, play your current CD-ROM games with a 6x to 8x backward compatibility, use huge data-intensive reference works, and play DVD specific games. Panasonic plans to have their first DVD-ROM drive on sale by the time this editorial reaches the news. stands. It will handle single layer discs with 4.7 GB of data and 8.5 GB with a double layer. Reading a DVD disc, data flows at about 1.4 MB per second. Games like managed to fill the discs but fill up three, five, six or seven of the little silver monsters. Game art and audio improved because of CD-ROM storage. The need for copy protection was sig. nificantly reduced (at least temporarily) and the cost of goods for a game title was reduced (one CD was cheaper than 6-10 floppies of CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Coming Soon! For Windows 95 Bradshaw Football '97 puts YOU in the Game Get ready for hard-hitting -football at its best! 22atures: Bradshaw Football\" '97 is a riveting gridiron experience with play-by-play mais commentary from legendary quarterback and two-time Super Bowl MVP Terry Bradshaw. With advanced photo-realism and high definition 3D graphics, it may be the closest you'll \"come to tre NFL action. Bradshaw Football-97 Ga new dimension in virtual game play. \"Helmet-Cam\" and 3D camera perspectives Official Bradshaw Football '97 playbook Great action football based on player statistics Terry's comments about teams and players Play for and against Bradshaw's super team Terry Bradshaw's play-by-play commentary Play section is superimposed over the field Great VCR playback for instant replays Create the ultimate team and/or trade players Complete up-to-date player statistics Injury history is reflected in player statistics Play against the computer or another player Stay on top of the action with \"Helmet Cam\" and unique wide-angle 3D perspectives! Check out your favorite pro football players! =-BRADSHAW FOOTBALL'97 Cord is a registered trademark of Corol Corporation Studio Arts Multimedia is a registered trademark of Studio Arts Multimedia, Inc., Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and or other countries Al other product and company names are trademarks of their respective companies, CORSI KUR-0304-US Tiger Direct $3999 PLAYERS Officially licensed product of Players Inc 1-888-222-9700 http://www.corel.com Call now for faxed literature! 1-613-728-0826 ext. 3080 Document # 1040 Please mention source code CMJ *USS plus applicable taxes and shipping. Please mention source code CMJ CIRCLE READER SERVICE #44 "


"JOHNNY WILSON ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY CHAIRMAN AND CEO Eric Hippeau Consumer Media Group President J. Scott Briggs Vice President Thomas Cottingham Director of Electronic Publishing Beth Cataldo Executive Director, Research Pandy Cohen Business Manager Cynthia Mason Creative Services Manager Terri Ravison Assistant to the President Francesca Kos Ziff-Davis Publishing President, U.S. Publications Ronni Sannenberg President, Interactive Media And Development Group Jellrey Ballowe President, International Media Group J.B. Holston IR President, Computer Intelligence/Infocorp Bob Brown President, Training & Support Publishing Group William Rosenthal Vice President, Chief Financial Office Timothy O'Brien Senior Vice President, Marketing Terri Holbrooke Vice President, General Counsel, And Secretary J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, Human Resources Rayna Brown Vice President, Planning Daryl R. Otte Vice President, Production Roger Herrmann Vice President, Controller Mark Moyer Vice President, Information Systems Steve Gladyszewski Treasurer Thomas L. Wright Second, many companies the picture is good enough that already build their products with they can finally leverage their film higher resolution (16-bit) art than assets into interactive products. they can afford to store on current The problem is that CD-ROM CD-ROMs. DVD will allow for prettigames with digitized video didn't er games, the main reason we fail as much because of image expect deluxe DVD editions to sell quality but because of bad game and encourage gamers to upgrade design. Gamers want to feel like to DVD-ROM drives. Processor they are really changing the face of intensity may impede full 16-bit game events, that the nuances of implementation on fast-paced real their decisions ripple through a time games, but 3D graphics cards game and change the game world. should assist in that area. Whether these decisions are realThird, the extra storage will allow time or turn-based, digitized video for CD quality soundtracks, another offers a feeling of closed-endedreason deluxe DVD editions will sell. ness. Publishers cannot afford to Fourth, DVD-ROM should allow for film all possible ramifications of an bigger game databases. Imagine a action, so they tend to create minirole playing game with a conversa malist branches for the storyline, tional database of several GB. Non cut-scenes and victory defeat player characters can have more sequences. This, in turn, creates a detailed conversations with your feeling of redundancy that reduces characters and character knowledge the satisfaction level and makes the can be cross-referenced more effecgame world less credible. That's tively. The games could conceivably why we think most games which become richer, but they may raise used digitized video failed and why development budgets yet again. We don't think DVD will cause hisFinally, DVD will allow for bar tory to repeat itself. DVD is a stor gain-priced shovelware collections age solution. on one DVD-ROM. This may keep We'll see some digitized video in some worthy games available in introductory sequences, cut scenes the channel because several and victory/defeat sequences, but games will be available in the shelf it really won't change the face of space that normally would be taken gaming. The bottom line for us is by a single-title. still, \"It's the game, stupid!\", and the success or failure of DVD-ROM FILM AT 12X adoption by computer gamers will Will DVD and its accompanying depend on its effect on the quality MPEG-2 capacity create a new of the gaming experience. demand for digitized video in Although some gaming compa. games? We hope not. Publishers nies already have DVD titles in should have learned their lessons development, most of them are with CD-ROM. The inception of CDdeluxe editions of previously ROM games caused publishers to released games. The earliest engage in a star chase where impact we can perceive DVD hav. everyone tried to hire as many outing on the gaming world will be for of-work and retired actors with Christmas '97, and the most likely name recognition as possible. impact is for Christmas '98. Most Then, we ended up with tired per gamers will take a \"wait and see\" formances which added a great attitude toward DVD-equipped comdeal to game budgets and very litputers, and I believe that's just tle to game value. what they should do. MPEG-2's higher resolution may You may read DVD hype else. encourage studios to believe that where, but you won't see it here. U.S. Publications Group President, U.S. Publications Ronni Sonnenberg President, Business Media Group Claude Sheer President, Consumer Media Group J. Scott Briggs Senior Vice President, Circulation Baird Davis Executive Vice President, Business Media Group Don Byrnes Assistant to the Chairman Tom McGrade Vice President, Marketing Services Jim Manning Vice President, Central Advertising Sales Bob Bader Vice President, Product Testing Mark Van Name Vice President, Circulation Services James F. Ramaley Vice President Al DiGuido Vice President Daniel Farber Vice President Michael Miller Vice President Paul Somerson Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director of ZD Labs Bob Kane Director, Benchmark Operation Bill Catchings Ziff-Davis Magazine Network: Senior Vice President Joe Gillespie Executive Director Jeff Bruce Executive Director, Marketing Mike Perkowski Managing Director Rita Burke. Directors Ken Beach, Michael Bird, Sue Pasieka, Melinda Maginn Scott Murphy Associate Network Directors Debbie Moss. Julle Tuttle Director of Public Relations Gregory Jarboe PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744 6667) is published monthly by Zift-Davis Publishing Division. Copyright  1996 Zitt Davis Publishing Division. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. If you want lo quote from an article write to Chantal Tucker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5802, or fax (212) 503-5420. For price quotes on reprints, please contact Ziff Davis reprints at (800) 8254237. Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. We periodically make lists of our CUS: tomers available to carefully screened mailers of quality goods and services. If you do not wishi lo receive such mailings, let us know by writing us at Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167 Boulder, CO 80322-7167 SOFT BAN K 2D ZIFF-DAVIS ABC Audit Bureau of Circulations Member AUDITED CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"EAT THIS ROCK BOY! It'll Rock Your World! Ibido, the world of CAVEWARS, is a rockin' place to dwell. In a vast, maze of caverns, eight species wage an incredibly brutal war for survival. Your job, Commander: take control of these subterranean lifeforms and roll over the civilizations of your enemies. TISSUS S ISUSTA It's Not All Blood  CAVEWARS is also a game of exploration and empire building. Play vs. as many as four computer or human opponents. Fight in \"Ibido\" or have the computer create a new underground world. Dig It or Get Buried! In the beginning, you have primitive weapons and magic and your empire is small. Manage your population and your troops, mine rich mineral deposits to forge new weapons, effectively research new technologies, and rediscover the lost spells of Gimlor. Now kick some serious butt and the vast levels of caverns will be yours! ADVARIK BERGBUI DWAREGAKKARK('HUMAN NMARIE TARCHON TROLL CAVEWARS for IBM CD-ROM is available wherever great games are sold, or contact: Alk. The Avalon Hill Game Company OS G DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 Toll Free: 800-999.222  Fax: 410-254-0991 http://users.aol.com/ahgames/avalon html CIRCLE READER SERVICE #281 "


"Only $49.95. Call (800) 757-7707 Please mention Special Offer NC1618 We've taken NASCA even more heartMIUI NASCAR Both the cars and the tracks are painstakingly detailed right down to the authentic decals and billboards. Realistic rearview mirror action lets you see who's coming up behind you. The competition's intense as you race to overtake NASCAR champion Dale Earnhardt. 2010 AUBE 77 mph Spotter and crew chief audio lets you know where the competition is as you race door-todoor with up to 39 other cars. Authentic NASCAR dashboard lets you keep track of your RPMs, fuel and other critical information 1904 3000 NASCAR. Racing is also available for the Mac and the PlayStation. SIERRA PEP >RUS We're talking authentic-check out this locall 01996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or designate trademarks of or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. NASCAR Racing 2/3 officially licensed by NASCAR. Papyrus and Papyrus logo are trade Penske Racing South, loc. Geoll Bodine's name and the likeness of the 17 car including the OVC trademark are used under license with GEB. Incorporated. The name of and Wkeness of Dave Marcis and the name, marks and race car design of the 271 Marcia right to use the name, Ukeness and image of Hendrick Motorsports car 124 DuPont Automotive Finishes and Jeff Gordon are granted under license from JG Motorsports, Inc. The name of Johnny Benson, the name, masks and race car design of Bahari Racin logo are registered trademarks of Proctor and Gamble and may not be reproduced without the written consent of Proctor and Gamble. Proctor and Gamble have licensed these rights to Papyrus Design Group's name. Name and likeness of the v10 Tide cari and Eagle are trademarks of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., reproduced by permission. Pontiac Pontiac Arrowhead Emblem, and Grand Prix are trademarks of General Motors Corporation used under license by Papyrus Design Group, Inc. NAPAIS used of Roush Racing. Livonia. Ml. The Family Channel trademarks PRIMESTAR trademarks. Roush Racing and Ted Musgrave's name and/or likeness used by authority of Roush Racing, Livonia, M. "


"Racing and added ounding action. PC Gamer called NASCAR. Racing \"...simply the best racing sim ever created.\" Here's what makes NASCAR. Racing 2 even better: Compete in the 1996 season with real NASCAR drivers Fast and easy Arcade Mode lets novices jump in and teams on 16 NASCAR tracks and start driving immediately Crew chief and spotter audio alert you to track  Faster graphics in SVGA conditions Officially licensed by NASCAR DALE EARNHARDT MII TIPI HYEH ANIMAL ESS ITALI COU PON Kom na Connect Setup Return Network play lets you race door-to-door and headto-head with up to 7 other players. W kod Save Deinte Hotar Change tires, suspension and more to customize your car to your driving style. earn all about 7-time NASCAR Champion Dale arnhardt, as well as your other favorite drivers. NASCAR DETAIL SHOP BETQUE DINT Havelength : 33 Rechers Opponents : Oppon Senyth : 49 Dergade Sinulator Entry Lat . season hace Weekend. Dan Teleflagr. PRIMESEN Temperature: 76 vectron South w you can personalize your car by creating your 7 unique designs and sponsorships in the SCAR 2 paintkit. Get the big picture, as you race against Rusty Wallace and other top NASCAR drivers. Choose all your race options, then compete in real NASCAR events like the NAPA 500 of Atlanta. LESTILLIS See your local software dealer or for a taste of the action, download our demo from http://www.sierra.com/games/NASCAR27 asion Group, Inc. PlayStation and the PlayStation logas are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Rusty Wallace's name and the likeness of the 12 car, including the Ford Motorsport logo are registered trademarks used under license with ve used under the license with Marcis Auto Racing. The name of Bobby Labonte, the name and marks of the Interstate Batteries Company, and the name, marks and race car design of Joe Gibbs Racing are used under license with Joe Gibos Racing. The 9 the trademark of Pennzahl Company, are used under license with Bahari Racing and Johnny Benson. The name and likeness and marks of 13 GM Goodwrench Service stock car and Dale Earnhardt, are licensed with Dale Earnhardt, Inc. Tide and Tide the with LCR. Inc. Chevrolet, the Bow Tie emblem, Monte Carlo, and related body desion are trademarks of the Chevrolet Motor Division, General Motors Corporation and used under license by Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Goodyear (and winged roof design) om NAPA. The Atlanta Motor Speedway is a registered trademark, the mark and track likeness are used under license from the Atlanta Motor Speedway. The Valvoline trademarks, Roush Racing and Mark Martin's name and/or likeness used by authority CIRCLE READER SERVICE #234 "


"LETTERS LETTER OF THE MONTH PORNO BILL TROTTER SPEAKS William Trotter sent the following letter to Contributing Editor Martin Cirulis after the latters critical aside in his November column. Originally a private message, we thought Bill's perspective was so interesting that his story needed to be told. We asked and received his permission to print the letter in its entirety In the two or so years since the incident happened, I've taken an incredible amount of flak for my review/strategy guide mistake with ASCENDANCY, but until now I have not replied, cither in public or in private, to any of the derision or accusations--during my 13-year career as a salaried music critic, I developed a pretty thick skin with regard to such matters and generally followed a policy of dignified silence. In this case, however, \"dignity\" doesn't cut it, and so I feel compelled to break that silence in response to the honor of being singled out in the recent 15th anniversary issue of CGW. Perbaps it's because I have such abiding respect for your magazine (I've bought, and kept, every issue since I got into this field in late 1987) -it is the only worthy competition PC Gamer has, and the continuing rivalry between the two titles helps, I suspect, to keep all of us honest. Or perhaps it's because I've always enjoyed your columns and reviews so much; or perhaps it's because of my personal and professional admiration for Johnny Wilson) and Russell [Sipe), both of whom I've met at various CES functions, and with whom I always enjoyed \"talking shop.\" In any case, I would like to at least get my side of the story on the record, once and for all. The whole wretched experience has confirmed the old proverb about reputations being hard things to build and casy things to damage, For almost a decade, now, I've labored in the software vineyards, trying to bring a historian's and novelist's insights into a field where the average standard of joumalism is abysmal, and mostly, I think, I've made a positive contribution. But the one time I seriously screwed up, I managed to wipe out all the accumulated good will and respect I may have acquired up to that time. At least I learned my lesson: when the editors asked me to do a review of CLOSE COMBAT, one that would appear more or less contemporaneous with the strategy guide I had written for Microsoft, I flatly refused. I suppose if I were 20 years younger, I could just shrug it all off, but at age 53, it's not so easy to do that any more. Ironically, some of my nine published books have gotten terrible reviews, too, but they've always been balanced-out by the good notices; in our genre, nobody \"reviews the reviewers\" except one's colleagues, and it is as one colleague to another that I write you this letter. when I was approached, by a third party, about writing the major part of the ASCENDANCY book, I took the job without much hesitation; I hadn't had a raise from PCG since 1989, the city 7 Housing Authority had condemned part of our home (built in 1907), and I desperately needed to raise a few thousand dollars to make the repairs, or it was conceivable that me and my family would find ourselves out on the streets. If I had known what I was getting into, I would have robbed a bank instead. Only after I had signed the contract, did I learn that the game's developers, for reasons never made explicitly clear, had no intention of providing me with the customary raw material necessary to write a valid strategy guide: no strategies, 110 caster eggs, no data tables. Hell, they wouldn't even give me the technology tree that's so important to the game! Never before or since have I encountered such an obtuse, paranoid attitude on the part of any game company. There was no alternative, with the deadline now only a month away, but to take a deep breath and blitz the friggin' game, So for two solid weeks, 12 or more hours a day, 3D PROTEST Your recent article entitled \"The 3D Wave Hits The Shores,\" published in the November issue, attempted to rate the new crop of 3D graphics accelerators. Unfortunately, the testing methodology used to measure 3D performance was faulty and did not adequately represent the benefits of 3D hardware acceleration, nor did it accurately reflect the performance differences between each of the products reviewed. There are a number of reasons why the testing methodology used is inaccurate. First, the results published in your article cannot be reproduced by Matrox when following the same methodology on a comparable system. Our testing shows Matrox Mystique consistently achieves higher scores than Diamond's Stealth 3D 2000. Second, HELLBENDER was the only Direct3D (D3D) title used to test the products in «real-world\" conditions (admittingly the only one available at the time). Because of this limitation, and testing methodology, the results simply indicate how each product would behave in one particular instance of that specific game, and therefore, does not appropriately rank how each 3D board could perform in any D3D game. In fact, the most disappointing aspect of the review is the fact that your testing methodology actually did not push the 3D hardware to its limits, and therefore did not test the boards' true capabilities. Although you set out to benchmark the new wave of 3D boards, your testing simply measured the CPU's performance (see www.matrox.com/mga \"3D benchmarking\" for further details). Therefore, the results you printed do not accurately represent the differences in 3D performance between software 3D rendering (i.e. the SIB Lightspeed 128) and a true mainstream 3D hardware accelerator (i.e. the Matrox Mystique). Your methodology also introduced the cleASCENDANCY THE OFFICIAL STRATEGY GUIDE WR TOT BB Continued on pg 28 cc FEBRUARY FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Puer Low on gas and ammo and the Germans are on your tail... Over the Reich LETA Plan your strategy then be prepared for air-to-air combat. Command one of 55 missions and pilot 19 different types of aircraft included in Over the Reich. Or, serve a complete tour of duty. BASE You're on a strategic bombing runcan you elude the anti-aircraft fire? 0000 2 Over the Reich is one of ihe besi WWW games we've seen, period...\" Computer Coming World Play solo, 2-player hotsed true internet play Windows Power Mac compatible The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 410-254-9200  Fax: 410-254-0991 GAMES OF http://www.avalonhill.com STRATEGY Available at your favorite game retailer or call us Toll Free: 800-999-3222 1997 AH Games. Power Mac is a registered trademark of Apple Computer Inc Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation BIG TIME SOFTWARE INC "


"LETTERS me, until after I started getting a merciless on-line flaming about the matter, that I might be perceived to have a conflict of interest. And not until the other reviews came out, especially the scathing one in CGW, did my blinders come off with regard to the game itself. Once ( I have paid a very high price indeed for letting my guard down. ment of human error in the testing, >>>Continued from pg 26 resulting in data that cannot be accuI did nothing but play ASCENDANCY, rately reproduced. And by only pub setting up every possible game-varilishing a minium and mayip ant I could think of and trying to range, and not an average score, your mine nuggets of useful information chart does not accurately represent by dint of sheer exposure. the overall performance of the The curious thing is that I boards during extended game play. became totally obsessed with the Although you do acknowledge, in game. The more I played, the more the sidebar, that using HELLBENDER I wanted to play. Looking back, as the sole application tested could can see now that it was simple only give an indication of 3D per obsession, rather than the quality of formance, not the final word.\" (p. the product that was driving me; but 153) you use these benchmark num at the time, I really and truly did bers to draw some very definite con think ASCENDANCY was a great clusions. In fact, the reviewer claims game. Therefore, when I was asked that \"the 3D performance of some to do the review, I had no hesitation of these cards isn't all it's cracked up about saying yes. Given my mind to be,\" which is a strong and invalid set at the time, I would have given statement considering the lack of the game a grotesquely high rating comprehensive tests used to draw anyway, regardless of my involvesuch a conclusion. ment with the strategy guide. Call In the end, this 3D accelerator me naive, call me stupid, call me feature fails to correctly clepict the temporarily insane-I'll cop to all benefits of using a mainstream 3D those charges. But I was NOThardware accelerator such as the not consciously, at any rate ---being Matrox Mystique in a real world venal, cynical, or manipulative with application. The test measurements, an eye toward bigger royalties. and therefore the ranking given for Of course, the strategy guide, each product, are both inconclusive when we finally finished cobbling it and erroneous. Had you used a together, was pathetic. Civen the methodology which effectively total lack of cooperation from the stressed hardware acceleration, your game's designers, we did the best we results could have been more repre could--a lame excuse, I know, but sentative even though you had only the truth. It really did not occur to one Direct3D game available at the time. the misrepresentation of the true As a manufacturer of 3D hardcapabilities of the technology. As the ware, Matrox relies on industry influleading publication in the gaming encers such as Computer industry, and as Gaming World a Ziff-Davis to educate YSTIQUE magazine, you readers, and are responsible accurately meafor ensuring sure, the impact that your tests of new technoloare reprogies. Instead, we ducible and are very disapfair, and pointed to see therefore, accurately measure true CGW developing such an ill-con performance. At least, since you do ceived 3D hardware test. It con acknowledge that these tests were tributes to readers' confusion and only the beginning of a series of able to play the damned game again, and have paid a very high price indeed for letting my guard down. The final irony in this whole sorry business is that, to date, I have not received a single penny of royalties from the book. I got a crummy advance of three grand, all of which went immediately into house repairs, and that was it. I got out my calculator, after the manuscript has been sent off to the black hole that is Prima, and figured out that, on the basis of the hours I'd put in trying to explore the guts of the game, I ended up making about $4.25/hour. Well, that's my tale of woe, and I thank you for taking the time to hear me out. I don't expect this confession to change your opinion of me or of my work, but I hope it may give you reason to feel a bit more sympathy and a bit less contempt. I walked into the situation with my eyes wide open and I got cold-cocked. I don't suppose I'll ever live it down, but I certainly won't ever allow myself to get backed into such a comer again. Ilook forward to reading your informed and refreshingly witty column for many years to come, and I hope some day to have the pleasure of meeting you. William Trotter Creensboro, NC those reviews did come out, I went back and replayed the game, and discovered, to my chagrin, that my colleagues were absolutely right it was a half-baked and essentially hollow game, all surface flash and precious little substance. I had simply been in the grip of an almost pathological case of game-lock, and, in order to sustain any enthusiasm whatever for the project, I managed to shut down my better critical faculties for the duration of the project. Since that day, I've never been accurately reflect the boards hardware 3D performance (www.matrox.com/mga). Nathalie Benoit North American Marketing/ Communications Manager Matrox Graphics, Inc. 3DISTOTKE M edia evaluations, you should have made a conscious effort not to draw the conclusions you did. In order to effectively reflect the hardware's capabilities in \"real-world\" situations, a 3D test or benchmark should not be limited to the measurement of a very specific situation, which was what the CGW tests did. We invite all CGW readers to visit Matrox's Web site and read the in-depth explanation of how the 3D graphics accelerators should have been tested, using HELLBENDER, in order to more mol We believe our tests were conducted on a level playing field. We measured CPU utilization because we believe that high-quality 3D cards should offroad some of the CPU calculations to their chipset. This improves game speed and benefits gamers in the long rum. FEBRUARY 1997 "


"DON'T GO SCHIZO. SM 60 RK THE PREMIER ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT NETWORK www.bezerk.com INTRODUCING beZerk, the premier online entertainment network. It's the most interactive, in-your-face entertainment on the Net by far--and it's totally FREE. So, go beZerk and play YOU DON'T KNOW JACK the netshow, the irreverent quiz show party game online. It promises wild, irreverent fun, regardless of your personalities. YOU DON'T KNOW JACK BERKELEY. Jellyusion You must have Windows 95 to play YOU DON'T KNOW JACK the netshow. YOU DON'T KNOW JACK is a trademark of J alan De. Al text and sound 1995 Jemisionin The biwitin logo is a vertered trademark of Jellyisson, Inc. Software, screen graphics and pack 0.1996 Therkeley Systems, Ine. The Brity Systems locals relatered mark and Deze servicemark of Berkeley Systems in Microsoft and Windows we plastered trademarks of Microsoft Corp mezETo CIRCLE READER SERVICE #48 "


"\"Heroes of Might and MagicTM II is games of this year-or any other RATED * Computer Gaming World EROES of Might and Magic EROES lof Might and Magic THE SUCCESSION WARS 26LEROES NEW WORLD COMPUTING uild an empire, overrun a continent, crush your opponents, and take the throne. Heroes of Might and Magic II: The Succession Wars picks up where the popular original Heroes of Might and Magic left off. Except now you have all new and enhanced tools to assist you in your quest to expand your empire and assert dominion over the land. Heroes of Might and Magic II: It's time to learn how to be a hero...all over again. Two new Hero types, Necromancer (shown) and Wizard LA MAIS Monsters are now upgradeable-make your Vampire into a Vampire Lord, etc. 7,524 Sulect zombie Strategic combat is enhanced by dozens of new spell typesHypnotize, Berserk, Holy Shout, Mass Curse, and tons more Innovative combat options include dynamic info bar for comparing troop stats on the fly and view grid function enabling pinpoint unit movement SKIP Expanded \"interactive\" battlefields with enlarged combat maps All new and improved artwork for creatures, terrain, backgrounds-everything! Strengthen castle defense by erecting turrets and building moats NEW WYRUD COMPUTING APS STUDIO 3 DO "


"OUTER COM clearly one of the best strategy year, for that matter.\" PC Gamer Coming Soon Computer Player Vaihe Ward e Tall .. Wizard's monsters include Boars, Steel Golems, Rocs, Archmages, Titans, and more Titans, and more ) New character component, Secondary Skills, includes Wisdom, Ballistics, Diplomacy, Archery, and more Heroes of Might And Magic II, The Expansion Pack 4 New Campaigns Containing 24 Scenarios Over 20 StandAlone Scenarios New Map Items And Artifacts Dwellings, such as Cathedrals, Armories, Mage Guilds etc. are now upgradeable and produce better troops 1 . Increased options for fortification building and troop recruitment Improved Interface Provides Sturmning Visuals and Enhanced Navigation  \"World Builder\" utility allows you to create your own lands Split campaigns let you choose whether to play on the side of good or evil Multiplayer action-up to six players via internet, modem, or network  65 heroes and 66 monster types to choose from Demo) 14. AQR For more information call: 1-800-251-9563 (outside the U.S. call: (415) 261-3227) http://www.nwcomputing.com New World Computing, Studio 300, the New World Computing and 300 logos, and Heroes of Might and Magic are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of the 3D0 Company. 1996 The 300 Company. All rights reserved. All other trademarks belong to their respective holders. New World Computing is a division of The 3D0 Company CIRCLE READER SERVICE #142 "


"LETTERS Your letter is representative of lots of letters on this subject. We wish the product had been playable, too. We'll let you know if we ever discover that it is. I've had a lot of fun with them, too, (but) I'm afraid all these resources put into multiplayer this and that is going to detract from what we really need-smarter computers! David V. Watts via the Internet What Matrox calls human error\" and \"data that camot be accurately reproduced\" is the result of flying through HELLBENDER with a joystick and the 2D cockpit overlay on. That's why we showed a range for frame rate instead of an average. We believe gamers want to be in the driver's seat. The frame rate goes up if you're not flving the game, but who cares? It was important for us to test realworld performance, and we believe our results reflect that approach. We urge our readers to check out Matrox Web site and then see the Computer Caming World online edition on ZDNet (http://www.zdnet.com/gaming) and join the discussion on 3D Testing.\" for a counter-example to your doomsday scenario, you might check out COMMAND CONQUER: RED ALERT and HEROES OF MICH MAGICII. Both games hane solid multiplayer capacity, but both have artificial opponents that offer plenty of challenge. BATTLELOSER 3000 This just in: Generalissimo Francisco Smarto's Battlecruiser 3000 is still not finished. NAPOLEON SOLO Reading your December issue's \"Letter of the Month\" got me boiling I for one am sick and tired of people in your magazinc-and in various newsgroups-griping and moaning about the lack or inadequacy of multiplayer gaming. I could care less about multiplayer gaming as I rarely have time for it. Until fairly recently it wasn't even an option in most games-now people act like it's an essential element. Bull! As far as I can see we're in danger of multiplayer being used as an excuse for poor Als. Come on game companies! Forget multiplayer! Give me well-designed and balanced games-give me games I can load, play for a while and then quit for more productive things! I don't want to have to log on, find an opponent and log off just to try my hand at a good game! I've been playing computer games for years, and Firing Line individual marines, etc.) have not been implemented, but are \"promised\" in future patches which will (hopefully) be available online from Take 2. Take 2, to its limited credit, is issuing patches as fast as Derek Smart can crank them out. Unfortunately, some of these patches are proving as buggy as the original game. I have deleted BC3000AD from my hard drive until I receive a proper manual and a definitive patch. Jeff Powell via the Intemet NOT-SO SMART GAMES I wish I had found your review of BATTLECRUISER 3000 AD before I bought the game! Your caveats were right on the money: crashes, bugs and a lousy manual make the game virtual ly unplayable. To make matters worse, significant features of the game (communication between ships, piloting We prefer you e-mail us at one of these addresses: CompuServe: 76703,622 Internet: 76703.622@ compuserve.com or write to: CCW, Letter To The Editor 135 Main Street, 14th Floor San Francisco, CA 94105 We reserve the right to edit all letters for spuce or clarity. UPDATEH ULTIMATE GAME MACHINE SCORES CBench: DOS Graphics Performance Winbench 96: CPU Portormance Winbench 96: Disk and CD-ROM Performance CGW Killer Rig CGW Killer Rig Micron Home MPC Falcon NW Mach v CGW Killer Rig Micron Home MPC Falcon NW Mach V 550.0 600r 1500r Micron Home MPC Falcon NW Mach V 1300.0 209.6 1250.0 500 1200 11100 1090.0 1030.0 4001 364.0 3650 368.0 363.0 360.0 900 865.0 139.2 in our January coverage of the Ultimate Game Machine, we managed to switch the performance graphs for our system with those of the Falcon North-west. If you were wondering how a $9,000 custom system could be beaten by a machine that costs half as much, it wasn't. These corrected graphs show how our Ultimate Game Machine out-performed the Micron Home MPC and Falcon Northwest Mach V, in some cases considerably. In the interest of preventing such mistakes in the future, the parties responsible, and their villages, have been sacked. 1333 300F 100 600F 200 49.6 50 40.7 38.2 300 1001 CPUMark32 CPUMark 16 Disk Winmark CD-Rom Winmark Cbench SVGA Cbench VGA Framos por second CPU WIn Marks DISK WIn Marks CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Journey through five SGIrendered, faithfully recreated 3D environments and unravel the secrets of Easter Island, Egypt, Atlantis and the Mayan and Anasazi worlds. Embark on a compelling, puzzlesolving adventure with stunning full-screen photo-realistici ray traced graphics as you travel through time and space. Enjoy over 40 hours of challenging gameplay with multiple endings as you attempt to reach your ultimate destination... Atlantis. JOURNEY TO ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS, DISCOVER AN ALIEN RACE AND SHATTER. THE THEORIES OF MODERN SCIENCE. holders. For more information call: 1-800-GTE-TODAY, Entertainment are trademarks of GTE Vantage Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective  1996 GTE Entertainment. All rights reserved. The GTE logo is a trademark of GTE Corporation. Timelapse and GTE \"What we saw stunned even us jaded editorial types.\" PC Games There are a lot of gorgeous MYST-style adventures, but this is the best of them all.\" Computer Games Strategy Plus TIMELAPSE \"... Timelapse's carefully crafted story line makes it a game worth completing.\". Newsweek WA Visit our web site for game info, forums hinds contests and downloadable demos artwork and screen shots GTE antertainment www.im.gte.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #115 A Graphical Adventure "


"he Adventure game that challenges your moral fibre  48 fully animated characters  60 stunning, high resolution locations  4 massive, non linear, inter-linked worlds  Animated by an ex-Disney artist \"A journey of a lifetime awaits you in this marvelous adventure. The world of Fable combines stunning animations with progressive puzzles, curious characters and outlandish events, all topped off with a twisted sense of humor.\" \"A game to rival the Lucas Art's Adventures.\" LEE BROWN, CD-ROM MAGAZINE \"Reminiscent of the King's Quest series.\" MARK ULYATT, PC POWER PLAY For Windows 95 and DOS Developed loy: To order, visit your retailer, or call: (800) 447-1230. TELSTAR Electronic Studios Copyright Telstar Electronic Studies Ltd. "


"COMING SOON SIRST REVIEWS PCPOWER 94% CD-ROM Games 90% CD-ROM Magazine VARG SIRTECH BOBSLED Tel: (315) 393-6633 Fax: (315) 393-1525 E-mail: webmaster@sir-tech.com www.sir-tech.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #125 "


"READ.ME Letting Zork Be Zorky Next Zork To Return To The Game's Roots In Humor WEST OF HOUSE The new Zork will incorporate familiar sites, including the famous white house of Zork 1. This mock-up is not representative of actual gameplay. ollowing quick ly on the heels of ZORK NEMESIS is Activision's interesting plan for a new chap ter in the saga of ZORK, the granddaddy of all adventure games. We visited Activision's office in Los Angeles for an exclusive interview with the team, who talked about the new game for the first time Tentatively titled ZORK: THE GRAND INQUISITOR, and scheduled for a September 1997 release, the new game represents Activision's revitalized \"We're (try\"We effort to \"let ZORK be Zorky,\" according to ing to make) designer and writer the interac Margie Stohl. While tion more NEMESIS was quite successful in its own refined, so right, many longtime fans considered it you can do rather dark for the things like spirit of the series. This time, says direc put steak tor Laird Malamed, sauce in a the design team will attempt to embrace toaster oven, what was wonderful and get a about the old text adventures-a fantasy reaction.\" world with an under -Michael current of humor.\" Set 150 years after Douglas, Lead NEMESIS in the year Programmer 1090, THE GRAND INQUISITOR opens with trouble brewing in the Land of Frobozz. An evil character named Mir Yannick has just seized complete power over the Land through his mastery of technology. Magic, which disappeared in the year 966, has THE GRAND INQUISITOR will use the same 360-degree panning engine as Nemesis, but lead programmer Michael Douglas is working on a few major refinements. An inventory screen is being added, which will allow you to manipulate items with each other, rather than with the environment alone, along with a spellbook, which will hold the magic spells you'll need to ultimately defeat the Inquisitor. Navigation is being made easier with a new map, which you can use to instantly transport to places you've previously visited. Graphics-wise, the team is still evaluating whether to continue with the photorealistic, FMVheavy look of Nemesis or go with a 3D animated approach. (The screen shot shown here is concept art only.) Douglas's overall goal in refining the engine was to make the entire ZORK world more interac tive. One of the great things slowly been creeping back, and threatens to undermine Yannick's authority, so he uses his might to begin a Magic Inquisition-imposing a curfew on the land, making daily roundups of citizens and severe. ly punishing anyone caught practicing magic. You play (of course) a hapless adventurer who, upon arrival in Port Foozle, learns of the Inquisition and sets about to stop it and take down Yannick. Along the way, you'll encounter the third Dungeon Master, a former class mate of the Inquisitor, who has been imprisoned in a lamp. The Dungeon Master becomes your guide throughout the early part of the game, until he embarks on his own story arc. the ones that frankly ain't so hot. Reviews for most are coming soon. ON THE SHELF Here are some of the hottest prod. ucts on the market, as well as TOMB RAIDER In a world of Doom clones, it's always refreshing to see a different kind of game. What is most unusual, though, is when that game exceeds expectations and amazes gamers with its very different style of gameplay. TOMB RAIDER isn't really anything new. After all, it's a platform game with a mixture of Doom-style shooting, a little bit of puzzle solving and a great deal of exploration. What is new though, is the excellent execu tion and the sheer beauty of the game. The environment is true 3D, and in hi-res mode, this game shines with incredible beauty. The gameplay is also very nice and reminds me of MARIO 64 on the graphically brilliant Nintendo 64. In fact, these two games play similarly, and while TOMB RAIDER fails to capture the true 3D movement and gameplay of MARIO 64, it comes very close. For those who've been living in a cave, or those rebelling against the hype, TOMB 36 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"READ.ME Blizzard Frees Diablo Online 4 Gaming Editors Instantly Hooked On Battlenet about the old text adventures was that you could try any thing, no matter how outra. geous, and you'd always get some kind of response (usually humorous) «We're rethinking the scripting system,\" Douglas said, \"so that the interaction is more refined, as in the old games, so that you can do things like, say, put steak sauce in a toaster oven, and get a reac tion.\" The team is actually proto. typing and playing the game as a text adventure as they work on it. which, said Douglas, gives them \"a design feedback loop that lets us see the structure of the game a lot better.\" Director Malamed, a longtime fan of the series before joining Activision, feels the pressure to be true to the ZORK universe. \"Managing a franchise is the best thing and the worst thing in the world,\" he commented. \"I have a lot of fond memories of the ZORK games and really believe in the ZORK universe. We feel a big responsibility to show people their ZORK.\" To prepare for the project, Malamed's team has built a linear history of the universe based on all previous games, simi lar to the Star Trek and Star Wars bibles, so that no anomalies are created in the new one. \"If even one person notices a mistake in the new game,\" he said, \"that's one too many for me.\" --Jeff Green Then four early versions of Blizzard's battle.net software arrived with a stripped version of DIABLO, the staff clamored to get their hands on them. Those lucky enough to play the beta were impressed, not only with DIABLO's excellent gameplay and dark atmosphere, but with the incredibly streamlined battle.net interface. Installation was easy, and we were never asked about our modem or internet configuration, the program was \"smart\" enough to figure this out on its own. After the DIABLO introduction you'll see a class selection display and then the battle.net connection screen. With one simple click, and a short wait for a connection, we were in. It was that easy. Anyone who fears any sort of hacking or headaches in connecting to Blizzard's online service can rest easy. The process is amazingly simple. And once you're in the interface is well set up. You can choose to enter chat rooms, create an adventuring group, or join a group already in progress. Blizzard is offering the battle.net service for free, although you'll still have to pay charges to your ISP for use of your Internet connection. Diablo is the first battle.net game to go live, and STARCRAFT is expected to follow in June. Blizzard plans to put more of its games on the service as they become avail. able.-E. Chin Red Alert On Mplayer INQUISITION MAGICKS player recently announced that COMMAND & CONQUER: RED ALERT would be playable over its online gaming service. RED ALERT will join COMMAND & CONQUER, which is already one of the most played games on Mplayer. For more information on the RED ALERT announce ment, turn to our website at www.zdnet.com/gaming. -E. Chin review.if we can tear ourselves away from the game long enough to write it.-E. Chin Eidos, (415) 513-8929 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 301 RAIDER is a 3D, third-person platform shooter, where you play a female adventurer, Lara Croft, attempting to find the missing pieces of an arti fact called the Scion. Along the way, you'll have to navigate the treacherous terrain of tombs and ruins and fight deadly beasts and stranger opponents. The graphics, which are in breath taking 3D, are spectacular when accelerated on 3D boards such as the 3Dfx or Rendition parts. Next month, we'll bring you an in-depth PHANTASMAGORIA 2: A PUZZLE OF FLESH The title pretty well sums it up. Flesh abounds in this game, and not all of it's soaked in blood. The creators of this non-sequel to last year's PHANTASMAGORIA put a lot of effort into dishing up scenes to shock and titillate even the most jaded sex 'n' gore film buffs. Too bad they didn't give as much thought to the story or gameplay. Curtis is a young technical writer at a sinister pharmaceutical company who's afraid he's losing his mind. He's bothered by horrifying visions and receives e-mail from Hell literally. Before long, P2 degenerates into a muddled conspiracy yarn that makes The XFiles look like C-SPAN by comparison. While the puzzles aren't difficult, they often don't make any sense, either. You're frequently required to perform tasks far more inane than going down into the basement. It's a shame, too, because under the bloody mess of a plot, the pacing and gradually deepening creepi. ness are the stuff great horror is made of. The end result, however, is neither fun nor entertaining. At least the sex in this PHANTASMAGORIA is consensual.-K. Hedstrom Sierra On-Line, (800) 757-7707 Win95 CD-ROM Reader Service # 302 FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"READ.ME The Buzz From Comdex 3D Chips, 3D Audio, Faster Modems & DSVD Are On The Way he biggest com puter convention in North America lived up to its hellish reputa tion, but once again it paraded new hardware technology of interest to gamers. This year's highlights include new graphics chip-sets, 3D audio that actually works, faster modems, and new stor. age devices, among others. Both Tseng Labs and 3Dfx were showing off new 2D/3D chip-sets. Tseng's ET6300 chip-set takes their successful ET6000 2D core, and adds 3D functionality. It features a well rounded complement of 3D fea tures, including: bilinear/trilinear fil tering, MIP mapping, subpixel accu. racy, fog, z-buffering, Gouraud shad ing, and alpha blending. Most notably, it moves up one step in the 3D pipeline to handle rasterization setup. Hercules has already announced a board based on ET6300, due to ship this spring. 3Dfx introduced a new version of their Voodoo chip-set called Voodoo Eizo (the monitor maker formerly known as Nanao) displayed a 17-inch monitor that was remarkable GOOD IDEA Monitors like this one from Eizo will make not so connecting your peripherals easier-a Universal Serial Bus port is built right in to the base. much for its image Rush, which will integrate with quality, which is sharp, but for the Alliance's ProMotion at3D chip, a Universal Serial Bus port found on its 2D accelerator. Both will be able to side. Imagine being able to daisy share the board's frame buffer, chain your keyboard, mouse, joystick which will help keep the cost down. and gamepad from your monitor, and There was a fair amount of buzz eliminate all that clutter going to your about new modems boasting a peak CPU. Eizo expects to ship its i-Station downstream data rate of 56 Kbps, monitors this spring. nearly twice the throughput of cur Another buzzing technology at the rent V.34 modems. There may, how show this year was DVD, with ever, be a small ruckus brewing since Pioneer, Panasonic, Mitsubishi, different chip-sets introduced by two Toshiba and Yamaha all showing major modem players are currently their works in progress. DVD drives incompatible (see related story later will support MPEG-2 and Dolby's in this section). AC-3 positional audio. For gamers, what they'll bring to the party is gobs and gobs of storage, with firstgeneration units offering up to 8.5 GB (see this month's Editorial). Diamond Multimedia was previewing its upcoming PCI-based Freedom 5600 DirectSound 3D accelerator, which incorporates binaural rendering technology from Aurreal Semiconductor (formerly Crystal River Engineering). Binaural rendering is a real-time 3D audio technology that models how humans determine the position of sound and applies algorithms to simulate various sound \"sources.\" Unlike earlier attempts at so-called 3D audio, this technology is remarkably realistic. In headphones, the experience is startling as sounds are rendered in full 720 degrees (360° horizontal, 360° vertical). In speakers, the vertical cues aren't quite as discernible, but the horizontal cues are still pretty stunning. As all of these up-and-comers make their way to shrink-wrap, we'll test them and give you the lowdown.-Dave Salvator he Lari , 10 ON THE SHELF nice touches throughout: Spices are enhanced for the Age of Discovery, the Great Wall is obsolete in The Mongol Horde; you can't change government types in Jihad. It's a shame that multiplayer options haven't yet been implemented, but even so, this should keep Sid Meier fans sleepless until the seem ingly inevitable Civ III.-T. Coleman MicroProse, (510) 522. 1164, PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 303 the best for last, and with the last-minute addi tions to the terrain engine, the game has actually leaped to the front of the technical pack. The accurate Chilean landscape over which most of the combat occurs is breathtaking, with huge mountains, deep valleys to buzz through, and wispy clouds. The textures flow Bominope CIVILIZATION II SCENARIOS The stand-alone scenarios that came with Civ II weren't particularly memo. rable, a situation corrected in a big way with this excellent add-on pack. The ancient campaigns are a wonderful change of pace, forcing you to conquer the known world as Alexander and Genghis Khan did, without the benefit of tanks and stealth bombers. There are several JETFIGHTER II In my recent preview of this game, I expressed concern that the delay in shipping JETFIGHTER III might result in a product with an outdated feel. However, it seems that Mission Studios saved CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Give your Eyes something to scream about. Absolute 3D graphics. You want them to scream. You want them to be real. You want them to be $3d. The What: The S3d acceleration chip makes your games, Internet 3D, and all Windows applications dance. When you match S3d logo hardware with S3d logo software, you get the best 2D graphics, the most realistic 3D, and an affordable price. The Where: Seek S3d on computer systems like Compaq, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, and Packard Bell. Find S3d on accelerator boards from Diamond Multimedia, Number Nine, and STB. Demand $3d on games from Interplay. Activision, Eidos, and Mindscape. The Why You want 3D so real it screams, SEEK FIND DEMAND 01996 S3 Incorporated. All rights reserved. 53 is a registered trademark sd, the ssd fogo and \"SOK. und demend are trademarks of 53 kubiportod in the United States and other countries, Microsoft Windows and the Windows 10 are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporabo All other trademarks are property of their respective companies a board S3 incorporated Designed for hit our web site for the real stuit: seek.s3.com Microsoft Windows 95 S3d is compatible with Windows 95, Windows 3.1, Windows NT, and OS/2. "


"READ.ME Total 3D: Fashionably Late New Canopus 3D Card Is Fast And Packed With Features CAUTION MORE DETAIL DAU). LUTION MORE SPEED MORE FUS MORE ADRENALINE GAUTION MORE SOUND ANAMA The TotalSD Bundle Includes: he Canopus Total 3D, based on the Rendition Verité accelerator chip, hit the scene just a little behind the first Verité cards, but in this case, later is better. Canopus has added features and tweaked performance, making the Total 3D a solid, wellrounded, single-slot solution for 2D and 3D acceleration. In addition to the standard 2D and 3D graphics features, the Total 3D is the first Rendition based card to offer support for stereoscopic VR glasses. The card even comes with a pair of NuVision 3D Spex and a couple of games-DESCENT 2 and WHIPLASH that have support for VR glasses. In addition, there's support for Spatializer 3D audio. Performance is probably the best of the Verité set. On a P166, it cranks out 30.1 Graphic WinMarks on Winbench 96 at 1024x768x8, and 28.1 WinMarks at 800x600x16. forum enables the cur. rent version to run. Like all Rendition cards, the Total 3D runs best in a system with fully functional, PCI bus-mastering DMA. VGA is slow, but there's now a utility available from Rendition's ftp site (ftp.rendition.com) called renutil that will speed up most standard canopus VGA games-but it won't work with games such as Doom and HERETIC that have a resolution of 320x240. Canopus, a new player in the US market, is the biggest graphics card manufacturer in Japan. They also manufacture the Sierra Screamin' 3D, which was one of the leading performers in our December graphics card roundup. The Total 3D will be offered at a list price of $279 with 4 MB of EDO DRAM.---Loyd Case Canopus (408) 467-4000 www.canopuscorp.com In addition, Total 3D supports true color (32 bit) at 1024x768, the only Verité card to date that can do this--and does it at a brisk 85 Hz refresh rate. The 3D performance isn't shabby. either. Like all Verité cards, The Canopus card will improve QUAKE frame rates, and adds bilinear filtering and anti-aliasing. At 640x400, we saw frame rates at the starting level of 26.1 frames per second (compared to 25.1 fps for the Intergraph Reactor-both running VQUAKE 1.06 beta 9). INDYCAR 2 is also stunning, especially on the new enhanced tracks. The Total 3D will ship with shareware QUAKE, DESCENT 2. WHIPLASH and INDYCAR 2. SVGA performance was also good, although we did run into a problem with F22 LIGHTNING II. This will be fixed in the next F22 release, but a terminate and stay resident file downloadable from CompuServe's Flight Simulator ON THE SHELF smoothly between areas, with no \"patch. work\" feel, and the variety of objects strewn over the landscape is astounding. Unfortunately, this detail comes at a price, and unless you have a 166-MHz or faster Pentium, you'll need to turn down the detail a bit. The game includes a plethora of adjustable detail parameters so you can adjust the frame rate to suit your desires. The flight model here is very light, and the game is far more about air-to-air action than realism. Still, no sim has captured the feel of speed as well as JF III, and all but hard-core sticklers should give it a look.-D. Alkin Mission Studios, (847) 202-3951 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 304 geous new maps of Europe, Asia, and North America, along with (gasp!) terrain effects. The fun chrome covers random events such as storms in the North Sea and plagues, while the alliance rule keeps diplomacy-always a cornerstone of Risk play-to the forefront. And while the Al is actually OK, it's the multiplayer options (including Internet) that will keep this light, very enjoyable game on hard drives for many campaigns to come. --T. Coleman Hasbro Interactive, (508) 921-3700 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 306 RISK If this old favorite merely received the same class treatment as Monopoly CD-ROM, fans would be content. Classic Risk is still here, but it's to Hasbro's credit that the package is much more than the old Risk board game. Ultimate Risk brings gorFPS FOOTBALL PRO 97 With the disappointments of the computer pigskin season almost too numerous to mention, it's about time we had something to CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Die. Die. Die. FREE Ultra rare ORAGON MASTER Die In Every Dragon Dice CD-ROM Survival comes down to two things, the role of strategy. And the roll of the die. DRAGON DICE Alle DRAGON DIOTE INTRODUCING DRAGON DICE ON CD-ROM. Not since the invention of the broadsword has there been a more realistic way to experience the pace of battle. The new CD-ROM version of TSR's blockbuster hit, DRAGON DICE, takes you on a dangerously realistic journey into one of the most challenging and popular fantasy dice games ever. This animated DRAGON DICE adventure, begins in eons past, when the strength of the sword or the spell power of a sorcerer was the only difference between a glorious life, and a vicious, terrible death. You'll have to use all 128 of the games built-in computer dice to build your own dice armies, to scout enemies, and to avoid traps. Plus, each DRAGON DICE CD-ROM comes with a limited and collectible, TSR sanctioned DRAGON MASTER die. It's the most true-to-life dice battle of strategy you've ever encountered. But beware, because only the extremely talented, or the unbelievably lucky will survive. . BASED ON TSR'S BLOCKBUSTER STRATEGY HIT, DRAGON DICE. CUSTOMIZE ENDLESS ARMIES FROM EVERY DIE AVAILABLE FOR TSR'S ORIGINAL DRAGON DICE (ALL 128) SINGLE PLAYER OR A 4 PLAYER NETWORK MODE DRAWS YOU INTO THE RICH HISTORY AND STORYLINE OF AN ANCIENT AD&D LINIVERSE BEAUTIFUL ARTWORK AND DICE-TO-CHARACTER ANIMATION BRUING THE POPULAR DICE GAME TO LIFE, CREATING A RICH GAME PLAYING EXPERIENCE Coming soon for Windows 95 Download the interactive preview at www.interplay.dragonplay.com Check out TSR's DRAGON DICE game available now. DRAGON DICE and O 1996 TSR, Inc. Used by interplay Productors unde sense tom TSA, Inc. INTERPLAY is a trademark of interplay Productors. All rights reserved. A01D and the TSR logo are trademarks of TSA, Inc Wndows 96 demark of Microsoft Corporation Alrights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #263 BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. "


"AAMOUR STRENGTH AAMOUR STRENGTH \"MDK promises 3-D technology so cool and action so...realistic that it will send everything else running for cover.\" PC GAMER \"...futuristic 3-D action/ adventure that could set a new standard for PC Gaming.\" PC GAMES ON A GOOD DAY, ONLY 2.5 \"There are too many innovations...to list here.\" COMPUTER PLAYER \"This highly anticipated title is certainly one of the slickest games we've seen...could be the action fest to rival Quake.\" BOOT ARMOUR STRENGTH RATING PENDING PC CD-ROM Created by Shiny Entertainment, Inc. 1996 Shiny Entertainment, Inc. MDK is a trademark of Shiny Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork and design  1996 Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. PIETM is a registered trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. EUTETTUIVATIOTASSE RATING BOARD "


"ARMOUR. STRENGTH Your planet is being bulldozed by the ton. Six massive mobile mining cities, controlled by a force that nobody can stop, are strip mining the Earth's surface, overrunning and crushing anything in its path. Unless you can stop them. BILLION PEOPLE WILL DIE.  Unbelievable 3-D graphics, adrenalinepumping gameplay and extremely fluid movement through a massive and wide open playing environment.  Over 60 arenas of play spread out over 6 mobile cities.  Over 60 hours of gameplay.  A fully reactive program intelligence where enemies think, listen and communicate in a calculated assault on your life.  An arsenal of innovative weapons and equipment including: A helmet-mounted sniper rifle with vision goggles target enemies from over two miles away. A living polymer suit that protects from piercing projectiles. A high-tech reusable parachute. Bombs...decoys... homing sniper grenades... and many more. MENT IT THINKS. THEREFORE IT KILLS. PIES GERTAIN N3 A12 Sy91 ENTERTAINMENT COMING MARCH 1997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #134 Windows '95 and DOS on one CD. http://www.playmatestoys.com 611 Anton Blvd., Suite 500 Costa Mesa, CA 92626 (714) 428-2100 "


"READ.ME 56K Modems 2 Chip-Sets Vie For Dominance 4. PLAYING LATELY? ere are the games readers are actually blowing the most time with, as opposed to the reader's overall \"quality ranking\" in the Top 100. READERS' The top five retained their lock on gamer's hard drives, with Civ II, DUKE he bane of all Netizens' existence is invariably their painfully slow NUKEM 3D and WARCRAFT II maintaining connection to the Internet. Newer V.34 modems, with their 33.6 Top 3 positions for the seventh consecuKb/sec data rates and various compression schemes, have tive month. QUAKE and HEROES OF MIGHT improved connection speeds, but these modems often achieve AND Magic creep steadily up the chart, Doom Il slips into eighth higher data rates by using larger memory buffers. These buffers, place, and DAGGERFALL makes its grand debut at number ten. like another train stop along the way, tend to increase latency, You'll no longer find the CGW Poll Card bound into the maga. which slows down gameplay. Additionally, V.34 modems often fail to achieve their Izine, but check your mailbox: We mail a survey to 2,000 randomly 28.8 or 33.6 Kbps connection speed, since the Public Switched Telephone Network chosen subscribers each month, and we use the results to calcu (PSTN) usually can't sustain the faster speeds, because of varying line conditions. late the Top 100 and Playing Lately each month. Last Months Month On Chart 1. Civilization II (MicroProse) . 1 9 PSTN V.34 Modem V 34 Modem 2. Duke Nukem 3D (3D Realms) 2 10 3. WarCraft II (Blizzard) 3 12 WIDENING THE PIPE Conventional modems require two conversions from analog to digital and back (above). New 56K modems (below) Command and Conquer nearly double their speed by leaving the downstream data in the digi(Virgin/Westwood) 4 tal domain, eliminating the line noise that reduces bandwidth. 15 5. MechWarrior 2 (Activision) 5 14 wh. 6. Quake (id Software) 7 2 PSTN x2 Client Modem x2 Server 7. Heroes of Might and Magic Modem (New World Computing) 8 14 While cable modems and Asynchronous Digital Subscriber Line modems offer fat8. Doom II (id Software) 6 11 ter pipes and lower latency, they require additional equipment that cable and phone 9. Steel Panthers (SSI) 9 1 4 companies will need to deploy. In the meantime, enter two new modem chip10. Daggerfall (Berthesda) sets-Rockwell's K56 Plus and U.S. Robotics' X2-both of which claim a transmis. sion rate to your computer of 56 Kbps, nearly twice that of 28.8 modems. The new 56K modems achieve higher bandwidth by using only digital signaling robust. The Al-especially for on the server modem side, thereby elimiplayer trades-has been upgradnating certain kinds of line noise that can ed, and the new playbooks include limit connection speed. The new 56K the trendiest zone blitzes and modems will be asymmetric, however, reverses. Simulating a season still since their data rate from your PC will takes a while, but the Win 95 interonly be 33.6 Kbps. face lets you minimize the applicaThe two 56K chip-sets, despite being tion (so that CGW editors can compatible with V.34, are not compatible meet their deadlines). Best of all, with each other. USR has submitted their earlier oddities in the programX2 to the International Telecommunications ming, such as wide receivers turnUnion (ITU) for approval, and Rockwell is ing around to catch most passes, First down, Jacksonville following suit. Rockwell has also lined up have been corrected. What else several large OEMs, while USR is offering cheer. FOOTBALL PRO 97 is far beyond the mere can we say? It's a winner.-T. Coleman free flash-ROM upgrades on some of their graphic upgrade of last year's version. Yes, Sierra On-Line, (800) 757-7707 V.34 modems. Hopefully, the ITU will help the graphics are excellent, but the interface is PC CD-ROM the two companies find some middle also more navigable and the play editor more Reader Service # 307 ground. Dave Salvator m it dhe loans S mumi ON THE SHELF CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"You're outnumbered. Your troops are exhausted. You face an intensely fierce Persian army. Yet you have one strength that overcomes all weakness You are Alexander the Great. Coming Soon The Great BATTLES of A L E X AN DER Windows 95 CD-ROM Game INTERACTIVE MAGIC CIRCLE READER SERVICE #175 P.O. Box 13 4 9 1 Research Triangle Park NC 277 09 www.imagicgames.com For more information Can1 . 800 3 48 50 6 1 The Great Battles of Alexander is a trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"GO WHERE NO MAN HAS EVER COME OUT ALIVE. NOTICE WE SAID \"MAN.\" IF THE GAME GRAPHICS DON'T BLOW YOU AWAY. ONE OF THESE WILL c OMETIMES, HAVING A Sometimes, you also need guts. Or a brain. Or quic feet. Other times, you need all of the above plu TREASURE SEEKING. PUZZLE SOLVING, ALLIGATOR WRESTLING, AND STILL TIME FOR A FIGHT. grenades, a shotgun and a matching pai of nine millimeters. Such is your fat when you control Lara Croft, heroin heartthrob of Tomb Raider ... B..............CORE PlayStation DESIGN INC. . EIDOS INTERACTIVE CORE, TOMB RAIDER, LARA CROFT AND HER LIKENESS ARE TRADEMARKS OF EIDOS, Plc.  EIDOS. EIDOS HINT LINE 1-900-288-4263 COST OF CALL $0.95/MINUTE. MUST BE 18 YEARS OR HAVE PARENT'S PERMISSION/TOUCH-TONE PHONE REQUIRED "


"NOTHING LIKE A LITTLE SWIM BEFORE FENDING OFF A PACK OF WOLVES C G KILLER BODY JUST ISN'T ENOUGH. NOT EVERYONE SEES A BRIGHT LIGHT JUST BEFORE DYING (LUCKY STIFFS.) Lara has her sights on a few ancient artifacts, and she's not going to let anything or anybody get in her way. Alligators. Wolves. Thugs. They're all tempting fate once in Lara's path. But hey, what's a little temptation? Especially when everything looks this good. In the game, we mean. Check out Tomb Raider at www.tombraider.com. EIDOS...... EIDOS U INTERACTIVE TOMER CIRCLE READER SERVICE #276 "


"GAME TRACK FIRST LOOK PIPELINE 4197 ere's your first look at games in development. These games aren't even playable yet, but we thought you'd want to see how they're coming along. 2/97 Nightmares 2 Harriers and SuperCobras, and Al-controlled M1A1 tanks, LAV-25 Personnel Carriers, combat engineers, 6197 01/97 L AWACHU 2/97 idos Interactive's FLYING NIGHTMARES 2 is on the leading edge when you consider just the simulation portion of the game. You fly both the AV8B Harrier II and AH-1W SuperCobra over Cuba, supporting an evacuation of Guantanamo Bay and battling Russians over Havana. The Win 95 simulation engine promises realistic flight modeling, 65,000-color graphics, and support for 3D graphics cards and MMX processors. Producer Bryan Walker flew Apaches during the Gulf War, and that experience will pay off with factors such as \"time on tar get\" and rules of engagement playing a big part of successful missions. But what makes FN2 unique is the Commandant multiplayer module. Up to 16 players can participate in an airlground battle. One player takes the role of team commandant, handing out assignments to both humans flying DEDIU nonnu infantry companies, and more. As the game progresses, the Commandant can issue updated orders and new objectives to individual players. In addition to LAN play, the game should be playable over the Internet and via an online gaming service, so you should never have trouble finding an opponent. FN2 is currently slated for a March ship date.--Denny Alkin Achtung: Spitfirel Avalon Hill Agents of Justice MicroProse Spring 97 Alde De Camp 2 HPS Simulations Spring 97 Armored Fist 2 NovaLogic 4197 Atlantis Cryo 3197 Battleground: Middle East Talonsoft Battles of Alexander Interactive Magic Spring 97 Battle Sport Acclaim 2/97 Betrayal at Antara Sierra 2197 Blade Runner Virgin/Westwood Fall 97 Blood Apogee Spring 97 Blue Heat Cyberdreams 3/97 Boggle Hasbro Interactive Callahan's Crosstime Saloon Legend City of Lost Children Psygnosis Commanche 3 Novalogic 3/97 Dark Earth Mindscape Spring 97 Dungeon Keeper Bullfrog 2/97 Ecstatica Il Psygnosis 3197 Entrepeneur Stardock 01/97 European Air War MicroProse Summer 97 Fallen Haven Interactive Magic Spring 97 Flying Nightmares 2 Domark 3197 Front Page Sports Golf Sierra 01/97 Grand Slam 97 Virgin Spring 97 Hardball 6 Accolade 7/97 History of the World Avalon HB 2197 iF22 Interactive Magic Spring 97 Imperialism SSI Spring 97 Interstate 76 Activision 01/97 Jack Nicklaus Golf 97 Accolade 3/97 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II LucasArts 3/97 Lands of Lore: Guardians Westwood/Virgin 3/97 Marvel Mindscape Spring 97 MicroLeague Baseball 6 MicroLeague Spring 97 Mig Alley Empire Summer 97 Myst 2: Riven Broderbund Summer 97 NBA Live 97 EA Sports 01/97 NFL Legends Accolade 9/97 Pacific General SSI Summer 97 Reach for the Stars II SSG/Microsoft Spring 97 Rebellion LucasArts 3/97 Rebel Moon Rising Fenris Wolf 7/97 Red Baron II Sierra 4/97 Return to Krondor 7th Level Spring 97 Sabre Ace Virgin Spring 97 Shadows of Riva Sir Tech Spring 97 Shivers 2 Sierra 4/97 Ship of the Line SSI Fall 97 Sole Survivor Westwood/Virgin 3/97 Spider Man Byron Preiss Spring 97 Star Craft Blizzard 6/97 Star Fleet Academy Interplay 2197 Test Drive Off-Road Accolade 2/97 TFX: X-22 Ocean 3/97 Theme Hospital Bullfrog EA 2197 Ultima On-Line Origin Spring 97 Unreal Epic 5/97 VR Baseball VR Sports Spring 97 VR Golf VR Sports 01/97 X-COM: The Apocalypse MicroProse Spring 97 6300 2D/3D Chip Set Tseng Labs 3/97 Sonic Vibes Audio Chip Set S3 01/97 Voodoo Rush 3D Chip Set 3DIX/Trident 01/97 Wipeout XL Psygnosis 3197 Zork: Grand Inquisitor Activision Fall 97 Jack Nicklaus Golf: Golden Bear Edition hile some might argue that Chi Chi Rodriguez is more quotable or Arnold Palmer more charismatic, few could disagree that Jack Nicklaus deserves the title \"Golfer of the Century.\" Accolades for the software that bears his name have been somewhat less forthcoming, mostly because of LINKS. What makes this attempt different is the attention to detail. If the look is not quite so photorealistic as that of its storied competitor, it's still more than adequate, right down to reflections in the lakes. And you can erect those finely sculpted trees-and dig those insidious sand traps-with the easy-to-use, revamped course editor, a wonderful tool that both PGA TOUR 96 and LINKS LS lack. The competitive level of the computer players for now lies somewhere between the Palmer opponent in LINKS LS and the multiple pros you face in PGA TOUR 96. Still, with the ability to create your own golfer and tee up with friends over the Internet in match play, tournament, or skins format, NICKLAUS is one driver that won't collect dust for a long time.-Terry Coleman FEBRUARY 1997 "


"GAME TRACK HANDS ON These are the products in development we've actually spent some time with. They represent some of the most interesting titles in the Pipeline, and they are complete enough to actually tell how they're going to play. Most should be released soon. MDK nyone who saw the Stallone flick Demolition Man will know that MDK stands for Murder, Death, Kill. That in a nutshell, is this game. But before anyone starts ranting on about the evils of violence in com puter games, it's worth pointing out that nothing you kill in the game bears any resemblance to the crea tures that inhabit our wonderful world. They're aliens; they deserve to die! Essentially a shoot 'em up, MDK is a remarkably sophisticated game with beautifully drawn futuristic cityscapes. Since nothing you meet will be friendly, the idea is to shoot first and ask questions later. But there's more to MDK than ham mering at the fire button. Switch to sniper view and you'll be able to zoom in on any part of your foe's anatomy (without a hint of pixelation), enabling you to select where you hit a target. Not even the mighty Quake lets you do that. And if it seems sadistic, there's a valid reason for it when aliens spot a wounded comrade, they'll rush to his aid, allowing you to pick them off at leisure. Sneaky, huh? In addition to his sniping helmet, our hero Kurt is equipped with a parachute that you can open or close to control the speed of descent while firing at nearby targets. The attention to detail is what makes MDK shine. The graphics are clear, crisp and bright-not a dull dungeon wall to be seen any. where. Aliens range from big and menacing to spindly and comical. Platforms, airborne surfboards for you to ride, glass floors to smash through, forcefields and Hunter Killer style spaceships pep up gameplay. Surprisingly, MDK is the first PC title from EARTHWORM JIM developer Shiny Entertainment, and perhaps that's why it seems so fresh. You get the feeling that Shiny looked at the PC and said \"Great different technology! What can we do with that?\" rather than \"How can we improve on QUAKE Or COMMAND AND CONQUER?\" MDK should be a winner. The City Of Lost Children version of the computer game shows a lot of promise in its own right. When the story opens in both the film and the game), the little brother of a circus strongman named One is kid HE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is an upcom ing adventure game from Psygnosis loosely based on the movie of the same name by French film makers Marc Caro and Jean-Pierre Junet. The movie is an amazing, surreal experience-a self-contained fantasy world made up of equal parts Terry Gilliam, Jean Cocteau and Fritz Lang-and is well worth renting for any fantasy or science-fiction fan (if you can deal with subtitles). So far, the beta napped by a mysterious group of men and carted away in a van. One hooks up with a young orphan girl named Miette (French for \"crumb\"), who is being forced to work for the evil Siamese twins who run the orphanage, and the two set off to uncover the mystery of the disappearance of this and other chil dren in the city. In the game, you play the part of Miette, and your search for the chil dren takes you through a pretty standard set of adventure game challenges-finding objects, solving logic problems, getting past barriers and so on. What helps set the game apart is its beautiful, bizarre look, which is quite faithful to that of the film. The game's motion-captured 3D characters are most reminiscent of Frederick Raynal's ALONE IN THE DARK and LITTLE BIG ADVENTURE. Gameplay was a bit frustrating in this beta-it was often hard to find the objects and hotspots you're meant to interact with, and there just didn't seem to be enough to interact with. Hopefully, Psygnosis will tune game. play enough before its final release so that it matches the game's truly stunning graphic look. Jeff Green FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"3 OUT OF 4 GAME CHARACTERS SURVEYED would rather crush and destroy you while playing on a PC with ATI 3D XPRESSION+ PC2TV. 30 XPRESSION+PC2TV MATROX MYSTIQUE DIAMOND STEALTH 3D 2000X1 Price S199 (2MB) $219 SUPERIOR 3D PERFORMANCE an 30 APRESSOX RCN  STEATR 30 2x 1 4x MATROX MYSTIQUE UNACCELERATED 3D GRAPHICS MICROSOFT DIRECT3D FILL RATE TEST And that's just because that one last game goon hasn't seen what this sucker can do. How the ATI 3D XPRESSION+PC2TV\" lets you plug your PC into your TV (in addition to your monitor) for the ultimate big-screen spine-chiller that blows away those game consoles once and for all. Or how ATT's new 3D accelerator technology breathes life Output to TV into everything on your screen. With 1600x1200 (ND) 3D Texturing (Bi-Linear) face-blasting speed, butter-smooth Smooth Video Scaling detail and 65,000 crazy colors. All because we build more features right onto the board than Matrox, Diamond or anyone else. Really cool stuff like Gouraud shading, MICROSOFT DIREC730 FIL RAJE TEST bi-linear filtering, perspective-correct texture mapping and fog effects. Which, as we all know, means scarier realism and faster response than dad's Porsche flat out on the freeway. You also get total game acceleration in 3D and 2D with Direct3D and DirectDraw support for Windows 95, fast DOS performance and jaggy-free, full-screen, full-motion TV-quality MPEG video playback. Plus you get the ATI Software Superpak with the hottest 3D games and 3D Web Browser software absolutely free. So why die an ordinary death when it's so much more fun getting dusted with the new ATI 3D XPRESSION+ PC2TV graphics accelerator upgrade. Available in 2MB or 4MB versions. See it now at your dealer. Call us at 905 882-2600 (press 2 for faxback). Or check out all the details at www.atitech.ca. + 2.1\"V 20 XEREVO An 3D XPRESSION + PC2 WALA NAD VOLGA 1. the Ander e r as me "


"Also in systems from IBM, NEC, Sony, and Acer Now YOU SEE IT. DATI Technologies Inc. 1996. ATI, 3D XPRESSION+ PCTV and NOW YOU SEE IT are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of ATI Technologies Inc. All other company and/or product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers, 1. Test conducted using Microsoft Direct3D Fill Rate test in bilincar. 2. Matrox Mystique does not support bi-linear texturing in hardware. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #106 "


"COVER STORY: SOLE SURVIVOR SNEAK PREVIEW BY ELLIOTT CHIN SOLE SURVIVOR Prepares To Conquer The Internet 52 CC FEBRUARY 1997 FEBRUARY 1997 "


"COVER STORY: SOLE SURVIVOR SNEAK PREVIEW ALERT estwood has certainly earned its star on the Computer Gaming Walk of Fame. After creating DUNE II, which could be considered the grandfather of real-time strategy games, Westwood went on to create the \"sequel,\" COMMAND & CONQUER, a classic battle between good and evil set on a near future Earth. With C&C eclipsing the million-unit sales mark half a year ago, Westwood is now ready to mine the franchise for all the gold it will produce. While CONQUERING THE INTERNET SOLE SURVIVOR is designed to be played exclusive ly on the Internet, and it won't have any single player campaigns or scenarios. After playing a few games of SOLE SURVIVOR at Westwood's offices, we were hooked. SOLE SURVIVOR isn't as much a strategy game as COMMAND & CONQUER. There are still obviously strategy elements, and the look is still that of C&C, but the gameplay is more action ori. ented. Here you don't command an army, nor can you build one. You don't even harvest Tiberium. Instead, you only command a single unit, and your only mission is to eventually kill everyone else. The game doesn't fit into the COMMAND & CONQUER story line. Actually, at this writing, there are no plans for a story to tie this product into the C&C line, and there will be no campaign play. Instead, the guys at Westwood like to describe Sole SURVIVOR as \"total anarchy,\" a multiplayer game with a top-down COMMAND & CONQUER View, with C&C units, encom passing dozens of players in a baltle to find out who will be the last unit standing. You can play SOLE SURVIVOR in simple deathmatch mode (like a strategic version of QUAKE Deathmatch), or you can play the game by allying with others and battling it out with other grouped players. The choice is yours, and ultimately, the goal of each game is to use whatever violent or treacherous means necessary to ensure that you are the sole survivor of the fray. SNEAK PREVIEW GAVE STILL IN DEVELOPMENT the first sequel, RED ALERT, is very similar to its predecessor, the company isn't just planning to mindlessly stamp out cookie cutter sequels in the C&C universe. Take, for example, COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR. This upcoming Internet game will bring all the frenzy and real-time excite. ment of the original C&C online, but it's a new gameplay experience GW played an early version of COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR, but since it's not live on the Internet yet, we needed to dig a little deeper to get the full scoop on the game. So we asked the folks behind SOLE SURVIVOR a few questions, to give us the full picture of their Internet-only game. Q. What is SOLE SURVIVOR? A. COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR is Westwood Studios' new game being developed for exclusive Internet hyperplay. We call it hyperplay because our multiplayer technology allows up to 50 people to play together at once. What's unique and cool about this game is that you get to play in the familiar universe of COMMAND & CONQUER, but the rules are totally different. It's fast paced and vicious. You command a single unit and focus on survival and acquisition instead of production. The challenge is to collect power-ups that make you the deadliest unit in the game. Q. How is the game being developed? A. Bill Randolph is heading up the development effort for us. He is one of the lead programmers from the original COMMAND & CONQUER, as well as COMMAND & CONQUER: RED ALERT. Bill is one of our most savvy Internet communication engineers. He's developed a server-based technology that enables us to continually enhance the quality of the game for our players through autoupdates. Q. Has COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR been beta tested yet? A. We've been beta testing for almost six months. We expect to begin an open beta as early as February and, hopefully. it will be available to all our fans by late March. Q. How and where can people sign up for beta testing? A. Interested beta testers will be able to register by early '97. As a lot of our fans know, Westwood already has a comprehensive online presence includCH2 Options H20 WO SONO Sidebar Kler Ecomator leach GDI SANDWICH Westwood's Internet-only multiplayer game, SOLE SURVIVOR, pits you against up to 50 other players. You can kill everyone yourself or form alliances, as Killer and Leach have done to crush Cremator in a heavy metal sandwich. FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"COVER STORY: SOLE SURVIVOR SNEAK PREVIEW ALERT HOWO BOS Sidebar SURVIVOR, but if you don't have many human players to play against, the game can spawn its own Al-controlled units. At this early stage, though, I wasn't able to play against these units and analyze the sophistication of the AI. ing a Web site, ftp site, online chat and game matchmaking services. Keep checking our Web site at http://www.westwood.com for information about these and exciting new services we are evolving. Q. Where can you play it? A. COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR is a unique product that can be played only on the Internet. Anyone with direct Internet access can log on to the Westwood game server to play. Q. How will SOLE SURVIVOR be priced? A. We're not sure right now. We want the game to be accessible to all our friends and fans around the world. We're considering letting people with existing Internet access play free by downloading the front end. We do plan on having a version available at retail that will provide instant Internet access for those gamers not already connected. Q. What kind of system do you need to play? A. You'll need to be running a Pentium system with Windows 95, 16MB of RAM, and at least a 28.8 modem with direct Internet access. We're not sure if you'll need to own the original COMMAND & CONQUER-that's an issue we're still working on. SoLE SURVIVOR is also hi-res THE NOD SQUAD The first form of strategy you'll have to mull over is which vehicle to choose. All the C&C DONUT HOLE Some C&C features, like the shroud, are there in SOLE vehicles and units, both GDI SURVIVOR. This GDI Humvee will now explore the shroud, looking for tarand NOD, are available in SOLE gets and power-ups. SURVIVOR. Each unit is rated in three different characteristics: HOPPING INTO BATTLE armor, weapons, and speed. Each vehicle's rating is My first few games of SOLE SURVIVOR were amaz. true to what you encountered in COMMAND & ingly simple to grasp. As soon as I started the game, CONQUER. Mammoth tanks have the best armor and I was greeted with a screen showing all the available weapon power but the lowest speed. Recon bikes GDI units, such as mammoth tanks and engineers, have the highest speed but significantly lower from COMMAND & CONQUER. A click of a button weapon and armor ratings. Each unit also has a changed the screen to the NOD selection screen, health bar, with the heavier units obviously having with NOD buggies, recon bikes and stealth tanks. more health points than the weaker units. You can choose only one unit, though you aren't Of course, if all you had to do was hop into a unit necessarily stuck with the unit you choose. As soon and shoot people, SOLE SURVIVOR would get boring as I jumped into the game, I knew I had been here and frustrating. Units like the mammoth tank would before. The look is right out of COMMAND & CONQUER, crush the lesser units, like puny little riflemen. except that the graphics are in beautiful SVGA. The Thankfully, Westwood is spicing up play by adding viewable play area is thus larger, just as in RED ALERT power-ups to the battlefield. Every map is peppered or C&C for Windows 95. The map terrain was mostly with crates. Within each crate lie power-ups and desert and hills, reminiscent of the levels in special items. There are power-ups that increase COMMAND & CONQUER. The games that I played did your three primary stats-armor, weapons, and boil down to kill or be killed deathmatches, and the speed-as well as health crates that heal your unit point was to rack up as many kills as possible. if it is damaged. Obviously, the game hasn't been play balanced yet, There are also special crates that will cloak you, but for the task of dealing death, I always gravitated to either the striking speed of the recon bike or the sheer power of the mammoth tank. You will die a lot, unless you have an insanely powerful unit or you're a very skilled player, but if you do die, you can simply respawn with the touch of a space bar. You can choose to change vehicles, but when you do, the game will deduct from your overall kill list. Thus, you can't just keep switching vehicles at will. Although there is theoretically no limit to the number of players in a single game besides the server capacity, SOLE SURVIVOR will likely allow a maximum of 50 players to duke it out on the battlefield. That's still plenty, and with dozens of players on the battlefield, that means you'll have plenty of targets and plenty of people to run from. The more the merrier in SOLE only. Q. How big are the Sole SURVIVOR battlefields? A. They are up to four times the size of the battlefields in COMMAND & CONQUER. Q. What variety is there to the battlefields, and will you be able to select the ones you play on? A. We're planning to include many of the best battlefields from the original COMMAND & CONQUER as well as some unique ones never before seen. The server will randomly select the battlefields. Q. Will there be any units from RED ALERT included? A. COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR will feature units found only in the original COMMAND & CONQUER. We're considering a RED ALERT variation of Sole CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"gab XIX This space available for immediate un.  KO The darkness of ancient Egypt and evil alien forces, possessing horrifying powers, have taken possession of the ancient city of Karnak. And these landlords are exacting extremely high rents. Like an arm and a leg...or worse. Airdropped into first person and third person landscapes, you must swim, crawl and otherwise run like hell through 30-plus levels of gameplay. Unique Stacked Sector Technology\" allows you complete 360° freedom of gameplay. With just a machete to begin with, search for 6 other weapons like hand grenades, a flame thrower, an M60 machine gun and a magical cobra staff. Dynamic lighting allows for stunning visual effects. Cross bridges, crawl through tunnels and swim through underwater grottos. Your only salvation is the guiding Spirit of the Great Pharaoh Ramses. He's the only one in this godforsaken neighborhood who wants to help you get a forwarding address. So welcome to the nightmare of Ramses' tomb. And enjoy your stay. It may last forever, PIE MATURE 611 Anton Blvd. Suite 500 Cesta Mesa, CA 92626 (7141428 2100 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #252 Lobotomy and Powerslave are trademarks of Lobotomy Software, Inc. 1996 Lobotomy Software, Inc. All rights reserved. PIE is a trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Artwork and design O1996 Playmates Interactive Entertainment, Inc. PC CD-ROM Fully networkable up to 4 players. http://www.playmatestoys.com AGES 17 "


"COVER STORY: SOLE SURVIVOR SNEAK PREVIEW ALERT Options HOWO SON Side it peach tentor POWER TRIP Half the battle in SOLE SURVIVOR is finding power-ups to increase speed, power and armor. With these upgrades, even light tanks can dwarf mammoth tanks. SURVIVOR, as well as a variation that combines units from both. Don't forget, our server-based technology will allow us to regularly auto-update SOLE SURVIVOR. This means we will have the opportunity to add power-ups and other game enhancements and variations. Q. What is Westwood doing to better balance the game? A. What we've done is create a game where, with a little luck and skill, players can design their own unit. You could start out with the Artillery Unit, get the speed of a Recon Bike, the armor strength of a Mammoth Tank and the shot power of a Rocket Launcher. The fun is a combination of hide-n-seek, direct confrontation and how you choose to pick your fights. All of this depends on how wise and lucky you are in collecting your power-up crates. Q. What other types of gameplay will there be besides death match? A. We don't refer to COMMAND & CONQUER: SOLE SURVIVOR gameplay as death match-it's more like anarchy, because you have so many people playing simultaneously with no set structure. We're also working on making it possible for players to form alliances with other players, which will change gameplay continually. SOLE SURVIVOR will take on an entirely new dynamic when you must decide what other types of units/players make the most deadly teammates. Since the combinations are endless, you can not predict what any match might be like-they'll all be different. Q. Will you be releasing new units or battlefields for download after people have purchased the game? What can people look forward to in future upgrades, if you upgrade the game at all? A. There will be downloads and auto updates that add battlefields, power-ups and other features to the game periodically. In addition to this though we haven't figured out how yet-we are planning to have tournaments and contests that will make it really cool as well as mean something to our fans to be the SOLE SURVIVOR Champion. teleport you or reshroud the map. Then there are WHAT'S FAMILIAR? other, less beneficial crates, that will destroy you There will be features in the game that will be with an ion blast, rip up the surrounding terrain familiar to the COMMAND & CONQUER general. For with a nuclear detonation, or decloak your invisible one, the shroud is still in effect and operates just unit. Even a tiny unit like the Recon Bike can as in COMMAND & CONQUER. The map starts out become a formidable opponent if it has five black, and as you move, the areas around you weapon, armor and speed power-ups each. A mam become visible. However, certain crates will moth tank is especially deadly with a surplus of reshroud the map. Also being kept are some speed power-ups. However, to better balance the C&C commands. Very useful is the \"next unit\" game, as you pick up more and more beneficial command, which in C&C moves you to your power-ups, the likelihood of picking up a bad crate next unit, but which in SOLE SURVIVOR highlights will increase so that the really powerful players are your only unit. Westwood is thinking about more likely to get zapped, while the less powerful putting in an auto-target key, so you can press a are more likely to pick up helpful items. key to click the closest target. Otherwise, it's a bit difficult to draw a bead on moving Cativa units with your mouse, especially when they're souped up with speed power-ups. There are other aspects of the game that are still being determined and questions that were left unanswered even after I played the game. However, SOLE SURVIVOR, with its simple and addictive gameplay, looks very promis. ing. With support for up to 50 players at once, it could attract a huge following over the Internet. Westwood sure hopes so, and the company won't be disappointed at all if gamers from all CLOAK AND CONQUER With the aid of cloaking power-ups, any over the globe clog up their phone lines unit can possess the Stealth tank's invisibility. This cloaked unit and fill the Westwood Chat servers to will get the jump on Speed and Cativa. maximum capacity. In fact, they're counting on it. & oeco CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"ERIC\"HELLCATS\" PARKER CREATED BY Available now for Windows 95 THE MOST REALISTIC FLIGHT SIMULATOR. EVER. ACTIVISION One of the fastest flight sim frame rates State-of-the-art AI guarantees high replayability The most advanced physics model of any flight sim 8-player over a LAN and modem-to-modem air combat www.activision.com PARSOFT UiNTERACTIVE Actions regtered trademark of Action Inc. A10 Cubals a trademark of Parsoft Interactive, Interactive All nights reserved. Published 1996 Parsoft All other trademarks and trade and distributed by Activision Inc. the properties of their respective owners sare Opera CIRCLE READER SERVICE #98 "


"S&M, TORTURE, FLATULENCE. SMALL WONDER THE CRITICS WENT NUTS. \"*****... OUTSTANDING. ... AN EDGY COMIC ADVENTURE IN THE GRANDEST TRADITION.» COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"... A GREAT GAME: BEAUTIFUL GRAPHICS CHALLENGING PUZZLES, OUTRAGEOUS HUMOR AND GOOD OL'STAR POWER.» — PC GAMES «GREAT... THE FIRST TIME PVE LAUGHED OUT LOUD WHILE PLAYING A COMPUTER GAME IN A LONG TIME. TOONSTRUCK IS SUCH A WELL-CRAFTED GAME GAME SPOT Toontrends PC CD-ROM "


"All 120.dong LANO MODA sau UTANA NA SUARA AR AUG U our PTA UM SED www.toonstruck.com INTERACTIVE entertainment CIRCLE READER SERVICE #239 "


"JUPITER, 2073. NOT A PLACE FOR THE FAINT-OF-HEART. NOR THE WEAK-OF-MIND. MECHANIZED ARMIES RUN AMOK, AND YOU MUST DEVELOP THE STRATEGIES AND ALLIANCES TO QUELL THE CHAOS. GO FROM BLUEPRINT TO BATTLEFIELD AS YOU DESIGN, BUILD, PROGRAM AND LAUNCH YOUR MECHANIZED WARRIORS INTO CONFLICT IN THE FIRST IN-DEPTH STRATEGY GAME FOR YOUR PLAYSTATION GAME CONSOLE.   B UL P R O TRAM UNT ASH TI LENGINE ETTRON 25 OUTPUT 22260 KG ENGINE DISPLACEMENT G1.2 LITER! -WEIGHT 390 KG PUT NAME: OVERKILL ENGINE MATERIAL: SUPER ALLOY ESTIMATED DURABILITY: 5-10 YEARS PURPOSE: DEMOLITION 8 ANNIHILATION GET COPY EDIT DELETE ETC HARMOR 70xx ARXOR DEFENSE FACTOR 26 E WEIGHT 16800 KG I CLPU -GHC-07TRI SPEED HIGH -CAPACITY 225 NC EWEIGHT 8 XG DESIGN YOUR OWN CUSTOMIZED MECHANIZED WARRIOR FROM FOUR BODY-TYPES AND NINE WEAPONRY SYSTEMS WITH NO LIMIT OF COMBINATIONS MAIN WEAPON PROYLER LASER FWEIGHT 300 KG FHM OSCILLATOR B Shots 200 FIREPOWER 65 (1 SHOT) WEIGHT 400 KG OKE BODY -PROXLER || DURABILITY 530 FWEIGHT 2360 KG u carne VSI PlayStation/ 10 PTIONAL EQUIPMENT -OX P5 MISSILE INTERFERENCE DEYICE FWEIGHT 340x6 SONY KDS TO ADULTS SONY COMPOTER ENTERTAINERE LOGO 15 ) PRADEMART OF SONY CORPORATION PLAYSTATION ID DIE PLAYSTALTON TOGO ARE TRADEMARKS OLSORY COMPETEK ENTERTRENT TRU. ORNOTE 15 TRASERAXE OH SONY INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT TIC 01996 ARTDINE PlayStation COM The cliniation has brol sout le me Perfume "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS Cheater's compiled by Thierry Nguyen Edge 1,001 Underhanded, Sneaky Ways To Win ometimes, you could just care less about honor. You're tired of having your tail waxed by those mangy Kilrathi. You're tired of being the only \"Mortal\" one in MORTAL KOMBAT. Or you're kicking yourself for investing so much time in DOOM KLONE #942, but you want to see the fireworks at the end. The solution? Type the magic word, invoke the powers of the developers, and cheat. Wreak unimpeded havoc on enemy ships after a tough day at work. Get to the end of that lame $45 game you bought so you can move onto something better. Or breeze past that seemingly impossible end-of-level challenge that's kept an otherwise intriguing game on the shelf for so long. Because sometimes honor has to be put aside in the name of fun. ILLUSTRATION: EDDIE LEE FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS nn200 CIELD DSC Simulations! Space Simulations MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries 54. SUPERFUNKICALIFRAGISEXY Invulnerability, 55. ISEEFIREANDISEERAIN Ammo 56. OOOHHHLLLAAALLLAAA Heat 57. WEDIDITAGAIN Dorcs 58. ITSDABOOOMB Bomb MechWarrior 2 16. PALEX kill targeted mech 59. INMYBEAUTIFULBALLOON Jumpjets To enable the cheats, hold down the Ctrl, All, and 17. BURR heat tracking off 60. REDJACKRULES Auto kill Shift keys and type the appropriate code. 18. THUNDROS unlimited ammo 61. LIKETHECOMSTARBABY Auto win 1. BLORB Enables complete Invulnerability 19. KABOOM kills all mechs 62. ONTIMEEVERYTIME Fast Mode 2. CIA Unlimited ammo for weapons 20. DRONE free eye mode 63. BUBBLEBOY Spheres 3. MIGHTYMOUSE Unlimited jump jet fuel 21. JUMBO jets on any mech 64. CRAZYSEXYCOOL Infinite jumpjets 4. DORCS Allows you to meet the makers of 22. CRILLION unlimited jet juice 65. BEHOLDMYGLORY Free eye Mechwarrior 2 23. MERLOCK time expansion toggle 66. ANTIJOLT Slow Mode 5. ENOLA GAY Destroys all targets in the mis. 24. SPEEDYGONZALE time compression sion (type quickly) 25. VOYEUR mini camera 6. FLYGIRL Adds jump jet capability to any 'mech 26. TIK collision spheres 7. ICANTHACKIT Ends the mission successfully 67. IMOUTTAHERE wins mission 8. TINKERBELL Unlocks camera from your 'mech Shattered Steel 68. RODRIGO spawns two light choppers to help 9. XRAY Gives image enhancement plus the abiliPress Enter and type any of these codes at the 69. CHERNOBYL nuke ty to see through objects prompt to activate 70. Teleport <1-512> <1-512> teleports player 10. HANGAROUND Allows you to continue 27. GONZALES Makes bot fast to any position on map exploring a mission after time runs out 28. RAGNAROK blows player bot's head off 11. GANKEM Destroys targeted 'Mech 29. SMITE destroys your target Wing Commander Series 30. CAPONE spawns five gnats to help you 71. When you type the startup command for MechWarrior 2: 31. HENCHMAN spawns a shiva to help you either WC or WC2, add a space then type Ghost Bear's Legacy 32. FNORD 120 howitzer \"Origin-K\". Make sure you use a capital O or Hold down Ctrl, All, and Shift and type the appro 33. BLIPPLEBLOOPS rapid laser the cheat won't work. You'll be able to fly priate code. 34. RATSNEST med laser against wave after wave of Kilrathi without tak 12. KENT Invulnerability 35. NUMBERCHANGER rolling mine ing damage and destroy any targeted ship 13. CLARK X-ray Vision 36. CGQ large rocket 8 pack (including the big capital ships!) at will by 14. PUTZ mission over 37. GFY small rocket 18 pack pressing Ctrl and Del simultaneously. 15. DORCS shows the guys 38. BCUA large rocket 18 pack 72. Wing Commander Ill is similar. Use the com39. DINGLEBERRY heavy laser mand line wc3-mitchell and while in combat slal 40. KWAHAMOT radar missle Ctrl-W will kill a locked on enemy, and Ctrl-Alt41. FISHHEADS IR missile W will destroy all enemies in the radar map. 42. BUMSAUCE heavy rapid laser 73. For Wing Commander IV, use the command 43. NAPALMINTHEMORNING fae mortar line wc4 -chicken. These controls should work: 44. EATMYSHORTS mortar Ctrl-W to destroy targeted enemy, Ctrl-Alt-W to 45. KICKSOMEBUTT heavy plasma, destroy all enemies on radar, and All-Oto small rocket 64 become invulnerable. 46. TINKERBELL nova 47. DOGAN 120 howitzer X-Wing 48. CURVEDLIVES 50mm gat 74. Type WIN for infinite weapons 49. HARDCODE 30mm gat 50. BIGONES 70mm gat Aces over Europe 51. STOOL mine launcher 75. BATAT full life 52. PYROTEK big boom 76. Dads full armament BUBBLEBOY With the Spheres cheat, you can see the hit 53. LOCKANDLOAD gives all weapons 77. QUARTS invisibility spheres for each of an enemy Mech's parts. max ammo 62 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Win 95 is cool, but sucks with DOS games! STONEKEET QUAKE Wing comNANDER NECK WARRIORZ operating system on your PC  Games run best on the OS Get it and play it. they were designed for! As you install new OSes, System Commander You've got great DOS games, but you really want to copies key files and adds the new OS automatically try that new Win 95 game. You want it all. But, if you to its menu. It manages unique copies of configuraupgrade to Win 95, it will really hose, tion files for each_installation of DOS, your DOS games. With System Now you can run more than one Windows 95 or any other operating system. Commander you can play each game Install your games into the OS for which the way it was meant to be played on they were designed and play them immedithe OS it was designed for. ately! System Commander allows you to boot both older DOSes and Win 95 on the same PC. When you turn on your Save a bundle! machine, System Commander gives Call our 800# by February 28, 1997. Give you a menu. Pick the operating sysus less than two minutes of your time to tem you want and with the touch of a COMMANDER answer our Gamer's Survey, and we'll give button System Commander does the you System Commander for only $69.95. rest. That's $30.00 off the regular price and FREE overnight shipping*. And it still comes with an Even your parents can do it. unconditional 60-day money back guarantee. System Commander's automatic installation will have your PC ready to add OSes in less than 5 minutes. : Call today and play your brains out tomorrow! And unlike some utilities, it uses less than 1 MB of hard disk space and no RAM! DOS UNIX Available in the utilities section of most major software stores, including:  V Communications, Inc. 4320 Stevens Creek Blvd, #120-CGW5 San Jose, CA 95129 (800) 648-8266 www.v-com.com COMPUTER UIT EGGHEAD S TATES *Orders received after 12:00 pm PST will be shipped tho noxt business day. No Saturday delivery. Standard shipping outside US. CA res, add $7.25 salos lax. Oller subject to change without notice. All logos and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their rospective companies. VISA/MC/Amex 01997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #384 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS nmazoor S40 DAVE Comanche: Maximum Overkill 78. From the options menu (press Esc from any. where and you'll be there) hold down backspace and type KYLE. A new pull-down menu will appear called \"Cheats.\" Go there during a mission and you can repair your helicopter and rearm all the weapons. one way and enough aileron the opposite direction to fly a constant heading). Enemies will think they can't get a shot at you. It only works from the front. Monster Truck Madness 100. Type TREX and your monster truck will turn into a real monster-a robotic dinosaur! Falcon 3.0 79. Shift-T time of day 80. Shift-U look down 81. Ctrl-Alt-5 auto level 82. P.TAB recon camera (Wait for pause before hitting TAB) 83. P-TAB-D debug mode 1st line: (unknown programming gibberish) 2nd line: N/S & E/W Coordinates: Alt. (divide by 2): Speed 3rd line: Frame Rate 84. P-TAB-T transporter: type location code & hit enter. While in Camera mode use the following: 85. + 1. increase / decrease speed 86. PgUp / PgDn increase / decrease altitude 87. F3 / F4 rotate right / left 88. Hold Shift for up & down rotation 89. Hold Ctrl for fine tuning 90. Hit to start sim back up Battledrome 101. If you've been clanking around in a low-budget herc in Sierra's DEATH BY KEYPRESS A simple press of Ctrl-W will destroy eneMETALTECH: BATTLEDROME, looking mies in WING COMMANDER IV with the cheats active. for a way to get a juicy upgrade to that top-of-the line model, then this cheat is TEX for you! When you type in your name at the 116. In flight, Shift-D gives you full ammunition, main screen, simply add an asterisk (*) as the rockets and chaff. first letter of your name. You'll find that you have all the money you need to buy the best Inferno equipment for your battles in the arena. 117. While in the cockpit hold down the RightShift key and type LOLIFE. «Cheat-Enabled\" EarthSiege will appear on your HUD. You will be invincible 102. From the main menu, start or resume a and have unlimited weapons. campaign. Now go back to the main menu and 118. In addition, pause the game using Alt-P and select single mission. Choose any of the mis. press numbers 1 thru 7 to award the corresions offered. Enter the briefing, then click on sponding combat pod. armament. Grab a big hulking Herc. Return to the briefing and cancel the single mission. Resume the campaign from the main menu, play the first assigned mission, then save. Load the save and you'll now have all Hercs com pletely decked out and ready for action. 1942: Pacific Air War 91. Type the code RASTA to enable cheat mode. Red Baron 92. Put your plane in a forward slip (full rudder Adventure /RPG Interactive Magic's Apache Just type these in as your login name (it's case sensitive) to activate the cheat modes. 93. Flamdwyn Aiobhell infinite weapons 94. Lyn Wins infinite weapons + invulnerability + model cheats Model cheats are: 95. All-T overtorque toggle. 96. Ctrl-T terrain following toggle 97. Alt-V no Fuel 98. SHFT-V refuel 99. Shift-Ctrl-Alt-Tab (with overtorque off) Speed warp. Each successive press of Tab (with the other keys held down) will cycle warp through 0-9. Star Rangers 103. Java enables cheats 104. Shazam invincibility 105. Cameo warp tunnel autopilot 106. Vitaminz full fuel and ammo 107. Scotty infinite Warp 108. Iseeu view all enemies on the map 109. Zoomerz time acceleration 110. Bogons shows design team 111. Boxes target boxes 112. Dust fly through ships and objects 113. Shift-112 low res mode 114. Voizis finish mission 115. Voizif fails mission Full Throttle 119. To win fights on the Old Mine Road : Press Shift and type V. Also, if you stop moving and don't touch anything for a few minutes, a screen comes up showing a selection of different vehicles and rotating them. Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis 120. Just press the Insert key during a fight to defeat your enemy FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Broderbund www.koalalumpur.com Koala Lumpur: Journey to the Edge The fur Flies 2/97  Broderbund Software, Inc. Koala Lumpur: Journey to the Edge and Broderbund are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Broderbund Software, Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #368 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS Bazoor SHIELD DRIVE Inca 141. Ctrl-Alt-Left Shift gives full energy in space dogfights. Dark Sun 2 154. To enable the cheats, run DSUN-K911 at the command line. Then, during the game: 155. T Raise level 156. M Restore all magic 157. Alt-F2 Increase attack power 158. Alt-F4 Learn all spells Tell him Farley sent jou Tell him youre a reporter Stand up to him and demand your release Clouds of Xeen Type at the teleport mirrors: 159. LORD XEEN 160. BOGUS 161. COUNT DU MONEY 162. SHOWTIME 163. SHANGRI-LA 164. I LOST IT to Lord Xeen to Lord Xeen to dragon's lair to endgame to hidden town get magical sword Daedalus Encounter 142. To skip a scene: select game from main menu, press Alt-F5, select JUMP TO to reveal saved games for all scenes. Click on one to jump to it. 143. To skip a puzzle: PUZZLING INTERVIEWS If you're interested in talking to suspects like press Alt-Shift, type the Falconetti in RIPPER, but you'd rather not deal with their puzzles, these first letter of the puzzle's sequences can be skipped using cheat codes. name. (Press alt-Shift-i to skip orbit puzzle.) Harvester 121. BRUCE god mode Ultima VI 122. NICK full health 144. Talk to lolo, say \"Spam\" three times, then 123. MURDERER extra guns say \"Humbug\" to get a cheat menu. You can 124. SON OF SAM extra items get objects, power-up your team, and look at 125. DUSTIN warp to the first level portraits of people in the game. (You must 126. BOSTON STRANGLER warp to the experiment a bit with the object list.) second level 127. HELTER SKELTER warp to the third level 128. CHARLES MANSON warp to the last level Betrayal at Krondor Strategy Ripper Type these in during the puzzle or action sequences to skip over them. Here are the chapter passwords, potions, and everything else you'll need to beat the game: On the overhead map, hold down the Alt-Right Shift and the tilde) for about three seconds, and a chest will appear. Each chest contains the items needed to finish that chapter, and an option to heal all characters. Just use the cheat trick, in conjunction with these level codes, and you can beat every chapter: 129. ARCADE catherine's well ice 130. ARCADE falconetti's shooting gallery 131. CAFFEINE catherine's brain ice 132. ZZTOP web runner's archive sliding puzzle 133. HEADACHE falconetti's secret well puzzle 134. ASPIRIN pegasus well chess game 135. ARCADE Orestes well ice 136. ARCADE odysseus well ice 137. SPONGE falconetti book puzzle 138. PRETZEL anti-viral well puzzle Warcraft 2 To enable the cheats hit Enter while in the game, then type one of the codes, and hit Enter again. In multiplayer, cheats effect both sides. 165. UNITE THE CLANS Takes you to the scenario's victory sequence 166. YOU PITIFUL WORM Takes you to the sce. nario's loss sequence 167. IT IS A GOOD DAY TO DIE Gives players Godlike powers 168. GLITTERING PRIZES Adds gold, lumber, oil 169. VALDEZ Adds oil 170. HATCHET, AXE AND SAW Accelerates production of lumber 171. EVERY LITTLE THING SHE DOES Upgrades player's magic 172. DECK ME OUT Upgrades units 173. ON SCREEN Shows whole map 174. MAKE IT SO Faster upgrades, construction 175. THERE CAN BE ONLY ONE Takes you to finale sequence 176. NEVER A WINNER Makes victory impossible 177. TIGERLILY Enables Scenario Jump 178. ORC# or HUMAN# Jumps to mission number (put a number in #) 145. Chapter 1: 6478 146. Chapter 2: 9216 147. Chapter 3: 7702 148. Chapter 4: 2132 149. Chapter 5: 5052 150. Chapter 6: 0680 151. Chapter 7: 0194 152. Chapter 8: 4743 153. Chapter 9: 9995 Relentless 139. To restore Life Health and Jetpack Power, hold down the keys B-I-G. 140. Tech Parameter Mode: Press Ctrl-Alt-Right Shift-F12 all together to display your current coordinates. Warcraft 179. To enable these cheat codes, hit enter, type one of the codes, and then hit enter again. First GG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"You're Fighting to protect good and Restore the Rightful King to power. 1000 Dreamworks Interactive LLC. All rights reserved. The averhood\" is a registered trademark of the Meyerhoca The Bad News is you're the guy on the right. \"Clever, an utterly different vision and experience from all the lookalike games...' -NEWSDAY Navrhood the The good news is you're a lot smarter than the guy on the left. Good thing, considering you'll have to solve more than 60 puzzles in order to succeed in the twisted, clay-animated world of Neverhood. You'll help Klaymen avoid pitfalls, collect clues, and kick a little clay butt. All to defeat the evil Klogg DREAMWORKS and bring the Neverhood back to normal. At least, as INTERACTIVE\" normal as it ever gets. [www.DreamWorksGames.com] overhood Embark on a clay adventure that breaks the mold "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS TO rr $100,0 DEVE 11111111 MENU use the Corwin Master Code to enable the oth ers. CORWIN OF AMBER enables the use of the codes below: 180. THERE CAN ONLY BE ONE Makes all of your soldiers invincible to everything except catapults, and can kill an enemy in one hit. 181. HUMAN# Warp to any human mission. Replace # with the number of the mission you want to warp to. 182. ORC# Warp to any orc mission. Replace # with the number of the mission you want to warp to. 183. HURRY UP GUYS Speeds construction, research 184. EYE OF NEWT Gets all magic spells available to your team 185. IRON FORGE Get the best weapon and shield strength 186. SALLY SHEARS Get full map (a help) 187. POT OF GOLD Get 10,000 more gold and 5,000 more lumber 188. IDES OF MARCH Takes you to the final sequence 189. YOURS TRULY Takes you to the victory sequence 190. CRUSHING DEFEAT Takes you to the failure sequence. SimAnt 214. QEEN Makes another queen in the nest (works only when you are underground). 215. FUND A message telling you KNIGHT that $10,000 dollars is worthless pops up. 216. RAND Gives the yellow ant full health. 217. ERAD Depletes the yellow ant's health. 218. HOLE Creates many more WARCRAFTY Falling behind in WARCRAFT? A little cheat magic can ant nest holes. speed construction and research. 219. JUST Gives 10 more fertil. ized queens to place in Full Game. Master of Orion 220. OOPS Gives the red ants 10 more fertilized 198. Alt-GALAXY Scouts the whole galaxy for you queens to place in the Full Game. 199. Alt-MOOLA Gives 100bc while in Planet screen 221. JEFF Places a new black ant colony in every single tile in the yard and house. A-Train 222. WILL Never lose a fight against a red ant. 200. Hold down the Ctrl and Shift keys and type 223. JOKE Shows a joke. \"petercheatercheaterwimp.\" This will give you 224. SUSI Unlimited health for the yellow ant. a million dollars and full supplies. 225. JENN Unlimited health for the black colony. 226. MICK Makes the spider walk backward. Master of Magic 227. FRED See how it looks if you win the game 201. In the \"Magic screen hold down the Alt 228. Weird Spider: Did you know that you can key and type POWER. You can cast all learn make the spider shoot laser beams at ants? able spells, including the Spell of Mastery, Did you know that you can make it walk backand get a fair amount of mana. Wizards also wards? To see these, click on the blank mysget this. tery button a few times. Be careful, for you 202. Alt-REVEAL You will get to see everything may have to click it many times and many on the map, and so will all the wizards. other strange phenomena may occur. Command and Conquer: Covert Operations 191. If you want to play secret missions with Dinosaurs type C&C FUNPARK and start a new game. Choose either GDI or NOD, and you'll see a new movie and about 5 new missions. Heroes of Might and Magic 192. 101495 Reveal the whole map. Afterlife 193. SAMNMAX Show the Sam & Max disaster 194. $@! Get 10,000,000 pennies; works only three times per game. CivNet To activate the cheat menu in CivNet, type Ctrl A ODBAM F in order. Don't hold down the Ctrl key. The menu enables these cheats: 203. SCALEIT Increases production 204. ARMYINFO See information on other races 205. MONEYANDPOWER Gives money and power 206. ALLSEEINGEYE Reveals the whole map 207. GETRICHQUICK Gives you 1,000 coins 208. GETSMARTQUICK Gives you a Civilization advance 209. MISSILECRISIS Creates a nuclear missile in each city 210. SETTLERSHO! Creates a settlers unit in each city 211. NUKESTORMS Causes global warming 212. AUTOMODE The computer moves for you 213. ARMAGGEDON Nukes every city. SimLife 229. SEED Plants seeds around world. 230. JOKE Shows a joke. 231. BABY Makes every female of the selected animal species give birth. 232. JUST Makes a funny noise 233. WALL Toggles barriers between SimLife rocks and SimAnt walls. Normally barriers, toxins, mutagens, and Ultra-Food Sources can't block fly. ing animals, but while this toggle is on, not only will barriers turn into walls, but all artifacts can block flying animals. 234. FUND Shows a window with three choices. Each one gives members of the selected animal species a Chaos Overlords When asked to type in your name before a one player game, type one of these codes instead: 195. SMGHUBBLE See every gang in all places 196. SMGKICKASS Five ground zeros, fully loaded 197. SMGMILK Every hire in at maximum health CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"His heater will cross the dish in .4 seconds. On Opening Day, it's your turn. GRAND SLAM PLAY FOR REAL \"... a hot new leve si artificial intelligence.\" GAMEPRO \"... 3-D, realistic gameplay that captures the essence of professional baseball.\" -COMPUTER PLAYER Burst STATSINE PLATES INTERACTIVE www.vie.com Coming this April for PlayStation Saturn\" and Windows 95 CD-ROM. For more information, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-874-4607. 1997 Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. G a a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid. Burst is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment. Inc. Officia de Major League Baseball Players Association. CMLBPA. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #116 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS amazoon Seild ORIE SimCity 2000 Jul 3575 <LAKELAND> $20.000 Elle Speed Options Disasters Windows Newspaper Helple DEPIDE button to repay the first bond. Select the but ton Issue Bond and click on Yes. Select the Repay Bond button to repay the second bond. Select Issue Bond and click on Yes. Don't repay this bond, ever. This will give you $1.4 million every year. quakes will occur! Save the game and exit. Start SimCity again and load your city. Unpause game and play. Repeat this process whenever you are low in money. 240. If there is a SimCity scenario that has a great city but you can't beat the disasters to win it, try this. Start the sce nario. Save the game. Restart and load the saved scenario. It will be yours! SimIsle To use the cheats, save your game as the name of the cheal 253. SIMONSCHICKENKB Increases heavy machinery by 100 and unskilled labor by 10 254. IAINTESTEDITCO Adds 10,000 to EMU'S 255. DEESEXTRAPIXEL Adds 1,000 building materials 256. RAGSCHOCOLATESTACH Adds 5,000 to food 257. MARKSANCHOVYPIZZA Toggles agent pay off (they work for free) 258. 3527490 Adds 10 skilled labor to game. PAUSED Chilly IGOTO Colonization 259. Cheat Menu: Press Alt and type WIN during play Defender of the Crown 260. After you have started playing, try holding K during a load for 1024 Knights in your army and 1024 Knights protecting the castle. Contering Tool SimCity 2000 BANKER BENEFITS Sure, the FUND cheat will work in SIMCHTY 2000, but Here are the cheat codes that it'll cost you 25 percent interest. we know about. For the Mac, these cheats are case sensi health rate equal to the percentage on the but tive (they must be typed in ALL CAPS to work). ton you press (e.g., 100% gives every member Unless otherwise stated, you don't have to be of the selected species a health of 100%). anywhere in particular when you type these When this is used on plant species, their food cheats injust be looking at your city. and water rates are affected. (All Platforms) 235. FOOD Eliminates every Ultra.Food source. 241. CASS Money or a disaster (15% chance of a disaster) SimCity 242. FUND $10,000 bond (at 25% interest) 236. Pause the game. Type FUND in all-caps. You 243. JOKE a Joke (Macintosh, v1.0 only) will have 10,000 more dollars. Repeat this until 244. PORNTIPSGUZZARDO $500,000, all you have about $80,000. The simulation will rewards activated not allow you to have more than that. Don't (Windows 3.1) unpause the game yet or countless earthClick on top of tool bar to make these work. 245. BUDDAMUS $500,000, all rewards SimEarth activated 237. SMOOTH'Smoothes the coasts of your planet's 246. GILMARTIN Military base continents. 247. NOAH Starts a flood 238. JOKE Type this when the Gaia window is in view. 248. MOSES Stops a flood Her face will be in a frying pan! 249. MRSOLEARY Starts a fire 239. Robots!: There is another class of life not (Windows 95) explained in the manual, the robot. Robots are able 250. IMACHEAT $500,000, all rewards acti. to survive everywhere, including on rock, arctic, and vated ocean. Robots can evolve sentience, too, but 251. PRISCILLA Debug Menu because they are already so advanced, they will not (DOS, v1.0 floppy version only) be able to have stone age, bronze age, or iron age 252. At the beginning of a new city, type in cities. They will begin civilization at the level of the FUND and click on Yes. Type FUND again industrial age. To create robots, simply place one and click on Yes. Pull down the Window nanotech city of any life form and set an atomic test menu and select Budget. To the right of on it. Robots in the city will escape and live as sep Bond Payments, you will see an open book. arate life forms! Click on it. Select the button Issue Bond and click on Yes. Select the Repay Bond Stronghold 261. Enter STRONG DEBUG to load the program, then press: 262. Alt-B Change building type by one 263. Alt-F Change building type by ten 264. Alt-C Change character(don't use enemies!!) 265. Alt-K Destroy a random enemy stronghold Theme Park 266. Choose HORZA as your nickname and start the game. Press and hold the C key and you'll be informed that you're cheating. 267. Ctrl-Z All attractions 268. Alt-Z All shops 269. Shift-Z and Enter-Z enable for features like toilets and trees. 270. Press C to gain money and when you think you have enough, press Enter FEBRUARY 1997 "


"A secret shared. A promise kept. A heart opened. Trust Trust is the shiny jewel glistening brightly in the rock of friendship. Then, like any rock, it can be a powerful tool. A blunt object that can be hammered against your allies' unsuspecting, trusting skulls, against a monolithic church and warring noble houses, against all that stands between you and ultimate power as leader of the universe. Trust is indeed a shiny jewel. EMPEROR of the FADING SUNS A military strategy game in space. SEGASOFT CIRCLE READER SERVICE #266 Emco fingum. Fading an and the Fading und For a free Windows 95 demo or to order Emperor direct, call 1.888.SegaSoft Microson and a detinathwaders logos and marks so i Holi Designs, Inc. 1607. Segist and the Beason logo are trademarks of Sensore 1997 Alrights reserved wrows L www.segasoll.com A S "


"$ 1,001 TIPS & CHEATS amazoor DROVE 21. lip rasa la romane you love a case cause the sile worster les 271. Alt-P Promote your character 272. Alt-L Increase character level (press repeat: edly, then click on character) 273. Alt-Z Destroy enemy units on screen 297. Ctrl-F9 Cause traffic pile up 298. Ctrl-F10 Disaster strikes 299. Ctrl-F11 Recoup resources 300. Ctrl-F12 Increase/decease morale, education, or crime. Action Action Minesweeper 274. When you start, type XYZZY and press Right Enter key and Left Shift key. When you move over a covered square with a mine, a pixel (very small) at the top right corner of the screen with be black. 21 no entantes en el sem von home say man atne or in camera Classics /Puzzles Crusader: No Remorse 329. Type JASSICA16 and you will hear a voice saying \"Crusader: No Remorse.\" By pressing Alt-F10 you'll become invulnerable: pressing F10 gives you all the items and weapons. Crusader: No Regret 330. Type LOOSECANNON16 and you will hear a voice saying \"Crusader: No Regret.\" By press ing Alt-F10 you become invulnerable; by press. ing F10 you gain all items and weapons. Metal Marines 275-289. Level 1: PNTM, Level 2: HBBT, Level 3: PCRC, Level 4: NWTN, Level 5: LSMD, Level 6: Lemmings 3D CLST, Level 7: JPTR, Level 8: NBLR, Level 9: Warp codes; type at any time. PRSC, Level 10: PHTN, Level 11: TRNS, Level 301. NASTALIK Level 2 (Which Exit?) 12: RNSN, Level 13: ZDCP, Level 14: FKDV, 302. PADUASOY Level 3 (Alilemm's) Level 15: YSHM 303. BRELOQUE Level 4 (Castle Lemmalot) 304. OCHIDORE Level 5 (A Short Cut Through Master of Orion: the Woods) Battle at Antares 305. CECROPIA Level 6 (Alpine Assault Course) Hold down the Alt key and type: 306. KABELJOU Level 7 (Land Ahoy) 290. EINSTEIN Gives you all technologies 307. DOUMPALM Level 8 (A Head Above the 291. ISEEALL Onmiscience (use with care-it Rest!) alters your race's statistics) 292. MENLO Robo miners Gobliiins 293. MOOLA Gives you 1000 BC Type in the code at any time to skip directly to 294. SCORE Shows the score these levels: 308. Level 2: VQVQFDE Outpost 309. Level 3: ICIGCAA 295. During play, press Alt, then type WIN. 310. Level 4: ECPQPCC 296. Ctrl-F8 Get some encouragement | 311. Level 5: FTWKFEN 312. Level 6: HQWFTFW 313. Level 7: DWNDGBW 314. Level 8: JCJCJHM 315. Level 9: ICVGCGT 316. Level 10: LQPCUJV 317. Level 11: HNWVGKB 318. Level 12: FTQKVLE 319. Level 13: DCPLQMH 320. Level 14: EWDGPNL 321. Level 15: TCNGTOV 322. Level 16: TCVORPM 323. Level 17: IQDNKQO 324. Level 18: KKKPURE ORF 433 325. Level 19: NGOGKSP OUTHOUSE? COMPOST? With a little creative cheating, you can get 326. Level 20: NNGWTTO 327. Level 21: LGWFGUS to the end of OUTPOST Sooner--and on to a more complete game. 328. Level 22: TONGFVC Duke Nukem 3D 331. DNALLEN says a message 332. DNCLIP walk through walls (very unstable) 333. DNCOSMO another message 334. DNHYPER steroids effect 335. DNBETA yet another message 336. DNSKILL# set skill level 337. DNCOORDS shows your coordinates 338. DNRATE displays the frame rate 339. DNITEMS gives you power-ups 340. DNKEYS all keys 341. DNDEBUG displays debug info 342. DNINVENTORY all power-ups 343. DNWEAPONS all weapons and full ammo 344. DNMONSTERS toggles the monsters off 345. DNCASHMAN throws money when you hit the use key 346. DNVIEW external Duke view (same as F7) 347. DNSCOTTY## level warp (episode, two-digit level number). To warp to level in episode 1 you would type dnscotty 107. It is important to include the zeroes. 348. DNSTUFF all weapons, keys and power-ups 349. DNSHOWMAP shows entire map 350. DNCORNHOLIO God mode, unlimited jetpack 351. DNKROZ same as Cornholio Alpha Centau RoboMiuet Site Structure Sus Ne Using your Portal Status Cow Landet Calandre permal PATE \". Touch Cowri: Doom and Doom II 352. IDDQD God Mode 353. IDFA Ammo & weapons 354. IDKFA Ammo, keys & weapons 355. IDCLIP Clipping mode on. Walk through walls! Toggle this mode back off to pick up items or use switches and doors. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"These testimonials are from some people who have played Soultrap... It's amazingly addictive, Once you start playing you won't be able to stop.\" \"It's like playing Quake and Super Mario combined in one game, only better!\" The fact that I could change camera angles as I played was really cool. There's even a smart camera that picks the best view for you!\" The soundtrack is incredible, so I love the fact that I can change the music as I play.\" So \"You look up, down... 60 degrees around you. I've never seen anything like it!\" \"Stunning 3D graphics, an amazing soundtrack and unmatched playability... I really didn't think you could get this kind of experience on a PC!. \"It's more exciting to play than Quake\". It challenges you on so many other levels that it goes beyond a traditional shoot'em-up!\" \"It's the only 3D game I've played that has a large amount of strategy built into it its not just another mindless shoot 'em up! ...But don't believe everything you read. Experience it for yourself. SOULTRAP FREE SOFTWARE CALL 800-685-3863 FOR DETAILS! SOULTRAP Microforum Available at tine software retailers everywhere. For more information or to order direct call 1-800-685-3863 or call (416)656-9594 or visit our website at www.microforum.com *SOULTRAP' 1996 Microforum Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. \"SOULTRAP\" is a registered trademark and \"Microforum is a registered trademark of Microforum Inc. \"Quake\" is a trademark of id Software, Inc. Super Mario is a registered trademark of Nintendo of America Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #80 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS 214147 amazoor SAL DAS 1100 Dark Forces Quake 399. LABUG Bug Mode lets you squeeze through You need to type these cheats in the console. Activate the console by hitting tilde). narrow passages and greatly reduces your size 356. GOD God mode when crouching (very helpful in the garbage 357. IMPULSE 9 Gives all weapons Crusher). 358. IMPULSE 255 Gives you Quad Damage 400. LACDS Reveal Map gives a full map of your 359. MAP ExMy Level warp. Replace the \"x\" with episode number and the \"y\" with the current level and locations of enemies, objects level number. and doors. 360. NOCLIP No clipping mode 401. LADATA Reveal Navigation Counter: Useful 361. FLY fly around use the \"d\" and \"c\" keys to move up or down in marking the exact coordinate of items and 362. NOTARGET Monsters won't target you unless you attack important corridors. 363. REGISTERED 1 Tricks the SW into thinking it is the full version, allowing all weapons 402. LaiMlame Invincibility Toggle: God Mode in multiplayer mode. Does not let you get into registered levels. 403. LAMAXOUT: Full ammo, shields, and 364. GIVE Gives you weapon # weapons, plus complete inventoy of items all 365. GIVE SH Gives you # Shells maxed out. 366. GIVE N# Gives you # Nails 404. LANTFH: This cheat allows you to teleport 367. GIVE R# Gives you # Rockets to the current map position one level above or 368. GIVE C# Gives you # Cells below your current location. 369. GIVE H # Gives you Health #. 405. LAPOGO: Disable height checking; allows you to reach high precipices and ledges with out cumbersome climbing gear. 370. IDSPISPOPD to turn clipping mode on for John!!!\" Reduce the size of your screen, use it 406. LAPOSTAL: Get all weapons and ammo. Doom twice and it displays \"Bye John.\" 407. LARANDY: The cheat produces the same 371. IDCHOPPERS Get the chainsaw (and a (Registered version) effect as the weapon super charge power-up, cryptic message) 391. GOWINGNUT Makes the Guidebot attack giving you an increase in rate of fire from all 372. IDDY With the AutoMap showing, cycles enemies weapons for 50 seconds. between normal map, full revealed map, and a 392. HELPVISHNU Makes more Guidebots 408. LAREDLITE: Freezes enemies in their full map showing the objects and enemies 393. GODZILLA You can kill robots just by tracks. All enemies take damage in this mode, 373. IDBEHOLDS Get berserker pack bumping into them. but you'll need to toggle it off before it takes 374. IDBEHOLDV Get temporary invulnerability 394. FREESPACE Level warp effect. 375. IDBEHOLDI G et temporary invisibility 395. SPANIARD Kills all robots first time, then 409. LASKIP: Typing this cheat successfully 376. IDBEHOLDA Get full Auto Map the boss robot, then poor Guidebot, if you type 377. IDBEHOLDR Get antiradiation suit it a third time. 410. LAUNLOCK: Get all keys, code cards, the 378. IDBEHOLDL Get light-amplification visor 396. ALMIGHTY Invulnerability broken Dark Trooper gun, data tape, ice cleats 379. IDCLEV Followed by episode and level 397. ROCKRGRL Full automap and Phrink metal. number, warps to that level 398. LPNLIZARD Gives you homing weapons. Level Codes: For those of you stuck in the early 380. IDMYPOS Display coordinates and heading. levels of the game, the following cheats will transport you to any level you want. Descent 2 Just type in the cheat during the game, (Demo version) and you're on your way. 381. ZINGERMANS Invulnerability toggle 411. LASECBASE Level 1: Secret Base 382. MOTHERLODE Wowie Zowie Weapons (The Death Star Plans) 383. ALIFALAFEL Accessories 412. LATALAY Level 2: Talay: Tac Base 384. EATANGELOS Homing weapons (every weapon) 413. LASEWERS Level 3: Anoat City 385. CURRYGOAT All Keys (The Subterranean Hideout) 386. JOSHUAAKIRA Full Map 414. LATESTBASE Level 4: Imperial 100 100 100 387. WHAMMAZOOM Level Warp Weapons Research Facility 388. ERICAANNE Bouncing Weapons 415. LAGROMAS Level 5: Gromas Mines 389. BITTERSWEET Psychedelic walls DNPERVERT? Sorry, kids, there's no cheat for this section 416. LADTENTION Level 6: Imperial 390. PIGFARMER Use it once and it displays \"Hi of DUKE NUKEM 3D. Detention Center DEALER CC FEBRUARY 1997 "


"LEISURE SUIT LARRY'S NEW Innuendo? It's in there! A bevy of buxom beauties? Sure! Scratch 'n' Sniff puzzles? Who else? Lounge lizards and disco \"LOVE FOR SAIL!» IS SO EXCITING YOU'LL music? Of course! Yes, software's best-known character is back and this time he's really \"cruising for chicks.\" Al Lowe FEEL THE BLOOD RUSH TO YOUR HEAD. is at his bawdy best in the funniest CD-ROM adventure game yet. It's a \"shipload\" of laughs, Lowe-ly puns, outrageous OH YEAH, YOUR BRAIN situations and the most beautiful women this side of your imagination. Vou're sure to find it, ah, um, uplifting. WILL FIND IT STIMULATING TOO. BAR RIFTLARRY Al-Ft-FUFFSAIL! The all new CD-ROM adventure from the mind of Al Lowe. MATURE For more information, call 1-800-757-7707. Or visit our website at www.sierra.com/Isl7. AGES 17+ @ WARNING: This game contains nudity, sexual content, mature themes and adult situations but in such a gooly, non-explicit, cartoony way that anyone looking for the really dirly stuff will be offended, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #235 1990 surra On-Linolog@and/or TM designate trademarks of or licensed to Serra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS ANTE Saab ALE 480. MAXMEUP 481. IMPUMPD 482. AUNTEM# 483. IMSTUCK 484. STEROID Makes the hull 100% All weapons!!! Warps to the planet 18 Skips the current mission Invincibility Marathon I and II (Macintosh) 485. At the new game scene press CommandOption, then start a new game. Then type BUIHAVENOCLUE. Type slowly-type a let ter, then wait two seconds before typing the next letter. Descent 450. GOBBET kill yourself In order to get the most out of these cheats, you'll prob 451. AIMOVE stop enemy a.l. ably want to reconfigure your keyboard settings so 452. \\FRAME display framerate you don't set off any bombs when you're typing 453. IFMK full health (that deadly 'b'key) or move yourself into danger. 454. IOUCH hurt yourself (Shareware version) 455. IGRAV lower gravity 417. SCOURGE Wowie Zowie Weapons 456. IBLUB toggle slomo 418. MITZI All Keys! 457. IGUNS take away ammo 419. RACERX Invulnerability On/Off! 458. IDUNHOUR kill all enemies 420. GUILE Cloak On/Off! 459. IPOED no gravity at all 421. TWILIGHT Shields Recharged! 460. TOREILLY give radar tracker 422. FARMERJOE Warp to Which Level? 461. 176TRUMBOS display sfx 423. ASTRAL Spirit mode (only from v1.4) 462. IGPS diplay location (Registered version) 463. Il repeat the last cheat (Demo version) 424. GABBAGABBAHEY Cheats enabled 464. FUSHIPI invincibility 425. BIGRED SuperWowieZowie Weapons 465. IGUNS all ammo 426. BUGGIN Turbo mode; everything (including ene. 466. IXMAS all inventory items mies) speeds up 467. ITUNNEL turn clipping off 427. BRUIN Extra Life 468. \\BLOODLUST give microchip powerup 428. FLASH Shows the path to the exit 469. 12KRAD4U kill yourself 429. AHIMSA Keeps enemy ships from firing 430. POBOYS Destroys the reactor (version 1.4 only) Terminator: Future Shock 431. PORGYS MegaWowieowie Weapons! (version 470. BANDAID Replenishes power, armor 1.4 only) 471. FIREPOWER Gives you all weapons 432. LUNACY The robots speed up (version 1.4 only) 472. SUPERUZI Gives you a super uzi with 9999 ammo 473. NEXTMISSION Takes you to next mission 433. LARAMSHED Level 7: Ramsees Hed 474. TURBO activates turbo mode Docking Port 475. ICANTSEE infrared sight 434. LAROBOTICS Level 8: Robotics 476. GARBLE Lets you see cheats as you type them Construction Facility 477. WHOAMI Displays your coordinates 435. LANARSHADA Level 9: Nar Shaddaa 436. LAJABSHIP Level 10: Jabba's Ship Hellbender 437. LAIMPCITY Level 11: Imperial City 478. TOTLPWR Makes main energy 100% 438. LAFUELSTAT Level 12: Fuel Station 479. URDEAD# The # = a weapon from 0.9 439. LAEXECUTOR Level 13: The Executor 440. LAARC Level 14: The Arc Hammer Rayman All letters must be typed without using shift, alt or control keys. To type the numbers, use the top row of the keyboard. 486. For 5 lives type \"komOogdk\" 487. 10 tings type \"86e40991\" 488. Breakout type \"b76b7081\" Heretic 489. QUICKEN Same as God Mode in Doom, the path to invincibility. 490. MASSACRE Kills everything on the level. 491. SKEL Get keys 492. RAMBO Get full health armor and weapons recharge 493. ENGAGE Level warp. Type \"engage\" and then the number of the level you wish to warp to. 494. KITTY This will let you walk through walls just like idclip for Doom II. Turn it off before you pick up an item or activate a switch. 495. COCKADOODLEDOO We're not going to say what this one does, but you'll get a laugh when you try it out Eradicator (Commercial version) 441. IRAGAMUFFIN invincibility 442. VARMS all ammo 443. IGIFT all inventory items 444. IDIG turn off clipping 445. OVERDRIVE turn on microchip powerup 446. ISPUTNIK fill in automap 447. IAMOBJECT turn on objects in automap 448. IVICI finish current level 449. IBLOAD load a particular level Hexen Use these mystic formulae to punish the monsters in the commercial version: 496. SATAN invulnerable 497. DELIVERANCE turns you into a pig 498. BUTCHER kills all the monsters 499. CLUBMED maximum health 500. NRA full weapons, mana and armour 501. INDIANA full inventory 502. LOCKSMITH gives you all the keys MAGTEL ZUSA3218 LARISSA DEATH IN THIRD PERSON With cheats, ERADICATOR can play like a whole new game. For real fun, turn off gravity. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"MORE SLEEPLESS NIGHTS Settlers AHEAD The VENI, VIDI. VICI ttiers MISSION CD \"The fate of thousands is in your hands Baseite A THE CRITICS JUST LOVED THE SETTLERS II! \"Simply put, it is everything \"Eye-catchingly Berf City was, and much, unique... You don't much more. Part of the want to miss this one. jame's appeal is simply C/Net August 96 isual: The game map is ncredibly detailed... This sn't just a game, it's a \"A must for fans of the vorld.\" PC GAMES July '96 original and gamers who like god sims.\" Those seeking the ultimate PC POWER April 96 jame to build the empire of their dreams will need o look no further.\" \"A substantial COMPUTER GAME REVIEW improvement on an pril 96 already excellent gaming system\"...\"should provide Settlers II has a very many long, long evenings addictive quality and is an of sheer bliss.\" Outstanding sequel...\" STRATEGY PLUS June 96 HAPPY PUPPY GAMES On-Line) NEW & UNIQUE! Be Prepared for more Sleepless Nights... AVAILABLE FEBRUARY, 1997 FOR PC CD-ROM REQUIRES ORIGINAL VERSION OF THE SETTLERS & 7 Continents Over 9 Detailed Maps 12 Additional Unlimited Maps A New Winter Scenario ASORGIL Easy to Use Man Editor For more information about \"The Settlers Il Mission Disc\" and other Blue Byte Software Products, visit our Web page or contact us directly at: Blue Byte Software, Inc. 870 E. Higgins Road, Suite 143 Schaumburg, IL 60173 Voice (847) 995-9951 Fax (847) 995-9956 0 1997 alue Byte Software, Inc. All Rights Reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #174 www.bluebyte.com Depute "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS 1111111 122001 BULD 565. BOUF Become invincible 566. GUNHED Get all weapons plus 100 rounds of ammunition for each. Radix: Beyond the Void (Many cheats work only with version 1.1.) 567. NSOPTA Full weapons, shields, energy 568. NSBAGWAN Turns on Ultra Shields 569. NSBJIPP Turns on manuevering jets 570. NSDIEBESTERDS Weapons fire at a faster rate 571. NSE Full energy 572. NSOPTL Lighting turned on. 503. SHERLOCK gives you all the puzzle items 537. SLAUGHTERHOUSE Access the first five 504. CASPER no clipping (like IDCLIP) levels of the game. 505. SHADOWCASTER# change class; # is a number: 0 = Warrior, 1 = Cleric, 2 = Wizard 506. Where gives map coordinates Eury_3 507. Ticker displays frame rate 538. TRYMEON god mode 508. Mapsco toggles map detail in map mode 539. GIVITIUP all weapons 509. Mrjones displays version number 540. URDUSTD turbo 510. Noise sound information 541. JUMPNIT warp to next level 511. Visit## Warps to level 01-31 or level 41 542. WORMITX Warp to level x (Cheats won't work at hardest difficulty level or in 543. SSMOKIN turbo mode multiplayer.) 544. TUFENUF gives you shields Use these cheats in the demo version: 545. PACKIN1 servo ammo 512. BGOKEY God mode 546. PACKIN2 isokinetic ammo 513. CRHINEHART All weapons 547. PACKIN3 rapidfire laser ammo 514. BRAFFEL Get 25 of artifacts 548. PACKIN4 DOM ammo 515. MRAYMONDJUDY All keys 549. PACKINS Viper ammo 526. SGURNO 100% health 550. PACKIN6 baryon ammo 527. RJOHNSON No clipping (walk through walls) 551. PACKIN7 superbombs 528. JSUMWALT X and Y coordinates 529. EBIESSMAN Turn yourself into a pig! 530. REVEAL While in mapmode toggles full map, full map with enemies/items, and normal map Need For Speed 531. TMOORE Get items First you need to win the tournament to get a 532. BPELLETIER## Warp to level ## bonus track. When you win the second tourna. 533. CSTIKA Massacre enemies ment you can use the following codes. 532. PLIPO Change player class (0 for fighter; 1 552. EAC POWR Bonus Car for cleric: 2 for mage) 553. EAC WARP Speed Up 554. EAC RALY Rusty Springs Becomes Egyptian Earthworm Jim 533. ITSAWONDERFUL Gives you an extra life Jazz Jackrabbit 534. HATMAN Turns Jim into Hatman To enable these cheats, pause the game by press535. ONANDONANDON Maximum number of ing the \"P\"key, then hit the Backspace key game continues before you type in the code for the cheat. In 536. POPQUIZHOTSHOT Gives you 1000 bullets some versions of Jazz Jackrabbit, you have to add the letters \"DD\" before each cheat. 555. SABLE Turn Jazz red and increase speed 556. CSTRIKE Gives you a flying surfboard 557. BAD Gives you the escort bird 558. DOOM Makes the enemies tougher 559. KEN Exit to DOS 560. HOOKER Collect a gem 561. MARK Kills Jazz 100 1190 562. APOGEE 16 color version that runs at half the speed KLINGON HIGH-FIVE Tired of being a Warrior? Use Hexen's 563. LAMER Skip the current level 564. HOCUS Teleport around the cur\"shadowcaster\" cheat to change to Cleric or Wizard class. rent level Rebel Assault 573. After the animated LucasArts logo, move your joystick UP and press FIRE, move the joy. stick DOWN and press FIRE, then move the joystick LEFT and press FIRE, then move the joystick RIGHT and press FIRE. You'll hear a telephone ringing and a voice answering \"LucasArts,\" which lets you know that the cheat mode is active. Now you'll be able to jump to any chapter in the game without having to write down all those silly codes! To go anywhere in the game, type the number of the chapter you want to play. Type numbers 1-9 for chapters 1.9 and A-F for chapters 10-15. By pressing the + key on the numeric keypad, you'll reset your damage to zero, and pressing Esc will let you move to the next cut-screen. Strife (Commercial Version) 574. GPS shows position 575. SPIN changes music 576. OMNIPOTENT God mode 577. BOOMSTIX all weapons 578. JIMMY gets you some keys 579. PUMPUP get Powers 580. GRIPPER no sliding 581. ELVIS no clipping mode 582. RIFT## Level Warp 01-32 583. STONECOLD Kills all monsters on a level 584. DONNYTRUMP Gives you 300 gold 585. LEGO Gives you another sigil piece 586. TOPO Full Map Toggle (when looking at map) 587. DOTS FPS Ticker 588. SCOOT# Teleport to map spot (Shareware Version) 589. STUFF Invincibility, all weapons and keys, CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ELITE   Wor 398 yards «Can I challenge Arnold Palmer and my buddy in Tibet to a skins game on Maui in heavy fog at 3 AM?\" an I golf in 16.7 million colors? Can I play against Arnold Palmer at Latrobe? Can I play against my friend in bet? Can either of them beat me? Can I take a 3-D tour of the Kapalua Plantation Clubhouse? Can I play macch play? Best ball? Skins? Can I add in my own sounds? Can position a camera over the ocean? Can I place a camera right in front of the ball? Won't that break the camera lens? Can I still play all the Links Championship Courses? Can I add foa? Can I play with WIN 95? Can I get 1600X1200 resolution? Can I make a higharching wedge shot back up on the green? Can I watch Arnie react to a good shot? A bad shot? Can I resize the vang windows? Can I see the tees break off? Can I choose from different golfers? Both male and female? Can I use the mowing stripes to read the contour of the green? Can I take a Virtual Reality tour of Arnie's workshop? Can I golf in Hawaii, Pennsylvania and Chicago on the same day? Can I get a 3AM tee time? Can I hear the birds and waves in 3stereo? Can I hit my ball 1/2 mile out of bounds? Can I play from there? Can I watch aerial fly-bys of every hole? Can I choose from more than 15 add-on courses? Can I watch an instant replay of my swing? Are there multiple camera views? Can I challenge an artificially-intelligent computer opponent? Can I retract the control panel? Can I call toll-free for support? Can I take multimedia tours of Kapalua and Latrobe? Can I save a round in progress, go to dinner, and finish it later? Can I send and receive text messages during a round on the modem? If I lived on the course could I find my house? Is Links LS the most realistic golf simulation ever? «Yes.\" PELICAN HILL The NEW Links LS add-on courses Links 5 Larry 5twelry scourselinary EEK LINKS ELS The NEW Links 5-Course Libraries Vol. 1, 2 & 3: Playable with Links LS, Links Pro CD, Microsoft Golf, & Links Pro CD Macintosh www.accesssoftware.com. Code: 010-CGW DEALS For a FREE Links LS Trial-Size version CD, call 1.800.800.4880 Call 1.800.800.4880 for a FREE Pandora Directive Demo CD CIRCLE READER SERVICE #248 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS amazoon SHIELD DRIVE 620. TRSCOPE Oscilloscope 621. TRIHOVR Combat hovering 622. TRFRAME Frames-per-second 623. TRIWARP# Warps to level number typed at # 624. TRIBURN Super afterburner booster 625. 3DREALM Weapon power-ups. and a teleporter beacon 590. IBGOD Invincibility 591. GUNS All weapons 592. LISTIT Accessories 593. OPEN All keys 594. STIC Stealth Boots 595. MONEY Money and Toughness 596. KELLEM Kill all enemies on level 597. SPIRIT No Clipping mode 598. GOTO## Warp to level ## (32-34) 599. MOVEME# Teleport to Map spot 600. IDDT Full Map toggle (when looking at map) 601. ILIVE Auto use health toggle (same as pressing F5) 602. AIBRAIN Al toggle 603. IDMYPOS Display co-ordinates 604. IDMUS## Change music to track ## (01-10) 605. TIC Devparm Toggle activate the cheats: 640. For version 1.0 press Ctrl-Alt-Enter 641. For version 1.1 press Left Shift-AltBackspace Now you can use these cheat codes: 642. TAB-G God Mode 643. TABI Add Item 644. TAB-H Self-Mutilation 645. TAB-N No Clipping Mode 646. TAB-P Pauses Game 647. TAB-Q 648. TAB.W Turbo mode 649. TAB-X Adds Extra Stuff 650. TAB-E Finishes Level 651. M-L-1 Weapons, ammo and invulnerable Exits Syndicate Rename your team one of the following names (depending on which cheat your want to enable) and you'll be all set. 626. Nuk Them Select any country on the map 627. To the Top Try it and see 628. Rob a Bank Gives money 629. Cooper Team Get money and items 630. Watch the Clock Speeds up the clock allowing for faster research completion. Terminal Velocity 606. TRIFIRO Temporary Invincibility 607. TRIFIR1 Reloads PAC 608. TRIFIR2 Reloads ION 609. TRIFIR3 Reloads RTL 610. TRIFIR4 Reloads MAM 611. TRIFIR5 Reloads SAD 612. TRIFIR6 Reloads SWT 613. TRIFIR7 Reloads DAM 614. TRIFIR8 Recharges afterburner fuel 615. TRIFIR91 nvisibility 616. TRIFIR 10 Full Invincibility 617. TRIGODS God mode plus weapons powerup 618. TRINEXT Jumps to the next level 619. TRISHLD Restores shields to full strength Death Rally During the race: 652. DRUB No-damage 653. DREAD Unlimited ammo 654. DRAG Unlimited turbo 655. DRINK Rocketfuel 656. DRUG Mushroom effect At the menu: 657. DROOL Get $500000 658. DRAW Get $1000 659. DROP Drop 10 points 660. DRIVE Get 10 points (Full version only) Magic Carpet To enable the cheats for Magic Carpet, bring your carpet to a complete stop (or type the cheat at the beginning of a level), and type \"T\". You'll be given a prompt under the status bar for you to type in a message. To activate the cheats type RATTY. The following key combinations will make you a very powerful wizard. 631. Alt-F1 gives you all the spells. 632. Alt-F2 gives you more mana. 633. Alt-F6 bestows complete healing. 634. Alt-F7 kills all creatures on the level. 635. Shift-C completes the level. 636. To jump from one level to another, type CARPET at the prompt followed by the level number (1-50), and you're off! 637. For Magic Carpet 2. type WINDY at the prompt to enable cheats. The Alt+Function keys work the same as in the original. SlipStream 5000 661. While you're in the main menu, type REFINERY (on some non-US keyboards this is REFINERZ). You'll get a message that says \"Cheating will get you everywhere\". Now you can chose any racing course and you'll always have enough money to repair your ship. Wolfenstein 3D Start the game with a command line parameter: 638. For version 1.0 type \"wolf3d-next\" 639. For version 1.1 type \"wolf3d-goobers\" Once in the game, you need to Screamer Type these codes at the menu screens. 662. VTELO All normal tracks available 663. INVER Reversed tracks available 664. MONTY Obstacle graphics are changed 665. JOINT More obstacle graphics 666. CLOCK Turn off that clock 667. TAZOR Makes the bullet car available 668. UPDOW Turns graphics upside down 669, MIRRO Mirror mode 670. ABURN Other cars become Bullet Cars. You can't undo this without a reinstallation or backing up the choice.dat file. REGIS WOULD BE PROUD The \"gripper\" cheat in Strife helps you flame opponents by disabling sliding. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Once upon a time, in an enchanted kingdom, there lived a big bosomed lady and some gerbils. Enter a severely fractured fairy tale. Discworld II: on holiday. And the hapless magician Rincewind Mortality Bytes is the graphic adventure with cheek. must find a way to restore order in the world. You'll Over 100 hours of be dazzled by 25,000 cells of hand-drawn hilarious gameanimation. You'll be delighted by the fiendishly play immerse you clever puzzles. You'll be deeply offended in a bizarre realm where dozens of bawdy by the vocal stylings of Eric Idle. Discworld II: characters face life without Mortality Bytes. It's magical. Death. Yes, Death has gone It's enchanting. It's sick. Discworld II features the voice of Eric Idle, former star of Monty-something-or-other. DISCWORLD I DISCWORLD II PISCWORLD! MORTALITY BYTES! TEEN PERFECT PSYGNOSIS ENTERTAINMENT www.psygnosis.com Discworld it 1996 Perfect Entertainment Limited all rights reserved. Published under exclusive license by Psygnosis Ltd Psygnosis and the Psygnosis logo are trademarks of Psygnosis Ltd. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association Any and all original and/or distinctive characters, features likenesses and element appearing in the Discworld series on which this product is based are trademarks and Tetry and lyn Pratchett Discworld is a trademark registered by Terry Pratchett CIRCLE READER SERVICE #288 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS 2995 0132000 SAED PORINE Hi-Octane 671. Alt-F1 672. Alt-F2 673. Alt-F3 674. Alt-F4 675. Alt-F5 676. Alt-F6 677. Alt-Y 678. Alt-c Selfdestruction Kill enemies Petrol Maximum ammo Maximum shields One more lap Autopilot on Autopilot off Whiplash Use these codes as your player name. 679. SUPERMAN Makes your car invulnerable 680. CUPWON See the end of championship sequence 681. CINEMA Play in widescreen 682. FORMULA1 Access alternate cars 683. MREPRISE Access to bonus set of tracks 684. MRFROSTY Tracks become very slippery 685. WARGATE Cars warp. combination is a two-key entry. The keys are 702. Switch 2: Blood On/Off not to be pressed at the same time. You can 703. Switch 3: Comic Book Offer On/Off not use the level warp unless debug mode (see 704. Switch 4: CPU Fatalities on/off above) is active. Key 1 is Z (Episode 1), X 705. Switch 5: Freeplay on/off (Episode 2), or Y (Episode 3). Key 2 is any key Mortal Kombat II... between 0 and 0. Q is Level 1, and O is Level 706. In copyright screen (black with white letters) 9. This works in both the shareware and regis t ype AICULEDSSUL. In the demo, press F9. tered versions. If you try to warp to a registered episode from the shareware version, it will One Must Fall 2097 crash the game. 707. Access the hidden menu during the game 698. Birthday Mode: This will automatically put by pressing and holding the number keys you into \"Battle Cow\" mode, and it will also 2,0,9, and 7 simultaneously. This gives you play the goofy Apogee theme song. To get it, many new options, including increased height, change the system's date to the birthday of vitality, damage, difficulty, and more. one of the Cygnus programmers, given below. 708. To increase difficulty in a 1.player game, at Any year should be ok, as long as it's not in the settings menu under Difficulty, several the past: March 12 Bobby Prince; May 16. presses of the right arrow key after World Scott Host; August 28 Rich Fleider; October Class will increase the computer to \"Deadly.\" 2. Jim Molinets. After that, Hold down the keys O, M, and F. The 699. You can also get \"Battle Cow\" mode by computer will then increase to \"Ultimate.\" darkening the switch on the \"choose sector\" 709. During gameplay, hold down the keys B, I, screen and turning on all three lights on the and G, plus a number 1-9 to increase the right (for v1.0, don't turn on the middle light). amount of debris and scrap metal that flies The Apogee theme song will not play if you do after a hit. Holding down the keys R, E, I, and it this way. N will cause all flying debris to «rain\" through the floor to the ceiling to the floor, nonstop. Mortal Kombat I and II 700. Open the setup menu by pressing F10. Hold Battle Arena Toshinden down shift while typing DIP. This brings up a 710. FUNNYHEADS Gives fighters big heads DIP-switch menu you can alter at will. Their 711. LIFEISUNFAIR Use the number keys to per purposes: form special moves 701. Switch 1: Fatalities on/off 712. GIMMEJIM Lets you select bosses 713. VIRTUAL1 SNSDMXXAKLINK, Changes the perspec tive to first-person. (Go to Options menu and adjust camera angle to bring perspective back to normal.) Pitfall: The Mayan Adventure 686. FRAMERATE displays the framerate 687. HATMAN turns Harry Jr. Into a stick figure. Type it again to undo 688. LETSDOTHETIMEWARP Access the secret Atari 2600 level 689. IDBUYTHATFORADOLLAR Gives you access to all levels 690. IDDQD Shows developers and a message 691. MEOWMEOWLIKEMEOWMAN Gives you nine lives 692. PUMPYOUUP Reloads weapons 693. EATMOREBRAN Gives you nine continues 694. FIVEEASYPIECES Access the first five levels. Raptor 695. Customer Cheat: Backspace key will restore your energy and give you a death ray at the cost of your money. Registered version only. 696. Debug mode: Type \"SET S_HOST=CASTLE\" (it must be in caps) at the DOS prompt before loading the game. When you play you become invincible and have all the weapons. 697. Warp: There is a level warp built into the game, so you can see any level you want at any time. Get to the screen where you see the level selection (Bravo Sector, etc...). The warp Rise of the Robots (Some of these only work in the two player game) 714. Temporary invin cibility: away, away, away, away, attack 715. Temporarily change opponents conCAR BORES If you're working through the lackluster WHIPLASH to see the pretty graphics on your 3D card, use SUPERMAN as your player name to drive an invulnerable car and speed through the tracks. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"HOW |\"The classic game of naval strategy is afloat, refitted and battle-ready for '97\" Gamesmania Web Site Lach So ELLALELI HARPOONOZ Cathed with HARPOON MAGIC 50 new missions with SVGA graphics for a total of over 250 scenarios. Available in Windows.1 and Windows 95. EDUCA GEOS Four theaters of play: Greenland & Iceland/ North Atlantic/Indian Ocean & Persian Gulf/ Mediterranean. Introductory quick start-makes Harpoon Classic 97 accessible to everyone! Gateway to Harpoon Online with FREE trial included. \"Just when you thought the Cold War was over, Interactive Magic introduces the classic naval warfare simulator in a new and more exciting way.\" The Department of War Web Site From the critically acclaimed designers of Harpoon \"War Game of the Year\" and \"Hall of Fame.\" Computer Gaming World \"Top 40 Best Games of All Time.\" PC Gamer Clter good for new members only Limit one free trial per household Your 15 hours of free online play must be used within 30 days of your initial sign on Audio Visual copyright 1988 by ASC Harpoon complet code portions coyoght 01993-97 by Three-Sixty Pacific Inc. Harpoon computer code portions conight 1934 By M Interactive Software Inc. and Applied Computing Services, Inc. Harpoon stepistered trademark of Larry Bond and Chris Carlson All other tradents are the property of theit respective owners. 01994, 1996 Allunde interactive, Inc. All rights reserved. \"Best PC War Game.\" Game Players INTERACTIVE P.O. BOX 13 491 . Research Triangle Park . NC 27709 . www.imagicgames.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #170 For more informational 1 . 8 8 8 2_3 2 5 8 3 6 "


"-1,001 TIPS & CHEATS imazoon SHIELD DINE screen flashes. Then you 737. DIPSTICK Enable/Disable Cheat Codes Virtua Fighter PC can either play against the 738. SHOOTME Bulletproof Armor All of the Saturn cheats are available in the PC version, including DURAL. supervisor as player 2 or 739. BURNME Asbestos Armor (Note: When translating Saturn cheats to the PC keyboard, the follow go to training and play 740. CHOJIN Woundless With Weapons ing substitutions have been made: Button A is now Del, Button Bis with the computer as 741. BOOZE Drunk Missile now End, Button C is now PgDn, and Start is now Enter) supervisor. 742. BONES Flame Wall 716. Play as Gold Dural: In the Character Selection menu, press Down, 726. Supervisor's moves 743. TOOSAD God Mode (Temporary Up, Right then Del+Left. If it worked you will hear a woosh sound. are down-toward-up to do Invulnerability) 717. Play as Silver Dural: At the character select screen, enter Down, Up, the praying mantis, and 744. FLYBOY Mercury Mode Right, DEL +Left. You will hear a \"swoosh\" sound effect if you down-away-up to melt and 745. BADTRIP Shrooms Mode entered it correctly. heal. 746. BOING Elasto Mode 718. Add Dural to the Records screen: 747. SPEED Enable Autorun A. At the \"Press Start\" screen, enter Up 17 times, then Enter Battle Beast 748. PANIC Restart to normal, full health, no B..Now enter the options screen, and you should hear \"Ring Out.\" At the order form type modes, keys or guns C. Dural's stats are now on the Records screen. YOYOYO. Type one of the 749. WHACK Whack Yourself 719. Ring Size and Stage Select: codes below into the 750. 86ME Kill Character A. At the \"Press Start\" screen, enter Up 12 times then Enter Cheater menu. Then left. 751. DIMON Light Diminishing on B. Now enter the options screen, and you should hear \"K.O.\" click the Cheat button. 752. DIMOFF Light Diminishing off C. Move the cursor down to Exit, then press down once more, 727. AOFRECIO grants 753. GOTO Go To Another Level D. The cursor will disappear. Access to all the bonus 754. GOOBERS Restart Current Level E. Press Del and a second options screen will appear. doors 755. GOGATES Exit to DOS 720. View Credits: Hold the DEL button down during the opening demos 728. EATEE Beast mor: 756. GOARCH Exit Current Level to see the names of the makers of VF. phing off 757. LONDON Fog On 721. Slow motion replays: At the end of a round, press and hold Del-End 729. EHRTRR toggles 758. NODNOL Fog Off PgDn and the replay will be in super-slow-motion. Autoflying in bonus rooms 759. SHINEON Light Sourcing On 722. View from other camera angles (in Watch Mode): Press F7. 730. ERHNE makes You 760. SHINEOFF Light Sourcing Off 723. Choose the victory taunt: Hold either Del. End, or PgDn before the fight all opponents 761. LUNGDUNG Gas Mask character does his/her victory stance and you will be able to select 731. ERHYHRLY 762. SIXTOYS Items Aplenty which one you see. There is also one reserved for when you get an Weakens the insidious 763. HUNTPACK Outfit Player (Bulletproof Armor, \"Excellent!\" Toadman Keys, HeatSeeker) CHCI-ID ON W ESTIME CHALLENGER 732. ITIHFO Activates 764. JOHNWOO Double Pistols \ KAGE two out of three bouts 765. PLUGME MP40 Machine Gun 733. OAOAEIOA Engages 766. VANILLA Bazooka autoflying in the lab 767. FIREBOMB Firebomb 734. OFOVH Doubles 768. HOTTIMES Heatseeker time limit in bonus rooms 769. SEEYA Hand of God (Permanent God Mode) 735. OIVNNFOF Activates 770. RIDE Missile Camera On/Off tadpole attacks in lab 771. WHERE Toggles Coordinate Display On/Off 736. ORUFO Gives your beast invincibility in bonus Prince of Persia rooms 772. Start Prince of Persia by typing PRINCE MEGAHIT and the following bonus keys become available. 773. K Kills all enemies on the screen. trols: forward, forward, forward, forward, attack Rise of the Triad 774. R Resurrects you where you last died. 724. Play military vs. military: At main screen, ROTT is our winner for game with the most cheat 775. + Increase time left. press left, then right, then left, then right codes (not counting level codes). To use these 776.. Decrease time left. repeatedly until the screen flashes. codes, just type them in during a game 777. Shift-L Warps you to next level. 725. To fight the supervisor: At the main screen, (remember to type the first code, \"Dipstick,\" to 778. Shift-T Gives you an extra life. press left, left, right, right, then repeat until the enable the cheats) 779. Shift-S Heals a lost life. OLF FEBRUARY 1997 "


"3-D fighting with a vengeance. They killed you. But you came back. An avenging angel from beyond the grave. A vigilante reborn to bring justice to the damned. Take your unearthly powers and wreak vengeance on Judah, L.A.s drug king. Kali, the nin-jitsu death-bitch, Curve, Spider Monkey and an army of lowlife thugs... Because life after death is hell. NO OBSTACLE WILL STOP YOUR UNEARTHLY QUEST FOR VENGEANCE! HUNT FOR THE DAMNED THROUGH A 3D LABYRINTH OF SEEDY STREETS! THE CROW city of angels CLEAR YOUR PATH TO JUDAH WITH SHOTGUNS, UZIS, AND MOLOTOV COCKTAILS! THE SWIFT KICK OF JUSTICE! DADE MATURE M CONTENT Aklaim Microsoft PlayStation SEGA SATURN W CIRCLE READER SERVICE #151 \"THE CROW.CITY OF ANGELS TM and 1996 Bad Bird Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. PlayStation and tho \" logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Soga and Soga Saturn are trademarks of SEGA ENTERPRISES, LTD. All rights reserved. Windows is a rogistered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. O 1996 Microsoft Corporation Acclaim is a division and registered trademark of Accinim Entertainment Inc. & 1996 Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Screenshots shown were taken from the PlayStation vorsion of the video gamo. CORTEOT RATED BY ESRB ontortainment inc www.acclaimnation.com Prince "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS 11111 mazoor Sie WM on the road and infinite weapons. 818. BEAVIS Skips ahead to 100 points from level finish 819. GULLIVER Midget mode: turns all your ene. mies small 820. KMFDM Full ammo 821. BELFAST Kill all enemies Lode Runner To make the Mad Monks your slaves, use these cheats: (DOS Version) 822. Press Ctrl-F3 to activate monk mode, then control the monk with the T-Y-U/G-H-J/B-N-M keys. Press TAB to switch monks. (Windows versions 1.2 and 1.3) 823. Click on the dot in the upper left corner of the main menu screen, then Type CTHULU (V1.2) or YOG (v1.3). Listen for a gong, then control the monk with the TY-U/G-H-J/B-NM keys. Press TAB to switch monks. D COMMON CODE You'll be hard-pressed to find a game with more cheats than RISE OF THE TRIAD. Allows you to float down long 780. Shift W drops. 781. Shift-N 782. Shift-U 783. Shift-H one. 784. ShiftLook at screen below current one. Look at screen above current one. Look at screen to left of current to the time left. 797. MINUS KEY Subtracts minutes of time left. 798. COMMAND K Kills all enemies instantly. 799. COMMAND-G Opens a level select screen. 800. COMMAND-L Takes you to the next level. 801. COMMAND-T Gives you extra health point. 802. COMMAND-V Tells the version number. 803. COMMAND-R Return from the dead. 804. Alt-N Skip to next level 805. Alt-D Create DUMP.TXT Look at screen to right of current Tek War 824. NOGUARD No guards in the game 825. NOENEMIES No enemies in the game 826. NOCHASE No shooting enemies in the game 827. NOSTROLL No innocent bystanders in the game 828. Alt-Shift G God mode (full version only) 829. Alt-Shift-W All weapons (full version only) one. 785. Shift-B 786. Shift-1 Blocks out no-animated objects. Inverts the screen. Flash Back 806. QUENCH 807. GHOST 808. LEGEND 809. BULLET 810. DISRUPT 811. TREMOUR Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 Level 6 Greed 830. RAVEN 831. OMNI 832. ALLAHMODE Full health Full map God mode Prince of Persia 2 787. For the powers of Jeffar, hold down the 1, 2, and 3 keys when starting the game. 788. F1: show position (press again to disable); F3: player on/off; F6: ruler 789. Type PRINCE MAKINIT2 to start game in cheat mode. 790. Shift-T Add energy 791. ShiftThis will invert the screen. Press the key again to return to normal. 792. Shift-R Shows you what number of room you are in and jump right. 793. Shift-W Shows you what number of room you are in and jump left. 794. Shift-B \"Blind Mode.\" Everything in the room is blacked out except animated objects. In other rooms everything is blacked out. 795. Shift-K Depletes one health point. 796. PLUS KEY(Shift =) Adds minutes of time Quarantine 812. omnicorp is all knowing Level 1 813. keep the opressor oppressing Level 2 814. the meek shall inherit zilch Level 3 815. have you had your hydergine today Level 4 816. kemo city is a nice place to visit Level 5 817. At the dos prompt add the below options after the EXE file you run: -cheater -infinite nocar-invince. When in the game, press Alt, Ctrl, and F7 before anyone hits you or you hit them and you will be invincible, with no cars Corridor 7 833. To receive all nine weapons, full life and proximity mines, press and hold the letters W, A, and X all at the same time. Note: Your score is set back to zero every time you use this code. You can also gain access to individual cheats by typing C7 LEVEL 1 DIAGNOSTIC at the DOS prompt when you begin the game. Then, during play, try these key combinations: 834. Backspace-G Toggles God mode on or off 835. Backspace-W Warps between levels 86 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"IS YOUR PC LESS THAN CONVINCING? REAL SOUNDS. Sound Blaster audio cards include Graphics awesome wavetable synthesis providing the most realistic PC sound in the universe. REAL GRAPHICS. Graphics and video products deliver faster performance, BLASTER MASO higher resolutions, more colors and full motion video playback and capture. REAL SPEED. Sound Blaster multimedia kits give you high speed CD-ROM performance with wave-table EDER sound and the software OLASTER you really want top sellers from current hot lists. REAL FREE SOFTWARE. To join our new on-line membership club and receive $200 worth of free software, go to the \"Creative VIIVIT Connection\" at www.soundblaster.com/ Do it today. And learn more about upgrades so real, they're unreal. 200 GET REAL. CREATIVE www.soundblaster.com idee a r Copyright 1926 Gicative Technology Lid Solind Blaster Sound Blaster brewery CD and the Creative Labs lotoare elistered Technology La Sound Blaster AWE Grophics Water and Internet Blaster trademarks of Cucative Technolowy lidst their respective holders All specifications are subject to change without prior nouce: CIRCLE READER SERVICE #78 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS nmazoor UNIVE Lets you walk through walls Puts a skull image in front of options screen to get access to devastating super-weapons. 836. Backspace N 837. Backspace-R your character 838. Backspace-1 Increases your score. Witchaven 847. Backspace 848. SCOOTER 849. MOMMY 850. WANGO Enter Cheat Mode for all weapons for all magic for all keys The Hive 839. There's one known cheat for this one. Use the name TORYO at the startup screen to get access to all 20 missions immediately. Fire Fight 872. While playing, hit C, W, and the + key on the numeric key pad. Then press F12 to access the cheat menu. From there you can choose Restore Shields, Full Weaponry, or tog. gle Invulnerability. Gender Wars 873.Save game as BUY A PLAYSTATION before mission and get invulnerability and unlimited ammo. Novastorm 840. Attack of the Killer Tomatoes: There are codes that make you stronger and codes that let you walk through walls, but it's rare that a code will bring a smile to your face. This one will. During the first level of NovaStorm (full version) if you type the word \"tomatoes\" you'll be treated to a few new levels, enemies, boss. es, sounds-and some very unusual music. Witchaven II 851. Backspace Enter Cheat Mode 852. MARKETING God Mode 853. WEAPONS all weapons 854. HEALTH restores health 855. ARMOR restores armor 856. STRENGTH gets you the STR powerup 857. POTIONS gives all potions 858. SPELLS get all spells 859. KEYS gets all keys. 860. INVIS invisibility 861. LEVEL! for level warping. i.e. level01, level 14 etc. Black Thorne To access these levels directly, select the pass. words option and type one of these codes. 874. FBWC Level 2 875. QP7R Level 3 876. K3CH Final Level 862. ELITEMASTER Weapons are ten times more powerful 863. PETSKUMODE Enables reverse gear. Super Stardust The following codes should be entered as pass. words on the title screen. 841. NOBRAKES Full engine power 842. HARDGAME Makes the game harder 843. DNUMUAHCS Ten times more energy, but only one life 844. DIEALIENDIE All weapons on full power 845. JJRULES Thirty-five lives, all weapons on full power 846. WARHEAD Makes missiles detonate when they hit a target -300 124200 40 3050 TITELLER Total Mayhem To activate, hold down Ctrl and Shift and type CHEAT from the base screen. 864. Ctrl-C Gives 1,000 credits 865. Ctrl-A Buy all weapons (use on base screen) 866. Ctrl-N Level Skip (use on base screen) 867. Ctrl-P SHIELD RESTORC Move unit to cursor (use in game) 868. Ctrl-1 Invincible (use in game) 869. Ctrl-R Shield Restore (use in game) 870. Ctrl-M Monster toggle (use in game) Blake Stone (Aliens of Gold and Planet Strike) 877. Press JAM and Enter. These keys are to be pressed one at a time. When all are pressed, the message \"Now you're Jammin'\" appears, and you will be given all keys, and you will get 100% health. Your score will also be taken to 0. Works only on the registered version. 878. Typing POWERBALL enables debug keys. This also requires that you hold down the left and right shift keys during the JAM Logo intro. Don't hold them down until the white letters start to appear. Once the PC-13 screen is loaded, you can let go. You will hear a \"ching\" during the intro when debug mode has been successfully enabled (if you have a sound card). With a PC speaker, you won't hear this. These cheat keys can be used during gameplay only if you invoked the program with the \"powerball\" parameter: 879. Backspace W Warp to level (shift) [W] loadsthe default map) 880. Backspace D Player invisible (dumb objects) 881. Backspace G God mode 882. Backspace-1 Item cheat 883. Backspace-M Memory info 884. Backspace.P Pause screen 885. Backspace-Q Fast quit 886. Backspace-A Add Actors to AutoMapper. 887. Backspace-U Unlock all floors SHIELD BOOST When doom seems near in FIRE FIGHT, the Restore Shields cheat can save the day Worms 871. Type BAABAA at the weapons 88 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"CALLATAN'S CROSS TIME SALOON \"the do Mosey on down to callahan's for a nice cool, euphoric buzz. Throw back, a shot, of comedy, chase it with a dash of time travel and mix in 10 or 20 of your favorite aliens... now, you ready to party. It's good old-fashioned fun without the hangover. LEGEND ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY dinadventure sua gli comeuy. Will www.legendent.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE 143 "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS 2528 Amazoor She DAVE 888. Backspace 0 Show hidden walls on auto mapper 889. Backspace E Quick Win Mission 890. Backspace-B Border color 891. Backspace-C Count objects 892. Backspace-F Facing spot 893. Backspace H Hurt self (if not in God mode) 894. Backspace-S Slow motion 895. Backspace.V Extra VBLS (Vertical Blanking Signal) 896. Shift-Tab Show full automap containing all live actors. These cheat keys can be used during gameplay: 897. 67 Collect all bonus items (gold, ammo, health, etc). 898. 78 Kill all actors. 899. 68 Collect all bonus items and kill all actors. 919. G-O-D (all three keys together) Enter god Cannon Fodder mode, with flying when you jump 928. During game, press M to bring up map, Press and hold Ctrl while typing FODDER. A Tyrian white border appears around the screen. Type these cheats at the opening menu: Pressing Enter advances you to the next stage. 920. TECHNO The Experimental POZ Special weapon: Mine field. Pinball Fantasies 921. STORMWIND StormWind 929. Select table, but before the game starts, The Elemental Special weapon: Sandstorm. type EARTHQUAKE to stop table tile. 922. UNKNOWN TX Silvercloud Special weapon: 930. Type EXTRABALLS to add seven balls. Proton dispersal. 923. ENEMY Captured U-Fighter Special Arcade America weapon: Dual vulcan. 931. Press ESC, type \"7th\" and enter the Codes 924. WEIRD Foodship Nine Special weapon: After entering the code press Enter and Joey Banana bomb-Spreadfire bananas. will say \"Cool\" if it worked. 925. STEALTH Ninja Star Special weapon: Blade 932. ILOVEJOEY 50 lives field. 933. GOLDENGUN 500 bullets 926. Artillery Mode: At the opening menu, type 934. OMNIJOEY invincibility 935. URHOPELESS obtain Special item Race Points erno. 10/20 936. FATBOYCANTJUMP enable fly mode 937. GIMMETIME Set time to 10 minutes 938. MAKEAWISH 10 extra lives 939. GIMMEAMMO 10 extra bullets Commander Keen: Goodbye Galaxy and Aliens Ate My Baby Sitter 900. Pressing B, A, and T simultaneously gives you 99 shots, an extra life, and all the gems. 901. Press A, 2, and Enter together to enter debug mode to activate the following cheats. 902. F10-G God mode 903. F10-1 Free items 904. F10Jump cheat 905. F10-N No clipping 906. F10-Y View hidden areas in the level. 907. F10-B Set border color (1-15) 908. F10-C Show number of active/inactive objects in the level 909. F10-D Record a demo 910. F10-E End the current level 911. F10-M Display memory usage 912. F10-S Slow motion 913. F10-T Sprite test 914. F10-V Add 0-8 Vertical Blanking Signals 915. F10-W Warp to any level 916. F10-Y Reveal hidden areas Destruction Derby 940. For invincibility, select Wreckin Racing and enter your name as \"Idamage!\" 941. To select number of cars, enter your name as \"nplayer\". DRIVING, CALIFORNIA-STYLE If your penchant for DESTRUCTION DERBY is based purely on mayhem, just make you car invulnerable and start smashing. Lion King 942. Type DWARF on the title screen, when \"Cheat enabled\" appears start the game 943. Type H for health 944. Type L for level select Commander Keen: Invasion of the Vorticons DESTRUCT. This is a game in itself. If you like Artillery-type games, this is the action version, with one or two players. Press F1 a list of keys. 927. 5 Card War: Probably the best one. You gel five vehicles each. Slug it out. Traditional: Two tanks trying to kill each other. Can't use degrees and power. Heli Assault: Player one gets the weak helicopters, and player two gets to shoot them. Heli Defense: Same as Heli Assault, but you're shooting down the choppers. Outgunned: Similar to five card war. 917. C-T-Space (all three keys together) pogostick, all keycards, and full ammo. 918. Shift-tab Pass through an unplayed level on world map Silver Ball 945. Escbn 946. Escin 947. Esc <F9>n 948. z 949. X 950. Space extra ball dropped on table! control ball with arrows neat sounds and graphics lock left flipper lock right flipper tilt! CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"DON'T LOOK BACK. YOU'RE ALREADY IN OVER YOUR HEAD! Ancient legend and underwater adventure come together in a brain-twisting high tech mystery... SACRED MIRROR OF KOFUN Angel Shark wer subs stand ready for your adventure The futuristic brider of the ship is your command center, From here you communicate and lamich your explorations, www.enteractive.com com Visit our website for cour puzzles and prizes! 110 West 40th Street, Suite 2100 New York, NY 10018 212-221-6559 To place an order call: Enteractive\"_800-433-4464 VOD woductio The waters and islands of Micronesia conical puzzling LUTURE D: Luciana Capucci—brilliant biologist and expert in ONCEPT IDP rutins and the sunken wrecks of World War II mwal battles. underwater crosystems. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #127 CIRCLE READER SERVICE H2 n  Enteractive, Inc. All rights reserved. Enteractive and the Enteractive logo are trademarks of Enteractive, Inc. The Sacred Mirror of KOFUN, KOFUN and Future Concept logo are The Sacred Micror of KOFUN, KOFUN and Future CON trademarks of Future Concept. Jean-Michel Cousteau's logo is a trademark of Jean-Michel Cousteau Productions. Co-produced in France by Future Concept, a subsidiary of IDP and JeanMichel Cousteau Productions, with the cooperation of the National Center of Cinematography and The French Ministry of Industry Developed by IDP. "


"1,001 TIPS & CHEATS za amazoor 10.3 DEIVE Havoc To use these cheats, hit the Tab key and then type: 951. VW Extra Vehicles 952. SSS Full Shields 953. MMM Heatseeker Machine 954. AAA Full ammo 955. To skip levels, go to the «pick your vehicle\" screen, type CHEAT, type the world number (1-6), and type the level number (1.5). 963. RATTY RAT RATTY invincibility Before entering a cheat, press Backspace.) 979. FIRE powerup weapons Zone Raiders 980. RAIN health Hit the F8 or F11 function key, then type in the 981. MAGMA power up stamina code at any time during game. 982. ASTRAL 250 mana gems 964. ISITWENTY20 Reveal all of automap 983. PRIME combines above four 965. ISILETSBAIL Successfully end mission 984. ETHER level warp 966. ISIJAVANET Shields/hull maxed out 985. WIND somewhat invincible 967. ISIWHEELS Xcar available 968. ISIDRIVE All other vehicles Wetlands 969. ISIMAKEITSO Access all levels Enter this instead of your name: 970. ISIBEENTHERE Access secret level 986. COOLCOLE all missions 971. ISIFATPACKED Weapons/ammo maxed out 987. SAVANNAH 100% energy 972. ISISLEEP All enemies asleep988. ELRAPIDO munitions 973. ISIQ Immortality 974. ISIWIRES Show grid Total Mayhem To activate, hold down Ctrl and Shift and type Zool CHEAT from the base screen. 975. Type GOLDFISH, hit Enter during gameplay 989. Ctrl-C Gives 1,000 credits to enter Cheat Mode, then type the following: 990. Ctrl-A Allows buying all weapons (use on 976. 1 Temporary invincibility base screen) 977.2 Skip level 991. Ctrl N L evel Skip (use on base screen) 978. 3 Skip to end of the world 992. Ctrl-P Move unit to cursor (use in game) 993. Ctrl-1 Invincible (use in game) Realms of Chaos 994. Ctrl-R Shield Restore (use in game) Cheats for shareware:(Press Caps Lock, D. X. 995. Ctrl-M Monster toggle (use in game) Deathkeep 956. LEBUZ 957. LEGEO 958. LEHAT 959. LENEE 960. LEOLD 961. LEPIK 962. LESKP Fly Map and teleport options Unlimited spells Invincibility Extra experience points Extra key Skip level Shellshock Hit the Esc key, type in the following code during gameplay, and then hit the Esc key again. 12008 22733 Bio Menace 996. C, A, and T simultaneously receive the machine gun, 99 ammo, & 99 grenades. Secret weapons: 997. Super Plasma Bolt Hold the up arrow until you hear a charge sound, then hit fire; this causes one hit point of damage. 998. Fireball Attack Turn left and right 6 or 7 times in succession, then hit fire. 999. Electron Shield Turn left and right 6 or 7 times in succession, then hit jump key. 1000. Invincibility Burst Hold up arrow until you hear a charge sound, then hit the down arrow. All Games 1001. Press Ctrl-Alt-Del, then flip the switch labeled \"Power.\" Enter the strange mode called \"reality,\" laden with 3D graphics, surround sound, and beautiful texturing. Although the campaign seems extensive, we're not so sure about the flight modeling, and many of the character interactions seem pointless. RAISING HAVOC Sure, the Havoc cheats can help keep you alive, but can they make that hideous box fit on your bookshelf? FEBRUARY 1997 "


"SKYNET Explosive Multiplayer Action. Compete as one of 6 Combatants or 2 Cyborgs. IPX LAN/Modem. Deathmatch: NO LIMITSU City streets. Los Angeles Hills. Interiors/Exteriors. SkyNet Compounds. Multiplayer Battlefields. Single Player Missions. True 3D SVGA Visuals. Environment: NO LIMITS Weaponry: 20+ total. Heat-seeking missiles. Motion tracker. Methods of Destruction: NO LIMITSI Ground Combat. Rampage by Jeep. Aerial assault. Modes of Combat: NO LIMITS Revolutionary XnGine True 3D system. 6° of freedom. Control System: NO LIMITSH ND LIMITS For PC CD-ROM UTAS PADANG POWERED BY ERLIN BETHICS0A 50 1370 Piccard Drive, Suite 120, Rockville, MD 20850 BBS: 301 990-7552  Fax: 301 926-8010. Website: http://www.bethsoft.com Copyright  1996 Bethesda Softworks. All Rights Reserved. XnGine is a registered trademark of Media Technology Limited. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service 389 "


"FREE CD INSIDEI COTTONS ***** Fixes Windows Problems Automatically. und much more Only. HOUR Complete Uninstaller ZORK 11 EMESIS IN 05 Internet Management & Full Virus Protection COMPTON'S Interactive ENCYCLOPEDIA First Aid 95 WinDelete A \"TELUTENPOILER \"THEUS ACIMISION. O TAKE ANY 2 CD-ROM NEW Zork Nemesis Adventure 5065602 DOS 486/66, 8mb or MAC PMAC, 16mb. M Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia '97. General Reference 5090501 WIN 3.1 486/66, 8mb, M First Aid '95 Deluxe Utilities 5066402 WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M The 11th Hour Interactive Game 5054309 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M WinDelete Utilities WIN3.1 386, 8mb, M 5084504 Strategy Game 5091301 Gen. Interest 5087408 Children's Ed: 5085709 U Bedlam DOS 486/66, 8mb, M Pro CD Internet Directory NEN WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M Are You Afraid Of The Dark? DOS 386/33 or MAC LC, 4mb, M Internet Guide 5091103 Home/Personal 5090006 Clip-Art Library 5084801 Children's Ed. 5072905 Arcade Style 5074703 Interact. Game 5004700 Arcade Style 5052501 Arcade Style 5060306 PANTASMAGORIA Strategy Game 5053202 World Beer Hunter WIN3. 1 486/66 or MAC 68030.4mbM Masterclips 35,000 Premium Image Collection WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M,K,P 7th Guest DOS 386 or MAC LCIII. 4mb, M Pool Champion WIN3.1 486/66, 8mb, M Zone Raiders DOS 486/50 or MAC 68040,8mb, JK Screamer DOS 486/66, 8mb, K Shivers WIN3.1 486/33, 8mb, M Mechwarrior 2 WIN 95 PENTIUM, 12mb, M The Complete Multimedia Bible WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M Arcade Style 5058904 Role Playing 5062906 Arcade Style 5058805 Computer Tutor. 5073200 Adventure 5058102 Children's Ed. 5091400 Arcade Style 5075403 SPYCRAFT Adventure 5072806 Bible Reference 5031703 ACIMSOR. Adventure 5072608 INDYCARE Phantasmagoria Interactive Game 5004502 DOS/WIN3 1 486/66 or MAC LCIII, 8mb, M Spycraft: The Great Game Adventure 5063201 DOS 486/66 or MAC 68030, 8mb, M COMMAND ONQUER Children's Ed. 5067400 Freddi Fish And The Case of The Missing Kelp Seeds WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68040, 8mb, M Home Phone '96 DOS 386 or MAC 68030,4mb, M Cyberia 2 DOS 486/66.8mb, M Mortal Kombat III DOS 486/33, 8mb, M,J,K Hoyle Classic Games WIN3.1 486/33,8mb, M Death Gate DOS 386/33, 4mb, M Java Programmer's Library WIN3.1 386.4mb, M Jumpstart Pre-K WIN3 1 486/33 or MAC 68040, 8mb, M Quest For Glory Anthology DOS/WIN3.1 386,4mb, M Star Trek Deep Space Nine: Harbinger DOS 486/66 or MAC 68040, 8mb, M Just Me & My Dad WIN3.1 486, 4mb or MAC LCIII, 8mb, M Panzer General DOS 386/33, 4mb, M Fantasy General DOS 386/40,8mb, M TerraNova: Strike Force Centauri DOS Pentium, 8mb, M Gryphon Bricks WIN3.1 386 or MAC Classic 4mb, M Trivial Pursuit WIN3.1 386 or MAC LCHII, 4mb, M Compton's Complete Street Guide WIN3.1 386,4mb, M Command Aces Of The Deep WIN 195486/33, 8mb, M Angel Devoid DOS 486/66 or MAC LCII, 8mb, M Dinotopia DOS 486/66, 8mb, M Tritryst WIN 195 486/33, 8mb, M Mission Critical DOS 486/33, 4mb, M testone Strategy Game 5045505 Role Playing 5067301 Arcade Style 5066600 Strategy Game 5080007 Strategy Game 5027404 NEW Travel 5065909 Urban Runner Adventure 5082300 NEW WIN3.1 486/66, 8mb, M Williams Arcade Classics Arcade Style 5072400 DOS/WIN3.1 486/33, 4mb, MJ Earthsiege 2 Arcade Style 5080700 WIN 195 486, 8mb, MJ,K The Oregon Trail II Children's Ed. 5078308 WIN3.1 486, 4mb or MAC 68030,5mb, M Pitfall: The Mayan Adventure Arcade Style 5076005 WIN 195 486/33, 8mb, M Steel Panthers Strategy Game 5065503 WIN3.1 486/33, 8mb, M Shannara Role Playing 5065008 DOS 486/33.4mb.M Flight Unlimited Flight Sim. 5070800 DOS 486/66 or MAC PMAC/66, 8mb, M,J,K Trophy Bass Fishing Arcade Style 5054101 WIN3.1 486/66 or MAC LCIII, 8mb, M NEW Azrael's Tear Adventure 5089909 DOS 486/66. 8mb.M Harvester Adventure 5090600 NEW DOS 486/66.8mb, M Command And Conquer IndyCar Racing II Strategy Game 5050208 Driving Sim 5083308 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M DOS 486/66, 8mb or MAC PMAC, 16rnh, M Strategy Game 5080809 Adventure 5065404 Adventure 5063003 Strategy Game 5075106 Hexen Arcade Style 5056403 WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68040, 8mb, M, J Shanghai Strategy Game 5075601 WIN 795 486/33, 8mb, M 1001 Really Cool Web Sites Internet Guide 5053004 WIN3.1 386 or MAC Classic, 4mb, M.K Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing 4.0 Typing Tutorial 5052402 WIN3.1 386 33. 8mb.MK Chessmaster 5000 Strategy Game 5083605 WIN 195 486/66, 8mb, M UCL Final Doom Arcade Style 5083209 22 DOS 486.4mb, M,J,K Cyberstorm Strategy Game 5079900 WIN '95 486/66, &mb, M Adventure 5062807 Flight Sim. 5080908 Silent Thunder: A-10 Tank Killer 2 WIN 195 486/66, 8mb, MJ CW 3 Invention Studio NEW WIN3 1 486/50, 8m, M Children's Ed. 5086806 How To Select CD-ROMs For Your System. Each selection includes the following important information: minimum system required, minimum CPU required, minimum amount of RAM required, and required peripherals (M=mouse. J=joystick, K=keyboard. P-printer) For all titles, the minimum systern requirements recommended (unless otherwise indicated) are: Hardware: SVGA monitor (256 colors), sound card, 40mb hard drive, double speed CD-ROM drive. Operating System DOS 5.0. Windows 3.1. Macintosh System 7.0. For faster service, use your credit card and call us toll-free 24 hours a day. 1-800-792-1000D OLUMBLA HOUSEY CD-ROM DIRECT Dept. D55 HOW "


"Mechwarrior 2 NEW Mercenaries Arcade Style 5091905 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M, J.K OVER 90 CHOOSE FROM NOW...HUNDREDS GREAT TITLES TO ONCE YOU JOIN THE CLUB! AVIS 80TT-HEAD LEAVIS Duke Nukem 3-D Arcade Style DOS 486, 8mb, M MERCENARIES 5077607 Prepare Yourself for Tolat Meltdown! Da VIACOM NHL POWERPLAY'96 LOKEE NEW NHL Powerplay '96 Hockey Sports 5089701 WIN '95 486/66,8mb, M.J.K NEW *NEW Beavis And Butthead In Virtual Stupidity Adventure 5075007 WIN 95 486/33, 8mb, M 5089404 Strategy Game DOS 486/66, 8mb, M ACTIVISION FOR PLUS 1 MORE AT GREAT SAVINGS H Details below) ea DUKE NUKEN Strategy Game 5083506 Warhammer: Shadow Of The Horned Rat WIN3.1 486/66, 8mb, M A.D.A.M.: The Inside Story '97 WIN3.1 486/66 or MAC 68040, 8mb, M 5082201 Medical Rel. 5083803 The Elk Moon Murder Adventure NEW DOS 486/66 or MAC 040/66, 6mb, M Jumpstart Kindergarten Children's Ed. DOS/WIN3.1 386, 1 mb or MAC LCIII, 4mb, M NEW 5027701 STAIT NYNAS TIME COMMANDO NCAA BASKETBALL Muppet TREASURE ISTANU CHAMPIONSHI Resume Maker Deluxe CD Home/Personal 5050703 WIN3.1 386/33, 8mb, M.K.P Navy Strike Flight Sim. 5051909 DOS 486/66, 4mb, M, JK Earthworm Jim Arcade Style 5075304 WIN 95 486/33, 8mb, M Aces Collector's Edition Flight Sim. 5037908 WIN3.1 486, 4mb, M.J.K The Lost Mind Of Dr. Brain Children's Ed. 5037502 WIN3 1 486 or MAC LCIII, 4mb, M Caesar 11 Strategy Game 5068606 DOS 486, 8mb, M Nick Jr. Play Math Children's Ed. 5072707 WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68030, 8mb, M, K Heretic Arcade Style 5066709 DOS 486, 4mb, M, J Dr. Ruth's Encyclopedia of Sex Home/Personal 5027602 WIN3.1 486, 4mb, M Nascar Racing Driving Sim. 5001300 DOS 386/40,8mb, M, JK Cyberspeed Arcade Style 5076104 WIN '95 486, 8mb, M Doom 11 Arcade Style 5021506 DOS 386/33, 4mb or MAC LCII, 8mb, M,J,K Flight Sim. 5083902 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M.J.K THE BEAST WITHIN ACIMILOR NEWS NEWS NCAA Championship Basketball Sports 5089503 DOS 486/66, 8mb, J.K NEW Muppet Treasure Island Adventure 5085303 WIN3.1 486/66, 8mb, M Time Commando Arcade Style 5089602 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M,K Gabriel Knight: The Beast Within Adventure 5060405 WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68040,8mb, M Adventure 5062500 Police Quest: SWAT WIN3.1 486/33, 8mb, M The Unexplained WIN3.1 486/50, 8mb M Corel Gallery Clip-Art Library 5010301 WIN3.1 386, 4mb or MAC LCII, 2mb, M, KP NEW Manic Karts Arcade Style 5088109 SMS DOS 486/33.8mb, M.J.K Historical 5079801 NEW SU-27 Flanker A whole new way to get the most exciting CD-ROMS games, reference, edutainment and more all at great prices! Just write in the selection numbers of the 2 CD-ROMs you want for $9.95 each, plus shipping and handling. In exchange, you agree to buy 4 more CD-ROMs in the next 2 years, at our regular prices (currently as low as $29.95, plus shipping and handling) and you may cancel membermember. ship at any time after doing so. What's more, you can get one more CD-ROM right now for the low price of $19.95 and have less to buy later (see complete details in coupon). Columbia House CD-ROM Direct Bloomington, IN 47407-1998 Direct Dept. D55, 3109 Canterbury Court, 1 Yes, please enrollme under the terms outlined in this advertisement. As a member, I need buy just 4 more CD-ROMs at your regular prices within the next 2 years. Send my CD-ROM selections for: (check one only) UPC (1) Macintosh (3) en my Write in the selection #'s below Send me these 2 CD-ROMs for just $9.95 each plus $1.75 each shipping/handling (total $23.40). Buy your first selection now and have less to buy later! I Also send my first selection for $19.95 plus $1.75 shipping/handling which I'm adding to my $23.40 payment (total $45.10). I then need to buy only 3 more (instead of 4) in 2 years. # Free CD-ROM magazine sent approximately every 4-6 weeks (up to 13 times a year) reviewing our Featured Selection plus scores of alternate choices, including many lower priced CD-ROMs. And you may also receive Special Selection mailings up to four times a year. (That's up to 17 buying opportunities a year!) Please check how paying: My check is enclosed. charge my introductory CD-ROMs and future CD-ROM Direct purchases to MasterCard Diners Club DAMEX VISA Discover (BYM/BYQ) (BYN/BYR) Buy only what you want! If you want the Featured Selection, do nothing it will be sent automatically. If you'd prefer an alternative selection, or none at all, just mail the response card always provided by the date specified. You'll always have 14 days to decide; if not, you may return the selection at our expense. I Money-Saving Bonus Plan. If you continue your membership after fulfilling your obligation, you'll be eligible for our generous bonus plan. It enables you to enjoy great savings on the CD-ROMs you want for as long as you decide to remain a member! 10-Day Risk-Free Trial. We'll send details of how Columbia House CD-ROM Direct works along with your introductory package. If you're not satisfied, return everything within 10 days at our expense for a full refund and no further obligation Act now, membership in CD-ROM Direct may be limited, Account Number Exp Dato Signature My main CD-ROM interest is: (check one) (Note: You are always free to choose from any category.) Entertainment Education Edutainment Productivity includes children's titles) Name Phone Address -Api_ Api City State State Zip Important! Did you remember to choose PC or Mac? Will your selections run on your system? Note: Columbia House reserves the right to request additional information, to limit membership or reject any application, or to cancel any membership. Her limited to residents of the contiguous United States. Residents of Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, U.S. territories, APO and FPO addresses please write for separate offer $97.CDR-962GS 100 1997 The Columbia House Company Zip Check us out online! For more titles...to order...or for more information. http://www.columbiahouse.com/cdrom Aposted the sale or "


"G SANDGOD A Bazooka MS5 multimedia subwoofer lets you hear things in the CD-ROM Drowned God you never heard before sweeping, pulsing, heart-pounding lows you simply can't hear with ordinary computer speakers. Call 1-800-The-Tube for your nearest deater, and hear the difference our patented Bass Tubes enclosure makes. Then get ready for a subwoofer so amazing, you'd swear it was reverse-engineered fr o hnology. In Canada, call: Trends Elechionics (04) 502-2966. SAS, Bazooks, Bass Tubes.. and Listen To Your Ears are registered trademarks of Southern Audio Services Inc. Wiesasbazooka.com Game graphics courtesy of EMG and Inscape Drewned God: Consuley and Inscape. Alriglit regered, ht uu THE KS mal Ooht\"SJOoo to You had a Wrapped microphone. recorded it with a condominto the studio toilet and an eight-inch plastic straw designers blew through Drowned Gact sound sound for Horus, the To create the perfect CONSPIRACY OF THE AGI DROWNED CODI a Bazooka, ready heard that, you alreco BR ZOO HR "


"LOYD CASE TECHNOLOGY tech -LOC The Agony And The Ecstasy vachi A Toast To The Best-And Torches To The Worst-Of Gaming Tech In the past year or so, I've come across a lot of interesting pieces of hardware and software and have played my fair share of games. While most products fall into a middle ground when it comes to issues like installation or the user interface, there is kind of a bell curve at work liere there are a few products that are egregiously bad in some areas and others that are stellar. Don't get me wrong, even some of the products with bad qualities, such as a really awful installation, may actually be utterly cool if you can get them to work. I wanted to somehow reward products that really thought about user issues, and also lob a few bombs at some that forget there are such things as users. After some consideration, I've come up with \"Torches and Toasts.\" A torch means that the product was taken out back and bumed only in effigy, of course). A toast means that we cracked open a bottle of Dom Perignon '59 and toasted the product (after a few of these, I avoided playing NASCAR...) With these thoughts in mind, let's dive into the product list. These are in no particular order, by the way. I've lost count of the number of games I've crashed by accidentally pressing the Windows 95 key. The Toasts The Torches iamond Multimedia's Suprasonic 336 external modem. The Suprasonic 336 sports a cool LCD front panel that gives you information like baud rate, whether compression is on and even what kind of compression is being used. Although connecting with a friend via a modem has gotten much easier with recent games, there's still occasion to have to tweak those dreaded modem strings. The extra info provided by this display can help get the connection right Creative Labs' Plug-and-Play configuration manager Creative Labs (finally) shipped a PnP configuration manager that actually works. Intel's ISA Configuration Utility (ICU) that often ships with PnP products doesn't work well, particularly under Windows 95s DOS mode, but Creative's works quite well. Note that you'll need to update your Win 95 settings to match any changes to the configuration of the card. If you're running DOS6.22, you can also run the full configuration manager to tweak the card configuration. ATX design motherboards. The ATX spec makes installation of new motherboards a much easier task. ATX systems also have more efficient cooling and a \"soft\" power switch (at long last). Not only that, but you can have more full-size cards if you need them. 3COMS ISA Etherlink III network adapter. Cheers to 3COM for allowing the user to disable the PnP capability on >>Continued on pg 98 he WING COMMANDER Kilrathi Saga's crummy installation procedure. If you have AutoPlay enabled, when the CD-ROM is inserted it proceeds to install DirectX without asking you. The result has been much anguish among gamers who have had their recent, DirectX-compliant video drivers overwritten with the DirectX default drivers, resulting in distorted screens and lowered refresh rates Any game controller that requires the keyboard port. Okay, so HOTAS (Hands On Throttle And Stick) is a cool concept, but even some gamepads now plug into the keyboard port. I like to switch back and forth between game controllers, and having multiple keyboard dongles daisy-chained doesn't cut it. As an aside, we'll herald the arrival of joysticks and other game controllers that adopt the Universal Serial Bus (USB), forever doing away with the somewhat dysfuntional IBM game port/multiple keyboard pass-through config. An oversight in the ATX specifications that doesn't define the back panel cut-outs for parallel, serial, keyboard and audio ports. I've seen at least three different cut-out patterns, and no ATX case I've seen supports all of them. Poorly designed Windows 95 keyboards. Some new keyboards have a Windows 95 key right next to the spacebar. I've lost count of the number of games I've crashed by accidentally pressing this key, which in Win 95 pops up the Start menu, a Continued on pg 98 FEBRUARY 1997 "


"LOYD CASE Toasts >>>Continued from pg 97 Torches >>>Continued from pg 97 TECHNOLOGY The Torches minor convenience not worth the hours I've lost in game-play The nVidca NV-1 multimedia chip-set. The NV-1 inflicted the most arcane hardware/software installation procedure I've seen since the days of S-100 computers. With a gaggle of connectors, installation options and puzzling prompts, you don't quite need an clectrical engineering degree to get an NV-1 board running, but it sure would help. Intel's Triton II chip-set. Intel promised but didn't deliver on their much-anticipated Triton II chip-set, which shipped with several key, heavily advertised capabilities missing, including universal serial bus support and parily memory support in the case of the HX version). Worse yel, motherboard vendors sold boards with these carly chip-sets without removing references to unimplemented features from documentation or the BIOS. The Toasts the ISA version of the Etherlink III network adapter. This way, the card can be used in any system appropriately, without the need for arcane configuration managers. CH Products keyboard connectors. CH Products includes all possible keyboard connectors for their joysticks that need a keyboard pass-through. These days, it's a crap shoot as to what kind of keyboard connector comes with a system: some use the smaller PS/2 connector; others use the older AT plug. If you get a CH Throttle or Pro Throttle, both connectors are included and attached-just plug in the right one for your system. RAD Software's free Smacker tools. Smacker tools let you view Smacker-encoded video files that ship with many games. RAD lets you download them for free from their Web site at www.radgametools.com, or CompuServe's Game Developer's forum (CO GAMEDEV). Bravo! Syquest's EZFlyer 230 MB SCSI. The SCSI version of the EZFlyer sports an automatic termination feature. On the end of an SCSI chain, it will turn on tennination, and in the middle of the chain it tums off termination. If only the rest of the SCSI universe could figure this out... IWILL Corporation's motherboards. IWILL, a Taiwanese motherboard manufacturer, packages their motherboards in a very user-friendly way. The packaging lists the features of the motherboard, and the internal packaging is actually labeled with the contents of those little boxes. On top of that, their Quick line of motherboards comes with onboard ultra or ultrawide SCSI for a very small price premium. Brian Reynolds support for CIVILIZATION II. Formerly of MicroProse and lead designer of CIVILIZATION II, Brian Reynolds supported that game beyond the call of duty. Reynolds was all over the online services, responding to messages and issuing new patches almost daily. The best part was that the patches weren't just bug fixes, but actually added cool new features to the game in response to user requests. John Hinkley's FastVid utility. FastVid dramatically accelerates graphics in older Pentium Pro motherboards, and even gives a bump on newer Pentium Pro boards. On top of that. Hinkley freely distributes the program on the Web, to the eternal thanks of Pentium Pro owners everywhere. Chris Dial's Chench. Dial managed to finally bury the venerable 3D Bench DOS graphics benchmark with his Cbench, a simple DOS 3D benchmark that will test both VCA and SVGA performance, and has a nice mix of floating point code thrown in as well. While not perfect, it's a decent gauge of DOS performance for your graphics board. Best of all, it's free at www.dw. net/-sdw/chris3d.html. And finally, a toast to all the readers who have sent me email or snail mailTcan't always respond, but seeing your insights and questions helps me do a better job serving you. Thanks very much for taking the time, and keep them coming Loyd Case can be reached via email at loyd@proaxis.com. CHIPS If you're getting consistent read errors from a CD-ROM, before you throw in the towel and try to get a replacement, try washing it. That's right, with a little warm water and nonabrasive liquid dish-soap, hand-wash the CD on both sides. Then dry it with a lint-free cloth. More than half the time, this will clean up\" any read errors you might be having. >If you have a particularly thin or long VGA cable, and your graphics display has a bad case of double-vision, you might try installing a pair of ferrite cores. Available at better Radio Shacks and electronic hobbyist stores, ferrite cores are little metal cylinders, usually encased in plastic, that wrap around a cable. Place one set of cores near the monitor connection and the other adjacent to the graphics adapter connector. If this doesn't fix the problem, a new VGA cable or monitor service may be in order >If your Windows 95 game seems to be performing sluggishly and you've already installed the latest and greatest drivers for your graphics card, here are some other things to check. First, turn off any screen savers-they eat up CPU cycles. Next, make sure that File and Printer Sharing aren't installed. While networking in general uses some of your CPU, File and Printer Sharing can cause a performance hit, especially if someone is connected to you. Finally, if you do have networking installed. make sure the network card is connected to a specific LAN, since some older cards pester the CPU unnecessarily as they hunt for a LAN connection. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Winner of atom od 1996 Winner WICKEDLY FAST 3D, WINDOWS & VIDEO MYSTIQUE MATROX Drect3D Test From the company that consistently delivers high performance graphics accelerators, comes the next wave of graphics innovation for your home PC. ATI 3D Xpression + PC2TV Matrox Mystique Matrox Mystique's state-of-the-art technology combines the new MGA-1064SG 64-bit graphics chip, an integrated high speed 170 MHZ RAMDAC and powerful SGRAM memory for mind altering performance. Diamond Stealth 3D 2000 XL Seores in frames per sees From now on your Windows 95 applications will explode onto your screen at over 44 million Winmarks and at resolutions as high as 1600 x 1200. You'll also play back TV quality MPEG and AVI video clips at a smooth 30 frames/sec. REND Senas And unlike many of the competition's 3D decelerators, Mystique delivers true 3D game power with the highest frame rates possible and a unique set of 3D features not available with other products. You'll also get blazing fast DOS game acceleration with Mystique's superior 32-bit VGA engine, new low price of $179 (ESP) MGA By adding on the Matrox Rainbow Runner series of upgrades, you'll discover an exciting new universe of digital video and make obsolescence nightmares a thing of the past (Q1 '97). You'll be able to send video over the internet, play PC games on a big screen TV, decode MPEG video in hardware and watch TV on the PC! Explore all the possibilities at incredibly low prices. Satisfy your desire for the fastest, most complete 3D, Windows and video accelerator available. Discover the plug and play world of the Matrox Mystique. Starting at only $179 (ESP 2 MB, PCI bus). matrox szene meno cement COMPUSA BEST. MICRO GENTER FREE SOFTWARE BUNDLE (AVAILABLE WITH RETAIL VERSION ONLY) MECHWARRIOR2 DESTRUCTION ACTIVISION SCORCHED VREAM PILET PSYGNOSIS CRITERION |M U 8 M 1-800-362-9349 http://www.matrox.com/mga Matrox Graphics Inc. 1025 St Boris Blvd Dorvat, oboa, Conda, HOP 214 Tel: 514.969-6320 Fax. 514-369 6363 In Quote, call: 514.969-6330 As Direct 3D tests conducted by Matto Graphics Inc on a Gateway PS-165 configured with Intel P5-166Mhz, 16VB: EDO RAM with 256K cache Manu Myat , bancad Scan 3D 2000X. and All 30 XHESSICA 218 merty for the PCI DSS citer releases 3 16,403.00 2101 3. respectively for Windows 95 Direct 30 tasts condusvg Turned from the DextX20 SD. D id Stouth 30 2KXXL :d Ali 30 Yth. 512 X 384 # 16 tot wa Matrox Mystique testing was conducted at 640 x 400 cc 16 bit based on Gowaud studed. Derstective cutrec textured. portit Sated 16-bit per Dial color. Quid rendere FC2V were condute with FC2TV tests were conducted at CIRCLE READER SERVICE #259 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 3 Theil Computer Game Magazine computer World Gaming PRINCETON OOC Build A Kick-Ass Pentium 200 For Less Than $2500 (Or An Even Better One For $3200) CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"BY LOYD CASE ast month there was an article on a fantasy game called «The Ultimate Gaming Rig\"; fantasy because most people don't have nine grand to blow on a gaming rig-at least, not all at once. So I sat down and mulled over what might constitute some best-of-breed components to build a \"real world\" ultimate rig. While I didn't set a particular price point, I wanted to build a system using the best price/performance gear | could get my hands on. The real problem was that the number of products at mid-level prices is staggering, and there are probably more opinions and emotional attachments to affordable products than to products at the high end. So it's very likely you might not agree with the choices here—if so, substitute your favorite item. The point is that you can build a very fast, very solid computer for a reasonable amount of money. Let's take a look at what went into CGW's «budget\" gaming rig. TALANA PHOTOGRAPHY: JOHN POPPLEWELL D For Pennies FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 3 intele pentiuno 0502200 +6391097.112 THE HEART OF THE MATTER The processor was a tough choice, because the Intel Pentium Pro 200's price point was-except during a brief shortage toward the end of last year-pretty close to that of the 200 MHz Pentium. However, the cost of Pentium Pro moth erboards was still higher, and we did want to make realistic decisions, so we chose the Pentium 200. The motherboard choices are huge, even if you restrict yourself to somewhat higher performance chip-sets, such as the Intel Triton II 430HX. However, after our experience with the Micron Home MPC system in the December issue, which earned a 5-star rating and Editor's Choice award, the choice became clear. We used the Micronics M55Hi Plus board, which ships with a 512KB Level 2 cache and is virtually identical to the Home MPC's excellent motherboard. Toss in 32 MB of EDO DRAM and you have the beginnings of a very solid system. will soon be superseded by the Medalist Pro 2540, which features the latest in hard disk technology, including MR (magneto-resistive) heads, PRML read channels, and a 5400 RPM rotational speed, at about the same price as the Medalist 2140. It should be available now. The drive mates well with the built-in PCI EIDE controller on the Micronics motherboard. For the CD-ROM, we went with the brand-new Toshiba 12x EIDE CD-ROM. Although EIDE CD drives inherently have higher CPU utilization than SCSI drives, at this speed most game titles should still run quite well. On top of that, the price point was attractive, at less than $200. Finally, we threw in a garden-variety 3.5-inch floppy drive for around 30 bucks. If backup is an issue for you, I would recommend lomega's parallel port Zip drive. The lomega Zip doesn't have the lowest cost per MB, but lomega offered a rebate program at the time of this writing, which brought the Zip drive in at around $150. Go Speed Racer Intel's 200 MHz Pentium will keep even the most demanding titles moving along smartly, STORAGE EN MASSE Again, there are numerous choices for mid priced hard disks, but we finally settled on the ven erable Seagate Medalist Pro 2140 (aka the ST32140A). This drive rotates at 5400 RPM, has a 256KB buffer, and moves data at the fastest PIO Mode 4 setting in most newer BIOSes. This drive GETTING THE BIG PICTURE If you get 10 gamers in a room together, it's very likely that you'll get 10 different recommendations for graphics. However, we were very intrigued by the Canopus Total3D graphics accelerator. Based on the Rendition Verité 2D/3D accelerator, the Canopus card is a bit more high-end than the other Rendition-based cards, supporting true color at higher resolutions and offering full support for DIRECT3D TESTS Direct3D Test: Pixel FIII Rate, Higher Quality Direct3D Test: Polygon Throughput, Highor Quality 350 25 24.0 23.6 306.5 300 20 250 223.2 219.7 200 olygon Throughput denotes the number of polygons a chip can render; higher throughput yields greater scene complexity without a loss of frame rate. Pixel fill denotes the speed that pixels are painted onto a surface; this helps improve performance in games containing fewer, larger polygons. As graphical realism increases, polygon throughput becomes more important since there are more polygons per scene. So, while the Rendition-based card in our budget system has lower fill rates, it delivers good poly throughput, and most 3D games will run smoothly on it. 150 105 100 Falcon Micron C GW Mach V Home MPC Budget Rig Kilopolygons per second Falcon Micron CGW Mach V Home MPC Budget Rig Megapixels per second The Falcon Northwest Mach V and Micron Home MPC machines scored the highest ratings in our December survey of off-the-shelf systems, earning 4.5 stars and 5 stars, respectively. FEBRUARY 1997 "


"WAGES WAR VAILABLE | THE BUSINESS.OF BATTLE TAKE ON THE ROLE OF TROOP TACTICIAN AND SHREWD ENTREPRENEUR AS YOU LEAD A PROFIT-HUNGRY BAND OF HIGHLY-TRAINED MERCENARIES ON A SERIES OF GUT-WRENCHING MISSIONS. SUCCESS WON'T BE EASY BECAUSE IN WAGES OF WAR, YOU CAN KICK ASS ON THE BATTLEFIELD BUT IF YOU DON'T TURN A PROFIT, YOU'RE OUT OF BUSINESS! F:* the cost Get ME Backup MDSR2 LEEBA re M Powerful \"Assault Ware\" Al the best turn-based combat system yet developed Super-realistic troop movement  Hours of endless gameplay Available at your local retailer. To order direct call: 1-800-251-9563 Outside U.S. call: 415-261-3227  Over 50 unique mercenaries Over 40 deadly weapons . Tons of accurately researched equipment Designed for NEW WORLD COMPUTING ME Microsoft Windows 95  High stakes business simulation  Superb SVGA color New World Contulang. Stulo 300. Uwe New World Computing and Studio 300 lopos. and Wages of War are trademarks and registered trademarks of The 300 Company The 300 Compaty. All rights reserved. Now tradatunk below to speciva hors. Now World Computing is a division of a 300 Compart CIRCLE READER SERVICE #137 1906 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 3 Where to Score the Best Deal stereo-shutter VR glasses. Choosing a monitor was another tough challenge since this article is intended for those on a real-world budget. My baseline recommendation is the 15-inch monitor from Viewsonic. The 15ES displays good image quality with a 0.28 mm dot pitch and has a maximum screen resolution of 1024x768. For $200 more, though, you can have a 17-inch monitor from Princeton Graphics. The E070 is a real deal at a street price of only $499. It won't win any awards for features, but it does offer high refresh rates even at 1024x768, has digital controls, and features a quality image with a 0.28 mm dot pitch. The E070 is a solid monitor and a good deal. the Waveforce card with my baseline system, it's worth spending the $180 if high-quality audio is important to you. If it helps you to rationalize it, remember that the Sound Blaster comes free with the motherboard. Having been weaned on high-fidelity audio systems, my ears can't take the sound of crummy speakers. Still, wanted to stay within a reasonable budget, so I opted for the Yamaha YST-10 desktop speakers. Despite the lack of a woofer, the YST-10s deliver good bass response and impressive sound quality for $100. If you want better speakers, you can opt for the Yamaha system 35, which mates the 25-watt MSW-10 woofer with a pair of YST-M7 5-walt-per-channel satellites. These will never be mistaken for a set of Polk Audio's finest, but they do sound good, and can be found for around $150. THE SOUND AND THE FURY Good audio is an increasingly important piece of the game puzzle these days. One of the cool things about our choice of the Micronics M55Hi Plus motherboard is that it comes with a built-in Creative Labs Vibra 16 chip on board. This solves the digital sound problem and gave us a workable game port. You should know, however, that the MIDI quality of the Vibra 16's FM synthesis isn't very good. I'm one of those people who consider audio very important, so plugged in the Yamaha SW60XG Waveforce ISA card for MIDI sound. While I did not include I'M IN CONTROL HERE Of course, you need to interact with a computer to play games. After a bit of research, we unearthed the Focus 6200 keyboard. At first glance, this looks like one of those ergonomic key. boards, until you realize that the keys themselves are still arranged in single rows; it's the oversized spacebar that throws you off. It has those funky Windows keys, but also has a nice, light touch, good tactile feedback and a logical layout, all for $25 (okay, we had to throw in a $5 PS/2 keyboard adapter, so it was 30 portraits of George). The Logitech 3. button Mouseman rounded out the standard input device list. Controllers are always controversial, and I have to confess: I punted on this one. I had two very nice joysticks and just couldn't choose between them. One was hen doing the research for building CGW'S budget game rig, I tried to look for the best prices possible. Here's what I would recommend if you want to do the same thing. First, I started with catalogs. I get a zillion catalogs from various computer mail order companies. Since I've been building computers for a few years now, I have a pretty good nose for reasonably good prices. Another invaluable source is the giant Computer Shopper magazine. This enormous publication, which can be delivered to your doorstep monthly, contains a seemingly endless array of mail-order vendors, pricing information and 800 numbers. And the technical articles are pretty good, too. Then there's the Internet. Although I still prefer to order by phone, I'm finding more good deals over the Internet every day. I've bought motherboards, memory, CPUs and more, all from vendors who advertise only in their Web pages. In other cases, I've found the Web site through an ad in another source (such as Computer Shopper), but the Web site will contain more up-to-date pricing or offer specials not in the paper ad. Finally, there's an interesting new medium that's available: the online auction. For example, check out OnSale at www.onsale.com. The chief caveat about buying in this format is that you must have a good idea of what you're looking for. It's very easy to get sidetracked and get something that looks \"almost\" right but turns out to be not quite what you expected. Bear in mind, too, that an auction medium like this will often have used or refur bished components, but if that doesn't scare you, then have at it. Shopping remotely has its benefits but also its drawbacks. There are unscrupulous vendors posing as legiti, mate mail-order companies on the Net. They never deliv. er and move on to a different phone number before you realize you've lost your money. Thankfully, most credit card companies will refund most or all of a fraudulent transaction, if you report it promptly. Then there's the merely incompetent, which is almost as bad. These are folks who send you the wrong stuff, causing you delays and often reshipping or restocking charges. Make sure you double check the return policy of any company that does business by mail order. Buying mail order is one of the most cost-effective ways to gather components for an upgrade or new sys. tem. All you need to do is exercise a little caution and do a little research. The potential payoff is substantial. V W COM ER. RIGONO KIU TROPA EVENWER TRETTIR STAIWAN GESTRE 12 TIESITI NUEN Playin' the Slots Because the Micronics M55Hi Plus motherboard has an audio and joystick port built in, you save about $70, and additional installation headaches. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Gaming so real it'll make you tense, anxious and screaming for more. Monster 3D All Monster 3D DIAMOND Ady Kit 3D Are you ready to be chewed up, spit out and totally price that'll make your head spin. Monster 3D sets a satisfied? Then brace yourself because the Diamond new standard in 3D graphics performance with lightningMonster 3D has arrived and it's about to blow your PC fast, full-screen 3D rendering and outrageous special away with the ultimate in arcade-quality performance. effects, giving you gaming so real, it hurts. And, it is Based on the state-of-the-art 3Dfx Voodoo 3D accelerator, the fastest performing Microsoft Windows 95 Direct3D Monster 3D's advanced PCI-bus architecture works with accelerator available, with equally high-performance 3D in Without Monster 3D Acceleration your existing graphics card to transform your ordinary MS-DOS and Windows 3.1x. Plus, Monster 3DXL\" comes computer into a monstrous gaming machine. All for a bundled with Whiplash\". Hyperblade, VR Soccer 96. Descent\" ll: Destination Quartzon 3D, MechWarrior 2. 3D Features Tomb Raider, EF 2000, Scorched Planet plus Microsoft  Texture modulation  Animated textures  Perspective-correction  Anti-aliasing Game Sampler 2 for WIN '95 which contains a variety texture mapping  Gouraud shading of Direct 3D and DirectDraw game samples that'll leave With Monster 3D Acceleration  Z-buffering  Sub-pixel correction  Level-of-detail MIP mapping  Per-pixel alpha blending effects you begging for mercy. Better run for cover, because  Bi-linear and advanced  Industry-standard OS and APIs texture filtering the Monster 3D is coming to get you. To find out more,  Texture compositing and visit our website at http://www.diamondmm.com or morphing call 1-800-4-MULTIMEDIA DIAMOND www.diamondmm.com MULTIMEDIA VISUAL SYSTEMS DIVISION * Bundled games come with retail Bundled games come with retail version of Monster 3DXL only 01995 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc., 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA Monster 3D is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc./Visual Systems Division. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders CIRCLE READER SERVICE #385 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE  PART 3 \"Total Gaming Solution\"). You can find it for around $120 with a bit of shopping. Though an internal modem, it is Plugand-Play, installs with little or no difficulty, and once running, is a very solid performer. the CH F16 Combat Stick; the other was the new Thrustmaster X-Fighter, their updated version of the FCS. The CH stick has a light, precise feel and built-in throttle wheel, yielding a somewhat more versatile stick, whereas the Thrusty, with its weighted base and stiff, geared potentiometers, might appeal more to the hard-core sim jock. Both were around $60. If you're an action or sports gaming fan, consider tossing in the new CH Gamepad, which you can find for less than $20-just the thing for side-scrollers and sports games. WRAPPING THE PACKAGE Most people overlook the case, but since I used the Micronics motherboard, which uses the ATX design, needed a good ATX case. I was impressed with the case used in last month's ultimate rig, so I went with a mid-tower from the same company-an In Win IW-G500A. It uses the same slide-out motherboard tray but is smaller and comes with its own 235-watt power supply, Topping off the CPU is a low-pro. file cooling fan from PC Power & Cooling. BLOWING UP YOUR NEIGHBOR Of course, multiplayer is all the rage these days. After some agonizing, decided to leave out the networking card-most gamers probably wouldn't use it. However, modems are important for a number of reasons-e-mail, downloading the latest game patch, and get ting together with a bunch of your virtu: al friends and blowing them up over the Internet. I wanted a low-cost but reliable modem, so I chosethe Hayes Accura 28.8 DVSD modem (also called the BOTTOM LINE TIME After putting all the pieces together, we ran our usual suite of benchmarkscheck out the graphs. Overall, it's a very solid contender-but more important, it's a Where's the Beef? Living below your desk, Yamaha's MSW-10 woofer will give your audio that needed oomph. GRAPHICS BENCHMARKS winbench 96: Graphics Winmarks at 10x 7 x 8 50 8 Quako: Time Refresh Tests 60.0 59.7 Quake 640x400 Quake 320x200 43.0 42.3 8 34.0 8 38.2 inbench 96 performance data, though not specifically relevant to gaming performance, will give you a very good idea how a graphics board or a system will perform in moving business applications along smoothly. It can also be quite handy for the Spousal Rationalization Factor. In our Quake tests, we used unaccelerated Quake in testing the Micron and Falcon systems, and the Renditionaccelerated VQUAKE for testing our budget rig. We used the Time Refresh command issued from QUAKE's command prompt at the same point in the first level. 8 28.2 16.2 Falcon Micron CGW Mach V Home MPC Budget Rig Graphic Winmarks FNW MicronCGW Machy Home MPC Budget Rig Frames per second The Falcon Northwest Mach V and Micron Home MPC machines scored the highest ratings in our December survey of offthe-shelf systems, earning 4.5 stars and 5 stars, respectively. 106 FEBRUARY 1997 "


"This drive's capacity is unlimited. (The offer, however, is not.) While technology is making the world smaller, it's also making your programs larger and requires you to store lots more information. The perfect situation $244* for the award-winning EZFlyer 230MB. And, by the way, it's really AFTER $55 MAIL IN REBATE. fast because it's a hard drive and really easy to use. Purchase a SyQuest EZFlyer 230 drive by Feb. 28, 1997, and receive a $55 mail-in rebate. Use this card as a rebate coupon. For each SyQuest drive you purchase, you must include the following items: This rebate coupon. Original sales receipt, dated Nov. 1 through Feb. 28, 1997. No photocopies Completed registration card included with the drive. UPC label from box. Serial number from box. Self addressed, stamped envelope. Which means you can run programs, presentations, whatever, right off the 230. Plus you can keep adding cartridges for virtually  : SyQuest endless capacity. Try it, you'll be glad you did! $55,00 Rebate c/o D&L Services, Inc. P.O. Box 1508 Delaware, OH 43015 Only 2 rebates per household. Please allow 8-10 weeks for rebate fulfillment. Must be postmarked within 30 days of purchase and received by 3/31/97. Void where taxed. prohibited or restricted by law. Not to be used in conjunction with any other offer 1996 SyQuest Technology AVAILABLE AT COMPUSA, BEST BUY, COMPUTER CITY, EGGHEAD, OTHER LEADING RETAILERS AND MAIL ORDER COMPANIES. 1-800-245-2278 OR WWW.syquest.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #118 Based on $299 MSRP CGW-2/97 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 3 Web URL www.micronics.com www.intel.com n/a $99 The Ultimate Game Machine On A Budget Component Street Price Vendor Name Micronics M55 Hi Plus (with audio) $300 Micronics, Inc Pentium 200 w/256 KB L2 cache $490 Intel 32 MB EDO DRAM $144 (Various) Seagate Medalist Pro 2520 $279 Seagate Corp. 3.5\" Floppy drive $29 Teac Toshiba 5702B 12x CD-ROM drive $199 Toshiba, Inc. Canopus Total 3D S250 Canopus Corp Viewsonic 15ES Monitor $329 Viewsonic In Win IW-G500 midtower case In Win Corp. Hayes Accura 28.8 DVSD $120 Hayes Corp. Yamaha YST-10 speakers $99 Yamaha Corp. CH F-16 Combat Stick $59 CH Products Focus FX6200 keyboard $30 Focus, Inc. Logitech Mouseman 3-button mouse Logitech Total $2,486 Bells & Whistles You Might Consider Princeton Graphics 17\" monitor (E070) $500 Princeton Graphics CH Gamepad $19 CH Products Yamaha System 35 speakers $149 Yamaha Corp. Yamaha MIDI Card (SW6OXG) $179 Yamaha Corp. Iomega Zip Drive $150 Iomega Corp. www.seagate.com www.teac.com www.toshiba.com www.canopuscorp.com www.viewsonic.com www.in-win.com www.hayes.com www.yamaha.com www.chproducts.com n/a www.logitech.com $59 www.prgr.com www.chproducts.com www.yamaha.com www.yamaha.com www.iomega.com The Lean & Mean Pentium 166 $368 $29 $199 system that uses the components we wanted to As for gameplay, everything ran beautifully. We use. The other nice thing about building your were concerned that running VGA games might own rig: now that you know what's in it, you can pose a problem for the Rendition Verité chip, plan a logical upgrade strategy, some of which since its VGA performance is quite slow, but we'll cover next month. DAGGERFALL ran smoothly and DUKE NUKEM 3D in standard VGA mode seemed smooth as When the Chips Are Down Can you guess which board well. The only hitch we ran into was a this is? No? Canopus' Total3D delivers excellent 3D perfor. clash between Novalogic's F22 LIGHTNING mance, respectable 2D, will run any Rendition-ready title. Il and the Total 3D's VESA SVGA mode, but a small TSR available from CompuServe's Flight Simulation Forum fixed that glitch. As for cost, the whole package came in at just under $2,500 which is a terrific price point for a machine this fast. If you see comparable-sounding systems advertised for less, it may be because we have included more of what you really need to play games, as well as better-quality components. If $2,500 is beyond your means, you can build a respectable Pentium 166 with 16 MB of RAM for around $2,000, which I've outlined in the adjoining sidebar. Although it's difficult to quanti fy the difference between the two sys tems in a brief manner, you can expect Micronics M55 Hi Plus (with audio) $300 Pentium 166 16 MB EDO DRAM $72 1.6 GB drive $199 3.5\" Floppy drive Toshiba 5702B 12x CD-ROM drive Intergraph Reactor $160 Viewsonic 15ES Monitor $329 In Win IW-G500 midtower case $99 Hayes Accura 28.8 DVSD $120 Quickshot speakers Focus FX6200 keyboard Generic mouse $15 Total $1,990 $70 $30 the Pentium 166 to be approximately 10-15 percent slower than the 200. Finally, if all of this sounds great, but you want to save even more money by upgrading your present system, I'll have a complete report on how to do that in next month's final installment of the Ultimate Game Machine series. FEBRUARY 1997 "


"\"Spin, fire, die die die! Nothing beats Wing Man Warrior's 360 degrees of pure killing power John Romero Id Software Stud and co-creator of Doom, Doom II, Heretic, Hexen and Quake. Spin Control Technology gives you predse 360-degree spin control for faster turning Just think where you want to be, and you're there. Two-handed digital control lets you move around in 3-D games like you're actually there. 4-way hat and multiple buttons eliminate most keyboard commands. Anglog and digital interfaces provide digital serial control in supported DOS games and Windows 95. Weighted steel base makes sure this baby stays put when you're busy dodging incoming explosive projecules: From the world leader in control devices comes the workers best way to play doom style games: WingMan Warrior. With 360-degreekmation and two-handed control, it's the choice of hard-core gamers everywhere. For FaxBack information call: 1-800-245-0000, TODE Document 8112. Or phone 1-800.986-0038 Visie Logitech and Wing Man COMPATIBLE Warrior at http://www.logitech.comwww. fa.Want to property of illeir respective owners. Products People love "


"If your software could dream.... it would dream of running on a MACH V Falcon Northwest's MACH V series of custom built PCs hand crafted silicon for those who accept only the best \"Falcon Northwest took top honors in CGW's review last year, and rightfully so. Overall, the MACH V is once again about the fastest rig of the bunch this year. Windows performance was rock-solid accross the board, with wins in just about every category, including 3D graphics.\" Computer Gaming World MyCorpha Deco Plenove Faton More Aecydolin CHOICE i ) 1 = e) a wel. \"A welcome by-product of the compo nent choices is the MACH V's excellent business-application performance\" \"The MACH V's Winstone 32 score [beat 8 other 166 MHz machines, and even a Pentium 200] for first place. The Falcon beat out its 166MHz Pentium competitors on hard drive and graphics performance as well.\" Computer Shopper The Internet My Deelcare Orine 5 VICH Sharee FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS "


"S ooler Computer Surroundmedy ZID Ultre 17+ FALCON PENTIUM pents CALL TOLL FREE: 1-888-FALCON-1 or 1-800-258-6778 http://www.falcon-nw.com Custom built PCs starting at $2,495 for game playing, graphics, game design or even getting some work done Cs starting at $2,495 for game playing, graphics, game design or even getting som CIRCLE READER SERVICE #257 "


"E RAYA N ANTARA ITS SPELL IS UNBREAKABLE. No other fantasy role-playing Experience the thrills, game comes close to challenges and unknown Antara's engrossing, dangers of Antara captivating fantasy, twisting plot lines, its magnificent realism, with our free 3-D world Internet demo at its advanced combat system, Www.sierra.com. Or and its incomparable call 1-800-757-7707 artificial intelligence, or see your local software dealer. 01996 SIERRA ON-LINE, INC. AND DESIGNATE TRADEMARKS OF OR LICENSED TO SIERRA ON-LINE, INC., BELLEVUE, WA 98007. U.S. PATENT NOS 5,430,835. 5,287,446, 5.377.997. OTHER U.S. AND FOREIGN PATENTS PENDING. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. SI ERRA CIRCLE READER SERVICE #155 "


"PAUL SCHUYTEMA GAME DESIGN Cla The Making Of MechWarrior 3 achie A Game Designer's Path To The Big Leagues, And How He Handled Mech 3's Design Challenges t seems like it was a million years ago. My father had just clied and a friend of my mom convinced her to buy me one of those \"new fangled\" TRS-80s, to help me get my mind off of the whole deal. It worked. I sublimated my grief through endless hours of BASIC programming, creating the world's crappiest dungeon romps. joke-I cut classes like a master, only to sneak back home, guzzle Strohs and program 6502 assembly language. In my first year of college, computers were my life I was going to create the world's greatest games one day. Until reality hit me. It was not really the fault of my data structures prof he wanted to \"ground me in the real world.\" Life with computers wasn't about programming games, he told me, it was about craftOIO TOPO EC 2030-01 STRANGE TRIPPIN Senior year in high school was a MechWarrior 3 Interface: cockpit HUD controls MOVING TARGET This display could change, but you can see it's shaping up as a major enhancement from MECH 2. For a full Sneak Preview of Mech 3, see clnet's coverage at gamecenter.com direction du r ation indicator Your Mecs d e stat shown wity P O VO E s your necht gero, wel on the heat cong' or the we op is the range ressress naruch e pode the w otwort this box will appear when the power has de effective range of the weapons as wel thering dress has lected a scere (af) This when a player activosti will contin one of two dos Correion sorted ist of possi Conds 000 the depisy wentype when the user selects to be creceveral display the mwy use for begg ers will be to get ist of citives projet how that Mences wa vse trudily to set up her wetene Vases tiene w use this bres to Y Coguae r ererer Mechs Torrow, gree n certang are o po twoche COCHER ergreering (see cool detailed d ette This ote a good place, pertanawider text pretheplayer access to Quick repint of control w ing solid COBOL code for your l'ortune 500 employer. The next day I switched my major to undecided and tossed my digital dreams over my shoulder. But those dreams never died I guess, and in the years since college, life came full-circle for me. 1 became a college prof, too, but I chucked it all to design MECH WARRIOR 3. I'm devoting this last column to my experiences on that project, and after ! send this to Ken Brownthe best and crankiest!) then be Divendres diply Ingles we for the as one two target status and drage  rt wuch mode active) INTERFACE DESIGN Here's how a game designer's schematics help translate their vision into reality. You can tell from the gameplay screen that MECH 3 syncs pretty closely with this design. FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"PAUL SCHUYTEMA 19010NH)31 editor I could ever hope for I'll be folding up my laptop and heading off to Texas with wife, daughter and dog to head up 3D Realms' Prey. What a long, strange trip it's been. MY MECH ATTACK I spent my summer and fall as lead designer for MECHWARRIOR 3, at FASA Interactive Technologies. While my occasional ventures in freelance game design gave me some intense rushes, I wasn't prepared for the intellectual whammy got when I landed at FASA. For wecks, my brain ached from the mental gymnastics needed to keep every variable of the game's design in my mind at all times. Working on MECH 3 was a true rush. It began with Jordan Weisman, a man so do you start? How do you organize it? MECHWARRIOR 3, being a simulation with a foundational campaign game, meant that the design needed to be reasonably grounded before the game production could begin at full steam this approach is very different from that of DOOM or DUKE NUKEM for those games, the design is sculpted as the levels are being built). My approach was to first nail down and refine the concept of the game, in a document which explored all of its aspects and features. This introduction had to be short, crisp and concise-its goal more than anything was to create a team-wide concept of the game that everyone could visualize and groove on. From here, the design grew as a mason builds a house first the foundation (the interfaces), then the load-supporting bricks (the devels opment tools needed), a strong base for the walls (the combat simulation) and up from there (scenarios, Al, the campaign game engine, etc.). star map and see what worlds would work. I ended up finding about 15-20 possible worlds, and my first step was to cull out all the worlds with stupid names. Who wants to log zillions of hours playing even a great game on a wimpy-sounding planet? That cut the list down to about five (I'm very hard on names). From there, it was into the Battletech texts, to seek out any and all references to those worldsI wanted a world of which almost nothing had been written about, and it turned out to be Yamarovka. One paragraph in the invading Clans book listed the date of the Smoke Jaguar invasion, and that was about it. I checked with the folks at FASA (the keepers of the universe), got the thumbs up and was ready to go. N ext, I worked through some of my old space and planetary physics to craft the world's physical properties, like insolation, speed of rotation, gravity, atmospheric make-up and other factors. I had to try out a slew of numbers to get the math to work out right. I wanted the world to be Earthlike and yet far cooler than Earthlower density, lower gravity and higher insolation leads to more tectonic activity, which in turn leads to more dramatic mountain ranges, more spectacular erosion, etc. MechWarrior 3 Interface: Mech lab ' the effect Mecher type This was what is in the Mithritt on Co reetwear mesosch contain a viungo w Hetta Gecedut tutorin Wente verso Acopert Areast, the box orterature The we were topes which boty Decorette nation, C od n otech hydra Norwarto opone per la state entre ourty selected to a secten town ( EN ) for Mac del de cerveterwapewire Clects t o more than one are the payer we toe word to you to the power seeds , porno chied types to come w ie wintech ucurech They choose ww w yes w e were Trang charge as the prej and substa ees niece, treu re of the water ter concerty L There veshow OVDE Mechter lyste che WORLDLY THINGS thesis a consistort, but cool bordor It's interesting trying to design UNDER CONSTRUCTION Welcome to the future Mech Lab, where you'll be able to select variwithin an estabous parts, such as weapons and jump jets, and drag them onto your mech under construction. lished universe. The Battletech stratospherically creative that he had to universe has something like 10 million have a \"grounded\" assistant just to keep words in print already, and we had to him aware of carthly concerns. It was make sure that MECH-WARRIOR 3 fit into from Jordan that I inherited the concept the universe neatly. One of our first tasks for MECHWARRIOR 3—30 rough pages of then was to find a world upon which to a game gem. From this, they expected me base the game. Much 3 takes place in to distill the entire experience. 3058, on a Kurita world now held by the My job was to envision, extrapolate and Smoke Jaguar clan. The world is behind explore every aspect of MECHWARRIOR 3, the front lines, but it is where, if the player and then write it down in a way that the plays the campaign game well, the front entire team could actually create a game line will move back to Armed with that out of it. What a cool project, but where information, it was time to dive into the COLLISION ME THIS One of the most interesting aspects of the early design processes of MECH 3 was working on the terrain system. While ! was cranking away on interfaces and other design areas, the technical team was getting a handle on porting their MUNGA (Multi User Network Came Architecture) code over the Windows 95 using the DirectXAPIs. That task prowed to be anything but trivial, revealing countless quirks in Direct X and in Microsoft's Visual C++. Soon, though, they had gott en far enough that we could have some Icam meetings on the terrain system. The terrain system in a sim like MECH 3 is a component in the 3D code which creates what you see out the window from your mech. The 3D code is made up of numerous parts, from Mech animations to the code that spawns things like explosions and flying chunks, to the physics ce FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Start your engines and get ready for the FIRST Multi-Player Racing Game directly playable over the Internetor coming at you April 1st. ...POD is the fastest, hypersonic, nitro-burning, neck-jerking, nail-biting, explosive futuristic game ever that exploits the latest cutting edge technologies...  Incorporates state-of-the art MMX technology (Pentium processor compatible*) Mix and Match multi-player options (Up to eight direct player connection over the Internet, local network or modem; two computer direct link connection, and two player split screen option.) Unprecedented speed...playable at up to 30 frames per second!  Pre-calculated position engineering eliminates latency!  Revolutionary website includes player matching, chat rooms, ranking lists, downloadable and upload able ghosts, tracks, and cars, customizable web pages for every player ...and more. DODOLBY SURROUND Designed for Windows 95 Be ready for it or get out of the way. Shareware available soon. Check it out at: www.ubisoft.com Ubi Soft ENTERTAINMENT Package contains one \"hybrid\" CD ROM disc containing POD optimized for Pentium processors with MMX technology, as well as Pentium processors, 120 MHz or higher 01997 Ubisoft Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. 1-800-UBI-SOFT, MMX technology and Pentium processor are trademarks of Intel Corporation. Dolby and the Double-D symbol are trademarks of Dolly Laboratories Licensing Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #271 "


"PAUL SCHUYTEMA 19010NH)31 rain mesh (like the triangles described above) along with a polygonal \"collision volume\" which, far more economically, represents the terrain as a series of polygons which are faster to compute (the best example is of a Mech walking on a plateau with the two-layered system, the ground can look as cool as you want, but since its essentially just a big expanse of flat rock, a single collision polygon, as opposed to zillions of small triangles can represent the collision plane between a mech's foot and the ground). Preditor Cy.map DAT model and the renderer (that all impor with the terrain. Consider a rolling terrain tant \"black box» which translates the digimap, just a single kilometer squared, tal goo of the 3D code into an image made up of triangles roughly two meters which appears on the screen). on a side-you can already guess that the The terrain system is the component number of triangles in that simple map which handles two chief tasks-repre would be astronomical. To calculate the senting the visual terrain of the world collision of a foot with the ground, you (Wills, canyons, cliffs, etc.) and handling first need to determine what triangle the the collision of objects with that terrain. foot is in, the angle of the triangle, the Since computers have to be told how to exact, three-space position of the foot and do everything, it's not as simple as making triangle and ask if the two collicle. a cliff face and then expecting a mech to \"To check all positions on a map in this stop and collide with it-everything has manner for a single mech is a daunting to be programmed. task, but consider doing it for just four In the first meeting, Tim Cerritson, the mechs, a tank and all of their missiles and producer, put his goals succinctly on the lasers (yes, collision has to be done on lasers dry erase board: \"I don't care how we do and the like, so that an explosion occurs at it, as long as it's fu$@%&cool!\" the right position). You can casily see that The first attack was to brainstorm just this complexity of calculations, performed what sorts of things we'd like the player to cach frame, would drag even the zippiest experience in the MECH 3 world-such computer down to a screeching halt. things as cliffs, canyons, rolling terrain and Now, let's add one more variable-we water. want the mechs to act differently on difConsider rolling terrain. From a visual ferent terrain types (walk faster on roads, slog through mud, Elle E&R Y Window Heb etc.). Yet another DSA 2K check, and yet BOX DO another calculation to slow down the system. It's JM Albertson's task to BOX listen to all of our design requests and sit there and shake his head as he consicers the myriad of calculations, as well as the scemingly endless exceptions: what happens when you shoot a PREDITOR PREY is still in development, but here's an early look at the game's editor machine gun at an Some toolbars will be added later, and the textures are temporary, but at least it's running. angle in water? There needs to be a point of view, it can be fairly easily represplash where it hits the water, right (one sented as a rolling mesh of triangles. collision detection)? But do the shells Textures can then be applied to the trianmove through the water to hit the legs of a gles to make it look like clirt, grass or snow. Mech standing in a pond another colliNo problem, right? Then how do you sion)? make a mech walk on it? While I've got to keep quiet on the To make a mech walk, you need to absolute specifics of the terrain system, know where each foot lands with each the way the problem was solved was by step, or, more precisely, where it \"collides\" using a system which creates a visual terTHE ROAD TO RODEO-LAND While I write this article, I'm wrapping up the specifications of the campaign game engine. I can't tell you anything specific other than it's going to be damn cool, and as a player, you're really going to feel like you're living (and battling, of course) in the Battletech universe. After I finish the last of my MECH 3 projects, it's time to pack up my PC and head off to Texas, to get my hands a little bloody in the world of Prey. Our first task is to really nail down the character, plot and universe, fictionally We'll cssentially be creating the \"bible\" from which the Prey game, and any other PREY-related projects (movie, novels, comic books, more games, etc.) are based. After that, it's up to my elbows in hardcore game creation-an opportunity that just wouldn't have been possible without the feedback and support of readers like you. Thanks for everything! As a parting remark, I encourage you to keep letting us (both at CCW and in the game industry) know what you think. Let us know what works, what rules and what sucks -it really does make a helluva difference. Chcers! Cymap For Hob.press F1 This marks Paul's last column on Game Design for the foreseeable future. We wish him great success in his new role with 3D Realms and look fonvard to his imaginative designs for MECHWARRIOR 3, PREY, and everything that follows. You can reach Paul at his new lair by tapping into his bitstream at Paulon Prey@aol.com. & CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"WIN A DIAMOND MONSTER 3D\" FREE! * With Yourself! stop playing start playing with the world ArONAenter the arena at www.earthlink.net/thearena GAMES ON THE INTERNET au MOST MULTIPLAYER DIABLO WARCRAFT II DESCENT ONLINE ROLEMASTER: MAGESTORM CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST SPLATTERBALL VIRTUAL POOL AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH CASINO POKER LEGENDS OF KESMAI'M THE ARENA IS BROUGHT TO YOU BY EARTHLINK NETWORK, INC., PROVIDER OF THE COOLEST, EASIEST INTERNET ACCESS ON EARTH. CALL TODAY TO SIGN UP AND RECEIVE YOUR FREE EARTHLINK NETWORK TOTALACCESS PACKAGE WITH EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO GET ON THE INTERNET IN MINUTES. Earth Link Network SMAAT ZUL: 4 QUIRDS IT'S YOUR INTERNET\" 01956 Earthlink Network, Inc. Trademarks and proporty of their motiv e r. The Arra is a registered trademark of Earpink Norwork, Inc. All rights Reserved A s roue rose Pa T 1-800-395-8425 PRIZES CHAT ON-LINE TOURNAMENTS ONE USERNAME. ONE PASSWORD ONE ACCOUNT CIRCLE READER SERVICE 1233 "


"A NEW DIMENSION IN RACING. "


"Take the race of your life aboard a futuristic cyber cycle It moved sideways. backward. upside down and over obstacles Choose from six feet tracks. SPINE-SNAPPING HAIRPIN TURNS. HAIR-RAISING LOOP-TO-LOOPS. ALL AT MIND NUMBING SPEEDS THROUGH THE SEWERS OF NEW YORK IN THE YEAR 2020 AD. Scorcher 30 PC CD-ROM PC CD rom are GT Interactive 1. www.gtinteractive.cen Scorcher 1996 Scavenger, Inc. All Rights Revted Created and published by Scavete, Inc Chistributed w il lateractive Software Corp. All trademais the property of respective companies CIRCLE READER SERVICE #366 "


"SURRENDER IS NO u Command & Conquer: Red Alert is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation.  1995, 1996 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"AN OPTION THE EXPLOSIVE NEW STRATEGY GAME FROM THE CREATORS OF MILLION-SELLER COMMAND & CONQUER Super VGA Graphics intensify realism and excitement Multiplay features include Internet Head-to-Head* and 8 player IPX Fight over land, sea and air. Thirty new units and structures to choose from including MIGS, spies, destroyers, submarines and more Now battle maps are twice as large Over forty missions to play and dozens of multiplayer maps Two CDs-one for you and one to lend to your favorite victim Create and trade battle maps with new terrain editor COMMAND CONQUER RED ALERT All the power. None of the responsibility. Three game difficulty settings Dozens of close-ups and action movies Internet access tonight!* Play against competitors across the world with Westwood Chat** *Windows 95 version only **Requires existing Internet access COMMAND CONDUER LEE ELIFE EN | Available now for Windows 95 & DOS CD-ROM Westwood Veetwood STUDIOS Www.westwood.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #B6 "


"It's the Titanic's fateful night and you play a British agent the key figure emangled in a race against time to change the course of 20th century luistory. Advanced 360° movement puts you on board an historically accurate SGI rendition of the Titanic as you search for clues and secret documents in fully explorable 3D environments. Astory of intrigue and disaster ufolds its YOU interact with over 25 fully animated characters who remember your responses and act accordi ingly as vou criss-cross their patris. Outwit spies, retrieve stolen documents and change history... before 90 tons of ice stops you. 423.546.1157 Fox: 423.546.0866 Tech Support: 423.546.7346 Email: supporte cyberilix.com are trademarks of their respective corporations. Cyberflix, 4 Market Square, Knoxville, TN mark of GIE Corporation. GTE Entertainment is a trademark of GTE Vantage Inc. Other brand names and product names 1996 CyberFlix, Inc. All rights reserved. Cyberflix is a trademark of CyberFlix, Incorporated. The GTE logo is a trade 37902. Phone: \"One of the best new games for Fall 1996.\" Computer Gaming World \"Nothing short of awesome.\" Next Generation \"Incredibly detailed re-creation.\" Newsweek TITANILS Atte AN Pottur Microsoft Windows NT A Graphical Adventure Visit our website for game info, forums, hints. contests and downloadable logos, artwork and screen shots TEEN www.im.gte.com GTE Entertainment CYROLUX CIRCLE READER SERVICE #240 "


"SCORPIA ADVENTURE/RPG Dull Blade ad venturn rus, fut pare under tion Neither Adventure Nor RPG, WIZARDRY NEMESIS Disappoints NEMESIS is more frustrating than fun. IZARDRY NOT YOUR FATHER'S WIZARDRY passes over an item of The game's perspective is the usual 3D interest. Right-clicking billed as \"a view, with the screen divided into three usually provides some WIZARDRY sections. The top holds the spell icons; the information about the object, while leftadven bottom holds the icons for automap, logclicking picks it up or manipulates it in book and inventory, and the middle of the some way: push a button, pull a lever, is not a screen is the main action area. The game open a door, and so on. Talking to people true is quite pretty, and each dungeon has its is very much a one-sided affair, and can adventure own look. You won't be bored by seeing hardly be called «conversation.\" They say game, nor is it related to any of the WIZARDRYS we know and love. This one is actually a hybrid, reminiscent of the QUEST FOR GLORY products: part adventure, part role-playing, and designed for play with a single character rather than with a group. If you were expecting a more traditional WIZARDRY, this isn't it. The plot is simple and familiar: an ancient evil has risen again, and you have to stop it. The method is familiar, too, namely, «pick up DISTINCTIVE DUNGEONS The best thing about NEMESIS is the graphic look, which varies sticks.\" In this case, the \"sticks\" considerably from one locale to the next. are the seven parts (talismans) of a powerful artifact. Once all the talis the same graphics, or the same graphics something to you; you never say anything mans have been collected, it's off to with different colors, all the time. Every to them. It's more like being lectured than the big confrontation with Foozle, area is distinct. anything else. which is actually a fizzle, but more on Interacting with the world is simple. Most of the puzzles are not difficult. that later. The cursor changes into a hand when it Usually, it's a matter of having the right item and liguring sequel to Myst, and it final out what to do ly has a name: RIVEN. Now, with it. In some what game does this cases, a little remind you of? experimentation,  With PHANTASMAGORIA 2 or just simple out the creaking door inspection and a Sierra's wrapping up little thought, will SHIVERS 2: HARVEST OF be enough. Souls. This lightweight Unlike tradifrightfest will apparently tional WIZARDRY feature original songs and games, your videos that provide clues to character is pre> It's been delayed for years. Hyped by some of the game's mys created. He has a many, dreaded by many others. It's the teries. Can you say \"Cop Rock\"? number of weapon skills, plus CRYSTAL BALL A FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"SCORPIA TIPS! A patch for WIZARDRY NEMESIS fixes a CD switching problem. Instead of reading the volume info for the new disc, it retained ADVENTURE/RPG oy yo the information from the first one. Obviously, that made playing beyond the first CD impossible. The patch is available from www.sir-tech.com, major online services, and on CGW's Web site at www.zd.com/gaming.  If you do get stuck, the Tour Guide booklet that comes with NEMESIS provides a fairly detailed walk-through for the first level of the first dungeon (including a map). After that, it has hints for the rest of the game (some obscure, some obvious). Using the keyboard for movement is difficult. On one occasion, the character turned in place for a good 30 seconds or so before I had control of his movements again. Another time, I backed him away from combat, and he kept going until he was all the way back in town. Problem is, mouse response isn't any better. HEPUB WHEN THE LIFE SPRAY COOLS You don't need to rest to regain hit points, which is good, because the mouse/keypad controls will have you fumbling in combat five attributes: strength, dexterity, health, magic ability and magic points. These increase slowly over the course of play, typically through combat with a variety of monsters. Critters are always ready to fight you have to hit the spacebar to put yourself in combat mode. This brings up Vour left W awapo di SCTRICOT TULISIS UVCI UCIVIC I CVCHUCS . 11 YUL the unboy DEMXESIS and right hands, which are controlled by the left and right mouse buttons, while the cursor becomes a crosshair for aiming blows. Magic is based on the four elements of carth, air, fire and water. There are two spells for each of these, and each spell in turn has an offensive and defensive function, making 16 effects in all. Once a spell Price: $49.95 begins to take effect, it draws energy from System Requirements: IBM-compatible 486/66 your magic points. You can let it go to the or better processor, maximum points, in which case it fires MS-DOS 5.0 or higher 8MB RAM, 2x CD-ROM automatically when no points remain, or (4x recommended) you can send off the spell before all the 256-color SVGA graph points are used up ics, mouse: most major sound cards An interesting feature of NEMESIS is that # of Players: 1 your hit points and spell points regenerate Protection: None (CD constantly. No special rest periods are nec must be in drive) essary to restore them. Of course, if you've Designer: Linda Currie Publishers: Sir-Tech taken severe damage from a fight, you may Software Inc. need to use a healing spell or potion to Ogdensburg, New York (315) 393-6633 help matters along, but given enough time, Reader Service #: 316 | the points will come back on their own. HERO OR SISSY? NEMESIS could have been fun to play (especially after an epic like DAGGERFALL), but I found it more frustrating than anything else. There were far too many times when I would click the mouse (both left and right buttons) to swing a weapon and get no response from the character. Similarly, once a spell had begun, it was often difficult, sometimes impossible, to send it off before all the impossible, lo send it off before all the magic energy was used up. I had the feel ing the game was so involved in providing ing the game was so involved in providing fancy effects that it wasn't noticing my input at all. Even more aggravating was the \"sissy hit,\" where you strike an opponent and, regardless of the weapon you're using, do absolutely no damage at all. This is especially true early on, when the character is still inexperienced, but even late in the game a fair number of strikes will be ineffective. Just to add some salt to the wound, most weapons don't do a lot of damage in the first place. You end up killing most of the critters with paper cuts. All of this means that most fights take about twice as long as they should and are often very annoying. Combat isn't a lot of fun here. The worst combat, however, is the big confrontation with the demon at the end. It can be done at one of two extremes: very, very fast or long and tedious. If you use the right talisman just before opening the final door, the demon dies the moment vou walk in (presuming you bypass all the cut-scenes). That's it; the fight is over before it even begins. If you don't use the talisman, you spend a little time pumping up your character as best you can, then go in and hope you can whittle the demon down (it usually has 300+ hit points) before it kills you. Since 300 the critter hits much harder than you do, this method usually takes several tries before it works. This is just plain nonsense. What's the point of going through all the previous combats if you can kill off the main enemy at first glance? Or, if you're supposed to fight the demon, why make it such a tedious experience? All you can do, basically, is stand there and beat on it. Either way, the finale really leaves you feeling let down. Overall, WIZARDRY NEMESIS turns out to be mediocre at best. The trite plot, poor mouse response, weak combat system and unsatisfying climax combine to make the game a disappointing experience. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"HEEHA SIMCOPTER --------WHEN SIMCITY 2000 CALLS 911. POLICE SIM COPTER 0 :45 pm: Fight five-alarm fire. 8:56 pm: Collar criminals. 9:02 pm: Save shipwrecked Sims. When you're flying U the first game to go above and beyond SimCity 2000 every job is an extreme rush. SimCopter\" sends you on high-anxiety missions into 30 pre-built SimCity 2000 cities. You can even import your own SimCity 2000 cities for homemade emergencies. And you'll see your cities as never before: up close in hyper-realistic 3-D. Each new adventure heightens your challenge, and your blood pressure. Aise up the ranks and reap lour reward: a new copter with all the extras, and several extra near-death experiences. BIENTE SimCity 2000 not required Nerves of steel recommended.  The Available for Windows 95.  Maxis, Inc. All rights reserved. SimCopter is a trademark and SimCitu 2000 and Maxis are registered trademarks of Maxis, Inc. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. For product of ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 800-33-Maxis. Visit the Maxis Web site at http://www.maxis.com, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #173 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW  CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON ADVENTURE / RPG Tales From The Glib Time And PUNishment In CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON by Johnny L. Wilson CSNEAK GPREVIEW Ithough my first trip to Boston didn't spawn an irresistible urge to visit the inspiration for the television show Cheers, my first visit to Long Island had me occasionally glancing out the window for any glimpse of a bar that only exists in all the realm of imagination, Callahan's Crosstime Saloon. The eerie juxtaposition of Long Islands sleepy little towns so close to the urban insomnia which is New York City had me feeling like I was in a timewarp from the start. The bizarre idea that I would see that cozy little tavern where time travelers, aliens and mutants gather nightly for liquid therapy and loquacious catharsis seemed significantly more probable once my car had crossed the bridge from city to country, urban to suburban. Callahan's Crosstime Saloon, for those of you who have never mentally navigated the conceptual byways of Spider Robinson's half-dozen anthologies of GAME STILL IN DEVELOPMENT interconnected short stories, is the place humor is perfectly in rhythm with the litwhere everybody knows your blame. It is a crary work and the game takes gamers Long Island saloon where Mike Callahan, beyond the setting of the bar. Instead of mild-mannered bartender from another verbally solving the problems within the planet, plights a never ending battle for assembled throng at the bar, the gamer Truth, Justice and the most humanitarian way. Callahan's offers the best in humorous and human stories. Whether expressed in the wide range of contests like Riddle Night and Tall Tales Night held nightly at the lar (wherein patrons can win back their entire night's bar tab) or the punful conversations CHALK DOC The game begins on Riddle Night at Callahan's, through which where Doc puts all of the clues on the board. Robinson weaves his stories, Callahan's must assume the role of Jake, the folkoffers the kind of cheerful retreat most of singing protagonist/narrator of the us would like to have in our lives. Callahan's stories, and proactively go out Callahan's is also the kind of magical and solve the problems of six very differplace where confession is truly good for ent patrons -everyone from a time cop the soul and understanding is ubiquitous. to a talking dog. The casting for Callahan's is delightful. THE GODS MUST BE HAZY The voice actor who plays Jake has the As a game, CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME perfect world-weary voice. George Lucas SALOON is meticulously faithful to Spider should have used him to voice Howard Robinson's universe. Josh Mendel, former the Ducks lines. Pyotr, the vampire, is a Al Lowe co-conspirator (FREDDIE perfect Transylvanian, but a mixture of PHARKAS, FRONTTER PHARMACIST) and cockney and Yiddish accents decorate the designer of CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME program in just the right spots. In addition, SALOON has both successfully paid Robinson will sing some of his own folk homage to the humor and humanity of songs for the game's soundtrack (such as Robinson's work and created what may be his fainous \"She Was Only A Telegraph the most sterling product ever to come cr's Daughter, But She Didit-Ah-Didit\" out of Legend Entertainment (the studio from \"The Law of Conservation of Pain\"), which brought us the SPELLCASTING but I haven't heard these yel. series, GATEWAY, SUPER HERO LEAGUE OF The game proper begins with a nonHOBOKEN and ERIC THE UNREADY). The interactive uber-story. It is essentially the SPIRITUAL EXERCISE The Transylvanian section of the game features some haunting special effects. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"CREATE CONTROL.CRUSH. UL . MECHANIZED ASSAULT & EXPLORATIONNetwork and modem action Simultaneous or turn-based play Ultimate control. Total customization. Advanced battlefield strategy. Wicked SVGA graphics. Tirplatz LATIS PERBIME M.A.X. has it all. Over 50 land, sea and air units BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" Interplay Productions 16815 Von Karman Avenue, Irvine, CA 92606 Interplay Website: www.interplay.com  Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. M.A.X. and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #79 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW  CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON ADVENTUREZRPG prologue to the Book of Job in the Bible ple from \"Pyotr's with amorphous, ephemeral, hazy aliens Story\" in the arguing about the future of the universe in Callahan's Secret corporate terms. One celestial being is collection: span; called to report to the other, and thcy tavern; money argue over the disposition of their cre You expect the ation. The universe seems to be lagging SC SCCms to be lagging answer to the ridcelestial indicators in such things as return dle to be a on investment, so Gingrinich is informing famous name or Parabalus, the manager of our universe, of title. Cet it? It's his intention to \"rightsize.\" Parabalus Bridge-it; Bar; decides that he might be able to avert Dough. Here's these draconian budget cuts if he can one from the prove there is something in the universe game: guided; PEE WEE VERMIN Can you find the toy that's merely for shelf that has paid off. If you win the game, that fastener with slidgratification? something is Callahan's Crosstime ing fasteners, face Saloon. that launched ships. If you get it, you're undead, one gets a sense of the humanity The prologue segues into a narrative going to love this opening segment. If not, among the characters that makes the voiceover about Callahan's in general and the riddles give you an excuse to interview Callahan's stories rise alsove «mere\" scidissolves into a lavishly recreated version other people/aliens in the bar and get ence fiction. of the saloon itself. Gamers will only have both hints for the ridelles and direction Most of all, Legend veterans will appreto click around a few times to realize how toward one of the first three stories. ciate the new wrinkle in the game engine. rich the game environment is. Almost Now, whenever you have a puzzle that everything pictured in any room of the PYOTR AND THE WEREWOLF requires gathering elements from various game has not only a brief text description, In order to win the game, you must locations, (such as the one Jake has to but a humorous one. For example, when solve three problems (miniquests) in any solve in order to get into Casimir's, the Jake enters Transylvania's Wereworth's order. You can help Josie the Timecop in Transylvanian bar where Pyotr is drinking (their equivalent of Woolworth's) you can her quest for cocoa, reunite Pyotr the himself to undcath cleath), the engine click on a wide variety of merchandise, vampire with his lost love, or save the ascertains whether you have all of the including a dinosaur. Much to your chaworld from an anti-testosterone ray. After ingredients to solve the puzzle and, grin, you'll discover that the dinosaur's that you meet the world's most famous assuming you are in the right locale with name is Pee Wee Vermin and that he is talking german shepherd, Ralph Von Wau the right inventory, it automatically not for sale, just for shelf gratification. Wau of Philip Jose Farmer fame, and advances the game until the puzzle is As the game proper begins, it is clear Alphee, the time-traveling salesman. solved. Further, even the advancing of the that it is Riddle Night. Doc, as Riddle Later, a sixth story proves that Callahan's game lets you hear the funny baclinage itself is the return on between characters that is so vital to the investment for which spirit of this game. the aliens pine. One of my favorite WHERE EVERYBODY KNOWS parts of the game is the YOUR FAME Transylvania mini In short, Mendel has succeeded in quest. It has some of going beyond his famous namesake. He the best visuals in the has taken the genes from a popular litergame, variety in the ary universe and forged a genesplice voiceacting, and punis between the characters that come alive in that complement the Spider Robinson's stories and the kinds of dark side: a jukebox characters with which we want to interact plays such songs as \"I'd in games. Unlike many hybrids, Mendel WHAT KIND OF A MAN READS VLAD? Even the window Really Love to See You hasn't diminished either lineage. dressing for Callahan's is often humorous. Ignite\" and \"Everybody CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON looks Master, has placed ten riclelles on the Flays 'The Fool;\" a Wereworth's novelty to be a brilliant incarnation of its inspirachalkboard and you, as Jake, need to solve store and a Starbucharest's coffee shop; tion. them in order to have enough cash to and a hilarious puzzle that allows you to move forward in the game. In order not to play the headless homeless person. More give away any of the puzzles, here's a samthan that, even in the society of the Play CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON on this month's CD. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"THINK FMV SUCKS? THINK AGAIN. Think about fast, seamless adventure, puzzles and 15 frames per second special effects! It's all in videoeven on a 2x drive! A Fork In The Tale Think about an Immersion the new game that's Engine projecting live so fast, so interactive action so fast you'll you're killed 6 times in make split second the first 10 minutes. decisions just to If this game doesn't stay alive. Think change the way about 5 CD's you think about packed with FMV* nothing will! * Full Motion Video NOT CONVINCED? GET THE FREE DEMO. YOU'LL MEET THIS GUY. HE'D LOVE TO REARRANGE YOUR JAW WHILE SETTING YOU STRAIGHT. CALL 1-888-GET-DEMO WHILE SUPPLIES LAST! Yeah, they're beautiful babes in fur bikinis. (Unfortunately, they want to kill you!) These marauding kingsmen need a hand. (Your hand! And then they'll kill you.) Up for a little face stomping? (Before Geebo-yeah you guessed it-kills you.) \"Thanks to me and half a dozen other outrageous stand-up coinedians, there are so many laughs in A Fork In The Tale that FMV now stands for Funny with My Voice!\" A FORK IN THE TALE. A HILARIOUS LIVE ACTION ADVENTURE. A NNE Starring funnyman Rob Schneider as the voice of the hero. Rover EN Call 1-800-771-3772 ENTERTAINMENT for Game Rating Information. www.anyriver.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #45 are trademarks of Any River Entertainment, Inc. Immersion Engine is a trademark of Advance Reality interactive. AnyRiver Entertainment and A Fork In The Tale "


"**** REVIEW. RAMA DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVENTURE/RPG Reinventing Rama Gentry Lee And Arthur C. Clarke's Presence Make This A Truly Interactive Novel by Keith Ferrell From abatinica: I would be hard to think of a seri games --depends ous SF novel better suited for upon unfailing adaptation to computer games internal self-conthan Arthur C. Clarke's sistency, and Lee Rendezvous With Rama. The and Sierra deliver novel itself is, like many adventure the real goods games, a journey of exploration, here. Nothing is during which the protagonists are shochorned in confronted with a variety of some simply for effect, times maddening puzzles, cach of nor is the integrity which must be solved before larger and of the Raman more enigmatic puzzles are revealed. Of environment ever course, something similar could be said seriously violated. for Larry Niven's Ringworld, and we know The bones of TECHNOLOGICAL TROPES The SF gadgets that underlie what happened when that one was adaptthe story match RAMA-arm computer, video mail, etc.-allow for seamless introcd for PC play. Clarke's original duction of video sequences and some fascinating special effects. Indeed, RAMA has been a computer more so than the game once before, back in the days of Clarke/Lee sequels: a huge cylindrical selected as the replacement. text-based adventure games, when construct enters the solar system and an Within that framework, a variety of stoTellarium's well-intentioned title ultimateexpedition is mounted to explore it and, if rylines and opportunities are concealed, ly failed. Sicrra has now returned to possible, make contact with any intelli ranging from the interpersonal can you Rama, under the guidance of Centry Lee gence it may contain. The hook for the trust other members of the exploration (Clarke's collaborator on three Rama game is equally simple: a key member of teams, and which ones? to the sequels), and the results are a spectacular the expedition has been killed and you are iminense. Just what is the purpose of and in some ways OBIVENA UMET Rama and what is the nature of the guidbreathtaking adventure ing intelligences behind it? that, ultimately, may work better as an interPROLOGUE active novel than as a The game gets going quickly, with a game per se. Lee himself prologue that establishes the scenario, folhas been evolving as a lowed by a video welcome. You are issued storyteller--if you equipment that includes a personal comhaven't yet picked up a puter/communications device, on which copy of his solo novel you will quickly come to depend for vidBright Messengers, you mail messages and other information. shouldand his sense Additional equipment reveals the creators' of story scrves RAMA'S occasionally puckish sense of humor. design beautifully. ALIEN VISTAS REVEALED Despite the limitations of 20 Paying close attention to the beginning Science fiction-and century home computers, the immensity of Rama's SF of the game is essential to your success, good computer world is brought to life through the gorgeous graphics. and it would not be a bad idea to keep a Price: $54.95 System Requirements: 486DX-66 or better processor (Pentium 90 recommended), 8MB RAM (16MB recommended), SVGA graphics, DOS 5.0 or Windows 95, 4x CDROM, mouse; sup. ports most major sound cards. # of Players: 1 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Design: Dynamix with Gentry Lee and Arthur C. Clarke Publisher: Sierra OnLine, Inc. Coarsegold, CA (800) 757-7707 Reader Service # 336 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"WYMI ( Maces in your back. Boiling oil in your face. Fire in your fields. (Will the fun never end? RDST OF THE REALM Elle Use the mini-map to plan troop positioning, Autumn AN 1268 Options Help Douse the enemy with boiling oil but beware of flaming arrows! Storm the castle using siege towers. Sharpen your pitchforks and fortify your castle. The Crown of England is up for grabs! It's a fight to the finish against your fellow lords. Where the winner is King. And the loser has bloody hell to pay. A sequel to the award-winning Lords of the Realm, this 13th century action/strategy game features challenging new tactics. A user-friendly interface. And real-time authentic battles. Play head-to-head via modem, or battle up to 4 rivals via network as you fight your way to the throne, Download your free demo and custom Lords II theme pack from our Web site at http://www.sierra.com/ games/lords2. Order your advance copy today. Call (800) 757-7707. Break down castle walls using the mighty catapult. +185 21 When victory is imminent, use the \"Mop-Up\" tool to finish off the enemy Choose from authentic armor-piercing weapons. SIERRA TEEN Impressions Designed by Impressions Software  1996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. XV and/or designate trademarks of, or license to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. Runs on Windows 95 or 1OS. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #156 "


"REVIEW  RAMA ADVENTURE/RPG notepad handy for jolting down information. Review every message that awaits you in the staging area before your descent to Rama proper: failing to do so will quickly result in your being stuck. Likewise, take a deep breath before proceeding, and drop into game exploration mode: that is, look at everything, touch anything, go everywhere you can before leaving your arrival point. Navigation around the various settings, and acquisition and use of the various implements at your disposal are simple and well conceived. It does not take long to get the hang of getting around in RAMA. 8 CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT Interpersonal relationships are equally well done with the various other members of the Rama exploration team being given levels of characterization that are surprising and refreshing for a computer game. In the course of playing RAMA you will come to learn the personalities of Clarke Lays Easter Eggs your fellow explorcrs (you'd better!), and from that knowledge will come the ability to navigate your way through some of the game's more challenging aspects. Deciphering the essence of an alien A MATTER OF TRUST Is the doctor on your side? Such interperculture is not supsonal dilemmas keep RAMA livelier than most interactive dramas. posed to be casy, but it's a tribute to the seriousness with which the designers various creatures and creations you'll approached their source material that encounter are striking and believable. To a nothing here is arbitrary. In Raman con large extent they appear to have text, almost all of the puzzles make sense stepped-or fluttered or crawled The puzzles themselves are as challeng directly from the pages of the novel itself. ing as one might expect from Clarke and Their appearance and function are brilLee. Linguistic and mathematical in liantly accomplished and almost wholly nature, the puzzles will draw upon all of persuasive. your skills as an interpreter and scientist, Is this a game? Like Myst, it's an envias well as your ability to pay attention to ronment studded with puzzles and enigthe world you find yourself in. ma, challenges and mysteries. Unlike Thus armed with a sense of your fel Myst, the story here outweighis its setting, lows, a gathering understanding of the a tribute to Clarke, Lee, and the team that Ramans and their technologies, you're supported them. RAMA is in virtually every ready to explore the vast ship and uncover way a triumph and another large step its secrets. toward the creation of wholly convincing Among the many charms of the novel interactive SF novels. It begs for a sequel, that the game seeks to duplicate is its I think, and not least because, as Clarke sense of vista. There's only so much you himself wrote years ago, the Ramans can do within the limitations of a monitor always do things in threes. & screen, and as a result, some of the interiors fail to communicate the sheer size of Keith Ferrell was Editor of OMNI Rama. Additionally, the brightness of Magazine from 1990 until 1996. His latest some scenes works to mitigate the mysnovel, Passing Judgment, was published tery and enormity of the alien craft. Even last fall by Forge. so, there isn't a single frame in the game that's less than gorgeous, and only a few that are less than convincing It does seem too easy to get around APPEAL: Science fiction and adventure game fans looking for an within the game's confines, and this occaexperience that treats their interests sionally works to diminish the sense of seriously. size of Rama. On the other hand, you >PROS: Faithful to the spirit of wouldn't want to spend real hours getting Arthur C. Clarke's novel; terrific graphics and sound; well-realized and somewhere, no matter how awe-inspiring self-consistent the scenery along the way, would you? alien world and cultures. EPILOGUE CONS: Still a These caveats aside, RAMA is among puzzle-driven game, with some very the most convincing computerized tough puzzles. worlds I've encountered. Certainly the larke himself is very much a presence in the package, with the third CD being devoted to interviews and commentary from and about this global intellectual treasure. At OMNI we always knew we had something special when a new piece from Arthur arrived, and it's reassuring to know that the same holds true for this game. Clarke fans will want to take a careful look around the first location in Rama proper: there's a gift hidden there, hot off his word processor, crafted especially for those who can't wait for the arrival of 3001. Ogos 006 GALACTIC CARETAKER When you die in the gameand you will-Clarke himself pops in for the wake. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"THE WORLDWIDE REPORTERE My Mail Was Lost-IN SPACE! SHOCKING PHOTOS INSIDE! $ 1.39/ $ 1.69 Canada Wineolu wdfilman mind-melds ewit) 30-legged spuce worm to save MINEOLA, NY-Lucky Long Islander Pat Hamis has encountered plenty of killer dogs on his postal route over the years, but never any killer space aliens until now! \"I was just minding my own business, delivering Mrs. Panayatocopoulos' mail when these space guys ask me if I want to go for a ride.\" Suddenly, Harris was transported to a bizarre bar full of creepy-crawly space critters! Then the wacky E.T.'s made Hams enter the minds of space port bar patrons including a mansized worm thing to retrieve clues that ultimately led space police to a shapeshifting serial killer! Sadly, after retuming from the minds of various insect-like aliens, Harris is left with a life-long legacy of flashbacks that cause him to eat maggots and simulate molting. But for Harris, it's a small price to pay for intergalactic glory!  / from ruzed killer! SEGASOFT www.segasoft.com \"I want to go back to Armpit VI. There, I'm an intergalactic hero. But here, I'm just another disgruntled mailman that's been abducted by aliens,\" reveals sentimental galaxy-trotter Harris. DIE 35 > In a strange twist of fate, the mail Harris was supposed to deliver to Steve Meretzky-creator of \"The Space Bar,\" \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" and numerous other science fiction games-ended up in the \"hands\" of a wide-eyed resident of planet Armpit VI. 0710495 MINE PIONE CIRCLE READER SERVICE #270 Desfer Developed by and 1007 Sopa Softinc Alights to served. Portions of The Space Bar 1997 Rocket Sclenco anos, Inc. All rights reserved. Portions of The Space Bar. 1997 Bolfo Games, Inc. All rights reserved SogaSoft and the SegaSon logo are trademarks of BegaSoft Inc. Rocket Science and the Rocket Sclerco logo are Microsoft trademarks of Rock Sciore Games, Inc, Boffo, the Boffo logo and The Space Dar we trademarks of Botto Games, Ing. War For a free Windows '95 demo or to order The Space Bar Mac OS direct, call 1.888.SegaSoft KORB Just another CD-ROM game where you're a psychic gumshoe detective trying to solve a murder by mind-melding with drunken aliens. "


"***** REVIEW  CIRCLE OF BLOOD DIFFICULTY LEVEL French Twist ADVENTURE RPG An American In Paris Digs Up Ancient Intrigue In Virgin's CIRCLE OF BLOOD by Kate Hedstrom W202 1 LCI THE UGLY AMERICAN Apparently on an unlimited budget, George takes his investigation into Syria, where he risks his life, and not just by eating the kebobs. CIRCLE 1 BLOOD t's almost enough to make you wish you'd saved your money and gone to Disneyland instead: George Stobbard, a young Californian on holiday in Paris, is soaking up the ambience at a sidewalk café when a man dressed as a clown barges past. A moment later, BOOM...the place is blown to smithereens, leaving a man insicle dead. While the French probably have some sort of law against the obstruction of justice, especially by foreigners, George gets a load of the Clouseau-like I'rench detective attempting to investigate the bombing-and decides to take matters into his own hands. So begins CIRCLE OF BLOOD, an adventure game from UK developer Revolution, published by Virgin Interactive. The story revolves around the legend of the Knights Templar, an order of knights founded by a French nobleman in the 1100s to protect travelers to Jerusalem during the Crusades. Despite taking vows of poverty and generally conducting themselves in a monklike manner, the Knights managed to amass significant wealth over the next two centuries. Their flair for matters financial attracted the attention of King Philip IV, who had been casting about for ways to fund his war against England. Needing a way to cliscredit the Knights and seize their gold, Philip resorted to the ever-popular accusation of devil worship, and before the order was officially dissolved in 1312, the Knights were subjected to torture and persecution BLOOD this is where the story takes off. Legend holds that the Knights were far wealthier than anyone guessed, and their treasure still lies buried somewhere, awaiting cliscovery, along with a supernatural sword believed to be the apex of their power. It seems that a medieval document that might be a map of the Knights' hidden secrets has recently been discovcred, and lots of dangerous types including a guy who dresses in funny costumes to murder his victims-are after it. Throw in a rival Price: $49.95 System Requirements: 486DX-66 or better processor, 8MB RAM, 20MB hard drive space, SVGA video with 1MB RAM &VESA 1.2 SVGA driver, Windows 95 or MS-DOS 5.0 or higher, 2x CD-ROM, DirectX 2. compliant sound & video drivers (for Win95), or MSCDEX 2.2 or higher, Microsoftcompatible mouse, FM & PCM sound compatibility # of Players: 1 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Revolution Software Publisher: Virgin Interactive Irvine, CA (800) 874-4607 or (619) 549-0222 Reader Service #: 317 group that models itself after the bloodthirsty Assassin sect, and a beautiful photojournalist who may or may not be what she seems, and George can kiss his plans for a quiet vacation goodbye. Cameplay is typical adventure farc. Ceorge checks out likely locations for clues, talks to everyone he can, pieces together bits of the story and gets himself into messy situations. Circle has one of the cleanest interfaces I've ever seen in an adventure game. Using the now-familiar hotspot routine, the cursor changes when it passes over objects or people with which he can interact. If he can pick up an object, he puts it in his pocket for later lise, and it appears in a drop-down bar at the top of the screen. When he talks to someone, the subjects he can bring up for discussion are displayed as icons across the bottom of the screen. BY THE SWORD That much is historical fact, but in CIRCLE OF REVENGE OF THE MOLE PEOPLE To unearth the Knights' deadly secrets, George spends a lot of time underground hunting for hidden chambers. I'M TALKING AND I CAN'T SHUT UP CIRCLE is at its best when George is talking with one of the many supporting characters. The script is witty (though uneven in places), peppered with comical types eager to use George as a straight FEBRUARY 1997 "


"30303 2. 63 64 (CT JUST MIGHT GIVE YOU A Bakinan 28930 DOBRO GOD COMPLEX... APS B01 008 Negotiate face-to-face with alien species in stunning 3D motion-captured video and digitized speech. Fragile Allegiance gives you ultimate control and power in building a galactic empire. Managing 90G80 Encounter 6 diverse alien cultures in a randomly generated universe. BOOB 000 every detail-'from BRAGILE providing a stable ALLEGIANCE atmosphere to Research and develop an incredible array of spacecraft. weaponry, mining techniques, and intelligence systems. securing adequate power, and constructing a ALLEGIANCE profitable mining operation will require impressive  Compete with up to 8 human players via network or modem. resource skills. Whether you build alliances, stay, RP neutral, or go to war, you must keep everything LEITERE under control. Your control.  Define your gaming experience with custom options including game length, universe size. alien hostility, and micro or macro management style. RAGILE Developed By KIDS TO ADULTS i00 ALLEGIANCE Gremlin AGBG BY GAMERS FOR GAMERS www.interplay.com Available on PC CD-ROM 1996 Gremlin Interactive, Lid. All Rights Reserved. Interplay and Fragile Allegiante are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All Rights Reserved. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor. Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive lid CIRCLE READER SERVICE #355 "


"REVIEW CIRCLE OF BLOOD Stop Running In Circles ADVENTURE/RPG make it easy to restore and try again if saying the wrong thing prompts a dead end...literally, George gets around through a map interface very similar to the one used in Sierra's GABRIEL KNIGHT 2: THE BEAST WITHIN. When someone mentions someplace new, it appears on the map and George can travel there. When he's done everything he can at that location, it becomes grayed-out on the map. who picked up his command of the English language from P. G. Wodehouse, and a janihough tor with a special fondness CIRCLE for his floor polisher. Don't OF get me wrong: this game is BLOOD shouldn't hardly a TOONSTRUCK or a give you too SAM 'N' Max. The humor is much trouble, not the focus, but it provides here are a few a nice counterpoint to the tips to get you often lengthy and involved started. Allons-y! TRUST NO ONE Despite being warned, lectures about Knights  Look at every George gets attached to Nico early on. Templar lore that reveal furthing you can Are her interests strictly journalistic? ther clues. Certain objects In fact, most of the game's bear a repeated or \"up close\" examination. riddles are solved through Nurse Grendel will allow only doctors into the ward. conversation, sometimes in Policemen lounging in cafés can sometimes be amused by surprising ways, so it pays to Americans wearing funny props. click on most, if not all of the  If George finds himself comered by the man with the scar, he icons that appear during a should be as truthful and honorable (and as quick) as he can be. discussion, even though it might seem ridiculous at first man for their sly repartee. Especially to broach a particular subject with a given memorable are a young Arab street trader character. Abundant save game slots ZUT ALORS! Circle's designers deserve applause for displaying restraint in the puzzle department. Most of the puzzles are plotbased (the sole exception being a single, not-at-all-clifficult chess problem), with nary a maze nor an arcade game in sight to artificially lengthen play. The sometimes endless conversations take up quite enough time by themselves. Granted, there are a couple of instances where Ceorge needs to be nimble on his feet, IN 1914, YOU COULD SAFELY RIDE THE NEW YORK SUBWAY 1997 Broderbund Software, Inc. The Last Express and Broderbund are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Broderbund Softwaro, Inc. HEAST EXPRESS "


"CIRCLE OF BLOOD  REVIEW ADVENTUREZRPG current trend away from (GABRIEL KNICHT) game in its historic live actors and full-motion detail or a good Tintin comic in its globevideo, CIRCLE wisely optstrotting adventurousness. I would have for lush, layered anima liked to see Nico, George's romantic tion and hand-drawn interest, get involved more often-it backgrounds by artists for doesn't make sense that he would trust merly with Don Bluth her so completely right off the bat -and Studios (An American a few other plot points don't hold up well Tale). The game also feaunder close examination. But overall, tures a conceit from ani CIRCLE OF BLOOD is a classy, entertainmated films that works ing adventure-perfect for whiling away well in the context of a a few dark winter evenings. PICTURE THIS When George wants to talk to someone, computer game, that of the available topics of conversation appear at the bottom drawing the main characAPPEAL: History buffs and novice of the screen as icons ters rcalistically, while takadventure gamers or gamers seeking plot over puzzle challenges. ing more cartoonish liberPROS: Involving, historically accubut they're not so frustrating as to bring ties with the secondary characters. The rate story; engaging characters; the game to a standstill. If there is anymusic, too, is reminiscent of animated sumptuous animation; seamless interthing wrong with the puzzles at all, it's that features, often swelling triumphantly face. they're too easy. Veteran gamers won't when George solves a puzzle and is back CONS: Puzzles are too easy; find much to challenge them and may off in hot pursuit of the bad guys. lengthy conversa even get frustrated by the lack of depth. Though things start off a little slowly at tions often drag on The designers also deserve kudos for first, CIRCLE OF BLOOD's story is engagbefore getting to the point. Circle's very elegant look. Following the ing-reminiscent of a Jane Jensen RATED IT WAS THE EUROPEAN TRAINS YOU GOT KILLED ON. A CD-ROM thriller by Jordan Mechner, coming in April. www.lastexpress.com Broderbund CIRCLE READER SERVICE #370 "


"IN THE PAST. WE EXCEEDED YOUR EXPECTATIONS. SOON, WE'LL CHANGE YOUR ENTIRE DESTINY. Westwood STUDIOS WWW.Westwood.com Lands of Lore: Guardians of Destiny is a registered trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  1996 Wostwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"LANDS OF LORE GUARDIANS OF DESTINY\" CIRCLE READER SERVICE #167 "


"***** REVIEW  AZRAEL'S TEAR DIFFICULTY LEVEL Dark Knights ADVENTURE/RPG More Than Another Myst-Alike by Robert Coffey VIDAR MELVEWNOLE Materac Acore Vale OOOR LATCH Water Dronte ON VOU Crear The Ducatum AZRAEL'S TEAR n 1146A.D. the twelve good and but the true rewards of AZRAEL'S TEAR lic room you're in and those on the other honorable Knights Templar in the compelling plot, played out side of the exits. The game crashed only moved the legendary Holy Grail through letters, books and conversations once, but the music-a real high point of underground for safekeeping. with the deathless knights. the game-cut out entirely a number of Hiding in the tunnels times and occasion where grailstone, the ally I lost all control marvelous stuff the Grail over movement, was made from, was finding myself mined, they bided time, careening around waiting for a compelling wildly. sign that the world above needThe biggest ed the healing power of the holy drawback is just object. Flash forward to the ycar how slow the game 2003 where you, a ruthless is. Even on a archaeological mercenary Pentium 150 the known as a Raptor, are on the movement at the trail of the most prized relic in highest resolution is history. You drop into a dank ponderous, and tunnel overrun with tiny, mutant some rooms and dinosaurs, and the strange jouranimations still take ney that is AZRAEL'S TEAR TIME BANDIT It's the year 2003, you're searching for the Holy Grail, and well over a minute begins. you're in an underground world full of evil, deformed knights. Have fun. to load. Forget about playing this ASHES TO ASHES THE ROAD TO HELL with the minimum system requireThe underground world of AZRAEL'S As you discover, the Knights Templar ments-on a 486/66 movement TEAR is impressively rendered in full 3D. Price: $45.00 are still alive, sustained by the unearthly becomes a lurching slide show and the System Requirements: Initially, the striking nature of the graphics power of grailstone. But while grailstone blocky graphics at low resolution make IBM-compatible 486 seems wasted, as many of the rooms show prolongs life it also mutates body and finding small objects extremely difficult. DX2/66 (Pentium recommended), 8MB RAM significant decay; but as the plot unfolds, mind, resulting in some dangerously disStill, if you have the computer and the (16MB recommended). the dichotomy between the few spaces of turbed and evil knights, not to mention patience for it, AZRAEL'S TEAR has a lot to 7MB free XMS memory, breathtaking beauty and those on the deformed dinosaurs and scorpions with offer. Its beautiful decrepitude, haunting MS-DOS 5.0 or above, verge of collapse subtly underscores the tails like poisoned bullwhips. music, and unsettling, bleak story offer a 10MB uncompressed hard drive space (25MB or complex story behind the game. The Most notably, an overwhelming sense unique and rewarling gaming more recommended) unusual look of the game quickly grows of sadness and betrayal pervades the experience. & 1 MB VESA-compliant SVGA video card, 2x CDon you. game. The knights' good intentions have ROM drive (quad recom While there are a few action elements, ultimately doomed them to centuries of APPEAL: Adventure gamers lookmended), Sound Blaster the bulk of gameplay is concerned with hell, corrupted and tormented by the ing for a game that goes beyond puzor 100% compatible exploration and discovery. The puzzles absolute symbol of goodness, the Holy zles to stimulate the mind. sound card, Microsoftcompatible mouse. you must face to recover the Grail are part Crail. It's an unhappy world, and recover PROS: Striking 3D graphics; strong, # of Players: 1 of the game's world and are concerned ing the Grail doesn't necessarily make it compelling plot that Protection: None (CD colors every aspect primarily with opening doors, powering better. If you enjoy mulling over movies must be in drive) of gameplay. Designer: Intelligent machinery and retrieving items. There's long after the credits roll, you'll find ample >CONS: High sysGames nothing groundbreaking liere, but then food for thought here. tem demands; yet Publisher: Mindscape, Inc. Novato, CA you don't have to beat a ghost at checkers another lever-yankAZRAEL'S TEAR isn't without problems. ing, key-hunting (415) 897-9900 to open a gate, either. It's all logical, mod\"The automap feature is only marginally adventure game. Reader Service #: 318 lerately challenging and fairly enjoyable, useful, displaying nothing more than the FEBRUARY 1997 "


"WE CONSIDERED USING HUMANS IN OUR NEW FIGHTING GAME BUT THEY TEND TO GET ALL LIMP AND RUNNY WHEN YOU REALLY START BEATING ON THEM.. Poor, delicate humans. Just when the fighting gets good they drop dead on you. Now a CyberGladiator, on the other hand is built for some serious mayhem. Choose from 8 different fighters, each with their own arsenal of over 50 different moves like the \"Pyro Punch\", \"Spine Grinder\" and the \"Humiliator. You can even knock off your opponent's head. And if decapitation wasn't bad ass enough, you can use stuff from the arena environments as weapons like spears, rocks, crates and barrels. 3-D camera moves capture the action in ten different arenas on four amazing planets. Try it and you'll see why cyberGladiators reduces other human fighting games to bloody pulps ADIATORS kaa, o con A SIERRA 01996 Siera On-Line Inc. and/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved.. 1-800-757-7707. http://www.sierra.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #72 "


"AND THE CHOSEN ONE SHALL BEAR THE MARK "


"THE APOCALYPSE HAS BEGUN All seven seals have been broken. Every evil that plagued the earth has become incarnate, disturbing the balancing force between good and evil, man and spirit. FRIGHTENINGLY DETAILED 3D ENVIRONMENT WITH INTERACTIVE OBJECTS AND PREDATORY DEMONS Not only have you stumbled blindly into a nightmare, you've set the stage for the Apocalypse. And now only one can stop it. He who bears the mark. The chosen one. You. Presenting a terrifying 3D adventure unlike anything you've experienced before. Realms of the Haunting. The forces of darkness are gathering for the final showdown. ROOM UPON ROOM OF QUESTS, PUZZLES, BATTLES AND CHALLENGES. * OVER 600 INTERACTIVE OBJECTS INCLUDING MORE THAN 155 POSSIBLE INVENTORY ITEMS MAPS, WEAPONS, AND MAGICAL OBJECTS. ** USER-DEFINED CONTROLS ALLOW CUSTOMIZATION OF ADVENTURE AND COMBAT LEVELS. FULL MOTION VIDEO, COMPLEX AND INTELLIGENT PLOT BRANCHING AND MULTIPLE ENDINGS SOPHISTICATED CHARACTER INTERACTION WITH A REAL-TIME, FIRST-PERSON, 360° 3-D ENVIRONMENT. ALD Nilut Realmsi ile Haun ing Realmsite Haunting ESTUEETSKOSTEN Haun ing Realms ok THE BATTLEGROUND BETWEEN ULTIMATE GOOD & EVIL. TETTEN Gremlin E'SRS AVAILABLE FOR PC CD-ROM BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS. 01996 Gremlin Interactive. Lid. All rights reserved. Realms of the Haunting and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor. Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive. Lid. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #269 "


"***** REVIEW  SPIDER-MAN: THE SINISTER SIX DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVENTURE/RPG World Wide Web-Slinger Spider-Man Gets Tangled In Byron Preiss 'Sticky Snare by Charles Ardai SPIDERMA phen I was growing have to solve lame puzzles, choose paths accompanying visuals (which often up, I wanted to be through interminable dialogues, and fight involve a screen full of characters standing Spider-Man. I wore six of Spider-Man's enemies in a set of perfectly still while one character's lips a jacket with a spiludicrous action sequences. wiggle a little) are no prize. The worst der sewn onto the The storyline involves a plot by six costhing about the game, though, is clearly back, took doubletumcd bad guys to trap our hero, in part the action. In Il fight sequences the same exposure pho by impersonating him and implicating three games keep shamelessly repeating: a tographs of myself him in their crimes, and in part by endanfirst-person shooting game, in which you apparently crawling gering his aspiring actress wife, Mary Jane fire webs at oncoming projectiles by aimup a brick wall. The baddies are Mysterio, The Vulture, ing a crosshair and clicking the mouse and stayed up late to watch the button; a third-person shoollive-action version starring ing game, identical except that Nicholas Hammond. I also you see Spider-Man on the longed for a good Spider-Man screen; and a third-person videogame, but never got one. dodging game, in which you Many years ago, Scott Adams move the mouse left, right, up, released a graphic adventure, or down to make Spider-Man which I remember as being leap to the one of four walls absolutely unplayable. Now along which no projectile is there is Byron Preiss Multithen approaching. Sometimes media's SPIDER-MAN: THE the projectile is a flaming jackSINISTER Six. The good news is o-lantern thrown by that it is playable. SPIDEY MEETS SPACE INVADERS If your spider sense is tinHobeoblin sometimes it's one gling, it's to tell you that the cool animation doesn't make up of Doc Ock's mechanical DOES WHAT A SPIDER CAN for the insipid combat sequences. MJ wouldn't recognize her arms. Big deal. This is a game The bad news is that SINISTER husband in this badly spun affair. for a Casio wristwatch, not for Six is really no better than that a CD-ROM awful adventure game of a decade ago). Dr. Octopus, Shocker, The Hobgoblin, How can someone buy the SpiderThe graphics are jagged, the story weak, and The Chameleon, plus Mary Jane's Man license and then squander it like the puzzles laughable (cryptograms, any nasty film director, Chip Alvarez. All of this? Somcone needs to tell that onc?), and the action sequences so dis these characters speak in hokey stage Rumpelstiltskin of computer games, mal, so minor, so clumsy, so basic, so dull, voices, as though the game's director told Byron Preiss, that his gold-into-straw act is so Atari 2600 as to defy comment. the actors to imagine themselves in an getting tired very fast. The game opens with an impressively 1898 melodrama. And this may have been vigorous cartoon sequence, showing the right call, given the clialogue they have APPEAL: Easily pleased, patient Spider-Man swinging from building to to utter. \"I am a pro-fesli-um-al!\" shouts Spider-Man fans. builcline in vintage form. \"Bravo, old boy.\" Alvarez. \"It's not your wifey on the line!\" PROS: Fine aniI thought when I saw it. \"Welcome And this, from Peter Parker to Mary Jane: mation between home.\" \"Watch out Sharon Stone! Pretty soon I'll game segments. But then the cartoon ends, and though he dusting off the mantel for Mr. Oscar!\" CONS: Lousy game between anisimilar cartoon sequences crop up The worst thing about the dialogue mation segments. throughout the game, to get to them you scenes is the dialogue, clearly, though the He Insel OU Price: $34.95 System Requirements: 486 DX2 or better processor, 8MB RAM, 20MB hard-drive space, SVGA graphics, Windows 3.1 or better 2x CD-ROM, Windowscompatible sound card, mouse. # of Players: 1 Protection: None (CD Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: F.J. Lennon Publisher: Byron Preiss Multimedia New York, NY (212) 989-6252 Reader Service # 323 CC FEBRUARY 1997 "


"AS OF NOW, AIRLINE FOOD IS NO LONGER THE MOST DEADLY THING IN THE SKY. Designed for TEEN AGES 13. Microsoft Wrows95 INTELACTIVE entertainment RATETET ESR LOOKS LIKE SALISBURY cannons and air-to-ground missiles will insure you STEAK HAS FINALLY MET wreak havoc on anything and everything in your path. WARRI ITS MATCH. Introducing All in unlimited access, on-the-fly 3-D environments. Agile Warrior: F-111X for Agile Warrior: F-111X. Windows 95. A game that's We love to destroy. so intense you'll discover And it shows. testosterone in places you never knew you had it. From the cockpit of one of the most advanced weapons in the sky, you'll fly numerous deadly missions while enjoying realistic explosions, blasting sound effects and the outlandishly advanced cutting-edge graphics you can only get with Windows 95. Meanwhile, on the ground below, your arsenal of laser-guided INTRODUCING AGILE WARRIOR: F-111X\" munitions, napalm canisters, cluster bombs, 20mm FOR WINDOWS 95. www.vie.com Agile Warrior F-111XO 1995, 1996 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc and Black Ops Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid. Microsoft Windows and the Windows Logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation CIRCLE READER SERVICE #369 "


"Dngeons & Dragons When the award-winning Descent game engine landed in AD&D game's most famous world, the gre FORGOTTEN REALMS ... EALMS ...it left in its wake the most revolutionary nev este BEM LLC All the wizards and magicians in the Realms could never have predicted what happened A that mystical night in the dungeons of Undermountain. After all of their spells, conjuring, and attempts to see the future, the future literally crashed down upon them. With deadly force. It left an indelible mark. It affected their vision. Their movement. Their way of life and death. It changed their history as well as their future. Introducing DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN\", the most revolutionary new AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS action RPG game in centuries. Based on the hugely successful Descent engine, the dark inhabitants of Undermountain's stone belly now experience 3D vision and 360° movement. Perhaps it was the strange visitor from the future. Perhaps just the trauma. But multiple characters are now developing in the cracks and under the rocks of ancient caves. All of this, along with multiple player options has forever changed the face of the AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS world. What came down from the hereafter that fateful night, is certain to continue down into history. And down. And down. And down. DESGENT TO | NDERMOUN RAIN Download the interactive preview at www://Interplay.dragonplay.com 01996 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Decent 1996 Parallax Software. Al rights reserved DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, ADSD, FORGOTTEN REALMS, and the TSA logo are trademarks of TSR Inc. All rights reserved. INTERPLAY is a trademark of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. "


"CORSOM IKANG Forcone RALAT UNDERMOUNTAIN THE RUINS OF NOERMOINTAIN THE RUN UNDERMOL LEVEL 2   EURLS160ER RPG game to date. DESCENTE Dungeons & Dragons' THE AWARD WINNING DESCENT\" ENGINE MEETS THE MOST FAMOUS AD&D WORLD, THE FORGOTTEN REALMS FULL 3D, 360° FIRST PERSON ACTION BASED ON THE HUGELY SUCCESSFUL DESCENT\" ENGINE AD Male Paying At MDERMOURMAT wah L o wer CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT IN OVER 20 DIFFERENT MAGICRIDDEN DUNGEON LEVELS FIRST AD&D ACTION RPG WITH UP TO 4 PLAYER MODEM/NETWORK OPTION. 3D Role Playing Action With Up to 4 Players 30 ACTIONm ROLE PLAYLIG CU ROM RATING PENDER 0 Trenents RP Available on PC CD Romi BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #123 "


"STRATEGY TOONSTRUCK ADVENTURE/RPG Getting In Toon CGW Walks You Through The Wacky Worlds Of TOONSTRUCK by Petra Schlunk Spoiler Alert This article offers a complete guide through TOONSTRUCK. Since it includes complete solutions to its puzzles, don't read any farther than you have to, so as not to spoil your fun. andering in a world of portable holes, exploding cigars and talking animals, there's no way to avoid being \"toonstruck.\"The trick, of course, is not to let your brains scize up while your side is splitting in this very fumy adventure game. TOONSTRUCK centers around the comical adventures of the cartoonist Drew Blanc (Mel's long-lost brother?) as he tries to find a way back to our world after being pulled into a world of his own animated creations. For those who get stuck (with Wacme super glue) trying to figure out who framed Drew Blanc, this article provides a complete walk-through of the game. So toon in, turn on your computer) and get Drew out! LANDING IN CUTOPIA Back at the palace's trophy room, grab Downstairs in the palace, head east to the watering can. Replace it with the meet Bricabrac. Talk to the footman in m ug. Go to the arcade. Speak with its the trophy room. Speak to Bricabrac owner, beat him at Wacman to collect a again and get the plans to the chain, and try the Strength-o-meter. Malevolator. Here you'll learn that you Head south out of town and talk with need to find the Malevolator's counter Fluffy. Cowest and speak with the parts to construct the Cutifier. Carecrow. Grab a corncob. Co to the Talk with the insufferably cute guards outside. Have them repeat their dance, and then pick up the cropped WATER SPORTS To leave the trophy room, you'll have to replace the key watering can with the reward you got from the barkeeper. Unlock the king's bedroom. Collect the music box bar, fill the watering can with fertilizer, and have flux search the bed for a vouchand speak with the cow. Then head west cr. Move the rug on the floor. Read the past the Carecrow to a forest. Head west note on the dresser, which should help and meet B. B. Wolf you solve the dresser puzzle. Enter the new passage to the basement. Have Flux ON MICE AND ELEPHANTS stand on the loose floorboard, and then Co cast and north to reach a broken step on it to open the trap door. Return to shuttle. To fix the shuttle, place the mouse the bedroom and roll the rug over the trap in the empty hand. Use the fertilizer on door. Pull thc cord. In the trophy room, the mouse. Take the shuttle to Zanydu. grab the red fish. I lead to town. Head east to Wacme. Note the broken clock. Wait for a light to go on over a door THE BAKER BOYS at Wacme and then enter that door. In the bakery, play the piano to get Speak with Woof. Collect the stars after some keys. Talk to the bakers. Visit the he demonstrates the boxing glove. Look at Costumarama and speak with Ms. Fit. In the Gift-o-matic. Examine the portraits the tavern, speak with the bartender. Try and make a note of the security guard's to pick up the mouse in the laver until it phone number. runs ricar the mousetrap. Play thic organ Head west from the towni center. Enter and, while you play, have Flux use the the gym, try to use the Pump-o-tron, and trap. Collect your reward (a baltered mug) speak with Jimn. Leave and notice the flyer and the mouse. nearby. Copy down the phone number. 2 THAT SMELL The broken shuttle needs one thing: an alert mouse! Maybe you can give the mouse a whiff of something to get him going. FEBRUARY 1997 "


"You can be the monster. Or you can be its prey. Either way, some poor bastard will get his ass kicked. First time ever the PC: split soen head-to-head ago In Hunter/Hunted, whether you live or die is all up to you because you choose the character you play. Either way, monster or prey, you'll need to dodge traps and run a gauntlet of 3-D characters just to stay alive. The blistering action takes you through flesh-eating tunnels and booby-trapped sewers with only your wits separating you from a body bag. Well, wits and whole bunch of guns, knives, grenades, and rocket launchers. Because, hey, when it's kill or be killed, it's better to give than receive. UNTER TM HUNTED SIERRA CIRCLE READER SERVICE #154  Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. 1-800-757-7707. http://www.sierra.com "


"STRATEGY TOONSTRUCK ADVENTURE/RPG Talk with the outhouse guard. the dough on the spit to make a roll. Bowl Flux to score a strike. Collect some Go to Cutopia's tavem and use the Pocket the spit and pick up the book and pins as your reward. phone to call the guard. From the mes read it!). sage you can deduce that the guard's shift Note: If you get caught by Nefarious's FINAL ASSEMBLY ends at 6:00. Call the Wacme Contest goons, here's how to get out of jail: Walk You now have everything you need to You must answer six questions (relating to on the rug until you are staticky; then build the Cutifier (pins, cloak, sole, nuts, the colors of various things in Zanyclu). touch the buttons by the door. Repeat arrow, roll, pepper, bells, stars, spit and You may need to do this part a few times. until you are free. Retrieve your belong chain). Assemble the Cutifier and press When you win, leave the tavern and col ings from the safe (after solving a sliding the red button. lect your prize: Wacme jumping beans. block puzzle). Drew ends up in Count Nefarious's Give the popcom to Fluffy in exchange dungeon. Speak with the guard. When TIME FOR A CHANGE for cotton candy. In the palace, use the he is sneezing, try to pick up the mat Return to Zanydu and set the clock to spit on the locked cabinet's hole to open (you'll get a crystal). Pick up the mat and 6:00. Enter Wacme and show Woof the it. Retrieve the stuffed cat. swat it against the bars. Collect the key beans. Use the Gift-o-matic to collect all Exchange books with Ms. lit. Go to and unlock your cell. Speak with the the Malevolands, speak bird several times and take notes. Head with the bouncer and east. pick up the meat. Enter Notice the chest in the fishbowl. Peek the first building to the into the kitchen to the west. Manipulate cast and speak with the the clown door, playing a game of imitarobot maker. Use Ms. tion to open it. Talk with the clown. Fit's book on him and Head to the dungeon and go north. take the plunger. Look at the Climatron. Press a button by Go to the next build the air circulator to open the vent. ing to the north and Climb in and use your fly suit to go up. retrieve the ink pad. In the bathroom, if you peek out the SUFFERIN' SUCCOTASH Drew and Flux are in some hot Solve the safe's sliding door you risk getting caught. Search the water. A little rock 'n' roll may help them out here. block puzzle to get a medicine cabinet for chloroform wipes. portable hole. Fill your watering can with tap water. the prizes: a glove, mallet and magnet. Go down the vent and visit the clown. Enter the outhouse and discover that the WEED KILLER HAS MANY USES When the clown removes his nose, pick toilet is clogged Return to Zanydu and use the weed it up and wipe it with chloroform. Pick Use the magnet on the haystack in the killer on the meat. Feed the meat to the up the clown's pin and balloon. Fill the barn. Fix the Churnatron with what you vulture. Collect the arrow sign and a balloon and your red glove with helium. find and collect two sticks of butter. Bring feather. In the outhouse, use the plunger one stick to the bakers and receive a lump to fix the toilet. Flush your red fish and FRIED FISH, ANYONE? of dough. Use the remaining butter on collect a green one (a sole). Use the pin to fix the Climatron. Set Jim's vaulting horse (at the gym). Ask Jim Bring the feather to the cow and get it to hot, and then back to normal. Hurry to demonstrate his routine. Use the some glue. Use the glue to join the jump upstairs and grab the chest from the fishPump-o-tron. At the arcade, use your ing beans, the stuffed cal, the piano keys bowl. Take the key from the chest. mallet on the Strength-o-matic. Win and the cotton candy to make a female Retrieve the Climatron's pin. Head some wine and collect the bells from the \"squirrel.\" Use the squirrel at the upstairs from the fish and look through broken machine. malevolated squirrel's door. Return to the bam and talk with the Have Flux collect the nuts. cow. Fill your watering can with weed Use the ink pad on the killer. Co to the forest and kill the briar music box, and then use the patch with the weed killer. Collect the blackened crest to stamp the pepper. Return to the barn and get more voucher. Pick up a harlequin wecd killer. outfit at the Costumarama. You will also get a fly suit. Give IN HOT WATER the costume to the Carecrow Give the wine to B. B. Wolf and get and get the cloak. thrown in a stewpot! Rock the pot back Use the cloak to get past the A BITTER END One of Zanydu's popular sports, fishand forth until it tips over. Use the com bouncer at Seedy's. Use glue flushing, is a fine way to spend a rainy afternoon. cob on the fire to make popcom. Cook on the bear's bowling ball. Flush the red fish. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"THINK ONLY THE STRONG SURVIVE? THINK AGAIN! AND AGAIN. AND AGAIN. AND AGAIN. Introducing DEUS, the 3D role-playing game that requires both brains and brawn.  Your Identity: 22nd century bounty hunter Your Goal: save the scientific community on the planet Alcibiade from terrorists  Your Obstacles: 40 predators; 5 lunatic terrorists; mind-bending puzzles; your own life parameters (health, energy, food)  Your Strategy: Kill. eat. Kill. sleep. Kill. tend wounds. Kill... Your Weapons: anything from spears to rocket launchers Your Bonus: 2 play modes role playing and arcade Don't joke about his height or he'll bash in your kneecaps. On second thought, maybe you shouldn't have skinned her babies. Website: http://www.readysoft.com Amputation, just what the doctor ordered. If he only had a heart, then you could rip it out. 01996 Silmarils. All rights reserved. DEUS is a trademark of Société Silmarils, Distributed by ReadySoft Incorporated. 66 Silmarils READYSOFT CIRCLE READER SERVICE #388 "


"STAR K GENERAL The Sky Is No Longer The Limit. S.STAR SERIES Go witere no gamer has gone before BEYOND PANZER GENERAL: Volume 4 in SSI's award-winning 5-STAR SERIES, STAR GENERAL is light-years .. ahead of its proud ancestor! . Feel the power of an incredibly enhanced PANZER GENERAL gme engine. A Two-Level Combat System that accommodates space combat AND surface combat. Resource management conquer enemy planets and develop them for your needs. See the beauty of over .90 fully rendered 3D starships, 100+ ground units and multiple planet types. Command, . a multi-planetary force as you struggle to repel the advances of six alien races. Engage in a variety of wars as any of 7 different races. And be prepared to put in some time! The scope of STAR GENERAL is as vast as space itself with well over 100 hours of game play. The sky is no longer the limit. So light up the heavens in a cosmic battle for the right to be called STAR GENERAL! MULTI-PLAYER OPTION FOR WINDOWS 95! Combo CD-ROM WWW.stargeneral.com WINDOWS 95 & DOS TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY. ESRE POR ORDAD STAR GENERAL is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc.. a Mindscape Company. 1995 Strategie Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Windows is a trademark ! Mierosott Corp Developed by Catware. PORABORCZARO --6 FL 0 A MINDSCAPE COMPANY CIRCLE READER SERVICE #236 "


"TOONSTRUCK  REVIEW WELCOME ADVENTUREZRPG TO THE CHARMING COMMUNITY OF CYCLONE ARIZONA. to the bathroom and open the door. Leave the bathroom through the door and go downstairs. Manipulate the left hom to unlock the right gargoyle. Go upstairs and down to the dungeon (via the bathroom vent) and back upstairs. Manipulate SNEEZE GUARD What to do with an allergic guard that the right gargoyle head to has swallowed your cell key? Stir up a little dust! get another crystal Co upstairs and open the west door. Co through the east door the east door with the fishbowl key. Here and look at the odd books. Pull out, in you will play \"chase the sunglasses.\" Tiy order: blue book l, red 1, red 3, blue 2. to get them from the bookcase. Tum blue 3, red 4, red 2 and blue 4. \"off\" the ceiling fan. Move the chair and Enter the new passage and use the try to get the glasses from the mounted music box on the guard. Set the monihead. Use the fly suit to get the flytrap to tor to view the knight. Use your magnct release the glasses. Finally, use your malon the ceiling plate your view will let to break the vase and retrieve the sunswitch to the monitor), and move the glasses. knight onto each raised tile until the Leave the room and head upstairs. Put gate opens. Go back upstairs, take the the gauntlet on the pool cue and use this knight's gauntlet and go through the to press the button to open the gate. Co new doorway. to the left door and take a whiff of heliYou will find Nefarious's goons playum. Use the intercom and say you are ing cards. Use the pin to unlock the Lugnut. Before walking up to Miss chest near the door and free Ray, who Fortune, don your new shades or you'll gives you a crystal. Cet in the chest and end up in the dungeon again. hop, while the guards are not looking, toward the TNT. Grab a stick and leave. Return to the kitchen. Use the water on the robot. Open the oven and grab a turkey. Stuff the turkey with dynamite, light it in the oven, and put it on the dumbwaiter. HAPPY THANKSGIVING Give the gators a dynaGo upstairs to the pool mite turkey they'll never forget. Put the bird into room and grab a pool cue. the oven (to light the fuse) and then send it on its Outside the pool room notice way on the dumbwaiter to the left. the two gargoyles. Manipulate the left head to get a crystal. FINALE Touch its horn (this unlocks the other Talk to the hypnotized cat and head). Now, go downstairs. (Note: if move her to the landing. Have her you cross the landing to the right head, open the east door. In this last room, it will relock.) use the four crystals on the panel (they will glow when correctly placed). Pull A COLD SHOWER the lever and retrieve the warp device. Put the pin back in the Climatron and Go to the monitor by the west door climb the vent to the bathroom. Plug the and set the devices properly. Enter the sink and tum on the faucet. Return to the west room to reach the epilogue. And Climatron and set it to freezing. Co back tttttthat's all, folks! GOD HELP YOU. SHIVERS Am Ry@stof Souls Interact with the evil at http://www.sierra.com/shivers2 1-800-757-7707 SIERRA 1995 Seria Online Inc. atrdot TM dogte trademais splied to Sierra On-l41, 1. All rigliseerd FEBRUARY 1997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #153 "


"Cloaking effer The first ever STAR TREK space battle simulator. Translucent texture mapping for unprecedented cloaking effects. Real-time color light sourcing for startling realism. Enemy artificial intelligence that learns and adapts to your battle style. No one this side of Kirk has flown anything this advanced. Until now. Enebolor light sourcing \"Starfleet Academy promises to be the flagship of MacPlay's immensely successful Star Trek line of games\" Mac Home Journal \"STAR TREK fans are finally about to get a simulation worthy of Starfleet itself.\" PC Gamer \"A game like STAR TREK: Starfleet Academy has been a long time coming.\" -computer Player Fly up to four Federation starships against 30 amazing 3-D polygon alien ships. Over 25 challenging missions in spectacular 3-D environments, Starring William Shatner, Walter Koenig and special appearance by George Takei in their legendary roles of Kirk, Chekov & Sulu. "


"STAR TREK\" STARFLGET ACADEMY .... STAR TREK STABELEET ACADEMY AVAILABLE THIS SPRING FOR WIN95/DOS AND MACINTOSH. COMING SOON FOR PLAYSTATION GAME CONSOLE. Developed and Published by MAC PLAY XLSESTI LINE IN Designed for bere WWW.INTERPLAY.COM WWW.MACPLAY.COM on 12 Microsoft Windows 95 Playstation CD-ROM BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS. Starfleet Academy Software 1997 Interplay Productions, Trademark and 1997 Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. Star Trek, Starfleet Academy and related trademarks are trademarks of Paramount Pictures, MacPlay and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. PlayStation and the PlayStation logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #63 "


"1-800-692-8069 4MB Order Reactor Direct! of Graphics Memory Unleash a 3D Graphics Meltdown! REACTOR. Fast action and stunning realism — BEFORE FTER that's the promise of new 3D games and Graphics options for -30 fps edutainment software. But if your Super Star Fighter jerks along instead of zooming and your \"terrifying monsters are glaringly pixelated face it. You're not having much fun. Don't just play it...Live it! 300 73998 3003956 80 08535 With a Reactor 3D graphics accelerator on your PC, expect a whole new interactive IndyCar with SVGA Graphics IndyCar with Reactor Graphics experience! Notice the jagged lines and edges and the flat, dull colors. Where's Now you're racing! See the detail on next cor. Watch those rearview the crowd? What are those blocky things in the background? Are mirrors-that's real 3D! Notice the crowd in the stands and the Plus IndyCar II and HellBender FREE! you really into this race? mountains in the background. And how about that sky! Want to know more? Call 800-763-0242 or reach us on the Internet at http://www.intergraph.com/ics/reactor samahan sigapa SUA e dinars and a szakterie l les Cerca pres s o OKIKO In prata est mutatta besta acc a de se instelashescobrance applicable to d e corate prid: t o ute INTERGRAPH ! CIRCLE READER SERVICE #74 "


"PETER OLAFSON ACTION ac tin lks! deem mon 5. Burnin' Down The House Bullfrog's Classic Returns In The Explosive SYNDICATE WARS \"unguided» are dressing like punks, acting like terrorists, and exacting an cxplosive revenge on their surroundings. People are being shot dead in the streets. Ciant concrete buildings are coming down with a crash. That is, things are a right mess, and you're the room. DEEEEEE 255EEDECESORES ullfrog is a respected name in gaming circles. Aside from CENE WARS, Peter Molyneux and crew have produced a stable of imaginative and addiclive titles: POPULOUS, POWERMONCER, SYNDICATE, and MAGIC CARPET. And so it is with SYNDICATE WARS, an inspired update to the 1993 classic that peels back the top of this dark world and pulls you in. Things aren't going well for the EuroCorp Syndicate, the world govem ment that you originally fought against in SYNDICATE. Its worldwide empire has come apart at the seams. A computer virus unleashed by the Church of the New Epoch-a mysterious rival --has punctured some citizens chip-induced illusions of a bucolic existence. These The box brags of a 'fully destructible environment, and, to my pleasant surprise, it's the truth. DEJA VU? SYNDICATE ENCORE SYNDICATE WARS is an action-packed This is still basically sequel with an abundance of explosions and fun. SYNDICATE. You are once Gameplay is similar to SYNDICATE, but with multiplayer again directing a quartet of options, better graphics and more mayhem. agents on a trail of blood across a series of grim cityscapes-seen LIVING LARGER from an angled-down point of So, from the sound of it, this is the view-while funding the R&D depart same game, yes? Not at all. The most proment to produce bigger and ladder found change is the view. SYNDICATE had weapons of destruction. These 60 multia small feel, and you had to squint to see stage missions may find you killing key your four agents. SYNDICATE WARS feels opponents, recruiting others, stealing huge. For one thing, you're much closer to technology, or guarcling EuroCorp instalthe action. In fact, the distance varies with lations. There's no sense of repctition: the action: the game has a dynamic zoom even when you're doing the same sort of cffect that adjusts to what's taking place thing from mission to mission, you're onscreen. The great gray prisonlike doing it differently and the game quickly cities-some 30 of them-loom up in moves beyond its quick-draw beginnings. your face, and it seems all the monitor Once again, solutions lic partly in good can do to contain them. The cffcct of strategy, patience and adapting to a level's rotating the 3D playfield is to open the tricks and traps. The agent you've been game up. You can see the game exactly assigned to expunge may be right next the way you want to see it. door to the drop zone from which your And there are the explosions, Icam starts. But the great door of the SYNDICATE was strange that way. You compound in which lie's taken refuge could wreak chaos upon its people withwon't open for anything but a hovercar. out making a dent on the infrastructure, You've got to find that car, and you can But the explosions here are simply bet it's all the way across town with an spectacular. The box brags of a \"fully honor guard of its own. destructible environment,\" and, to my The release date for Epic Megagames' UNREAL is looking like April or May of 1997. The game will be playable with or without the MMX chip, so those who won't be jumping on the bandwagon will have full reign of the same cool QUAKE killer, CGW saw the non-MMX engine, and it has fantastic light sourcing, dithering for getting rid of pixelation, and an overall 3D graphics engine that is much better looking than QUAKES. INSIDE ACTION FEBRUARY 1997 CG CG "


"PETER OLAFSON ACTION pleasant surprise, it's the truth. It's a edges that comes only with SYNDICATE sales event: everything must SVCA. And, beyond the go, and everything does — in expanding technicalities, it's strangely, rings of smoke and flame and waves of darkly beautiful. Water ebbs hot, bright light. \"Top-down shoot-'em-ups and recedes. Smokestacks everywhere are turning green in jealousy: smoke. Tiny citizens fice, Another change is that you can play as shrieking at the sight of your either the Syndicate or the Church. The guns. Everything seems threads aren't so different you get to bathed in a streetlight glow. I wear a cape and big shoulder pads as was so immersed in the sinNew Epoch warriors but it's nice to gle-player mode that I never have the extra missions. tried out the multiplayer SYNDICATE: didn't offer a cutaway view modes (eight-player nctDYNAMITE! SYNDICATE WARS has incredible explosions, of your party when it entered buildings. work and modem). some of which are so vivid that you can almost feel Indeed, it acopted this conccit as a sort of them. I recoiled at the flashes, dreading their accompanying sound of tearing fabric; and that's kind of scary. quirky subgame of anticipation and timSYNDICATED ing. You can still go insice buildings in DISSENSION SYNDICATE WARS -you'll need to in purNot to say that everything works per exception rather than the rule. By and suit of some objectivesbut, happily, fectly in SYNDICATE WARs. The 3D large, SYNDICATE WARS is clean as a whisthese sequences seem to have been simengine has the odd rough spot. On one tle-so clean, in fact, that the oddities plified. In the missions ! threw me off a bit more than they should. played, I didn't need to If there must be a downside, it's that, for fidget with the mouse to all this ingenuity and craft, the guts of the shoot or persuade semigame haven't changed appreciably. The visible targets. basic gameplay is derived almost slavishly \"The overall structure is from the original. This is essentially the different, too. The original 1993 game with church bells and steam game was set up a little whistlesand perhaps we had the right like Risk: you could to expect something more. But, right now, undertake missions only with my agents under fire from three in regions adjacent to directions and a world of blood and flame those under your control. collapsing about their heads, I can't think Here, you're all over the GET IN THE CAR SYNDICATE WARS still has a nice blend of of what that might possibly be map as a Syndicate fire strategy in its action-packed gameplay. Most missions are man; one mission may goal oriented, with some goals hidden or reachable only APPEAL: Fans of explosions, isosee you visiting Hong after completing certain actions: like hijacking a car. metric shooters with depth, or the Kong, Beijing and then original SYNDICATE. Phoenix. It doesn't give SYNDICATE WARS occasion, I watched the bottom of a com PROS: Gorgeous SVGA graphics, the texture of a step-by-step conquest, but pound gate appear beneath the supposed totally combustible world, network and modem play, a it does free you of the burden of playing ly opaque sidewalk outside. On another, a more flexible IRS agent with the conquered regions. hovercar pulling off the side of the road gameworld than It all looks grcat. Thic graphics are won passed through a perimeter fence. Ona SYNDICATE. clerful in SVCA mode. The textures have third, one car passed through another and CONS: Same that rich combination of smooth surfaces, a member of my team was caught waist basic gameplay as SYNDICATE; a few fine lines, bright centers and shadowy deep in a ramp. (That glitch cost me a visual glitches. RATED* mission.) But these goof-ups were the S UDD SYNDICARS BEHET Price: $59.99 System Requirements: 486-66 or better, 8MB RAM, 2x CD-ROM drive, VGA graphics, 55MB hard drive space, DOS 6.0 or Win 95, mouse, Sound Blaster -compatible sound card. # of Players: 1-8 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Bullfrog Publisher: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 Reader Service #: 320 superuzi Gives you lots of ammo for an uzi that will rock your world! arnold Gives you all the weapons, though not all the ammo. surgery Full health and armor. nitrous Speeds the game up. illbeback Jump to next level. joycam Switches to 3rd person perspective. Only for multiplayer gaming. You need to have a joystick peripheral attached for this to work. counters Shows game counters. SKYNET is out, and we'll have a review and strategy article next month. For now, though, chew on these cheat codes for Bethesda's TERMINATOR sequel. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"reasons to play *Top 10 reasons Bulb #1. Breaks New Ground For 12 gruesomely-detailed, bloodsoaked worlds demanding non-stop violence and mental marauding. NEY Aspiring CrossDressing Lunatics w Play specialized psycho-killers equipped with personalized killing machines like the \"Big Bang Stick\" blue plasma laser and the «Superior Motha\" rotary cannon. NEW Blistering terrain morphing effects and enhanced environmental interaction with obstacles such as balconies, conveyor belts, and more.  Throw a Party Thrashing soundtrack sends you into a homicidal rage. NEW #2 Never met a guy he didn't plug #3 Lipstick color never clashes with bloody carnage #4 Can load an automatic and wax his legs at the same time #5 6\" stiletto heels provide better Sniping angle #6 Does the tango better than Rupaul #7 Wears bullet-proof panty hose #8 \"Gender-Defender\" Uzi wipes off that smirk real quick #9 Didn't win the Miss America pageant, because \"world genooide\" didn't sit well with the judges 410 Stunt-doubles for Pamela ..., Sequel to the \"Best Action Game\" of 1995 Game Pro IRELA Also Available For The PlayStation  Bring Your Mop  Take A Stroll In The Park Game Console UNCENSORED IM RELOADED MATURE www.interplay.com www.reloaded.com CONTENT RATED ST SRB Crime: Fashion Victim Weapon: Gender Defender Special Weapon: Flaming Ring Gremlin 1996 Gremlin Interactive Limited. All rights reserved. Reloaded is a tradem a interplay Productions. Alrights reserved Unterplay is the sole publisher and distributor. Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive, Lidl other trademarks and copyrights her the property of their respective holders. TC DOG PlayStation BY GAMERS FOR GAMERS "


"THE QUAKE PAGE NO110V Hell's Kitchen Grow Your Own QUAKE Levels With New Shareware Editors by V. Long TEM inally, usable QUAKE level editors have arrived. It's taken a bit longer than expected, but then again, QUAKE is a True 3D program, and that extra dimension adds an entirely new twist. Of the ones I've tried, three (all still in beta at press time) stand out, BSP is free ware by patent attomey Yahn Bernier. THRED is shareware by Jonathan Mavor, a programmer for Neural Storm, the makers of RADIX: INTO THE VOID. WORLDCRAFT is shareware by Ben Morris, the renowned creator of the popular Doom CONSTRUCTION KIT. Each has its advantages, but all are powerful and casy to use. For a demo on using WORLDCRAFT, visit our Web site: zdnet.com/gaming CRAFTING A NEW WORLD Celting started with QUAKE level cditing is quite easy. To illustrate, let's use WORLDCRAFT to create a simple roomthe basic building block for any level. Select New from WORLDCRAFT'S File Menu. Select the Block Tool (wireframe cube) from the Object Bar on the left. In the top view (top right pane), leftclick/drag until you form a box of about 6x grid lines. Check either the front (bottom left inside the room; if not, left-crag it into the pane) or side (bottom right pane) view for room. Avoid placing the info_player_start a box with solid black squares. Left-click in the floor. Hlit (Enter) to create the ention a top-middle black square and drag it up until the box is about six grid lines high. The modeling views merely showa wireframe representation of a solid cube yet to be created Reposition the box by left-clickCHURCH OF GAME DESIGN Good luck trying to duplicate the masing/dragging the terpieces of design you'll see in Raven's QUAKE variant, Hexen 2. outline of the box. Center it on the two ty. If you want, add other entities such as black axes crossing each pane. light_, monster, and so on. Hit (Enter) Add a texture to the box by left-clicking for cach one. Browse in the texture selector window on Hit (F9] to compile (QBSP), light the right, and select a texture suitable for a (LICHT), and visually optimize\" (VIS) room (i.c., not a liquid). Check that the the level. Select Normal QBSP and Full Solid Type selector says Block. Check the VIS and No LICHT. If you've added size, shape, position and texture of your \"light_\" entities, try Extra LIGHT. Then c ube,then hit Enter to create a solid. hit [OK]. Congrats, you've created your You now have a solid cube that needs first QUAKE \"level,\" called a .BSP. Put it to be hollowed out. Click the Selection into your QUAKE/DI/MAPS subdirecTool (giant cursor) button and select the tory and run it with QUAKE-MAP solid. A red bounding box will outline the name of BSP). solid. Select Make Hollow from the 'Tools Now you're ready to add all the other menu. The default wall thickness of 32 is goodies that make a good QUAKE level fine. Voila, what was once a solid object is deliciously hellish. Next month we dive now a room consisting of six solid walls into QUAKE server modifications, like joined at the edges. Capture the Flag. See you next month, At minimum, you need one entity: a same QUAKE time, same QUAKE page & player start point. Click the Entity Tool (axe) bulOnline Resources ton. Select info_player_start as the You can download these level editors from the Entity Type. In the top following addresses. vicw, left-click inside the BSP http://ourworld.compuserve.com: room. Check another 80/homepages/bernier THRED http://www.visi.com/jlowell/thred view to make sure the WORLDCRAFT http://www.islandnet.com/worldcraft green/purple reticle is dule 19 all CH 100:-/ www 012 CONNECT THE ROOMS Levels are cleverly connected rooms of various sizes. WORLDCRAFT'S camera shows you the level as you create it. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"LOSER Most people enjoy the inferiority of their best friends. — Lord Chesterfield Microsoft Compete head-to-head. Surrender nothing. SIDEWINDER game pad The Microsoft Sidewinder game pad makes it a fair fight for you and up to three of your best friends. Fook up to any of your Windows 95-based games and all four or three, or two) of you get the same fully functional, lightningfast game control and multibutton maneuvers. So no matter how many are plugged in, the competition's still quick and exciting. It's a perfect fit for hands of all sizes, letting you keep a solid grip and making it easier to use any of the buttons or triggers to vanquish your opponents. Record complicated, hard-to-remember multibutton moves and map them to a single button for swift execution of lethal maneuvers. Remember, the more SideWinder game pads you own, the more friends you can take advantage of. A little friendly competition never hurt anyone, right? Microsoft Where do you want to go today? www.microsoft.com/sidewinder/ 01996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft. Where do you want to go today? and Windows are registered trademarks and Sidewinder is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. "


"***** REVIEW  ERADICATOR NOTI)V OP Doom Stew DIFFICULTY LEVEL Mix Equal Parts DUKE NUKEM, DARK FORCES, And Hexen In 320x200 Broth by Thierry Nguyen h, the Doom-clone. Forever being refined, as A Primer On Eradication companies look for new ways to improve on the First off, for all you cheaters, just flip On that note, use the other weapons model of slaughtering on over to the 1,001 Cheats feature only for certain situations. Mines are things in first-person per for the codes. good for retreating, and so is weapon spective in a pseudo-3D  Use picture-in-picture only for slot seven. Even though slot seven is a world. From the master remote weapons (like the crawlers) character-specific weapon, it is always piece of Doom itself to and enemies. Looking through cam an explosive that leaves something such notable games as eras doesn't yield much detail, and behind. Use the flyer only when you DARK FORCES, DUKE NUKEM 3D, and the PIP is useless for the guided mis have room to maneuver, and the misnow QUAKE, the first-person action genre sile; by the time you get into missile sile when you have a straight line-ofhas seen steady evolutionary steps. Now view, it will have exploded. sight at the creature and need the firecomes Accolade's ERADICATOR. If I were Always destroy those towers with power. Finally, use the little \"crawlers\" to play the «mix and match titles and lightning on them. They're power gen to sneak around comers, and use components» game to describe erators, and they are usually key weapon slot 15 to kill a lot of enemies ERADICATOR, I would say that it's a blend power points for any forcefield or with minimal resistance. of DUKE NUKEM 3D's interactivity, with defense system you run into. the mission objectives and puzzles of  In terms of DARK FORCES, and a dash of multiple weaponry, I use a characters a la HEXEN. This is the first universal Weapon, shooter Accolade has developed, and as the Death Darts, as first steps go, it's a decent start. my standard. They are plentiful, and can I'M WATCHING YOU fire up to 200 One of Accolade's big promotions is rounds. When you the third-person perspective that counters start to run low, use the traditional first-person viewpoint. your pistol or shockWhile you can play the game from first wave cannon RC BOMBS Use the PIP window for the remote-conperson view, I found the design of (weapon slot 3) until trolled weapons, like this crawler-mine, which is a key ERADICATOR requiring me to play from you get more Death element in finishing this level. the third-person perspective. Dart ammo. One interesting twist they added that needs this thircl-person view is the MARIO quite useful, such as when you take concharacters. They differ mainly in the basic gameplay. The jumping puzzles that were trol of an enemy (you can control the attributes of defense, offense, and speed. the downfall of ULTIMA 8 aren't as bad in enemy and still see from your character). Elecna the mercenary is quick but flimsy, ERADICATOR, but they're still there. There This viewing feature is also used whenevKamchak is strong and lumbering, and are quite a few platforms scattered around er you look through a surveillance cam Dan Blaze is the balanced fellow. Another the various levels, and you will need to era. However, in certain situations, such factor separating the characters is the perfect your jumping skills; this is best as the guided missile, it's not as useful. weapons they use. Out of the 15 available done from the third-person perspective. The missile simply moves too fast for you weapons per character, there are five that While you can view your character from to guide it accurately. Still, the picture-in vary from character to character. seven other perspectives, I find those extra picture view is a good addition overall. Since only the beginning levels are difseven excessive; over-the-shoulder is the ferent for each character, and the rest are best way to play THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY identical, it's hard to see the differences in Another ERADICATOR feature is its pic Taking a cue from HEXEN, ERADI single-player mode. But when it comes to ture-in-picture view. Most of the time it's CATOR allows you to portray onc of three multiplayer, these differences will affect BUDICATOR Price: $49.99 Minimum Requirements: 486-66 or better, 8 MB RAM 30 MB hard drive space, VGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM, MS-DOS 6.0 or higher: supports all major sound cards. # of Players: 1-8 (Modem, serial, or IPX) Protection: None Designer: Scott Amos Publisher: Accolade San Jose, CA (800) 345-7744 Reader Service #: 322 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Vicious, interplanetary species have invaded. And our only defense is you. HORCHED  The fate of mankind rests upon your shoulders and you only have two weapons: a tank that morphs into a fighter plane and your own intelligence, Lucky you have that morphing thing. SEARCHED ATTAGE VA Designed for TEEN 2X Unbelievably intense gameplay across 18 distinct levels, demanding hair trigger shooting skills and razor-sharp strategic decisions, Incredible on-the-fly 3-D environments immerse you in the action State-of-the-art weapons to annihilate enemy creatures Full 360° freedom of movement with heightened SINT 3-D directional sound Allows up to 8 players over a Local Area Network www.vie.com 2 T CRiterion Studios Microsoft Windows 95 AGES 13 CONTENT RATIOS Y INTERACTIVE entertainment CIRCLE READER SERVICE +376 C 1996 Criterion Software Ltd. All rights reserved. Criterion Studies and Criterion Software are trademarks trademark of Vircin Enterstises Ltd. Microsoft Windows and the Windows Loco de resistered trademarks and in Scorched Planet mademark or Critenon Sortware Virginis a registered Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks belong to their rester cernies "


"REVIEW ERADICATOR ACTION ENGINEERING weaponry in the game. There are a total YOU WILL THEN KNVC CU SCC. WINDOW TO FLY TO 10X18... WEAPONRY of 15 weapons ranging from your fist to a ERADICATOR doesn't deadly kill-all fireball that homes in on its have a truc 3D engine, but cnemies. There are also weapons that you like DUKE it pushes 2D can remotely control and a mine that can graphics technology pretly be used as a camera far. Also like DUKE, it features interactive environ CAN IT ERADICATE ments, such as breakable THE COMPETITION? windows and computer terDespite the few good details and minals. However, PLOT COMPRESSION ERADICATOR'S plot is fleshed out in a you can have unique first level for each character, but the gameplay is basi small level seccally shoot-'em-up with a few limited twists. tions on top of other sections, your play style: Eleena is best for fast hitwhich is an admirable feat for a and-run attacks, while Kamchack is good 2D engine. This is evident in the for simple showdowns. first level for Dan Blaze, as you Also, after you finish the game, you hop into a secret room that lies OG HALIK 200m unlock the bonus fourth character. I don't on a platform above the ground. want to spoil it for you, but this fourth The levels are filled with lifts and PICTURE IMPERFECT The picture-in-picture feature character is pretty cool and can be used in floating platforms for you to lets you see action through the eye of a camera, a multiplayer matches as well. jump onto. guide robot and even from the tip of certain One big plus is the amount of Weapons. Don't fight futuristic creatures with a prehistoric weapon. boots EDITORS internet insider Available at: AAFES, CompUSA, Computer City, Electronics Boutique, Elek-Tek, Fry's Electronics, Incredible Universe and Nobody Beats the Wiz. Chun ASS PRODUCT "


"ERADICATOR  REVIEW NOTIV MISSION OBJECTIVES: QTEPEGTE TE HOLDE SECURITY FORCES GESTROY AT SICCITACS DAN PUTE EM 1 COPPET ER cannot challenge DUKE or QUAKE, though it does have enough to stand above the rest of the clones out there. Accolade was playing it safe with this one, and who knows, they might make a sequel. If they clo, I hope they can push the gaming envelope by doing what they should have from the beginning creaming up memorable creatures, using the engine for more than MARIO-esque runand-jump puzzles, and making different characters trily different among the characters, and those live SOUL CAGES ABS still function similarly for each person. I would've preferred completely different weaponry, which would have brought a tactical edge to the game that hasn't been seen before. Also, the chemics weren't very LE memorable. Doom and QUAKE had creatures that gave me nightmares, YOU ARE HERE ERADICATOR'S automap is actuwhile DUKE had comical pulp sci-fi ally quite well done, as it tells you your objec aliens. I will always remember tive, where nearby items are, kills, time, and Doom's Cyberdemon, QUAKE'S number of keycards for the bonus levels. Fiend, and DUKE's BadAss, but I won't remember G'or from enhancements, ERADICATOR just does ERADICATOR. not push gameplay hard enough in an And for you folks with the hot-rod innovative direction. With four unique gaming rigs, there's no hi-res here. The characters, I expected more varied game plays only in 320x200. Though weaponry or levels. Hexen lost replay graphics do not entirely make a game, it value because the levels were exactly the still would be nice to have something same no matter who you played, and I higher than the outdated and chunky was hoping that there would be level varilow-res display. cty in ERADICATOR's single player mode. So in the crowded world of 3D shootAlso, only five weapons are different ers, how does ERADICATOR fare? Sadly, it APPEAL: DUKE and QUAKE fans who need a new clone. PROS: Decent level design, innova. tive third-person view, wide selection of weapons. CONS: Characters too similar in solo play, identical levels limit replay value, average enemies, low-res graphics. RATEU* Introducing Spacerb 360 — the 3D game controller for Quake» For PC games like Quake there's no controller better. In fact, comparing the new SpaceOrb 360 Reallife 3D game controller to the joystick, keyboard or mouse is like comparing an arthritic old geezer to an Olympic athlete. The unique Power Sensor ball is the key. It practically translates your brain waves into on-screen motion. Push, pull and twist it to get fluid 360° motion in any and every direction for otherwise impossible combo moves. Use it also to play Duke Nukem Descent, and Doom.\" You will be stunned at what a technological leap this is. And even more stunned when you see the leap in your scores. Check out the SpaceOrb 360 Web site al www.spacetec.com for awesome reviews, the latest news, industry buzz and what current users are saying about it! aceOf6, pacetec IMC As 3D as your own life. Maybe more. "


"***** REVIEW HUNTER HUNTED NOTI)V DIFFICULTY LEVEL Hunting Season Head-to-Head Side-Scroller Is A Fun Break From The Usual 3D Fare MUNTER by Scott A. May ot long ago, players crooled You also have the role Tunter Hunted at the concept of first-perof either the Hunter or son 3D games. Now that the Hunted. As the store shelves are littered Hunter, your goal is with dozens of Doom simply to scck the exit knock-offs, maybe those and destroy everything old side-scrolling shooters in your path. As the weren't so bad after all. Hunted, your goals Apparently that's what the vary, from surviving a designers at Sierra's new certain length of time, ka.a. development team were thinking to collecting objects, to when they created HUNTER HUNTED. reaching a destination. This side-scrolling blast-fest has a delight Multiplayer mode ful retro look and feel, described internally splits the screen and is as \"LODE RUNNER on steroids.\" Relax, great fun. In coopera TICKET TO RIDE Various weapons and supplies are scattered though. Although the game's basic structive missions, players throughout the multilevel mazes, including pieces to this ture may be shopworm, its presentation is must work together vehicle, which is your only means of escape. anything but dated. -one as Jake and another as Carathe Den-to solve puzmost PC gamepads, which is the preMULTIPLAYER MASTER MISSIONS zles and overcome obstacles. The real ferred method of control. Response is In the future, Earth has been annihilated thrills come in the death match scenarios, good, but not always precise, especially by an alien race known as The Masters. a blazing game of hide-and-seek where when jumping from surface to surface. For entertainL everyone and Like most games of this type, HUNTER ment, the everything is HUNTED starts off easy, but quickly heats invaders stage a your enemy. up as you enter the larger, verminand gladiatorial game This mode is a puzzle-infested missions, Dynamix claims called Hunter to be considering both a level editor and Hunted. As con Store have been even supplementary missions, available as testants, players better with a downloadable patches. For the sake of assume one of modem option. side-scrolling fans, let's hope the game Price: $54.00 two roles: Jake, a sells enough to warrant such additions. At System street-wise 2D WITH any rate, this is a fun and refreshing Requirements: human survivor, Ixoo 20001 DEPTH change of pace from the usual 3D fare. Pentium 90 or better, 16 MB RAM, 35 MB or Carathc Den, WHERE ARE YOU? HUNTER HUNTED allows you Graphics hard disk space, SVGA an cnslaved beast to move in and out of the multilevel dungeons consist of 2D APPEAL: Fans of side-scrolling graphics, Windows 95, imported from along the z-axis through those doorways. backdrops, full 2x CD-ROM drive, arcade action, weary of first-person retreads. mouse; supports another ravaged of grimy detail Win95-compatible joy planet. The playing field is a series of and spot animation. Dungeon layouts are >PROS: Lots of large, intricately sticks, gamepads and sticks, gamepads and Labyrinths, located below Earth's demoldesigned levels, filled with explosive multilevel. scrolling up, down, left, and sound cards with DAC. action and terrific special effects. # of Players: 1-2 ished cities, each teeming with monsters, right. Each dungeon also has several par Split-screen, two-player deathmatch is Protection: None (CD traps, and puzzles. allel sections along the z-axis, adding particularly intense. must be in drive) The game can be played three ways: three-dimensional depth. >CONS: Incredibly Designers: k.a.a. slow load times. (Dynamix) single player (65 missions), multiplayer The characters are 3D rendered miniaCharacter control Publisher: Sierra On cooperative (15 missions) and head-to tures that stand out nicely from the back is sometimes slugLine head deathmatches (20 missions). In soligrounds. Unfortunately, though, they gish. Missing both Bellevue, WA (206) 649-9800 modem play and sometimes blend with solid objects. taire mode, you play either man or beast RATED * level editor. Reader Service #: 324 | depending on cach mission's objectives. The game offers special support for 166 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"ANOTHER CRITICAL HIT! \"If you thought Mech 2 was addictive, Mercs will have you wishing there was a clinic for PC game junkies...\" PC GAMER \"In a nutshell MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries is an incredible game.\" = NUKE \"I bought it and no one has seen me since.\" — GAME SPOT \"There's no denying that this is the best looking and sounding game set in the BattleTech Universe.\" MERCENARIES PC MULTIMEDIA & ENTERTAINMENT COMPUTER GAMING WORLD THE ALL-NEW SEQUEL TO MECHWARRIOR\"2 ACTIVISION FOSS MS-DOS & WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM TOUNDELDE HTTP://WWW.ACTIVISION.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #41 Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc.  1996 Activision, Inc. MechWarrrior, BattleTech, BattleMech and 'Mech are registered trademarks and Mechwarrior 2: Mercenaries is a trademark of FASA CORPORATION. O 1996 FASA CORPORATION. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners, "


"Dnt hogy THE LOST GAMES. THE RECOMT HETs. The Book. THE LIMITED EDITION COLECIBLES. Other Hindu Jewish Protestant Catholic etors "


"ROUND IN www.idsoftware.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #241 Distributed to www.gtinteractive.com GT Interactive Software Id Anthology TM 1996 id Software, Inc. Published by id Software, Inc. Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. All trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"WARWIND Conflict is the Great Teacher. And the lesson is in real-time! he ancient, alien world of Yayaun teeters on the brink of anarchy. For centuries, 4 diverse races have tolerated a precarious balance of power. But a new order is in the wind... one born of blood and fire! Advanced combat options include stealth movement and bio-mechanically enhanced units. Play solitaire or choose multiplayer and head-to-head play via network and modem. TEEN Online tutorial and popup windows help you learn the game quickly. ERE 256-COLOR SVGA DISPLAYS. WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM This real-time strategy game lets you carry your 8 favorite units from scenario to scenario. SFEEL A MINDSCAPE COMPANY Developed by DreamForge Intertainment. WAR WIND is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc., a Mindscape Company DREAMFORGEZ Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation.  1996 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. www.warwind.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #237 "


"CHARLES ARDAI  CLASSICS & PUZZLES Jack Be Nimble, Jack Be Quick Both JACK 2 And JACK SPORTS Are Sassy, Sarcastic And Hilarious 9 $2,000 Farm Dancing Bungen Burners Which of the following would be the best title for the scene? |f there's one thing the folks at Berkeley Systems understand, it's how to milk a franchise. Following the success of screen savers like After Dark, they gave us a sassy and sarcastic 'IV game show parody called You DON'T KNOW JACK. And because the thing was brilliant, it immediately shot to the top of the charts. Sure enough, a 400-question expansion set quickly followed, along with promises of more in the future. A few months later, the future is here. 6 The You DON'T KNOW Jack franchise is the master of gonzo trivia. 1. \"Laboratory Limbo Contest\" 2. \"Albert Beer Stein Hall\" 3. \"Last Tango in Manhattan\" 4.-E=MC Squared Dance\" Yorgat $2,000 Dan CHECK! HIT THE ROAD, JACK BIG AL'S BAR & GRILL You don't need to know the Theory of Relativity to laugh at You DON'T KNOW JACK, VOLUME 2. JACK's clever questions. and You DON'T KNOW JACK SPORTs both follow in the footsteps of the original, the mat of the first game: up to three players come in two flavors, improvement and former more closely. Both keep the forrace to buzz in and answer multiple expansion; in the case of JACK SPORTS, choice questions there's specialization as well. Under the  If you can't get enough You Don't KNOW JACK posed by a snidc offheading of improvement there isn't a (who can?), you might want to check out You screen host. Both also whole lot to cite, not surprisingly. The DON'T KNOW JACK NETSHOW, available at keep the little bits of only bad thing about the first game was www.berksys.com. At press time, the Berkeley gameplay (such as the the repetitiveness of the (relatively) long folks had a $5000 contest going. \"Screw Your musical passages that introduced each Neighbor\" option, question in a game. In both of the new Play which allows you to games these have been shortened and YOU DON'T KNOW JACK the netshow force another player to some variety has been added. FREE and Win $5000!! answer a question you As for expansion, this is not merely a find particularly hard) matter of there being hundreds of new and style (such as the questions to answer, though that is certwisted parodies of TV lainly the case. It's also a matter of new commercials that play question types being introduced, to keep after a game ends) that things fresh. VOLUME 2 contains some have made JACK such questions with visual aids, for instance: petshow a hit at parties. you see a photograph of Rodin's The differences \"Thinker\" with its arms missing and have YOU DONT KNOW FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"CHARLES ARDAI 1L PS! DIFFICULTY LEVEL CLASSICS & PUZZLES Sins in that wee bed. Brock swings. Gibberish questions require you to come up with a silly rhyme under time pressure. There's no better time to use the \"screw your oppoIt's My Way or the Bi-Way nent\" tactic-especial ly if he/she is laughing over the question. You can easily frustrate the walking sports almanac in your family with JACK SPORTS, because unlike say, Trivial Pursuit, sports knowledge is Nurz Hufby secondary to quick $4,000 -$3,000 thinking. $4,750 YOU DON'T KNOW buzzing in at random until they ended. you don't need much sports trivia knowledge at all in order to play JACK SPORTS. eneral que shownym to guess that the name of the modified statue should be \"The Thinker de Milo.\" It also contains haiku whose subject you have to determine (what TV character would have written, \"Coroner's office/l do the work but Quincy/Takes all the credit\"?) and \"Dis or Dat\" questions in which you have to indicate into which of two categories a given word or phrase falls. (Puck: Santa's reindeer or MTV personality? Mixture stop: musical instrument or sex organ?) Of course, the designers have retained the original \"special\" types of questions, such as the gibberish questions, which require you to figure out for example, what famous army recruiting slogan rhymes with \"Bits got rust. The slob spits a bad denture.\" Once in a very long while, you get to hit the road for a \"Fiber Optic Field Trip,\" in which an ordinary person poses a question for you to answer. And each game still ends with the «Jack Attack\" matching sequence, in which you have to buzz in when matches appear on the screen: «Billie Jean King\" and \"Bobby Riggs,\" for instance, in the category \"Bitter Rivals.\" In JACK SPORTS you have the additional fun of seeing JACK through a sports-colored lens. The fonts are changed into the chunky letters you see on football jerseys: the generic ball that splats on the screen between rounds is replaced by a baseball, basketball, tennis ball, or football: the sound effects include cheers and other appropriate matter (\"Cet Your Ice Cold 19 Here!\" the game shouts before question 19); and the number that represents you On-screen high-fives itself when you get a question right. Needless to say, the questions are all about sports, but they're still wildly creative (\"lf Mahatma Gandhi had represented India at the Olympics in freestyle wrestling...\") and sex-obsessed, so there is plenty here for non-sports fans to enjoy. In fact, except for the Jack Attack questions, which I tended to play by YOU DON'T KNOW The first game contained plenty of innuendo, but it stayed on the right side of the invisible, fine line dividing silly and sexy from sophomoric and embarrassing. Suggestive categories like \"Kiss With More Tongue\" and \"Little Pricks\" are line, and so are most of the host's elbow-in-theribs asides. But the designers, among whose good qualities I would list fearless audacity, don't know when lo stop. There's a lot of flatulence in this game, and a fair amount of vomiting. And the commercial parodies this time around make you cringe, with ads for \"Eat-andServe Colostomy Bags,\" \"No-Slip BenWa Balls» and «The Wedge Butt Cheek Separator\" appearing in place of the original game's much funnier \"Health Food Store Boy Doll\" song and \"Chockolicious Num-Num Bits.» Less Jim Carrey next time, guys. Otherwise, you're on a roll. & CPOBTE NO TRIVIAL ISSUE Actually, the JACK games really aren't about trivia in the conventional sense. Unlike some other recent trivia games that have tried to cash in on JACK's popularity, you don't have to know how many pounds the world's heaviest man weighed at his death in 1953 or how many episodes were in the full run of \"The Avengers.\" What you need are bits of marginal but comparably common knowledge, and you need to be able to recognize what bits are being requested at any given time. Jack would never ask, \"What color was the giant knight slain by Sir Gawain?\" lustead, it's \"If Sir Gawain went shopping, which of the following would frighten him: the Snuggles bear, the Pillsbury Doughboy, Capn Crunch, or the Jolly Green Ciant?\" Clever questions like this onc, combined with very funny retorts whether you guess wrong or right, make Jack a joy. One sign of just how good the writing is is that I've been known to play a three-player game by myself, just so I can hear the responses to all the wrong choices. There is just one problem with the new JACK games, aside from the obvious, which is that the idea isn't new any longer. This is the problem of good taste or, to put it another way, the problem of bad taste. Price: $29.99 each System Requirements: PC-486-33 or better processor, (486-66 or better recommended), 8 MB RAM, 16 MB hard drive space, Windows 3.1 or better, 256color graphics (640 x 480), 2x CD-ROM; supports Sound Blaster 16 and compatible sound cards. Macintosh-68040 Mac or any Power PC, 5 MB RAM, 16 MB hard drive space, 256-color monitor (640 x 480), 2x CD-ROM. # Of Players: 1-3 (hotseat) Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Jellyvision Publisher: Berkeley Systems Berkeley, CA (510) 540-5535 Reader Service # 325 APPEAL: Though the jokes sometimes seem aimed at the National Lampoon crowd, the questions will appeal to any fan of \"Jeopardy\" or other TV trivia game shows. PROS: Questions and gags every bit as creative and hilarious as in the original, with plenty of new surprises to keep things fresh. CONS: Sometimes a bit too fresh; the designers should ditch the worst of their toilet humor. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"TO MAKE IT BETTER, NE BLE! IT UP. FULL PINBALL GO S1. Because the only way to add more bumper-thumping thrills to Full Tilt! Pinball was to explode each table all the way up to full-screen. So now FULL TILT! 2 PINBALL, bursts on the scene with panoramic views and bonus-scoring missions that will blow your mind. And three new high-impact tables that land you smack in the center of the action. You'll flip for the new 3-D graphics, new ball animations and a barrage of new sounds, not to mention good old-fashioned table nudging. Now the best pinball ever is bigger than ever: MAXIS FULL TILT! 2 PINBALL. TRI Available for Windows 3.1/Windows 95. Coming soon for Power Macintosh.  Maxis, Inc. All rights reserved. Full Tilt! is a trademark and Maxis is a registered trademark of Maxis, Inc. All other trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. For product or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 800-33-MAXIS. Visit the Maxis Web site at http://www.maxis.com. Circle Reader Service #371 "


"***** REVIEW  SMART GAMES: WORD PUZZLES DIFFICULTY LEVEL Get Smart INTERMEDIATE Word Puzzles Serve Up More Cerebral Fun CLASSICS & PUZZLES Sant Games Word Puzzles Navowe Option Elaze Nord Hunter HARLEM CURRENT SCORE HOWL DEX HELE OKLAHOMA OON TO HAUCERBRY YA JABBEL LDLWLNA EEK LMSE SEG TO ABH AMEJ ATABNLOL KRT TLAPNMII SGT LEO 1 IS IT SOWLHANMESDM HAK SHDITWULFWKS IN TALAGRANPGI ED 3101 TUN SONWLNNYL BRL BE EWEGA OBUO HIU GL SR EN SERTL LRG REPMORDYB HDLNS GL VEGEBELOTEN NWRAOROSI MRRME ENARCOSWP GEAROV INAME SO IRRHEOE SHELLEYNOTE TMRT FOUNDONNEUSHES SAPPHO MAYERELK WAVE MUSSAGE IN KANADU DID. KUBLA KHAN KODE ON A ORBCIAN DON THE GIRL MANMASI 19000 ROSY FINGERED DANNET PARADISE LOS SHALL I COMPARE THEE TO A BHD WALK IN EBAUTY SONG OF MYSELF MOGLISS INTO QUIT by Charlotte Panther fyou adore word puzzles but find HOLD THE yourself filled with ennui as you VOWELS, POETRY glance over the insipid selection PLEASE provided each day in your local \"Then there's newspaper, perhaps it's time to Word Melt, in discard your well-chewed pencil. which you're HOW DO I LOVE THEE? 05000 THINK THAT SHALL NEVER SEE toss those dreary black-and-white given one word OF ARMS AND OF A MAN that you must form of cerebral exercise change, letter by Imagine taking four of your letter, into SONGS OF INNOCENCE favorite word puzzles-the crossword, the another. 0022 ONLOVED STRIKE TAM word melt, the word search, and the anaTorming specific 37040 A WWW.KORKUSVIBES gram-and throwing them into a mixing words, or using   0 122 120 bowl. The result? SMART CAMES WORD all the letters of PUZZLES #1: four new games, familiar in the alphabet in HEROES, BARDS, AND GRANFALLOONS Word Hunter tests your appearance, but each with certain surpristhe process can knowledge of poetry, pop culture, and pithy sayings. cs. As you play, you may notice elements score you bonus associated with one particular puzzle aris points. In Scanagrams, you gain bonus WORD PUZZLES certainly doesn't foring in another, while some completely points by unscrambling words, then guesssake substance for shadow: these are intelnow factors appcar out of nowhere. ing the punch line that links them all. ligent brain-teasers, set in a user-friendly Take the crossword, for example. If you think you're going to miss solving interface, which focuses more on practiInstead of filling in the answers to clues on the clues in Crossed Words, don't worry. cality than on prettiness. That's not to say a blank grid, SMART GAMES' Crossed In my favorite puzzle, Word Hunter, you it doesn't look good, just that unlike some Words provides you with a grid packed must figure out the answers to clues in other multimedia products it doesn't rely tightly with letters. Your job is to fill in the order to reveal the words you're searching upon a graphical extravaganza. for. The category could be wellTliis game has something for everyone. known pairs: if your clue was Whether you're a whiz at the New York LILO LIMEREN Troilus, you'd scarch for Cressida. Times crossword or you have problems kuceta DISCUDO Likewise, if the subject was poetry completing the puzzles in TV Guide, and your clue The Wasteland, you'd there's a WORD PUZZLE level just for you. Tutu Le LUNTATE look for Eliot. (Get ready to dust off And it sure bcats getting newspaper print GIAIALSE DIALAI LUMIA your Colden Treasury of Poems.) all over your hands.& QUTULILLE SUULLUSTO Puzzles vary between 60 and 99 COBUTON TEXTCWANGIL APPEAL: For anyone who relishes levels of difficulty, and if you find turning to the puzzle page of the UT E NOSTITUITUDITVITELTUVUTO the first few puzzles too casy, you newspaper each day, and wants some0.100.21230D can jump straight to the higher lev thing even better. A SHECKEL SAVED If you're into word jumbles. els. If you're completely stumped, PROS: New variations spice up these much-loved word puzzles. The Scanagrams will have you racking your brain for solutions are posted on the Smart interface is very user-friendly, with memories of vacations past. Games Web site. (Unfortunately, multiple levels of difficulty. Another players without Internet access will winner from Smart Games. black squares and create as many real just have to tough it out themselves. The CONS: Solutions words as possible. The more words you object of the game is to cam as many are only available on the Web. There create, the more points you scorc, and points as possible. Although only one perare only four basic there's an extra bonus if you complete the son can play at a time, you can save multi puzzle types, puzzle. (Every line, vertically and horizon ple games and compare scores with although each may vary slightly as skill D | tally, must make an actual word no gobfriends (or post your high scores on the level progresses. bledygook allowed.) Web site). WAGIN ll! SMART GAMES WORD PUZZLES CO000 12001 Price: $29.95 System Requirements: 386-SX or higher processor, 4 MB of RAM, 5 MB of hard drive space, 640x480 256 color SVGA graphics, Windows 3.1 or Win 95, 2x CD-ROM, Windows-compatible sound card, mouse. Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer/Publisher: Smart Games, Inc. Distributor: RandomSoft New York, NY (800) 788-8815 Reader Service #: 326 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Fore! Look out for the world's most challenging golf tournament. BRITISH OPEN CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF koran LOOKING GLASS TECHNOLOGIES www.lglass.com COMING SOON COMING SOON THE LOPEN CHAMPIONSHIP CIRCLE READER SERVICE #65 19% Looking Glass Technologies, Inc. All Rights Resened. British Open Championship Golf and Looking Glass are registre trademarks of Looking Glass Technologies, Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. op alt and takin.IRCLE READER SERVICE #65. les Technologies, Inc. All other trademarks an "


"Think you've mastered all these games?  BOE XenoSphere Fie Onders Economics T oy 000 BAD @HO SVEROVATO MESTER TOLAE JAMHUNKAIBURNINE TANKS! BEF AIR SELL MAP PLANETARY CONQUESTA Bir Rea racing COMAND CONQUER Terminal Velocity WARCRAFT HUMAN WWW.m lyer.com "


"So do they «I'm the Mad Dog TANKGIRL \"I'm the Quake master. You're fresh meat.\" Fresno, California New York, New York ONT Butte, Montana TRENChriGHTER \"Prepare to be eliminated.\" Houston, Texas The Doctor Toronto, Canada \"No one can Command and Conquer . No one.\" The Eliminator Santa Cruz, California BIG GUNS Your favorite games just got tougher to beat. Because Seattle, Washington we've added a random, unpredictable, nasty little thing called opponents. Welcome to Mplayer! The new Internet-based game service that lets you take on real, live players from all over the U.S. and Canada, in the latest, hottest games. We're talking about Quake. Command & Conquer. Deadlock. And more-with new games added all the time. With Mplayer, live opposition is only the beginning. Because you get to talk to these opponents in real time-using your own voice. You also get the fastest live action of any online game service, with no delays between player moves. And Mplayer gives you a place to hang out between games, where you'll find tournaments, contests, awards, expert advice, and lots more. Want to check out Mplayer? Visit our Web site at www.mplayer.com to download our software. If you'd rather have a CD, go to our Web site or call 1-888-MPLAYER. And get ready for the kind of opponents you won't find in a shrink-wrapped box. Wanha Play? PLAYER 01996 Mpath Interactive, Inc. All rights reserved. Mplayer, the Mplayer logo and Wanna play are trademarks of Mpath Interactive, Inc. All other names are prop erty of their respective companies. www.mplayer.com Circle Reader Senice #362 "


"Kicks. Bass.. THE ART OF Fly Fishing The realistic sights, sounds, psychology and art of fly fishing come to life on CD-ROM, in this PC-CD ROM challenging multi WINDOWS 95 level skill game. PHILIPS KIDS TO ADULT w CONTENT RATED ESRE Tired of catching bass? Ready for a challenging fishing sim? Welcome to the relaxing and challenging world of fly fishing on your PC. The Art of Fly Fishing Volume I recreates this skillful sport using live videotaped footage. Fish three of the United Kingdom's finest trout and salmon rivers: the Blackwater, Spey and Test. With the soothing sounds of nature and the intricacies of choosing the right equipment and flies, this fishing simulation puts you right in the water. The Art of Fly Fishing is not just a fun fishing simulation; it also contains an extensive library of information to help you learn more about the fish, their habitat and their behavior. Choose your fishing spot based on conditions including time of day, season, temperature and water currents. Once you've chosen the right conditions, a variety of flies and rods will help you land the fish of your dreams, provided your casting skill is up to par. After you've practiced, invite up to 5 friends to enter into a fishing competition where the winner receives a cash prize and the opportunity to upgrade his equipment. The Art of Fly Fishing; the only fly fishing simulation for your PC, To order, see your local retailer or call 1-800-340-7888 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #280 PHILIPS  Arc Development. Published by Gametek, Inc. Distributed by Philips Media. All rights reserved "


"DENNIS MCCAULEY  SPORTS sport sport Gettin' Schooled a lving GTE's NCAA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL Is Real March Madness YU NCAA blends the best elements of arcade and coaching action into an enjoyable simulation. hile pro and collegiate flavor to the tourney. those silly \"number one\" basketball Worse, you're assured of reaching March sponges. The game cams fans have Madness, even if you finish the regular a foul, however, for an gleefully season 0-28. unfortunate bit of coding run the that has players with sinfloor with WHATSAMATTAH U gle-digit numbers displaying zeroes on EAs excelGraphically, NCM trics, but it's no their backs as well. Number 7thus lent NBA NBA LIVE. While its large players are becomes 07. LIVE series noticeably pixelated, their movements are Perhaps the least pleasing graphic the past couple years, college hoops fans nonetheless fluid. The clever behind-theaspect of NCAA is its claustrophobic who have longed to create their own back pass, the subtle wrist motion as a viewing angle. Players follow the action March Madness have suffered through a jump shot is released, and the follow from a point slightly above court level. gaming slump. That's why I was excited to through on the slam dunk will please even The camera position changes with the get my sweaty palms on CIE'S NCAA hard-core hoops fans. flow of the ball but is controlled by the CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL, a groundCPU --with no customizing. breaking sports sim that combines the upW! This is troublesome in arcade close graphic elements of NBA LIVE with play, where at times you can the career concept pioneered by Sierra's lose all perspective beyond the FRONT PAGE SPORTS games. Although G Ent narrow confines of the ball the hybrid product has its problems, it handler. Overall court awaredoes succeed in clisling up a game that ness is an obvious casualty. has appeal for action-oriented gamers and NCAA offers arcade play, a computer coaches alike. coaching mode, and a fast sim NCM offers gamers their choice of 64 option. If your joystick is up to Division I schools to compete with. It's no PAINT JOB If you can handle the pixelated graphics, the challenge, NCAA's arcade coincidence that you're provided exactly NCAA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL offers fast, play is one of the toughest yet crough teams to complete the NCM challenging arcade-style action. in a basketball sim. The opposToumament, since your ultimate goal is to ing team's Al knows just what reach the Final Four and win the National Gamers will also soon notice that it wants to do, and then goes ahead and Championship. While the concept is NCM is rather wooden--in a nice way. does it if you let it. Coaching can be exciting, CTE threw up a brick by restrictIts planked courts are trimmed in school problematic, unless you're quick on your ing play to just the 64 included schools. colors and polished to a high shine that Air Jordans. The difficulty is mainly Sadly, no odelball underdogs are around reflects player movement. A harried caused by timeouts, which blitz by so lo sneak in-the Ball States and Drexels coach paces the bench nervously, and quickly that it's hard to make substitutions that annually lend so much excitement spectators hold up posters, signs, and and change strategies before the game WA returns you to the court. An Mac sports fans: there's one more reason to live. Sierra has finally released extended timeout option would NASCAR RACING for the Mac. More than be a welcome addition. In a nice just a port, the game has been updated touch, players let you know to include 31 drivers from the '96 seathey're fatigued by wiping their son, includes network play over brow or standing hunched over AppleTalk, includes single versions of at the foul line. Now if only the night races, and incorporates speech timeouts lasted long enough to recognition so you can talk to the pit get the subs in the game. crew. Now that it's here, of course, PC owners are moving on to NASCAR 2... ON DECK B 137 po a ONDE FEBRUARY 1997 "


"DENNIS MCCAULEY SPORTS CTIPS! Up Close & Personal OT Sports' ABC's MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL is at its best as a multiplayer game. If you have an Internet connection, you can access the company's Web site (www.otsports.com) for a couple of cool multiplayer options. The Match Up screen lets you find, challenge and set up kickoff times with other MNF owners for direct Internet play. The I. Challenge is a special online An early bug in NCAA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL that caused computer-controlled players to freeze with the ball has been addressed by a patch available at GTE's Web site (http://www.im.gte.com). tournament that will continue through the regular NFL season. You play in real time as coach of one of the teams of the upcoming televised MNF games against someone representing the other team. Winners will receive all sorts of MNF-related goodies game. Adding this element would have increased both the realism and the challenge of NCM. Fretting whether your dominant 72\" sophomore center might declare for the NBA draft would add a healthy dose of tension to the strategizing. UCLA Bruins Pacific 9 Rebounds 7 2 Turnovers 3 Defense 8 Massachusetts Minntemen Eastern CAREER OPPORTUNITIES While the recruiting aspect is fun, it What helps elevate NCAA could be more challenging. Camers who CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL above the take time to analyze the scouting reports ordinary is its career mode. Employing will have little trouble uncovering the winscarce recruiting resources to attract the ning strategy. By not wasting time on best talent to your program lends an indisunlikely recruits, you will quickly learn putably exciting aura to play. At the start of how to focus on the type of player you cach new scason, you're taken to a recruitcan successfully attract. After a few strong ing screen where you'll have an opportunirecruiting seasons, your record improves, ty to compare scouting reports on hundreds of (fictional) high Exhibition school seniors. Since NCAA rates players for offensive, defensive, and physical skills, it's Match-ups U Moss 3 Scoring 5 fairly casy to find the types of players you need. Landing 13 them is another question. Overall 1 The prep stars are interested in your school's coach, reputation, and Final Four potential. GTE Entertainment Getting substantial playing SCHOOL SPIRIT You can choose from among 64 time, playing close to home, Division 1 teams to lead on your long march to Final and playing for a schwol that Four glory. shows an interest in them are also important issues for recruits. NCM and you'll move deeper into the NCM serves as your bird dog, letting you know Tournament. Now you're able to attract Price: $59.99 what's on a kid's mind and what schools those hotshots who base their college System Requirements: he's leaning toward. decision on Final Four potential. Soon 486DX2/66 or better; Armed with this information, you must you're one of the four. I successfully MS-DOS 5.0 or better, choose how heavily to pursue each player. employed this strategy twice, taking both 8MB RAM, 2x CD-ROM drive, SVGA graphics; Your recruiting is measured as heavy, averVillanova and Wake Forest from poor supports Sound age or light efforts, with five of each type rankings to national titles in six years. Blaster-compatible available. Be careful, though. There's As in most career mode games, player sound cards. # of Players: 1-2 nothing more frustrating than sinking four ratings change over time, and player attriProtection: None (CD heavy tries into a sought-after point guard tion takes its toll on your roster. While ratmust be in drive) only to have him sign with a rival school. ings can both increase and decrease, it's Designer: Jerry Albright Not only have you missed out on the playnot entirely clear what drives the changes, Publisher: GTE er you wanted, but while you were woo although playing time does seem to be a Entertainment ing him, dozens of other top prospects factor. Each year players leave through Carlsbad, CA (619) 431-8801 were inked to letters of intent by your graduation, but none ever seem to bail Reader Service #: 327 | competition. out early for the instant riches of the pro AT THE BUZZER Cive NCM a few extra points for including a good manual increasingly rare these days. Keep the manual handy, too, since the game's nonintuitive interface can be difficult to navigate, Overall, though, NCM is a well-conceived effort, blending the best elements of arcade and coaching action into an enjoyable simulation. In some ways, the differences between NCM and its NBA gaming competition reflects the difference between the college and pro games themselves. Both are fun and exciting, but the NBA products come at you with a whole lot more multimedia hoopla. Nonetheless, if you love college ball, NCM CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL. is a solid pick NCAA LAPIORSAL SKETBAL APPEAL: Fans of college hoop and gamers who enjoy career mode sports sims, as well as those who crave very challenging arcade action. PROS: Unique recruiting aspect, nicely modeled player movement, ability to work through a multiple-season career. CONS: Recruiting game is too easy, player graphics are not up to current standards, viewing angle is out of player's control and at times hinders arcade play. RATED* CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"There can only be ONE #1 NCAA BASKETBALL \"We got NEXT! Coming March 1997! www.mindscapegames.com MINDSCAPE SPORTS ALTERNATIVE Windows 95 CD-ROM PlayStation 1996 Mindscape, Inc. All rights reserved. Mindscape is a registered trademark and Mindscape Sports Alternative and the MSA logo are trademarks of Mindscape, Inc. The NCAA and Final Four are registered trademarks of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and are used under license by Mindscape, Inc. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. PlayStation and the PlayStation logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc, All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #133 "


"***** REVIEW  TROPHY BASS 2 SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Gill Joy Sierra Serves Up More Of That Funky Fresh Fish With TROPHY BASS 2 by Scott May BULL SHOALS DEPTH 03.4 FEAT SESUATS TROPHY BASS 2 | ever underestimate the and guruassure that power of a niche market. In everyone will get a bite. 1995, TROPHY BASS sur Chat lines let you inquire prised everyone-particu about current \"hot spots larly the marketing folks at on the lake, brag about Sfriko! Sierra by remaining the your luck, or lament the company's top-selling title ones that got away. for more than 12 months The excellent online Given the original's suc user manual features cess, it's not surprising to vidco tips from Kevin Van see Sierra dip their nets one more time Dam and other awardFISH-ON! with TROPHY BASS 2, part of the compa winning bass pros. Other ny's growing FRONT PAGE SPORTS line. options include hundreds LUCKY STRIKES Land a fish and reel 'em in, but don't Stylistically, this new version looks and of user-defined lure types expect your prey to give up without a fight. plays pretty much the same. Several new and configurations, rod key components, however, have been sizes, line weights, and casting styles. If of fishing in a barrel. A better solution added to increase the challenge and pro the three base skill levels aren't challengwould be a 360-degree virtual camera, long play value. If you liked the original, ing enough, you can manually tweak nine locked on your position, employing a 3D you are going to love what they have different fishing variables. Sierra even first-person perspective. As is, you're done here. claims to have improved the fish AI, granted an overhead view of the suralthough you'd have to be a bona fide rounding water well beyond the normal FISHING AROUND fishhead to notice. visual range. While this makes fishing a To begin, five new lakes have LIVEWELL breeze for first-timers, veteran anglers will been added to the roster, for a 1. Channel Catfish 210.0 07. TOTAL WEIGHT find the challenge greatly dissipated. total of 10, including the exoti2. Largemouth Bass 215.0 oz. 5 lb. J oz. Overall, though. TROPHY BASS 2 fur3. Spotted Bass 1 lb. 14 07. cally named Castaic Lake, CA, ther refines what's come to be the best and Lake Kissimmee, FL. Each fishing simulation available. The game's lake is rendered in full photostreamlined play mechanics are easy bait, realistic glory, including every 2 lb. O oz. even for novice anglers, while the wide inch of shoreline, and a toposelection of lakes and multiplayer options graphic navigational map. It's release will have you hooked. OK, enough puns. like hitching up your desktop Go fish. CATCH OF THE DAY Tall fish tales are part of the for a coast-to-coast dream fishsport, but your livewell never lies. ing trip. APPEAL: Armchair anglers of all skill levels. Although fishing alone can be fun and REEL LIFE PROS: 10 accurately rendered relaxing, nothing beats the challenge of Despite all this realism, the game takes lakes, improved fish Al, online multimatching techniques with other live fishcertain liberties in regard to the actual player tournaments and a boatload of ermen in an online multiplayer tourna simulation of casting, catching and reeling variables guarantee almost limitless ment. You can take on a friend in a two in your aquatic prize. The angler's vantage gameplay. player modem game, or assemble an point is too omnipresent-visible onCONS: The single-minded, pasoffice expedition with a LAN connection. screen at all times, even when you cast 15 sive nature of this The biggest kick, however, is fishing the to 20 feet away. As you reel the lure in, the sport may prove Internet, where dozens of people from surface water scrolls upward, while your tedious, and some visual aspects of around the world can join in competitive boat remains fixed at the bottom of the casting are overor cooperative play. Four online skill screen. This makes it very difficult to simplified. levels-novice, intermediate, advanced gauge distance and gives the impression 2. Largemouth Bass Price: $59.95 System Requirements: 486DX/66 or better, 8 MB RAM, 17 MB hard disk space, 2x CD-ROM drive, SVGA graphics, Windows 3.1 or better, mouse; supports Win 95-compatible sound cards: Windows 95, modem, network card or Internet connection required for multiplayer options # of Players: 1-100 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designers: Randy Dersham and Kurt Weber Publisher: Sierra OnLine Bellevue, WA (800) 757-7707 Reader Service #: 328 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"TIRED OF THE SAME OLD LINKS? CHANGE COURSE. ISIM GOLF Hal THEN CHANGE IT AGAIN. AND AGAIN. SimGolf-with the new Course Architect gives you the power to create endless courses, as heartbreaking or handicap-friendly as you like. Go ahead, dig yourself new fairways, bunkers and lakes. Choose from hundreds of objects to make one-of-a-kind courses. (Think Sahara-size sandtraps. And watery golf ball graves.) Video tips from legendary course architect Robert Trent Jones, Ir. help you turn your blueprints into G greens. You can even play -or customize-two Jones masterpieces, Rancho La Quinta\" and The Prince Course. Then tee off on your new links. Or round up a foursome to play your custom course on the Internet. SimGolf. It's the ultimate 18 holes (some assembly required). Use the powerful Course Architect to cusOnce you've designed your ideal course, tee tomize courses. Make them flat or hilly, place off for high-stakes skins, stroke or match play, SIMGOLF COMPETE ON COURSES YOU CREATE. holes and hazards, and it's too time. DOSTLUS TA MAX Available for Windows 95. 01996 Maxis, Inc. All rights reserved. Simboli and Course Architect are trademarks and Mnds is a registered trademark of Maxis, Inc. Hancho La Quinta is a trademark of TII. Desert Clevelopment Limited Partnership. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. For produd or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 800-33-MAXIS Visit the Maxs Web site at http://www.maris.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #76 "


"INTRODUCING NCAA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL ON PC CD-ROM It's a college dream come true. It's about adrenaline. Bragging rights. And wall-to-wall basketball. Welcome to the nirvana of college hoops. The Big Dance. The NCAA Basketball Tournament It's 64 of the top  S; Division I teams in the country. Playing in their own arenas. With all the excitement of the college crowds and rivalries built-in. And artificial intelligence so advanced, your players' skills actually improve as they go from true freshmen to savvy seniors. Consider this your official invitation. An \"at-large\" bid to the celebration they call March Madness Lace up your high-tops, Cinderella. 'Cause you're going to the dance. WANNA GO TO THE DANCE? YAA FOUR O OUTDOOR Devil En rent ITETI NETWORK AND MODEM OPTIONS Challenge your friends for season or tournament play. ADVANCED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE Develop and guide your players from freshman to senior year. EXTENSIVE RECRUITING FEATURE Rebuild your team after each season of play. 192 FOR MORE INFORMATION CHECK OUT OUR WEB SITE AT WWW.IM.GTE.COM AVAILABLE NCAA SEE YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR ORDER DIRECT BY CALLING 800 GTE TODAY, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #244 S HESHINIUS E Entertainment 1996 GTE Vantage Inc. All rights reserved. The GTE logo is o registered trademark of GTE Corporation. The NCAA and NCAA logos are registered trademarks of the Kalion Collegiate hifletic Association and used e thod of time "


"DENNY ATKIN SIMULATION/SPACE Back To 'Names simvolutio ing im sim y that cates cor Vietnam Scenarios And Multiplayer Action Make This Sim Worth One More Visit he Vietnam War has been neglected by sim producers since the release of Spectrum HoloByte's old FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER. This is probably another result of those same marketing «experts» who have quashed Korean War sims in the past, on the theory that the only proven markets are the world wars and ultramodem jets. Luckily, Jane's Combat Simulations decided to listen not to the marketing department but to the users who actually play their simulations. After overwhelming requests for a Vietnam sim, Jane's delivered quickly with their Windows 95 update of the venerable US NAVY FICHIERS (USNF). paign missions set during the Vietnam You'll fly all the includconflict, in addition to multiplayer supported missions in either the and new Jane's multimedia reference data. Phantom or Crusader; New flyable aircraft include the F-43 you can pilot the MiCs in Quick Missions and F-4 Phantom Ils, the F-8 Crusader, or use-created Pro Missions. Even if the MiC-17 Fresco, and the MiG-21F you're a whiz at the original USNF, you'll Fishbed C. Also present and flyable in find you have to relearn combat maneumultiplayer mode) are the A-4E Skyhawk vering when flying these vintage supersonic jets. They're very fast but not maneuverable. Get into a tuming fight with a nimble MiC-17 and you're toast. You'll need to take advantage of vertical maneuvers and your jet's ability to speed away from your opponent, allowing you GUNFIGHTER CORRAL The new planes in USNF 97, such as this to regroup into a F-8 Crusader, are highly detailed; the original planes, however, are better position. still plain. You'll also have to develop new and new models of the A-7 Corsair II and techniques to deal with the far less effecA-6 Intruder. Unfortunately, Vietnam stative missiles of the Vietnam era. Heatples such as the A-1 Spad, A-5 Vigilante, seeking Sidewinders are effective only and F-105 Thud are nowhere to be found within a very small cone right behind the in these skies. cncmy's tailpipe, and hitting with a Even hard-core sim pilots will enjoy Crusader vs. MiG-17 matches in USNF 97's multiplayer mode. SAME FACE, NEW PERSONALITY USNF 97 is a single-CD game that includes all the aircraft and missions from the original US NAVY FICITIERS and the MARINE FIGHTERS add-on. New to this version are 10 single missions and 25 camON THE RADAR If you're frustrated by JetFighter lil's slow frame rates in higher graphics resolutions, a solution may be just around the corner-if you don't mind a little hardware investment. Mission Studios is hard at work adding support for Intel's MMX processor, as well as the 3dFX Voodoo and other highend 3D chipsets. Also planned is multiplayer support, a mission editor, and a campaign add-on that may be based in more familiar territory. Meanwhile, Longbow developer Andy Hollis has made no secret of the fact that his East Coast team is working on a \"fixed-wing jet simulation. Our information that this is to be yet another F-15E Strike Eagle simulation seems to be confirmed by recent posts by Hollis on the Internet, where he jokingly responded to someone's attempt at using reverse psychology to get him to produce an F-15 sim with \"You're right...I give up. I'll never do another F-15 sim again. \"Bartender, another round!... and I used to be good <sigh>...\" We're working on infiltrating the Skunkworks now and will follow up in coming months with more information on this late-'97 release-as soon as we get our operatives away from Andy's bartender, FEBRUARY 1997 CC "


"DENNY ATKIN SIMULATIONISPACE Sparrow from any angle is only a little The engine has more likely than winning the lottery seen some minor Radars are also realistically less effective. improvements, Unfortunately, these classic planes utialthough they're evilize the same pop-up Multi-Function dent only in the Display (MFD) and HUD metaphor as Vietnam scenarios. the modern jets -instrumentation far too The planes and high tech for this era. Another annoy groud terrain look ance-some of the ATF improvements, much better, and you such as the ability to display more than now have to deal with four instrument windows, weren't carried flak bursts and more back to USNF 97. realistic SAMs. Flight modeling's a bit bet SCRATCH ONE TINKERTOY As this MiG-17 closes on its tail, GOIN' DOWNTOWN ter, but it's still pretty the A-4 pops its speedbrakes in an attempt to make the attackUSNP 97's missions are based on actubasic. Although it's a er overshoot; someone's been watching too much Top Gun. al Vietnam strikes. Some liberties are Win 95 game, it still taken, such as sending Navy F-4s on mis looks and feels just like the DOS version. well as in ATE the Phantom/Crusader sions actually flown by air force zoomies. It's a little slower on some systems, a little vs. MiG-17/21 combat is much more but overall the historical flavor is there. faster on others, with video card perfor exciting. The radical performance differThe flavor of Vietnam is there, but much m ance being the deciding factor. ences between the various planes and is missing. There's no air-to-air reMultiplayer mode is essentially identithe ineffective missiles make for thrilling fueling-crucial in the real conflict-and cal to that found in Jane's ATF, allowing dogfights. Many hard-core realism stickMiG-17s tenaciously light to the death LAN, modem, and null-modem conneclers who don't like USNF's simplified instead of employing the one-pass slashtions. While Internet play isn't possible environment are still drawn into the muland-run techniques actually employed by yet, nor is connection to ATF, both are tiplayer mode. the NVAE. It doesn't hurt gameplay, but planned enhancements. Although some The Jane's reference section is it's sure to irk aviation buffs. of the extra planes here aren't modeled as packed with aircraft data and some nicely done videos of the flyable aircraft, US NAVY FIGHTERS 97: all available planes, including those not normally fly and there's a superb spiral-bound manuIn multiplayer mode, able in single-player mode. Now you can fly any air al included as well. you can fly any of the craft-including the Atomic Moth introduced in Marine Realism sticklers may want to wait for sim's planes, including Fighters-as you practice against the computer. Eagle Interactive's PHANTOM ACE, due those available only to computer-controlled pilots in If you hold down the right Ctrl-Alt-Shift sequence in late 1997, for the full Vietnam experisingle-player missions. But what if you want to prac when choosing Single Mission, you can fly any of the ence. But if you don't mind a little game tice flying the A-4 Skyhawk? Simply hold down the campaign missions. Not only that, but you can fly any in your simulation, USNF 97 is a fun right Ctrl. Alt and Shift keys and click \"Create Quick of the single-player-mode aircraft when you enter a change of pace. Mission.\" Now continue to hold down those keys as campaign mission using this method. Those Vietnam you select your aircraft. The sim will toggle through missions are a lot easier in the F-22! APPEAL: Fans of the original USNF JETFIGHTER III: looking for new missions or multiplayThe best solution for getting a decent frame rate on er play; pilots so anxious for a anything less than a 200 MHz Pentium Pro is to drop Vietnam sim that they're willing to tolerate USNF's compromises. down to 640x350 mode, which maintains a high level >PROS: Sixties-era jets provide a of detail but also allows for speedier updates. Alas, much more interesting challenge than many graphics cards don't support the 640x350 superplanes like the F-22. Extremely mode, so you're stuck in either running the pokey addictive multiplayer play, especially in the Vietnam arena. Multimedia con640x400 mode or hopping in the Wayback Machine tent is well done, not just filler. and flying in 320X200 mode. Fortunately, the shareCONS: Creaky 1994 graphics ware SciTech Display Doctor 5.3 (formerly known as engine and flight UniVBE) plugs VESA support holes in almost any models have seen graphics card. With SDD 5.3, most graphics cards only tiny improvements. Modern SCOOTER VS. MOTHRA Using the USNF 97 cheat, will support all of Fili's resolutions, including MFDs and HUD you can fly the A-4 against the Atomic Moth. 640x350. For more information, see displays out of http://www.scitech.com place on Vietnamera planes. STIPS! RATE CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Sure, there are cheaper PC and Mac game controllers. But if you're ready to get serious, you need the high-quality. built-to-play-rough peripherals from CH Products. When you're ready to get serious, you'me ready, un joysticks, throttles, flight yokes, rudder pedals. and other controllers are born in the USA, and made to take the heat of any battle, race or game you throw their way. So put on your game face, get down to your computer dealer and grab the game controllers made for serious players. FlightStick Pro (PC & Mac) FlightStick Force FX CH Gamepad (PC & Mac*) Ch Pedals (PC & Mac*) Pro Pedals F-18 Fighterstick (PC & Mac* F-16 CombatStick F-16 FlightStick Pro Throttle (PC & Mac* Ch Throttle Virtual Pilot Pro (PC & Mac*) Virtual Pilot Gamecard 3 Automatic *Coming soon. Visit our web site! http://www.chproducts.com/ CH PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083 Phone 619 598 2518 Fax 619 598 2524 http://www.chproducts.com/ America OnLine: Keyword: CH Products CompuServe: Go GAMEDPUB PAUCIS Available at: American ADO Inc.. American TV. Best Buy Bits & PCs. Circuit City Computer City  Computer Express Comp USA. Computerware  Egghead  Electronics Boutique . Elek-Tek Fry's Electronics  The Good Guys . Incredible Universe. Infotel. Ingram Micro .J & R Computer World Jetstream Lochmere  Media Play. Micro Center. Montgomery Wards Electric Avenue Nobody Beats the Wiz. Ollice Maxi  PC Connection, Inc. PC Tronic. Ricom Electronics Ltd. . Sears. Software & More Software Plus Ltd.  Susteen. Ultimate Electronics United CD-ROM Wal-Mart CIRCLE READER SERVICE #60 "


"***** REVIEW . FLASHPOINT: KOREA DIFFICULTY LEVEL SIMULATION/SPACE Restringing Longbow HOV No Back-Seat Driving In This Updated AH-64D APACHE Sim by Robin Kim improved atmosphere and n the rugged borderlands between gameplay. Nearly all these North and South Korea, death enhancements apply to the comes swiftly to the careless or missions from the original impatient Apache crew. Nap-of game as well. the-earth flight through the twisting maze of claustrophobic SPLIT PERSONALITY canyons is a risky proposition, but The most obvious new one you can't refuse, because feature is the ability to jump every hill you crest could be an to and from the copilot/gunambush waiting to happen. For ner (CP/G) cockpit position, those who have mastered Jane's AH-64D with its optical relay tube COPILOT/GUNNER'S SEAT The new crew position in LONGBOW and are looking for new chalfront allows the best use of the TADS and radar, but the and two extra multifunction lenges, FLASHPOINT: KOREA (FPK) may displays. The avionics associeye-level canopy brace makes back-seat driving best for be the ticket to chopper heaven. ated with this position are low-level work. significantly expanded from the to either side, permitting a 270-degree arc simplified treatment they were to be covered in 90-degree segments. given in LONGBOW, making them All this added workload is not everyconsiderably more useful. The one's cup of tea, so FPK lets you select TADS (Target Acquisition just the options you want. Even if you Designation Sight) now displays ignore all the new gadgets you have to realistic pictures in all three play with the game's enhanced wingman modes at the correct magnificaeffectiveness (see sidebar), enemy Al, and tion levels, aiding target detection mission complexity may still draw you in. and identification. New radar controls allow you to tailor the THIS IS WAR WHITE LIGHT, WHITE HEAT The FLIR sensor width and direction of the scan Unlike LONGBOW, cnemy units here makes targets stand out in stark contrast to the zone or zoom in on a particular don't just sit there as you pound away at terrain, and it can also be toggled so targets arca. Full-screen TADS and radar them with your chain gun, but move to appear dark against a light background. displays are available from the CP/C's seat for extra detail. The heart of FPK is a hypothetical Other changes better reflect AH-64D's campaign that begins as the North real-world capabilities. The RF Hellfire is Korcan army surges south across the borgiven its due as a true fire-and-forget misder, precipitating a second Korean war. sile, radar detection ranges have been Scores of stand-alone missions are includdrastically reduced, and target icons now cd in addition to the ones comprising this accurately convey needed information. branching tree-structured campaign. Curiously, one glaring omission remains: Unlike many add-ons, FPK goes beyond the ground scanning mode is still limited providing just a new locale and extra vehito a 90-degree arc clirectly alcad despite BIG GUN This A-10 will make many cle types to blow up. New features and information from both Jane's and Martin passes over a priority fire zone, using its enhancements are found in almost every Marietta (a Longbow radar manufacturer) legendary 30mm cannon and potent aspect of the sim, resulting in greatly that show the real unit can rotate farther Maverick missiles. LASH KOREA INVALID TVPE 214 200 MSL Price: $29.95 System Requirements: 486DX4/100, 8 MB RAM, local bus SVGA video, 2x CD-ROM drive, 19 MB hard drive space, MS-DOS 5.0 or higher, mouse. (Original AH-64D LONGBOW must also be installed.) # of Players: 1 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designers: Andy Hollis and Origin Skunk Works Publisher: Jane's Combat Simulations Austin, TX (800) 245-4525 Reader Service #: 330 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"The reason doesn't strike twice same place in the is that the same place isn't there the second time. Willie Tyler Digital precision. Deadly accuracy. SIDE UNDER 3D Pro Imagine scorching your enemies with razor-sharp precision. With the world's first digital-optical joystick, the Sidewinder 3D Pro, you'll balance complex moves with maximum control to get the ultimate in responsive game play. You won't have to recalibrate, even after hours of play. And every handle rotation instantly changes your viewpoint, Digital Overdrive lets the joystick communicate more efficiently with your Windows 95-based games. All the better to singe your competition. Microsoft Where do you want to go today? www.microsoft.com/sidewinder/ 01996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks and where do you want to go todayi and Sidewinder are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation "


"REVIEW FLASHPOINT: KOREA Wingman Evolution SIMULATION/SPACE achieve preset goals. T-80 tanks defend themselves or run away when attacked. Infantrymen fire rifles and shoulderlaunched SAMs at you. Any unit that spots you may call in air support, making stealth a prime consideration. The enemy activity and logical reactions impart a real sense of the battlefield Interactions with friendly forces also contribute to the greater feeling of immersion in FPK. Many missions are long and complex, with status reports and even new orders coming in over the radio. When escorting Rangers to a strike on a North Korean chemical weapons plant, for example, you must take out the facility's air defenses; deal with enemy reinforcements; provide covering fire; then escort the Rangers home. the original, so it feels almost like an entirely new game despite its add-on pricing. Some may be put off by the large amounts of time and energy that many of the more demanding missions require, but nobody ever said being an army aviafor was easy. Those willing to invest the effort will be rewarded with an imprecedented level of realism in this, a new benchmark for flight simulations n LONGBOW, your wingman was essentially a slowmoving Hellfire carrier who needed constant handholding. Forget about him: he's been given the boot in favor of a smarter, quicker, and more communicative replacement with all the makings of an efficient killing machine. New commands let you direct your wingman to pop up and pass targets he detects on to you, or stay planted while you move to a different battle position. His reaction time to orders is gratifyingly short-there's almost no hesitation before he engages ground or air targets. Given a priority fire zone, he'll ripple-fire a swarm of Hellfires (even in lock-on after launch mode) to destroy the assigned targets as rapidly as possible. No matter what orders he's given, he always tells you exactly what he's doing, and will even report how much ammo he has remaining when queried. Your wingman in FPK is an indispensible asset. Protect him, and he will repay your efforts the first time you blunder into an enemy ambush-few are quicker on the draw than he is. APPEAL: Fans of AH-64D LONGBOW and other helicopter sims seeking bolder challenges, increased complexity, and more involving gameplay. PROS: Improves almost every aspect of an already great sim. Enhancements carry back to original missions. CONS: Multiplayer fans will have to wait for the next add-on; landscape still devoid of trees; slightly more demanding hardware requirements. QUANTITY AND QUALITY FPK is far more than a mere mission disk: thc enhancements in every major area result in gameplay that transcends RATE THUNDER SEAT \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback system used in Real F-16 Simulators KEVIRTUAL UTOPIA!\" COMPUTER SHOPPER Now Available to the Public HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates law frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES Put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1 800. 8-THUNDER Whether its the rumble of your NASCAR of recoil of your Chain Gun, the ThunderSeat lets you blast off to a new level of realism. ThunderSeat Technologies 17835 Sky Park Circle Suite C Irvine, CA 92614-6106 714. 851-1230 Fax: 714.851-1185 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #161 "


"Sega Rally Championship\" The arcade racing hit. Now available on PC. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #180 "


"***** REVIEW  FLIGHT SIMULATOR FOR WINDOWS 95 DIFFICULTY LEVEL INTERMEDIATE Still Aloft The Old Bird Flies To Win 95 With A Minor Overhaul SIMULATIONISPACE by John Nolan the desired weather box with the mouse. Easter Eggs In The Clouds ince MICROSOFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR 1.0 hit the shelves in November of 1982, over three million copies have been sold, making it not only one of the most successful simulations of all time, but also one of the longest lived. The sixth iteration, MICROSOFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR FOR WINDOWS 95, sports a new Win 95 interface, two new aircraft, an excellent aviation reference section, more lessons, and scenery improvements. However, you'll also find some of the previous versions' flaws here as well. ustomizing flights is easier thanks to the Win 95 point-and-click interface. You can select the time of day, as well as month, day and year. While this may seem just a minor adjustment to vary your flights, there are a few surprises hidden in the calendar: N ew Daire Yen MAINT Microsoft REINFORCEMENTS HAVE ARRIVED Tivo new aircraft, the Boeing 737-400 airliner and the Extra 300S, are excellent additions and long overdue. The available choices now cover most types of unarmed aircraft, and the 737 provides a chance to step into the cockpit of a very popular commercial airliner. The extensive database of airports and navigation aids, coupled with an clementary 737 operating handbook, allows you to create credible imitations of airline trips. There are even a few instrument approach plates. It's overly simplified, but it's a decent introduction. Similarly, the Extra 300S allows you to experience one of the most exhilarating aspects of flying: acrobatics. You can ratrace around the sky, yanking and banking for the sheer fun of it, or you can try the programs Aerobatics Course Competition Aerobatics are precise, challenging maneuvers; you'll get instrucWHERE'S WILBUR? Check out Kitty Hawk, NC, on December 17, 1903, at noon (go to N 036 01 10.5999 / W 075 40 46.4675; stay below 50 feet and set the scenery options at Dense). Many scenery areas have date-related Easter eggs such as this Wright Flyer. Simulator ons as POLISHED WINDOWS First off, the old, agonizing joystick setup routines are gone; the Joystick setup applet in the Win 95 Control Panel does the jobs. On start-up, the Fly Now button defaults to the Cessna 182 at the easiest aircraft settings, and you begin in Chicago at Meigs Field with preset scenery options. While you can create and save flights with the specific options you desire, there's still a bit of extra pointing and clicking before flying. Moreover, each time you set up in a new aircraft or airport, you must resclect all your personal preferences. After so many versions, you'd think Microsoft woull let you select and store personalized start-up defaults. FLIGHT SIMULATOR'S world database contains over 300 airports, and you can create representative weather cffects. \"Though these two assets make the sima capable instrument procedures trainer, creating weather areas is unfortunately awkward. You must enter two points using latitucle and longitude to define the arca, and then specify its wiclth in miles. It would be much simpler to display a map and allow you to zoom in and clrag open Price: $59.95 System Requirements: 486DX/66 or better (Pentium recommended), 8MB RAM (16MB recommended), 40MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, Windows 95, 2x CDROM, Windows 95compatible sound card, mouse. Protection: None Designer: Bruce Artwick Publisher: Microsoft Seattle, WA (800) 344-2121 Reader Service #: 331 Som CESSNA? BORING! Microsoft provides a free converter on its web site which allows you to import FLIGHT SIMULATOR FLIGHT SHOP planes such as Michael Gurezka's superb freeware F-4B Phantom II. CC FEBRUARY 1997 "


"And hey, it's networkable. 13/ 22 5.16 13115 D 0-45-70 A. H SEGA RALLY SEGA RALLY PIONS Racing You're sitting at your desk. And you're bored. Bored, bored, bored. Now imagine you're sitting at your desk taking hairpin turns through dirt and mud. Massive bumps send you flying into orbit. And you better anticipate the next curve or you're gonna get to know the side of a mountain a little too well. Ahhh... there's nothing quite like the off-road racing experience of Sega Rally Championship for the PC. There's even head-to-head network play. So, c'mon, you get a little time off for lunch go find some buddies and let them eat your dust. SEGA racing ntertainment Check out our demo at www.sega.com/segapo SEGA is registered in the U.S. Patent of Trademark Office. (pretty impressive, huh?). SEGA Entertainment, SEGA Racing and Sega Rally Championship are trademarks of SEGA.1996 SEGA, PO Box 8097, Redwood City, CA 94063. All rights reserved. Every single one of 'em. Order o game by calling 1-888-SEGA SALES for just call to say 'hi,' our operators love that). CIRCLE READER SERVICE #180 "


"REVIEW  FLIGHT SIMULATOR FOR WINDOWS 95 INSTART SIMULATION/SPACE tion from Patty Wagstaff, one of the Unfortunately, a few world's best. The superb in-flight videos features that needed showing Wagstaff in action, text instruc an overhaul didn't tion and instant replay feature combine to get one. PLICHT make this a great introduction to the sport. SIMULATOR still I lowever, the flight model is showing its sports gigantic instruBO BEDRE age and is nowhere near as accurate as ment panels. You can that found in FUCHT UNLIMITED. move the panel The six flying lessons and the light down to make the School section are one of the best aspects viewing window largof this sim. If you intend to take real flying er, but that may cut lessons, read all the info in the School out the vital informa0.0 entries, and practice each lesson until you tion that keeps you get it right. The School provides a basic from mixing the aluunderstanding of the \"how and why\" of minum with the dirt BETTER SQUINT FLIGHT SIMULATOR'S instrument panels block flying, and the lessons give a general idea Realism notwithmuch of your view as you buzz the Olympic opening ceremonies of how to perform the mancuvers you'll standing, there's no in your 737-400 be asked to demonstrate. You won't be an need for the radio instant ace, but you'll save yourself time, stack in the Extra to take up so much valuup like a CH Pro Throttle/Combat Stick money, and embarrassment when you go able space. All the cockpit's panels should combo solves this problem. Starting fuel out to the flight line. be reevaluated to emphasize the primary flow on a jet engine requires you to press references, minimize the frills and shrink Ctrl-Shift-F4; it's not that complicated in a ROOM FOR A VIEW? the panels overall. 737! 'The present keymap was probably The game's visuals have seen a slight The keymap is also in desperate need of retained because three million users are enhancement. Most big cities received a an overhaul. Most view changes require the already familiar with it. However, it's not pargraphics tune-up, with additional photo pilot to hit two keys. After looking left, it takes ticularly intuitive, and perhaps it's time that it realistic effects and textures. Weather two more key presses to look out the front joined the WORDSTAR keymap in the comeffects also reccived minor updates. again. A good programmable controller setputer museum Flicirr SIMULATOR provides the best all-aspect civilian flying experience Realism's In The Eye Of The Pilot presently available. If you don't own an earlier version and you're interested in this hile the scenery is touted as «as real as it gets,\" the flight model can't match that claim. A quick type of aviation, the choice is a complete flight in the Cessna 182 will demonstrate that you just can't enter a fully developed spin. Pitch no-brainer-at least until Sicrra's PRO the nose up to 20 degrees, pull power to idle, and hold attitude by increasing aft stick. When Pilot arrives to provide some stiff compethe stall buzzer sounds, stomp a rudder to the floor. The nose will slowly drop and you'll enter a tition later this year. If you already have a lazy spiral. Release the rudder and case the stick, and you almost instantly recover. It's not that easy in a real 182. recent version of the program, the choice Also, while the Extra 300S is described as having a roll rate exceeding 400 degrees per second, a single aileron is more difficult. The improvements are roll takes over two seconds in this simulator. You can exceed 95 C's in the Extra without a trace of grayout, let incremental, and you'll have to decide if alone blackout (Perhaps Flight Sim Extra pilots ca the new interface, aircraft and videos are have C-suits.) None of the prop planes exhibit proworth the price of admission. c peller torque effects when you push the power up, nor is this characteristic even mentioned in the APPEAL: Aspiring private pilots, or anyone who wants to fly on a PC Flight School documentation. without dodging missiles. The game's 737 also suffers from a mild flight PROS: Windows interface, two new model. I've got a significant number of hours aircraft add ease and variety, while behind the yoke of the Boeing; it's a great airplane. weather capabilities make this a good instrument flying experience. Many pilots call it \"the sports car,\" and indeed it has CONS: Some excellent control response in pitch and roll. In this cumbersome sim, though, it's rather ordinary. The present level of aspects; keymaps realism is more than adequate for the flight lessons, and controls need an update; instruinstrument practice and challenges built into the VIRTUAL FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR Extremely detailed help ment panels game, but it can't match the state of the art set by files provide you with useful information for flying both obscure the view; some of the combat simulations. virtual and real aircraft. flight model is unsophisticated. Airplane Handbooks 3000 Canet CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"sho Wake Up and Smell The Pigskin, You Douche Bag! BONE-CRUSHING FOOTBALL ACTION! Incredibly Exy-To-Use   Noven Art TrueHard Core Garn Sensational 3D Graphics, Sound & Video Hard-Nord, Head-to-Head Competition Power Strategies and Options Play Bad-Ass» Football. TOUCHDOWN! Buy TOUCHDOWN today and play the only game that spits blood, rips guts and puts you-right in the action. TOUCHDOWN is the most realistic 3D football game available. Pick your favorite team, choose from over 300 plays, hear bone-crushing hits and see unbelievable plays y unfold right before your eyes. CA Score TOUCHDOWN at your nearest retail store or call Toll-Free: 888-833-1228 Intent , Intermark 4600 Campus Drive, Newport Beach, CA 92660 S/Phone: 714-833-1220 Fax:714-833-1204 www.intermk.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #391 "


"DEADLOCK. ONE PLANET. ONE Take It Before They Do. BESIMI MESOM A L20 Multiplayer Action. Play against the computer, or up to six human opponents via modem, network, Internet, or e-mail. Delade ANIME IN C LED DIODEIADALLE Zoom in for a close and amazingly detailed look at the situation, or zoom out for a global view. aa HOE BER File Maps Beperti Diploss TED Contreten WH. 23300 3 0LTAT The Struggle Begins. Each species lands their first colony, equallyequipped with basic supplies and a powerful instinct to survive. Will your drive and abilities extend to total world domination? Look for the Deadlock playable demo in select magazines or online at http://www.accolade.com Explore and Expand Your World, Scouting areas to expand is just one of the ways to build an effective empire. Mines work best in rocky regions. Cracked earth is best for producing energy. Ancient ruins and artifacts hold strategically useful technologies. "


"\"A solid multi-player game fest.\" -Computer Gaming World CHANCE. \"Multi-player, city building, land exploring, alien busting fun\". -Strategy Plus «Absorbing gameplay... the best visuals and sound effects that today's technology offers.\" -Next Generation SOLUZISHU Interactive Enemy A.I. Your incredible 3D-rendered opponents possess unique attributes that will till the balance of power. Intimidation is key as they hurl Insults and carry out strategies that can mean your doom. PALLIDE PLATER OP antion Resource Management Like No Other. Manage your initial population and scarce resources and build a selfsufficient, expanding colony. Choose wisely from farms, mines, factories, power plants, R&D and military expansion to achieve final victory. For Windows 95 and Windows 3.1 CD-ROM. ACCOL DE While a peaceable victory is possible, war may be inevitable. Deadlock takes you there in incredibly realistic detail. Engage your opponents in a bitter struggle to destroy or be destroyed. Find out why Computer Gaming World called Deadlock \"A solid multi-player gamefest.\" Call 1-800-245-7744 to order, or for more information. Deadlock is a trademark of Accolade, Inc.  Accolade. All Rights Reserved. Liit RATING PUNDIG CIRCLE READER SERVICE #292 "


"STRATEGY HIND 1) VS/NOITVINWIS Russian Rotor Results Ruling The Battlefield In Interactive Magic's Hind by Robin Kim TIP! ig, fast, and ugly, the Mil Mi-24 HIND is a testament to Sovict practicality in aircraft design. In the right hands, this odd fusion of helicopter gunship and troop transport can be a fearsome force on the virtual battlefield. Nevertheless, APACHE sim veterans accustomed to kicking butt with the AH-64's sports car-like responsiveness and whiz-bang technology may be in for a rude awakening. The Hind's bulk and lack of computerized flight controls give it all the handling prowess of a souped-up ROCKET ATTACK Because RPGs are unguided, you need only make constant Winnebago on bald tires, and its avionchanges in direction or altitude to avoid getting hit. ics are decidedly low tech. The solution to overcoming these disadvantages is a paradoxical combination of brute BE PREPARED flat terrain. If that's not possible, marking force in-your-face tactics and piloting Though you're eager to rush into bal out a route over water is better than nothfinesse. Timid or uncoordinated pilots tle, striking terror in the hearts of the ing because it allows you to clistance yourneed not apply. Rodina's adversaries, take the time to self from many threats; just watch out for study every armed patrol boats. Above all, avoid travaspect of the eling along roads, or you'll risk encounters mission plan with armored columns before you lift Once you've memorized all pertinent off. Don't hesimission parameters, it's time to take off. tate to alter the The Mi-24 is a handful to fly when using <lcfault flight the realistic flight mode. Repeat the trainplan to make use ing missions until you've learned to comof cover and pensate for collective changes with antiavoid known air torque pedal movements to avoid undedefenses. It's sired yaw. Several of your wcapons are safest to stick unguided you won't be able to hit near lilly areas much with them if you can't keep the as they can pro nose steady vide refuge from Cood altitude control is also mandatoLANDING ZONE If you must land during a mission (as danger, ground ry. Always keep close tabs on both the altiwhen unloading troops) it usually pays to wait and reload your units are generaltude indicator in the head-up display and weapons before you take to the air again. ly found only on the vertical speed indicator gauge in the TIP! FEBRUARY 1997 "


"HIND. STRATEGY SOMETHING SIMULATION/SPACE EVIL HAS ARISEN IN THE ARIZONA DESERT. AND IT'S instrumentpanel. Unless there are no the blink of an eye. Kill any attack lielos enemies about, you should always fly as you see as quickly as possible, from as far low as safety permits. Staying below 15 away as possible, because you may not meters keeps you immune from most get a second chance. l'ixed-wing close SAMs but requires intense concentra support aircraft are much less of a threat, tion--especially in Korea, where you but fighters can be a problem. Avoid must weave around trees. Cruising at 25 them when possible. If you're attacked, meters is a happy medium that takes you retreat through uneven terrain. over the tops of trees and provides a greater margin for error when you're disTHE RIGHT TOOL FOR THE JOB tracted by other tasks. Be ready to dive for \"The payload screen in the mission the deck if you come under attack planner presents a variety of weapons lo choose from. Your selections should HEALTH HAZARDS match the strengths of each class of ordThe most common threats you'll connance with the types and quantities of tarfrontare SAM launchers and M . Flying gets you expect to engage low will usually foil SAMs, but it's not With its long range and superb accuraalways practical to stay right on the deck cy, the 9M114 Shturm antitank guided If you have a missile inbound, tum to put missile is the most valuable weapon in the it to one side and crop countermeasures Wind's arsenal. Since it's your only true to try to spoof it. Your aircraft carries a stand-off weapon and you can carry only huge supply of decoys-100 seconds eight, you should ration them carefully worth of flares and 195 seconds of Facing off with the dreaded Apache is the chaff--so if you find yourself entangled one exception to this rule: launch two in a huge mclee, just leave the dispensers missiles in rapid succession to ensure a on until the smoke clears, clean kill. Unlike SAMS, AM can find you no matter how low you fly. If you see tracers coming at you, jink and weave violently to throw off the gunners aim, then cither line up a counterattack or escape out of range. The Mi-24 is tough enough to withstand an UNFRIENDLY FIRE The 12.7mm machine guns comoccasional lit, but mon in Afghanistan aren't as deadly as the AAA vehicles in not the massive the other theaters, but they shouldn't be ignored. pounding it will take if you don't evade, so react quickly Shturms are not fire-and-forget, but Though relatively rare, the deadliest they can be ripple-fired at multiple foc your big bad attack helicopter will ground targets as long as you wait several face is -you guessed it another attack seconds between cach launch. All mishelicopter. Of these, the worst is unques siles will head for the initially selected tartionably the AH-64 Apache. While other get until it's destroyed. The others still in craft can ruin your day using missiles flight will then turn toward the next target launched at long range, only the Apache the weapon systems operator (WSO) deswields a deadly accurate 30mm chain ignates, and so on. gun that can rip you a new exhaust port in The only other guided weapon availWAITING FOR YOU. SHIVERS #ARest Of Souls Interact with the evil at http://www.sierra.com/shivers2 1-800-757-7707 SIERRA 01996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designate trademarks of or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. FEBRUARY 1997 CG CIRCLE READER SERVICE #153 "


"POWER COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, The #1 Computer Game Magazine zna Confirmed Kim Sports Game All-Stars We Pick the Best in Football, Basketball, Baseball & Hockey Go Online, Meet New people, and Fill Them With Lead In Domark/ICI's Alr Combat Arena What's Your Pick for Game of the Year? See Our Winners Inside.... U DANS Furidad  PLAY to win. Frenzy SUBSCRIBE to save. Here's the move that'll blow'em away: Call 1-800-827-4450 And grab the rock-bottom rate other gamers would virtually die for! ARTINSVILLE X-Com NASCAR Racing Wing Commander 111 "


"HIND. STRATEGY you cannot bypass. Conserve your weapons for the target area, since it's invariably well defended. As you ncar your destination, you might launch some Target Selection SIMULATION/SPACE able is the R60 air-to-air missile. Regardless of its finy warhead and attraction to flares, the R60 is still your best bet for bagging fast movers. Fire in salvos of two, making sure to pull lead on crossing targets. In many ways, the Hind's turreted 12.7mm machine gun is your most versatile weapon despite its limited range. Boasting a huge supply of ammo, it is der astating against infantry. Lightly amored vehicles, cargo planes, and most helicopters are also vulnerable if you pump enough lead into them. Just don't bother trying to hose down an AH-64--you won't even scratch the paint. Unguided rockets are your bread and butter for attacks on groups or columns To saturate an arca, turn off the Silicon WSO and walk the crosshairs over the targets with the pedals or forc-aft cyclic movements while holding down the trigger. When using the computer controlled release mode, it's also possible to nail individual targets out to 4 km, but it requires good aim and steady flying. Both sizes pack enough punch to destroy any vchicle, but the larger Somm's sizable kill radius more than offsets the smaller quantity per pod. Take some along on every sortie you fly Bombs and 23mm cannon pods are strictly specialty weapons; always consider whether one of the more generally useful ordnance types described above might suffice instead. For instance, any builcling or bunker that can be destroyed by bombs will also fall to rocket barrage. Bombs can be useful on very large concentrations of enemy ground units, but be sure to break hard away after release to avoid fragging yourself. Cannon pods should be relegated to attacking aircraft, where their high lethality and lead-computing sight can be best cxploited. They aren't the best choice for dealing with ground targets because they have a shorter range than rockets and no blast effect, yet are just as difficult to aim. he pilot's duties of keeping the aircraft in the air, navigating, and operating various systems won't leave you much time to look around for targets-that's what the weapon systems officer is for. The computer-controlled \"Silicon WSO\" (SWSO) usually does an adequate job, diligently scanning for threats as you tend to other matters, so 90 percent of the time it's best to leave him in charge. For that remaining 10 percent, Hind offers two other targeting methHIGH LOB Launching antitank guided missiles while ods: the Track Target mode and manual nose-high helps them get over obstacles that may be targeting. Each has its advantages and between you and your target. Reducing collective as disadvantages. you pitch up lessens your altitude gain. The SWSO can't be beat for initially spotting targets, activate him as soon as you take off. When there are many enemies nearby, however, you may disagree with how he prioritizes them. For instance, he may decide to target an APC when you're more concerned about that Apache firing Hellfires at you. Only occasionally will the Re-scan command switch his attention to the target you want. Use the Track Target command in such cases to select targets yourself. From the CLOSE ENOUGH The blast effect from rockets and WSO's seat, you must slew a reticule over Shturm antitank missiles is deadly against infantry the desired target before selecting it-a concentrations. time-consuming process in the heat of battle. Fortunately, there's a quicker and more convenient way to do it. From the pilot's position, you can designate a target simply by pointing the aircraft toward it and then locking on The Track Target command can be given as a temporary override while the SWSO is active; he'll automatically resume activity when you exit Track Target mode. Note, however, that manually aiming the WSO's reticule will silently deactivate both the SWSO and Track Target modes. The default manual targeting mode is SCRATCH ONE CONVOY Rocket salvos fired in manual best suited for those times when you just targeting mode can devastate vehicle columns. Once can't get the reticule locked onto the right you're lined up, just hold down the trigger. target, or when you need to disable computer-controlled Weapon release so you can just point and shoot. HIT AND RUN Because of your aircraft's limited ordnance carrying capacity, you should avoid trouble while en route to your main objective, engaging only those threats FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"STRATEGY HIND 1) VAS/NOTIVINWIS TIP! you envelope Contrary to what the manual says, the rather ground crew packs reloads aboard before than from the mission starts even when you're transwithin it. porting troops. Once this is done, it's time Don't get to fight your way home. greedy: It's almost always best to plan your conce cgress route to overlay thic path you used trate on to come in, since you've probably flatthe tened most of the air defenses along the assigned way the first time through. The battlefield targets, is a dynamic environment, however, so then bug never let your guard down. out once you've finHOME SWEET HOME ished the When you arrive back at the base, tired MEDEVAC Try to park nearby when picking up wounded soldiers job. The but victorious, your final challenge is to set because they move very slowly. only time your Hind down amidst the clutter of tents, supply pallets, trucks, and other airShturms to climinate some of the air should sanitize the entire area is if you craft. Always make your approach into the defenses at arm's length, but you'll evenmust set down to load or unload troops. wind (you did memorize the direction of tually have to jump in and get your hands You'll often find yourself low on ammo the prevailing wind before you took off, dirty. Make liigh-speed slashing attacks, at this point. If you're not already on the didn't you?), and make certain your chosen extending away after each firing run so ground and can find a spot clear of enemy landing arca is clear of obstacles using the that the time needed to line up targets is activity, it pays to land so you can reload wider field of view available from the taken outside the enemy's engagement your weapons and countermcasures. WSO's seat. An ideal approach will have both your altitude and Managing Your Wingmen ground speed decrease to zero at the same ou're accompanied on moment, but it's also each combat sortie by okay to slow to a hover at least one wingman, first and then drop sometimes up to three. straight down. Instead They're valuable assets both offenof constantly adjusting sively and defensively, and if the cyclic during final employed properly, they'll greatly approach, try to find increase your chances for success. one pitch angle that Perhaps the most vital function results in the proper your wingmen play is to divide enemy deceleration and sink antiaircraft fire. Without them along, rate. Pick out a nearby all those guns and missile launchers landmark and use it to would be aimed solely at you. It judge your lateral therefore behooves you to stick close FORM AND FUNCTION Ordering your wingmen to follow drift it's essential that by them, for their sake as well as you will bring them into tight formation from wherever your sideways velocity your own they happen to be. be reduced almost to There are two ways to fly as a nil. At the last moment, group. You can follow your wingmen or order your wingmen to follow you. The choice is yours, but keep put the nose three in mind that if you loiter in an area for an extended period, your wingmen will continue on without you degrees above the horiunless directed to do otherwise. When flying near other helicopters, the potential for midair collisions is zon to match the attiever present. If you decide to let your wingmen pick the course, hanging back a bit lets you keep track tude the Hind assumes of them all to avoid getting sideswiped. When you take the lead, they'll form up in a tight echelon forma on the ground, then tion, so avoid making abrupt maneuvers. gently descend to a perYour wingmen will usually engage air defenses en route to the primary target only if they're fired fect touch-down. Well on first. Use the Attack My Target command liberally to order preemptive strikes from maximum donc, comrade! range. While your wingmen are taking out one target, you can focus on others to maximize the firepower your formation brings to bear. >>Continued on pg 204 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"They call this the City of Angels.. Water BEER BALE 11 Now Largest babes 701 LOCAL CHEVROLET but names can be deceiving. NOIR on muca Femme fatales, fedora-wearing henchmen and corrupt city officials-just a few of the unsavory characters you'll encounter in the urban underbelly of 1940 Los Angeles. Journey through unsolved cases ranging from wartime espionage to the underground lairs of Chinatown and seductive excesses of Hollywood-all brought to life in dramatic black and white as you search to discover the truth behind the disappearance of fellow P.I., Jack Slayton. TM Order NOIR direct NOIRE ORDER ON-LINE www.cyberdreams.com ORDER BY PHONE (818) 225-1049 A SHADOWY THRILLER Now available for PC and Macintosh 14 CYBERCRIMS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #258 Cyberdreams Inc., 23586 Calabasas Road, Suite 102, Calabasas, California 91302 Noir is a trademark of Cybordroams. Inc. Cyberdreams is a registered trademark of Cyberdreams, Inc. "


"STRATEGY. HIND Pilot/WSO Two-Player Mode SIMULATION/SPACE WSO is essential to make effective use of unguided munitions. If the WSO selects a target, the pilot should turn to line it up. When the pilot has the target centered in the crosshairs, the WSO must pull the trigger. It sounds difficult, but with a little practice, you and your partner will find the two-player pilot/WSO combination to be devastatingly effective. & 18 he real Mi-24 splits the tasks associated with flying and fighting between two people, so it's not surprising that a single player will occasionally find the burden of doing both jobs at once difficult to manage. The Silicon WSO helps enormously, but he simply lacks the intelligence and initiative a human being can bring to the table. It's for these reasons that the two-player pilot/WSO mode is where Hind truly shines. With half the workload of single-player mode, crew members can devote more attention to their specific responsibilities. The pilot can fly lower without compromising safety, and the WSO can search a wider area for possible targets while maintaining complete control over how they are prioritized. Both players must know the exact division of duties to prevent costly misunderstandings. The pilot is tasked exclusively with flying the helicopter, operating the landing gear and cargo bay doors, and navigating. The WSO selects weapons, designates targets, fires weapons, and also controls the chaft and flare dispensers. This last capability is odd because the WSO has no idea when to turn them on or of-only the pilot can see the threat warning indicator. Either crew member can issue wingman commands. Because the pilot cannot fire weapons, cooperation with the OVERWATCH When you must land in enemy territory, telling your wingmen to follow you will keep them close by to protect you from unexpected threats. Plant Trees for America Trees provide food, shelter, and I nesting sites for songbirds. Trees increase property values, and make our homes and neighborhoods more livable. Trees help conserve energy. They cool our homes and entire cities in the summer, and slow cold winter winds. Shade trees and windbreaks can cut home utility bills 15-35%. Trees clear the air we breathe. They provide life-giving oxygen while they remove particulates from the air and reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide. the Arbor Day Foundation. Your trees will be shipped postpaid at the right time for planting in your area, February through May in the spring or October through mid December in the fall. The six to twelve inch trees are guaranteed to grow, or they will be replaced free. To become a member and to receive your free trees, send a $10 membership contribution to Ten Blue Spruces, National Arbor Day Foundation, 100 Arbor Avenue, Nebraska City, NE 68410. Join today, and plant your Trees for America! onalar need more trees to protect our farm fields and our rivers and streams. To provide wood for our homes and a thousand products we use every day. America needs more trees The United States has lost a third of its forest cover in the last 200 years. Our towns should have twice as many street trees as they have today. We need more trees around our homes and throughout our communities. We 10 Free Trees Ten Colorado blue spruces, or other conifers selected to grow in your area will be given to each person who joins The National  Arbor Day Foundation "


"this may hurt a little. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #275 "


"they never attack in hore seeni his by the lightniit. when a ums. h a een \"The Vanguard of a terrifying level of immersive interactivity.\" no carly prospeo secret ric thc to app of Doo were had trou order to \" By far the most addictive multiplayer action game ever.\" Icvcks COMPUTER OAMINO WORLD Qunke's greatest addition feature somc form which FC MAGAZINE If you TOEST be disappointed the urious as it Death . ever was in Doom, but much harder. In fact, if \"Quake overwhelms the senses... USA TODAY Bloody amazing.» world is cada un so slowly. But, thank ciny departmico \"Quake is the biggest, baddest, bloodiest and most atmospheric 3-D action game ever conceived CAMER on the digger loves tatou ameplay, Total Manles aning than robot-shooting, which, let's Tau «Quake looks like no other game and perfectly displays id's trademark fusion of nightmarish art and advanced technology.\" WIRED terrak Toral www.idsoftware.com  1. you can target an enemy roles and fire at it powing because these can be sold when you get back converted into valuable credits. alla Distributed tyy GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com Quake M 1996 Id Software, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Published by Id Software, Inc. Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"1 full registere VOT3105 now availabl CIRCLE READER SERVICE #275 "


"***** REVIEW  BATTLECRUISER 3000 A.D. IL Crippled Ship DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVANCED The Ambitious Effort Left Out A Major Feature: Fun 1) VDS/NOITVINKIS LIETTI by Martin E. Cirulis n my entire career as a critic, BATILECRUISER 3000 A.D. (BC3K) is easily the strangest and most difficult title that I've ever had to review. I say this because this game presented me with so many bewildering firsts. This is the first time I ever had to wait for a game's third patch before I could even play it long enough to decide what was going on. This was the first time I ever reviewed a game with documentation so bad that a software pirate would be embarrassed to send it along. This was the first time I had to wonder if one of my reviews would garner me a lawsuit, as threats seem to fall like rain around anybody who says anything untoward about this product in print. And this is the first time I've had to do two reviews of one game. SHUTTLE DIPLOMACY Shuttles can be used to carry cargo to and from planetary surfaces that, unfortunately, look very dated. Price: $59.95 System Requirements: Requirements: Pentium 60 or better processor, DOS 5.0 or higher, 8MB RAM 50MB hard drive space, 2x CD-ROM, 1 MB SVGA graphics card, mouse; supports all major sound cards. # of Players: 1 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Derek REVIEW A This review is for those of you who can't access the Internet in order to download patches or those of you who believe that after plunking down your hardearned bucks at the software joint, you shouldn't have to do anything else but sit back to enjoy your new game. In other words, if your plan is to play only the proden this advice is for you: Do not buy this game under any circumstances! It runs for less than 15 minutes at a time on the majority of machines out there. The documentation pamphlet is poorly done, incorrect, and about as useful to players as if FALCON 3.0 had shipped with only 30 pages of info. Take 2 has promised to send out proper docs to any registered user free of charge, but to date this has not occurred. In its original, store-shelf condition, this is a nongame. not mind a lot of fixing up if the game is worth it, this is the review derived from playing the LOIC patch version (see the sidebar). There is still no adequate documentation for this game, but various FAQs give you a shot at figuring things out, and a downloadable set of relevant instructions is still possible. BC3K is basically the mother of all starship simulator/space exploration games. The genre goes back almost to the dawn of computer gamin, and includes such notable titles as SUNDOG, ELITE and PRIVATEER. The twist in this case, though, is that instead of being a free trader in a tramp starfreighter, you take the role of a captain of a huge military starship that could be the bastard child of the Galactica. Despite the fact you are regular navy, you can still engage in a little free trading just to keep your hand in. There are two paths of play in this game. One is the advanced campaign mode, where you accept various missions assigned to you from High Command and try to carry them out, working your way through a prearranged plotline. The other mode is simply one of free exploration, where you can journey throughout the 25 star systems and involve yourself with the various goings on as you see fit. What makes this secondary mode at all interesting is the fact that BC3K supposcally has a dynamic neural net system running the various worlds and governments, resulting in a universe that not only reacts to you and your actions, but goes on without you. However, despite some interesting events that take place in the game, there is a fair amount of evidence that there are as many hard-wired incidents as there are dynamic ones. So, the jury is still out on exactly how \"alive\" this universe is. Despite this, you are free to do a dazzling number of things in this game. Your starship carries not only fighters, but shuttlecraft as well, and these can carry all-terrain vehicles down to the surface of any solid world. You can also beam space marines around to board other vessels or take over surface installations. Your BattleCruiser itself isn't simply a Smart Publisher: Take 2 Interactive Software (212) 941-2988 Reader Service #: 335 REVIEW B If you are the type of gamer who does CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"BATTLECRUISER 3000 A.D.  REVIEW Patching It Up his game was reviewed using the 1.01C patch (available at http://www.bc3000ad.com), which corrects most of the frequent crash problems and gameplay aberrations, but still leaves more than 25 known \"features\" unhindered (avoid all previous patches!). The D-level patch is in the works but was unavailable at the time of this review. Derek Smart, the designer, has promised to get BC3K working before he gets on with adding modules to it. It is unknown whether the expansion modules will be released in a functional or nonfunctional format. The nonfunctional version of this game, with its inadequate documentation, will not be replaced in stores until Take 2 has sold out the entire first printing. Sources inform us that should Take 2 not include returns as sales, the Devil will be skating to work before a playable version reaches stores. SIMULATION/SPACE APOLLO 13 REDUX With a huge crew and a variety of vehicles, your BattleCruiser would be an amazing mount for space exploration; unfortunately, it doesn't work very well—even with the version 1.01C patch. MATTIA flying gun/landing pad, it is an environand end-all of any siin, here they are poor ment unto itself, with personel taking enough to actually inhibit gameplay time to get from their quarters to their Combat is reduced to guessing if you're posts, getting injured and having to be hitting the target, and if the graphics taken to sick bay, and getting down to fixcould just match those of WING COMMANDER 1. it would have made a huge difference just in getting involved with this game. As it is, it's like adventuring through Microsoft's 252. 4335 SPACE BASE SIMULATOR. The informaHERE, ROVER Along with fighters and shuttles, your BattleCruiser tion is all there, carries ATV rovers which can be used to explore planetary surfaces glaring in its stark accuracy, ing the myriad things that can be dambut you can't really get excited about it, aged in combat or in day-to-day wear and and you would be better off reading text tear. This is really the most extensive and descriptions of the combat instead of tryambitious SF simulator made to ing to figure things out from the graphics. date-when it works The amount of effort put into imaginary jargon doesn't help cither. I realize THE PRICE OF AMBITION the designer wanted the feel of a scrious The bottom line for me is that at no sim, but if he had a dime for every point was I deeply thrilled with BC3Kas a acronym that appears in this game, he'd game. While graphics are not the be-all t riple what he got from lake 2. It all comes across like an air force wannabe's wet dream. As for the missions, again it seems far less concern was invested in playability than in backslapping oneself over how difficult and realistic it was all going to be. By your fourth mission, you are already facing an opponent you cannot defcat. If the Earth is this badly off technologically, you should be playing this sim from the other side. BATILECRUISER 3000AD, when it's working, is a big, intricate game with dozens of hours of gameplay and plenty to do no matter how many times you play. I just wish there were any rcason, other than sleer intellectual curiosity, to do so. APPEAL: Science fiction and simulation fans who like to explore complicated sims without the help of documentation. PROS: The largest and most complicated space simulator yet. If the bugs are ever fixed, it could be the most open-ended sci-fi game universe yet seen. >CONS: Unplayable without the latest patch. Space combat can't match even the original WING COMMANDER. Too little of the game's rich universe works properly. FEBRUARY 1997 "


"CHIPS & BITSINC. COMPUTER GAMES POB 234 DEPT 10835_ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Orders/Questions: chlsales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@ sover.net Aus Ch o rd TOMB RAIDE TOMB RAIDER Dive into the action packed fanlasy world of inlamous aclventurer Lara Croft, in her quest to retrieve the legendary \"Scion\". Explore an environment that takes you through Jungles, ruins and more! CD $42 'INTERSTATE 76 Oil is scare and the U.S. economy is crumbling. OPEC is planning to deliver the finishing blow, by destroying the U. S strategic oil reserve. With a 425 horsepower 72 Picard Piranha and an M60, it's up to you to put a stop to their plans. $48 \"LUCAS ARTS ARCHIVES VOL.11 STAR WARS' YOU don't have to be Yoda to comprehend the wisdom of this deal. 4 clas. sic Star Wars games, plus a look at the the atrical release of the Star Wars Trilogy special edition. $48 \"MASTER OF ORION II Population growth has outgrown planetary resources. Acting as powerful emperors, players start with one colony and control how resources are used. CD $46 ASTER OF ORIONI AT ANTARES SORY STAR AL Feel the GENERAL 012 'STAR CONTROL 3' The fabric of the universe is crumbling and it's up to you to find the answer someWhere in the unexplored reaches of the Kessari Quadrant. You're in control of a star fleet. searching hundreds of planets. CD $47 \"STAR GENER AL Feel the power of an incredibly enhanced Panzer General Game. A 2level combat system accommodates space and surface combat. Conquer enemy planets with over 90 fully rendered 3D starships and 100's of ground troops and multipul planet types from fertile gems to barren wastelands CD$43 \"PRIVATEER 2: THE DARKEN ING' You decide what challenges each day should include: scout ing a dangerous sector, hunting down a wanted criminal, detending an embattled planet, escorting a vulnerable transport, delivering a valuable cargo, flying recon and many, many more to choose from. $49 \"IM1A2 ABRAMS The player commands a platoon of four tanks, or an entire company team with other vehicles artillery. helicopters and artillery attached all from a variety of external views and a multi zoom map view. CD 545 STAR CONTROL 3 DMIRAL TRE DIFERITE LITSS \"AGE OF SAIL 1775-1820 Delivers an excel lent blend of exciting Real Time 3-D perapective naval combat with pageantry and grandeur of beautifully endered sailing vessels from the Tall Ships era! CD $42 \"DESTRUCTION DERBY Challenging new tracks that are longer, wider and faster with hills jumps and high speed banked corners! Get on a collision course with crumple zones and hit and run mayhem! CD $47 \"DESCENT II:THE INFINITE ABYSS Warped into the furthest edge of the Zeta Aquilae System, you hur tled down to all new alien mines battling enemy robots for control fighting to penetrate their base and destroy their stronghold. $48 'ADMIRAL-SEA BATTLES' A naval conquest simulation game the combines the best of 18th cen tury naval war fare strategy with challenging board play boasting a full musical score and integrated sound effects. $41 the AGE.SAIL ST IBM HARDWARE IBM ACTION IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM BUNDLES IBM ROLE-PLAYING IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION $41 $48 $4 $46 $37 $42 $44 $40 Altc ACS55 Spker Sys S159 Crusader No Remorse $26 7th Guest 2 W95 $14 Riddle Master Lu $19 20 Wargame Classics S20 Anvil of Dawn $34 CH F16 Combatstick $58 Crusader:No Regret $34 7th Guest $29 Second World $45 Aces Collection $25 Arch Mage W95 CH F16 Fighterstick $96 Dark Forces $30 Ace Ventura Shadoan $38 Archives 2:Star Wars $48 Arena Deluxe 547 CH Force FX $159 Dark Frces 2 Jedi W95 $48 Advntres on Lego Isle $35 Shannara $42 Atari 2600 AP W95 $25 Betrayal in Antara $48 CH Game Card 3 Auto $25 Dark Vengeance $45 Albion Snow Crash W95 $44 Attack Stack $24 Champions of Krynn $16 CH PC Gamepad 318 Doom 2 W95 $34 Azraels Tear S39 Spycraft W95 $47 Award Wining Wigmes $22 Cobra Mission $29 CH Pro Pedals $74 Duke Nukem 3D S37 Beavis Butthd Virt St $31 Star Trek Judp Rt Coll $38 Complete G N Bts $32 Dark Sun Online W95 $15 CH Pro Throttle $98 Duke Nukem 3D Atom $46 Blast Chamber W95 $40 Star Trek Voyager $48 Defntve Wargme Coll 2 $34 Diablo $16 CH Virtual Pilot Pro 969 Duke Nukem 3D Plut Pk S25 Chronomaster $24 Star Trk Str Fit Acad S46 Ecstatica Bundle $19 Die By the Sword S48 Gravis Grip Controllr $85 Eradicator $12 Circle of Blood $43 The Dig $26 Eye of Beholder Tril $25 Disciples of Steel S12 Gravis GoIP Pad 2 Pak $24 Firelight $38 City of Lost Children S44 Third Millenium W95 S44 Frisy Girl Strat Bndl $34 Dungeon Master 2 $25 Gravis PC Gampad Pro $27 Hexen Death Kings $25 Clandestiny W95 $44 TimeLapse Anc Civil $46 Herous M & M Bundle $39 Elder Scrolls 2 $56 Gravis Phoenix Joystk $83 Hexen W95 Curse of Monkey Isle $48 Titanic Joy Out Time 544 D Anthology 599 Fallout Gravis Thunderbird $43 League of Pain $44 Dark Earth W95 Tme Wip Dr Brain W95 533 Intrply All Nabr 2 30 Forgotten Realms 946 1-0 Jaz Orv T Gig Int $369 MOK $44 Deus W95 Tomb Raider $42 Kilrathi Saga $34 Halls of the Dead S38 Joyswitch $39 Magic Carpet 2 Discworld 2 $44 Toonstruck $18 Kings Quest Anthology 525 Iron & Blood Labtec LCS 2612 Spkr $112 Marathon 2 Ecstatica 2 $47 Varuna's Forces $45 Legend Kyrandia Series 525 Knights Xentr PG13 $34 Lgitch WingMn Wrrior $85 Perfect Weapon W95 $42 Full Throttle $28 Zork Nemesis $53 Leisure St Larry Anth $25 Lands of Lore 2 948 MS Sound P Whibde 586 Powerslave W95 $38 Gabriel Knight 2 Lost Adventures $29 Meridian 59 W95 $34 Master Pilot $52 Prey $50 Harvester $46 IBM ARCADE Megapak 5 $32 of Light & Darkness $48 Msoli Sidwndr Pro Pad S39 Quake $53 Heart of Darkness $55 Might & Magic Trilogy $19 Ravnift 2 Sin Prop S19 Space Orb 350 Rebel Moon Rsing W95 545 Hunter Hunted W95 $45 3D Ultr Poll Crp Nght $12 Mile High Club S26 Realms of the Haunting $46 TM Driving Contrl 12 $108 Robotron x W95 $41 Interstate 76 W95 Bus & Bith Wnr Takes $19 Pinball Gold Pak S19 Riftwar Legacy $23 TM F16 TOS $108 Ruins Into the Shadows $48 Cyber Gladiators W95 $45 Pinball Gold/Builder $36 Rims Atk Shadow Riva S15 TM F22 Pro $124 Shadow Warrior $49 Leisure Suit Larry 7 $18 Ecco the Dolphin $38 Paz Gen Stit Gd Bnd! $19 Sacred Pools $48 TM FLC F16 System $108 Siege $45 Magic of Xanth Hyper 3D Pinball $34 Police Ouest Antholay $25 Secret Silver Blades $19 TM Flight Contr Pro $99 SkyNET 43 Myst 2 $52 Jungle Pinball $30 Power Hits Bauitch $16 Serpent's Kiss $43 TM Game Card $25 Star Trek Genrins W95 $48 Nemesis Looney Latyyrinth Phall $29 Prince Persin Collect $19 Skyrealms of Jomne $33 TM Rudder Contr Sys $98 Tek War $18 $43 Pro Pinball $37 Quest for Glory Anth $25 Star Trail $29 TM Wiz Pinball Cntrl $32 Tenka $40 Outlaws W95 Rebel Assault 2 $25 Rapid Fire Pak $29 Star Trek TNG Fl Unity $46 TM X-Fighter Jystck S15 Terminator Fur Shock 544 Pandora Directive $46 Tempest 2000 SU-27 Strat Gde Bndle $30 Stonekeep $30 TM XL Action Control $24 The Fallen Phantasmagoria 2 $54 Toh Shin Den Space Quest Anthology $25 Terracide $12 TM Phazer Pad $47 Time Commando $40 Plague $44 Total Pinball 3D $19 Star Control Colict 519 Ultima 7 Series $15 TM GP1 Ultimate Doom W95 $37 Police Oust 5 SWAT $47 Virtua Fighter W95 $42 Str Trek Hollidy Bndl $29 Ultima 8 Pagan $15 TM Top Gun Joystick $32 Witchaven $25 Qin Tomb Mid King $39 Worms $34 Take Ten $19 Ultima Undrwid 1 & 2 $15 VFX1 Vitt Realty HG 5802 XS $46 Rama $48 Worms Reinforcemnts $34 The Archives 1 Unlimited Adventures $19 Verbal Commander $119 Zombieville $44 Return to Krondor $45 X-Men W95 S42 Trophy Case $24 Wizardry Gold W95 $32 Viac and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS GASH. COD S8. Price, availability, offer subject to change at any time Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges. Defectives replaced with same product All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and ner item basis. The per order charge is charged once per order placed and the per item\" charge is er order Post Per Shipment charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment\" charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you Per item 1943 Euro Air War 844 688 Allack Sub 3 $48 A-10 Cuba W95 340 A.T.F. Gold $46 A10 Tank Kilir 2 W95 $48 ACS Marine Fighters $25 ACS Navy Fightes Gld $34 AM 64D Longbow $51 AH64 Flash Pnt Korea $25 ATF Nato Fighters $22 Accelerator W95 $44 Across the Rhine $29 All Clot le Firs 9 $45 Air Cmbt Paclic 1942 $16 Air Combt Pacific Gold $34 Air Warrior 2 W95 $44 Alen Alliance Apache Archimedean Dynsty $41 Armored Fist 2 $49 Battle of the Ironclads $46 Burning Road $44 Comanche 3 $49 Command Aces W95 $25 Conquest of the Skies 948 Vaiklight Daytona USA $42 Descent Bundle $26 Descnt 2: Innte Abyss $48 Destruction Derby 2 $47 EF 2000 Tactcom $38 EarthSiege 2 W95 $40 F-22 Lightning 2 549 F16 Fighting Falcon 848 FA 18 Hornet 3 W95 $45 Falcon 3 SD1 Fght Tor $12 Falcon 3 SD2 Mig 29 59 Falcon 3.0 Falcon 4.0 Falcon Gold Fighter Duel Pro Net 33 Flight Unlmtd W95 $3 Flying Corp Flying Nightmares 2 S4 Formula 1 W95 $4 Fury Cubed W95 Great Naval Battles 4 $4 Harrier 2020 $4 Hellbender W95 $3 Hind Helicopter Indy Car Reng 2 W95 $4 Jet Fighter 3 S4 M1A2 Abrams W95 $4 MechWarrior 2 W95 $4 Mechwarrior 2 Net Mech $1 Mechwrrior Mercnries $4 Microsoft FS 6 W95 $5 Monstr Trek Manss $4 Msoft FS 5 Europe 2 $4 Msoft FS5 Airbus Coll 53 Msoft FS5 Flight Shop $5 Msolt FS5 Obict Dsgnr $4 Muzzle Velocity $4 Nascar Racing 2 $4 Naser Acng W Trck Pck $4 Need for Speed 2 $4 Red Baron 2 W95 $4 SabrAce Sail 95 Scorcher Shattered Steel Ship of the Line W95 $4 Silent Hunter Silent Hunt Patri 1-2 a $1 $48 $48 $42 $44 Noir $44 Standard Priority U.S. Mail U.S. Mill 7.10 DES 23 Days $1.00 $1.50 $100 S 1.50 $1.00 S1.50 Federal Express 2 Day $2.00 $2.00 $2.00 Federal Express 1 Day Mail to Canada 7 Days Mall To The World 14 Days $400 $2 DO $2.00 $200 $2.00 $600 "


"Call NOW to Order! Source 10835 Chips & Bits, Inc. Online at www.cdmag.com/chips.html 800-699-4263 AEROBSTI PHANTAS MAGORIA 2 Craig Curtis is out trading in his Straitjacket and ready to face the world again. The inexplicable starts happening Talking rats, bleeding photos and a computer with a Vicious mind of it's own. $54 ERO 'HARPOON 97 Imagine sitting in the frigid water, strategically guarding the Norwegian coast. You discover a hidden submarine, a fleet of enemy ships heading your way. Your goal is to destroy everything that prevents you from your mission. $14 'MAGIC: THE GATHERING' This top selling trading card game is now for the first time, an interactive multiplayer online computer game, Ii's an addictive fantasy game featuring wizards, exploration, adventure and role playing. CD $46 \"HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II Having crushed his enemies, consolidated his power base and eliminated dissent, Lord Ironfist settled down to rule. After 25 years the land is again thrust into turmoil. CD$35 Stefano COMAS ADERMOUNTAI RED ALERT SPEX DIABLO \"DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN' With a visit from a stranger from the future, many characters are now developing in the cracks and under the rocks of ancient caves Move through an new world of 30 With 360 degree movement. $46 \"3D SPEX' From the minute you put these on you're engulfed in 3D game field where wicked realism rules. Bring a whole new level of excitement to PC games, adding to your competitive edge with depth clues unavailable to the naked eye, plus exceptional comfort for hours of gaming enjoyment. $79 \"COMMAND & CONQUER RED ALERTY WWII never happened. Hitler never rose to power. In-stead, Joseph Stalin and his Red Army are plung ing Europe into a bloodbath of terror. Do you command the Allied Forces? CD $48 DIABLO' As a young boy, you return to your vil lage to find it razed and your family dead. Exploration of the countryside reveals that a similar fate has befallen all the neighboring towns, except for one. CD $46 Coming soon! Jark's STEEL PANTHERS 2' Fight tank vs. tank in this contemporary tactical squad level game Lead a single platoon or up to an entire battalion while you battle the enemy in vanous conficts from the 1950s on, including Korea, Vietnam and Desert Storm Experience what World War III would have been like by Creating your own \"what if situation. CD $43 'ACS: U. S. NAVY FIGHTERS 97 Experience some of the toughest air com bat in modern history, with all new artwork and terrain including Vietnam Make precision strikes and engage in Vicious ar-to-air combat with the thunder of an FA 18 on afterburner. $45 \"BETRAYAL IN ANTARA An empire over time has fallen pry to corruption and decay. Today a wellmeaning Emperor faces a crumbling infrastructure where bribery. intrigue, nepo tism, deceit and assassination run rampant. $48 'THRUSTMASTER F-22 PRO' With a powder coated metal base, glass filled ABS handle metal gimbal mechanism, and heavy gauge spring tension, the F-22 PRO gives you the edge you need in advanced tactical warfare. $124 U.S.NAVY FIGHTERS IBM SIMULATION IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WARGAMES FREE $25 SimCopter W95 $40 Super EF 2000 W95 $46 Super Motocross W95 $33 TFX EF2000 $45 TFX:X-22 $46 Test Drive: Off Road $42 The Darkening Tie Fight Coll $28 Trophy Bass 2 $48 MX Racing W95544 iper. Oper Red Sect $34 Ving Commandr 5 W95$55 Wing Commande 4 W95542 Wild Circ Gran Prix 2 $44 X-Car Exprmnul Ron $44 X-Wing Collector $24 X-Wno V Tle Fighter $54 F-22 $44 NBA Live 97 $45 NCAA Bball Final 4 97 $44 NFL OB Club 97 NFL Total Control Net $45 NHL Hockey 97 $46 PBA Bowling 2 PGA Europn Golf Tour $46 PGA Tour 96 Sawgrass $19 PGA Tour 96 Spnsh By $19 PGA Tour 96 Wentwrth $19 PGA Tour Golf 96 W95 $37 Pro Golt $42 SimGolf $40 Strange Golf W95 $39 Striker 96 $33 Ten Pin Alley W95 $40 Total Control Football $46 Triple Play 97 5 48 Power Chess W95538 Pyst $15 SciFi Chan Trvia Game $44 Scrabble Shanghaii Grt Mm W95 $26 Solitaire Dlx W95 Solitaires Journey $16 USCF Chess $40 Ultimate Yahtzee $28 Unicorn W95 $19 Universal Neverlock $19 Vogas Games 95 W95 $19 Virtual Pool W95 540 Wheel of Fortune Plat $22 You Don't Jck Ost Pck $20 You Don't Know Jack 2 531 You Dot knw Jack Spit $31 You Dont Know Jack XL 542 Pnthrs Shd Cmp 1-Bea $15 Panzer General 2 $42 Panzerblitz $42 RELee CW Gen W95 548 Road to Moscow W95 $43 Stalingrad $39 Steel Panthers $37 Steel Panthers Cmpon 515 Steel Pnthrs 2 S43 TACOPS Tank Resistance 2024 $39 Third Reich $39 Tigers Pruit Cmp 1-2ea $15 Tigers on the Prowl 2 542 V Victory Bundle Wargame CS3 Rities $43 Zukov's Campons W95 $37 Zulu War $29 $48 GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $80 Elements 3.5, ESPN Sports Shorts CO, Precision Approach CD, Return of the Phantom 3.5, Ultima Underworld 23.5. SPEND $160 Battles of Destiny 3.5, Disciples of Steel CD, Jutland CD. Riddle Master Lu CD $47 $25 IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES IBM BUDGET Civilization 2 Scen $26 Civilization Network $25 Civilization $19 C&C Red Alert W95 $48 Colonization $25 C&C Covert Ops $22 C&C Red Alert $48 Command & Conquer $47 Command & Conquer 2548 Commnd & Conqr W95 $45 Command HO $18 Cong of New World Dix 548 Conquered Kingdoms $19 Conquerer AD 1086 $25 Conquest New World $36 Constructor W95 5 44 Dark Earth Strty W95 545 Dark Reign Future War 540 Deadlock Destiny W95 $45 Dominion Dungeon Keeper $45 Emperor of Fadng Suns $44 Empire 2 $24 Empire 2 W95 $24 Empire Dlx Mstr Ed S19 Empire Dix Scenario 1 $6 Enemy Nations W95 $42 Evolution Exploration $40 Fallen Haven W95 $47 Flight Commander 2 $39 Forbes Corp Rder Gme $45 Fort Apache $16 Fragile Alliance $48 Free Enterprise $45 Front Lines $34 Galactic Miraga W95 541 Gender Wars $42 Grandest Fleet $14 Hardline $34 Heroes M&M W95 $34 Heroes of M&M2 $35 Tranpsort Tycoon Olx $42 History of World $40 Wages of War W95 $29 Imperialism Warcraft 2 $46 Imperium Galactica $46 Warcraft 2 Add On $27 Into the Vold $44 Warcraft 2 Maps $19 Jagod Alinc Odly Game $44 Warcraft 3 $47 Jagged Alliance $19 Warcraft Orc/Humns $29 Jutland $19 Warhmmr Shad Hrn Rt $28 Lords of the Realm 2 $48 Warlords 2 $19 MAX Warlords 2 Dbx 541 Machiavelli the Prince $19 Warlords 3 $42 Magic Gathing Stratgy $44 Warwind W95 $43 Master of Magic $29 Wooden Ship fron Men $39 Master of Orion S19 Wrld Circ GP2 Manager $29 Master of Orion 2 $46 X-Com Apocalypse 345 Mechcommander $48 X-Com Terr frm Deep $41 Mighty Machines W95 $32 X-Com UFO Defense $19 Mission Force $43 Outpost Pax Imperia 2 W95 $48 IBM TRADITIONAL Pirates Gold $19 Planetary Raiders $45 Battleship W95 Railroad Tycoon Bridge Dix 2 Omr Shrt S29 Reach for Stars 2 W95 $48 Chess Wars $38 Rebellion W95 $48 Chessmates $33 Return Fire W95 5 37 Chessmstr 5000 W95 $35 Risk W95 Clue $40 Romance 3 Kingdoms 4$34 Dinosaur W95 $19 Second Conflict $24 Dragon Dice $44 Sentient Game Guru $24 Settlers 2 Game Maker 3.0 532 Shadow of the Emperor $35 Golden Nugget W95 S29 Shattered Nations $46 Hong Kong Mahjong S29 SimCity 2000 Collectn $51 Hoyle Casino Coll W95 $30 SimCity 2000 W95 $51 Jeopardy Platinum $28 SimCity 2000 W95 Net $51 Magic Gathering W95 $46 Sim Park W95/W3 $34 Monopoy S40 Sim Tower Monty Pythn Holy Gr $39 Star Control 3 $47 Muppet Treasr Island $37 Star General $43 Orig $14 Starcraft W95 546 Othello 528 Syndicate Wars 546 Paparazzi $19 CIRCLF RFANFR SERVICF #68 IBM HINT BOOKS $39 ABC Monday Night FB $52 PBA Pro Boxing $38 British Open Golf $48 Extreme Street Hockey $42 FIFA Soccer 97 945 Fron Page Football 97 548 Front Page Golf W95 $48 Front Pg FB Pro 96 $48 Grand Slam '97 W95 $44 Hardball 6 $42 Jack Nicklaus Golf 97 $42 John Daly Golf W95 $42 egends FB 97 W95 $43 Links LS Links Pro Crses 1-1Gea S19 Links Pro 386 919 Lunar Goll $44 MS Gott 3.0 W95 $37 Madden Football 97 $44 Mileague Footbil 3 W95 $34 NBA Hang Time W95 546 $16 1830 RA/Rbbr Baron $34 7th Legion $48 Aden Magic $39 Admiral Sea Battles $41 Afterlife $39 Age of Empires $48 Age of Sall $42 Agents of Justice $48 Allegiance $34 Ancient Empirs W95 $29 Ares $42 Battlecruiser 3000 $30 Battles of Destiny $12 Birthright W95 $48 Blood & Magic $46 Caesar 2 W95 Capitalism $42 Cave Wars $39 Chaos Overlords W95 $29 Citiz Bckwer Attr 5 42 Civilization 2 $42 Aegis $19 Age of Ironclads $42 Age of Oars Allied General $28 American Civil War 545 Battlegrnd Gettysburg $32 Battleground Antiotam $41 Battleground Bulge $28 Battleground Bull Run 542 Battleground Mld East $42 Battleground Shiloh $39 Battleground Waterloo 542 Close Combat W95 $38 East Front $42 Great Battles Alexndt $44 Harpoon 2 Deluxe $25 Harpoon 97 W95 $44 Last Blitzkrieg $41 Nam $42 Over the Reich Pacific General W95 $45 Tek War Terra Nova Alone in the Dark $12 Return of the Phantom $16 Riddie Master Lu S19 Under Killing Moon $19 CyberJudas $12 Disciples of Steel $12 Falcon 3.0 $16 Flight Sim Toolkit $16 World Circuit $16 Battles of Destiny $12 Civilization $19 Grandest Fleet $14 Jagged Alliance $19 Jutland Master of Orion $19 Piratos Gold $19 Warlords 2 X-Com UFO Defense $19 Harpoon Class $19 $16 Betrayal in Antara $16 Civilization 2 Comm Cong Red Alert $13 Daggerfall Chronicles $19 Dark Forces 2 $16 Diablo Elder Scrolls 2 0 13 Heroes of M&M 2 516 Leisure Suit Larry 7 $16 Master of Onion 2 $16 Mech2 Mercenaries $16 Star Control 3 $16 Wrert 2:Bynd Drk Prtl $13 $41 $19 $19 CON29793 "


"PC CD ROM WINDOWS 95 ARE YOU THE CRACK PILOT THE POPULATION IS DYING F So RFACE TIENSIS RATING PENDING E PHILIPS CONTENT RATED BY CIPELE READER SERVICE 127 COMPRO GAMES "


"TERRY COLEMAN  STRATEGY/WARGAMES Strat gen Red Alert Dappli Real-Time Strategy Gaming Grows Up c&c: his just in! Real-time strategy gaming was invented in the last year and a hall! Forget about all that time you spent playing SimCry, or SIMEARTH, or SIMANT, or SIN WHATEVER, those many years ago, because those don't count (they're all \"sims,\" right?). Worse, even real-time strategy games that sold well a few years ago, such as HARPOON and DUNE 2, are ignored in the New Order. Why? It's very simple, really: Marketing mavens refuse to believe that they've missed out on any big trends. So, games like COMMAND & CONQUER and WARCRAFT II are hailed as the new frontier of gaming for the next millennium, simply because these two titles have moved, between them, somewhere near two million units. What this gives us is a flood of realtime strategy games due to arrive over the next couple of years, because the computer gaming industry is much like Hollywood: why risk trying something new when you can copy a success? As we've seen with such tepid titles as Z, simply going real time is no guarantee of cither artistic or commercial success. Nevertheless, expect every company to come out with its C&C or WARCRAFT basher by next summer, with the good first efforts (SSIS WARWIND) far outnumbered by the clunkers. If you think I'm overstating the case, just think of the countless-and soulless-MYST clones that hit the shelves every month. of the few clones that gets it all right. dance club riffs don't always C&C: RED ALERT is a Mozart symphony jibe with the specific misto all the Salieri clones. A marvelous techsion you're playing. nical achievement, RED ALERT takes the You probably know the quaint sprites of COMMAND & CONQUER setup by now:Albert Einstein goes back and transforms them into SVGA figurines in time, kills Hitler, and changes history by leaving a power void in Europe for Stalin to fill. Is it great sci-fi? Maybe not, but it works well in game terms to set up the plausible SovietsVs.-the-West conflict that historians, professional and armchair alike, have speculated about in the decades since WWII. Like DUNE 2 A BRIDGE TOO FAR You actually need real combined and C&C before it, RED arms tactics to take your objectives in RED ALERT ALERT then eases you into the action with a good tutorithat move at high speed, even in al that introduces some interesting charWindows 95. The all-digital music is acters. My favorite is Tanya, a not-so-closrobust, adrenaline-pumping stuff, with ct pyromaniac who empties her revolvers great range, although the technopunk into anything that moves. She isn't quite RED ALERT is sleek, sophisticated and very addictive. BRIEFINGS  It's a tribute to the popularity of real-time strategy gaming that the best of them are still widely available. HARPOON CLASSIC '97 just shipped prior to press time from Interactive Magic, while most of the rest are still carried via mail order or direct from the game companies. If you pick up one of the older games, such as DUNE 2, make sure to get the latest drivers for your Pentium systems (see Patches in this issue). Alternative history, a la RED ALERT, has long been a sci-fi staple. One of the most thought-provoking is Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle, which has recently been re-released. It postulates a very believable, and chilling, version of what might have happened had the Axis won WWII. No word yet on whether this will be made into another movie for Arnold to flex his biceps. TERRY'S REAL-TIME FAVORITES 1. HARPOON 360 Pacific Still the best-deep and challenging 2. RED ALERT Westwood/Virgin Sleek, sophisticated and very addictive 3. WARCRAFT II Blizzard An elegant design spiced with humor 4. COMMAND & Westwood en Multiplayer \"DUNE 3\" with improvements CONQUER 5. DUNE 2 Westwood Great atmosphere, severely challenged Al 6. WARCRAFT Blizzard Derivative but charming Tolkienesque affair 7. DEFEND THE Incredible Sim. Low budget but heartfelt and accurate ALAMO! 8. PAX IMPERIA Changeling Playable real time or turn-based WESTWOOD TO THE RESCUE Okay, now that I've gotten the Dvorak out of my system, I want to tell about one FEBRUARY 1997 "


"TERRY COLEMAN units which requires you to master a variety of tactics if you want to win from both the Allied and Soviet sides. Tesla Coll STRATEGY / WARGAMES RAAF, la Tostarughe is w o od and for starodobne The calc i o 2010 V always ri 1thi I, MP4 VINAP 41 PHT & gt; 1, 1, 1, 1, 4 t, l à thi : tin tin techo doa r easing the with one godord the negative to the soul Asochon L u t S ekolteres rout donnab Year the same gharen t eral Lara Croft from TOMB RAIDER, but Tanya makes up for it via her proficiency with plastic explosives. From the very first RED ALERT mission, you see the Westwood stamp: plenty of interesting units and buildings, but not so many different types as to overwhelm you during play. The best of the new items are right out of a 1950s B-film, full of McCarthy-cra \"Soviets are going to conquer the world\" imagery, except that here. it isn't paranoia. 'The Soviets have V-2 rocket technology that they lifted from the Germans, to complement their own rocket infantry (from the old Red Army rocket artillery days?). Just as they did in our his tory, Stalin's lads have developed Mic fighters, the world's largest submarine flect, and Hind helicopters--complete with Vulcan chain guns! Which, we can only assume, they got through some bizarre alternative to lend-Lease. If those nasty weapons weren't enough, the Soviet Tesla Coils, a lightning-based defense, can deep-fry a chicken (or a tank) at 100 yards. In fact, when you toss in spy planes, flame throwers, and parachute bombs, it's obvious that the Soviet side gets more cool new toys. But Westwood has always donc a good job making sure that opposing sides have dissimilar TIPS! TWITCHY TEENAGERS NEED NOT APPLY EAT YOUR HEART OUT, TOM EDISON The secrets of the Tesla Coil and other mysteries of RED ALERT are revealed online Many of the sillier aspects of C&C are at http://www.westwood.com. diminished in RED ALERT'. It's a shame the log of War rules them orders with a hot key that you aren't as sophisticated as the rest of the assign. design; but if you had really good intelliGuard Mode is useful for aggressive g ence reports, that would spoil half the deployments, such as search-and-destroy fun. And yes, the designers carefully avoid sweeps. any comparisons with realism by sticking  Force Fire lets you lay down fields of to their alternative-history guns. Still, fire even where there are no apparent tanks are tanks regardless of whether enemy target, and is great for suppression you call them Tiger Ils or Mammoth or covering fire. Tanks and if you shoot at them with  Force Move is basically overrunning small arms fire, they are going to crush enemy infantry with armor. you under their unforgiving treads. Allied Scatter can save you from imminent naval vessels are pretty indiscriminate death by bombing nearly hungry tanks or about where they lay down their salvos, other mass destruction weapons that othand if you aren't careful, your units will fall erwise ruin your day. to friendly firea nice touch.  Escort works better in theory than in What I find most encouraging about practice, but it's better than clicking RED ALERT is the reduced emphasis on around constantly on units of widely varyarcade reflexes to win. You do need to ing speeds. react quickly, but even on top speed, you All in all, the forination and ordering actually have some time to think, not just modes give RED ALERT a much-needed twitch. Firetcams have evolved from dose of depth and internal consistency. C&C as well. It always irritated me in It's still nowhere near the small-unit tactiC&C that you'd land crack commandos cal exercises of X-COM or STEEL or other supposedly elite units in an area, PANTHERS. And in terms of perceived only to watch them stand by and perish \"realism,\" this can't touch I TEROES OF ignominiously because you couldn't click Micur & MAGIC II, or even PANZER on them fast enough. The Al isn't all that GENERAL, for that matter. Still, RED much better your units are still pretty ALERT clocs what it sets out to do: deliver stupid individually--but there are many fast-paced strategy excitement in a familways of improving your troops' likelihood iar milieu. 'That it does so with even better of survival graphics and sound than before, we have First off, your units will actually a right to expect. That it manages to delivreact--other than dying-lo enemy er this visceral punch with surprising tactiattacks. Often, there seems to be no cal subtletics, we can count our blessings. rhyme or reason to whether they run or And we can be secure in the knowledge shoot (the C&C universe could really that no matter how many wannabes use a dose of X-COM's morale system), crowd themsclves onto store shelves this but at least they do something. Christmas and next, there will always be Alternatively, you may save all the col plenty of space for the Westwood lected units into a firelcam, and give folks-the real deal in real time RED ALERT-My advice is to start as the Allies. This way, you have to learn how to maneuver your teams to their objectives without the benefit of Tesla Coils. When clearing a road for an approaching convoy, you need a two-pronged attack. Send some heavy units to wreak havoc at the enemy base, while you send a couple of fireteams to the critical road junction and set them to Guard Mode. CIVILIZATION II Scenario Disk---If Threextra happy you are having a P. ople inity unth tough time keeping extra honny the folks at home from getting restless in the Alexander scenario, remember: invention can't be discovered; so, research Pottery and build the Hanging Gardens for more happy campers. It isn't worth going for Medicine and Shakespeare's Theatre, since the scenario is so short. ordus   /  /  CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"GCEREA la Official Hint Book Daggerfall Chronicles Available Now! Prepare to experience your new oosession! che solo Thaide Scrolls Chapter 1 Revolutionary! Announcing The Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall, Bethesda's latest installment in the Elder Scrolls Series and the sequel to the award-winning TES:Arena. TES: Daggerfall is one of the most ambitious computer games ever devised. This is no dungeon hack, no bit of fluff with medieval trappings. Daggerfall's world is twice the size of Great Britain, filled with people, adventures, and scenery as real as reality. This is a world designed to allow you to play the game any way you want. Be the Hero or the Villain... or anything in between. TES: Daggerfall is all your favorite movies and books wrapped up in one package with hundreds and hundreds of hours of playtime. Prepare to experience your new obsession. -Johnny Wilson Editor-in-Chief, Computer Gaming World \"This is the game that hardcore FRPG fans have been waiting for since the beginning ... Daggerfall will introduce players to a mirror land inside their computer that looks and feels like real-life ....\" -PC Gamer Actual IBM screens shown POWERED BY  ONE ELDER SCROLLS\" Chapter Two Bad dogs dont cast that spell! MATURE BEHETASUTUOKS 1370 Piccard Drive, Suite 120, Rockville, MD 20850 BBS: 301 990-7552 Fax: 301 926-8010  Website: http://www.bethsoft.com XnGiner, Daggertall@, and The Elder Scrolls are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. Copyright  1994-96 Bethesda Softworks, a division of Media Technology Limited. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #51 M ESRB "


"***** REVIEW HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II DIFFICULTY LEVEL Classic Heroism HEROES II Is An Amazing Sequel To '95's Best Strategy Game STRATEGY / WARGAMES by Elliott Chin nekin nce in a while, you get a strategy game that amazes everyone with its surprising, addictive qualities and amazing ease of use. The original HEROES OF MICHT AND MAGIC was such a game, carning the coveted CGW 5-star rating. When that game hit our offices, several CGW editors suddenly found themselves knee-deep in warlocks and dragons --strictly for research purposes, you understand. And now, with HEROES OF MICHT AND Magic II having cast its own magic spell, I find myself campaigning for endless hours, conquering castles and heroes while articles pile up on my desk. AUTO ates one superhero, with all the most powerful troops and best magic, just like experienced HEROES II players would. The Al opponents also seem to upgrade mage guilds faster and use higher magic intelligently Close Spellbook In several instances. WELL, BLESS MY CHAIN LIGHTNING! Whether it's Mass Haste I was literally pulling or Berserkers you prefer, you'll find both the magic and combat my hair out because systems improved in HEROES II. the computer kept on casting chain of role-playing in the heroes you recruit lightning on my troops, decimating my and command. Your champions horde before I moved even a single unit. It statsattack, defense, spell power and helped that the computer also gave his knowledge, and so on-increase as you army a very fast stack so he could move gain more experience, which is acquired first. through success in combat or in special I can't stress enough how much better areas on the game map, such as training this game is than the original HEROES OF gazebos. MICHT AND MAGIC. The less cartoonish Price: $59.95 System Requirements: 486-66 or better processor, 8MB RAM, 55MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, DOS 5.0 or Windows 95, mouse; supports all major sound cards. # of Players: 1-6 (null modem, modem, network and Internet) Protection: None (CD must be in drive to play) Designer: Jon Van Canegham, Phil Steinmeyer Publisher: New World Computing, Inc. Woodland Hills, CA (800) 325-8898 Reader Service #: 332 A HEROES BRIEFING For those who never played HEROES, HEROES II will be a welcome treat. Unlike SSI'S FANTASY CENERAL, which is simply a succession of tactical battles, HEROES II requires that you master tactics and strategy. Most of the game is played at the strategic level, as you move your heroes about the map, searching for artifacts, looking for resources and gold, and taking control of mines. Mines are essential because you need the resources in them to build up your towns. The towns are where you recruit units and build your troop quarters, mage guilds and other and other structures. Tactical combat arises from the inevitable struggle to defeat your rivals and conquer luis holdings. To that end, you build armies, assign them to the control of a hero, and then send that hero out to attack your enemics. Yet within this seemingly simple structure lies incredibly robust gameplay: a good tactical model; an expansive game of building, exploration, discovery and resource management; even an element BIGGER AND BETTER THAN EVER I've placed sevenyear-olds in front of a computer with HEROES II, and they picked it up inside half an hour. But the casy learning curve hides a deceptively good Al; and unlike HEROES I, where the computer fared well mostly clue to its superior initial troop allotment, in HEROES II, the Al seems stronger. The computer often creFEBRUARY 1997 "


"HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II  REVIEW Nearly everything is perfect in HEROES II. I still wish there was a wait function in the combat, and you still can't command your hero in combat if all your troops are immobilized. But apart from those little squabbles, this is a great game, even better than HEROES I. It complcm ents the expected mix of simplicity and adclictiveness with more special objects and magic artifacts to be found, larger map sizes, and two new classes. Tactical combat has been enhanced with a larger map and more units, the role-playing has been expanded with new skills, and the magic is much more extensive. Add in null modem, modem, network and even Internet play and you arrive at that 5-star package that will suck any strategy gamer into this black hole of addictive fun. STRATEGYZWARGAMES look mcans I won't have to cover up the The tactical and strategic play arcas are sprites now when my WARCRAFT II budnow twice as large as they were in dies come to ask what I'm playing HEROES I, This is an improvement, espeHEROES II also now sports two new classcially for tactical combat, where it's no es: the Wizard, the most powerful mage longer so confining and restrictive. character, and Necromancer, the com The role-playing element has also been mander of the Undead. Each class has cnhanced to include secondary skills. new units and building as well. All six Now, each hero can learn up to seven difclasses also now can upgrade a certain ferent skills, including logistics (which number of their troops, so you can make increases your movement), basic estates war trolls out of regular trolls, or veteran (whereby your hero contributes 125 to 500 pikemen out of pikemen. This simply gold per day), leadership (which gives you adds an even greater array of units to the permanent morale bonuses), and up to Il game, in addition to the imique units that other skills for a total of 14 available abili come with the two new classes. lics. Each skill also has three degrees of 7 proficiency, so you can A Tale Well Told make your licto even more specialized in particular abilities. The magic system has also been overhauled in HEROES II. There is now a fifth level to the mage guild. More important, cach Ice hiero now has a num DAO ber of spell points, and cach spell takes off a number of those HAIL THE CONQUERING HERO The familiar points, depending on Heroes look has been enhanced by SVGA graphits level and power. ics, improved Al, and a well-focused campaign. Your overall spell points are determined by your erhaps the most noticeable improvement knowledge, so if you for HEROES veterans is the inclusion of a have 3 knowledge, you much more integrated and enjoyable cam possess 30 spell points. paign. The campaign in HEROES I was sim Not every hero has ply an excuse to have you play nine scenarios in a row. instant access to all In HEROES II, though, there is a tight story with a consis spells now though. tent plot One of the new secA civil war has broken out in the kingdom, forcing ondary traits is mystiyou to choose: do you champion the good or evil king? cism, which is a skill It's more than a simple plot element, as the scenarios in you need in order to each campaign derive from your choice. As the evil gen cast any spell beyond eral, you will play one scenario that requires you to second level. break up the Dwarven-Human alliance, while if you play Obviously, knights and the good side, you will actually have to forge that barbarians don't start Dwarven alliance. Not only are the scenarios for each with mysticism and so side thus dynamically different, but you also get oppor can only cast up to see tunities during the campaign to betray your present king ond-level spells, while and switch sides! Short cut-scenes also flesh out the warlocks and the other story between each scenario, giving the campaign a spell-casting classes, much more consistent feel. Of course, if you tire of the who begin with this campaigns, you can create new scenarios with the skill, can cast spells excellent editor beyond that level. 17:34 EXIT LADIES AND GHOULS This town, where you recruit troops and raise essential buildings, showcases the new Necromancer class, complete with menacing Undead legions. APPEAL: Fans of the original and anyone looking for an engrossing, challenging and fun strategy game. PROS: Very easy to learn, with a wonderful blend of tactical, strategic and role-playing elements. Great multiplayer options, combined with an improved magic system and campaign, make this even better then the original. CONS: Could stand a few more tactical tweaks. CG "


"***** REVIEW  STEEL PANTHERS II: MODERN BATTLES DIFFICULTY LEVEL STRATEGYZWARGAMES A Penetrating Success SSI'S STEEL PANTHERS II: MODERN BATTLES IS Right On Target by Patrick C. Miller PCCCS n 1975 Mech War\"77, SPI's excellent board game covering tactical armored combat in the 70s, came with colored cardboard picces representing 51 units from six major powers. The game's ten scenarios were played on a single two-color map. For desert scenarios, players had to pretend that the trees on the map didn't exist. What a difference 21 years and computer teclmology makes! STEEL PANTHERS II: MODERN BATTLES has more than 50 types of tanks, as well as 400 different weapons from 25 nations, and covers tactical armored combat from the 1950s to 1999, The six campaigns and 55 scenarios, portrayed in brilliant SVGA graphics, are accompanied by realistic sound effects. If that's not enough, you can randomly generate scenarios or create your own with the game's editor, choosing from three different terrain types (desert, summer and winter). of armor-piercing ammunition, simulating the interaction between the units and weapons systems is a far more complex proposition. To their credit, designers Cary Grigsby and Keith Brors have made it happen. STEEL PANTHERS II, while more complex than its predecessor, is just as much fun to play. The game is turn-based and played on aliex grid map. Each hex represents 50 yards and cach turn represents 2 minutes of time. Infantry units can be as small as a single sniper or as large as a 12-man squad. and casy to use as that of the original. The variety of historical scenarios include: Korean War battles from the 1950s; '60s Vietnam air mobile and armor operations, Isracli-Arab conflicts over three decades; even Desert Storm scenarios from 1991. Be forewamed that some of these sccnarios have been play-balanced to make the battles more challenging and interesting than they were in real life. However, another strong feature of the game is the player's ability to control various factors that affect troop quality and Het 47,47 Hecht 10 Clear SISTEEL WTHERS HD Freference SHOTS 5555 RANGE 100 hexet 2 143 MiA1 ERNESTY SEER Put \" 2 Price: $54.99 System Requirements: 486-66 (Pentium 90 or better recommended), 8MB RAM, 12MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM, DOS 6.22 or higher, mouse; supports Sound Blaster and 100% compatible sound cards. # of Players: 1-2 (email, hotseat) Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Gary Grigsby. Keith Brors Publisher: Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (800) 245-4525 Reader Service # 333 ON TO KUWAIT Following the success of the original STEEL PANTHERS, the question was: could its game cnginc be adapted to modern armored combat without a serious overhaul? Ammored warfare in World War II was primarily a question of gun power against armor thickness, and few weapons were effective beyond 1,000 yards. However, in this age of highly accurate, long-range guided missiles, high-tech fire control and gun stabilization, Chobam and reactive armor, helicopter gunships and troop transports, supersonic attack aircraft, cluster munitions, radar and infrared antiaircraft systems and a variety HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF Historical scenarios in STEEL PANTHERS Il feature conflicts from the 1950s to the 1990s. Here, the U.S. 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment slashes through the Iraqi Republican Guard at the battle of 73 Easting during Desert Storm in 1991. Squads are organized as platoons or companics. Vehicles are represented individually and can be organized in two-unit sections, platoons or companies. Air mobile infantry and attack helicopters are also available. The interface remains as clean weapon performance. If you want the Iraqis holling Kalfji to defend the town as they really did, adjusting morale and accuracy settings can provide a more listorical result. Campaigns test your command skills CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"STEEL PANTHERS II: MODERN BATTLES  REVIEW STRATEGYZ WARGAMES 229 DO over a series of battles and your ability to While playing STEEL manage combat resources. First, you purPANTHERS II under Is The Abrams Really That Good? chase core units for the campaign. DOS and Windows 95, Depending on the mission, you then have I didn't experience any f you've ever wondered whether the U.S. M1 the opportunity to purchase various sup game-crashing bugs as Abrams tank is really as good as it's portrayed, portunits prior to battle, such as off-map with its predecessor. one engagement from Operation Desert Storm in artillery, attack aircraft and engineering Most of the bugs are 1991 suggests that it probably is. units. After a battle, points are available to minor annoyances, Just before dawn on February 25, an entire battalion repair damage, replace losses and upgrade such as an Su-25 attack of 31 Iraqi T-72s and four T-55s closed to within 1,200 to better vehicles and weapons. In the jet making the sound of yards of Bravo Company from the 4th Marine Division's long campaign, you can play against up to a prop-driven plane 4th Tank Battalion. This Marine reserve unit had 13 three different nationalitics. and having the picture M1A1s and was supporting the 2nd Marine Division's Play by e-mail support has been for the earthen bunker assault into southern Kuwait. By the time the Marine improved with a VCR playback function, unit show up as an F-8 tankers recognized the threat, the Iraqi battalion was well but computers must have 16MB of RAM Crusader. There are within the effective range of the T-72's 125mm gun. to use this feature. Modem support for also problems with land Despite the Marines' being surprised by the Iraqis two-player games didn't make it into the terrain sometimes and being outnumbered nearly 3 to 1. in seven minutes final code. The word from SSI is that its showing up in water Marine tanks futurc is uncertain. That's too bad, and non-amphibious destroyed 34 because although the Al is okay, it can't units being deployed in of the 35 Iraqi match the challenge of playing against a water. tanks. The human opponent A new feature gives Iraqi gunners RIS: vehicles a chance to didn't score a CHINKS IN THE ARMOR bog down and become single hit. The \"The two biggest flaws in this game are immobilized when M1A1's therits skimpy manual and a significant numcrossing a stream. mal sights and ber of irritating bugs. At least the online That's fine until you its ability to AMAZING ABRAMS The STEEL unit encyclopedia provides more detailed discover during a cam fire two shots PANTHERS II scenario editor lets us reinformation than was found in the first paign game that the for every one create Bravo's encounter with a batgame. Unfortunately, the manual doesn't only way you can get of the T-72's talion of Iraqi T-72s, which fare no provide a good explanation of how to the vehicle's mobility proved lethal better here than they did in real life. interpret this data. Camers have already back is by spending the and decisive. begun the laborious process of breaking points to completely down the unit data, converting it into replace it. Probably the most annoying are almost always appallingly and unrealreadable charts and posting it as clown feature is that some hexes that appear to istically high. Nonetheless, STEEL loadable files online. Why SSI doesn't be clear terrain are actually buildings. PANTHERS II is an excellent game with include this information as text files on Driving a vehicle into what you think is an enough realism to satisfy most grognards the CD is puzzling open hex, only to hear the sound of a coland enough fun to entice casual lapsing building and see wargamers. your unit become immobilized, is a tough APPEAL: Grognards and casual way to find out where wargamers alike will find enough realism and variety in STEEL PANTHERS II to the buildings really are. keep them entertained for months. www bers In the final assessPROS: Modern armor galore, hunA Tourer ment, STEEL PANTHERS dreds of weapons and dozens of II, like STEEL PANTHERS, nationalities combine with first-rate graphics and sound to provide is more of a game than a tremendous depth luighly realistic simula and replay value. tion. Units with wirewe manier word met een moet CONS: A poor guided antitank missiles manual, numerous are allowed to move and annoying bugs and lack of modem FREEDOM OF CHOICE With a simple click of the shoot, which they play detract from preferences button, players have a tremendous amount of an otherwise outshouldn't, and despite standing wargame. flexibility in adjusting troop and weapon performance attempts to model morale, casualty rates GENERAL PREFERENCES POLYER FAZENGES FROIT GiGiigiai spic saa lisa SVE @ ** FEBRUARY 1997 "


"* ** REVIEW  DESTINY DIFFICULTY LEVEL STRATEGY Z WARGAMES Destined For Failure l-Magic's DESTINY Definitely Won't Make You Stop Playing CIVILIZATION by Tim Carter Ravereizi Lunde 121 Deonte 121 Hardenance Employees 101 Avalle Resources Hories 381 lion (16) Lumber12121 People (331 Stone [206] Tags [10] Delete COH telesa DESTINY fl were a professor at Computer that can legitiDET LO Ele View Govern Fod Seng Help Gaming and needed to illusmately be Edu View Artrony in Carison Army Now Force Construction Production Store Branca trate the principles of game design fermed \"Civ Polen Focal Boking Costs to bright-eyed freshuman, I might with options.\" BOSAS Caway Construction Bronze Age Sword Amy Houses (20) bron Age Svord Ally well choose DESTINY, a recent It's called Civ Stone Age Covaky Army Stone Apelanty Any relcase from l-Magic, as part of II, and it works War Pub Force Composton my demonstration. Unfortunately, pretty well. BONCU Lo Charcot Ligh Spea Cavaly particularly for those who spent Second, anyMeder Spos Corady their hard-camcd cash on this one who turkey, I would have to use thought that DESTINY as counterexample, a foil, to the inherent show what not to do Set alongside real strength of computer games, this product stands out Civ-like gaines CIN 931 BC Med 822 PM for its all-encompassing awfulness, its was the options almost total lack of respect for its con they offer isn't SPREADSHEET COMMANDER DESTINY really isn't a game, but a sumers, and its complete dearth of paying anymocked up spreadsheet program with very bad graphics and awful redeeming qualities. where near sound thrown in. cnough attenIT'S ALIVE! IT'S ALIVE! tion. technology, associated military units and DESTINY feels more like a kind of Truc, DESTINY does have an impressive buildings is broad, as is the range of coml'rankensteinian mistake than a completarray of options. For instance, you may m ands that you may give them. Further, cd game. All of the requisite parts have play in overhead or 3D perspective, realyou can play the big, build-an-empirebeen stuck together in more or less the time or turn-based. You may start your across-a-global-landscape-type game, or conventionally accepted fashion game in any one of a number of historical play shorter, strictly military engagements (although a few are ugly, and others don't time periods, with technology and miliinvolving limited forces and a small tactiquite work right). Yet, once that jolt of tary equipment to match. The range of cal map. clectricity is adminis19 II This mclange of options, lists, and dooFie Vew Goran Fed Setnas Heb tered, it quickly becomes Amb dads lacks one crucial ingredient, howevPrice: $49.95 apparent that the beast w Admin Onion com ww Force Conn ect w el er: fun gameplay. Simply put, DESTINY System Requirements: 486/66 has no soul. Where are plays like a spreadsheet program, and the or better, 8MB RAM those villagers with last time I checked, Excel just wasn't a lot 2x CD-ROM drive, of fun. (Actually, this comparison may be SVGA graphics Torches when you really Windows 95: supports need them? somewhat unfair to Excel.) DESTINY-in Windows 95 compati The marketing contrast to your favorite statistics proble sound cards. # of Players: 1-8 approach for DESTINY gram-has graphics, although they are Protection: None (CD seems to be pretty cheesy, and would be more in keepmust be in drive) \"CIVILIZATION with all ing with a game from four years ago. And, Designer: Adrian Earle the extra options you Destiny has sound, even if it is boring, Publisher: Interactive Magic wanted.\" This strategy immensely repetitive, and completely Research Triangle has two olwious flaws. CENTER OF HABITATION? Why not just call these cities? COH unrelated to gameplay Park, NC First, there already is a management leeches the fun out of this game, as you spend (800) 298-0872 The basic problem with DESTINY is that way too much time micromanaging annoying little details. Reader Service #: 334 | product on the market it just isn't fun to play. Virtually every CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"ENET:Z ne PC CD ROM & WINDOWS 95 'A Cyber Junkie's Ultimate Fantasy Come True. hdd T:24ne Cross the boundary that separates dreams from reality. Enter the virtual world of Net: Zone, an adventure game with a world full of bizarre computer programs, artificial life forms, and floating platforms. Discover the CYCORP virtual reality interface linking you to the cyberspace world of the Genecys Zone. Attach the neural device to your head, and let your mind interface directly with the Zone....the secrets of CYCORP and the mystery of your father's disappearance are waiting... To order, interface with your local retailer or call 1-800-883-3767 Website: http://www.philipsmedia.com 01996 Gametek, Inc. All Rights Reserved KIDS TO ADULTS COMPRO GAMES 1996 Compro Games Ltd. All Rights Reserved  PHILIPS CONTENT RATED BY ESRB CIRCLF RFADFR SERVICE #278 "


"To those million fans who are addicted to Command & Conquer... Me just uppedu dosage. COMMAND CONOUER FOR WINDOWS 95 "


"Command & Conquer Gold Edition for Windows 95! ALL-NEW GOLD EDITION FEATURES Super VGA Graphics intensify realism and excitement Internet Head-to-Head play Play against competitors across the world, with Westwood Chat* New Command & Conquer Theme Pack includes screen savers, icons and desktop patterns GANI O NI COVER GAME OF THE YEAR LIST STUNICY Incoming! This Winter! For Windows 95. ww Wawad Westwood\" Command & Conquer is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1995, 1996 Westwood Sludios, Inc. All rights reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation S T U DIOS www.westwood.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #226 * Requires existing Internet access "


"REVIEW. DESTINY FOX Destiny Ile Setting Heb aspect of the game works against the playcr's potential enjoyment: from clumsy commands to bad graphics to a weak interface and an overemphasis on micromanagement STRATEGYZWARGAMES Ross E 2850BC Tun 8.30 PM HOLLOW HABITAT You begin DESTINY at your first Center of Habitation. Why the designers couldn't call these cities (or villages, settlements bases, or homes) is beyond me. This may seem like nit-picking, but in fact it is symptomatic of what's wrong with the whole game: it feels like it was created by and for accountants-really, really, bored accountants. from your COH, you send out military units to explore the surrounding terrain and settle in new COHs, near the appropriate terrain, of course. Mind you, it can be difficult to determine where the right terrain is, as the map tends to be a wash of colors. Which brings up the question of graphics: on the whole, I do not believe that graphics are particularly important to a strategy game. Certainly there is no shortage of products on the market with snappy pictures and no gameplay, and there are as many with fairly clunky I AQ graphics that are most enjoyable. Graphics only matter when they begin to interfere with gameplay. Unfortunately, in DESTINY this is the case. The map is difficult to read, some military units are hard to tell apart, and UNSAFE AT ANY SPEED The artificial intelligence of the units most do not show up really makes the tactical combat atrocious. Here, a line of well against the terGerman ships heads straight toward the enemy, running into rain background, and over the other battleships. Within each COH, you control your burgeoning civiwent straight at my battle line, and at one lization through a series of Windows point actually sailed directly over the top menus. There is a lot to do within each of several of my battleships. Now, admilCOH, which tends to become highly tedly it has been a while since I took a milburdensome as time wears on. The effecitary history course, but I don't remember tive management of each location will overrun attacks at Jutland, or even the require many, many changes in a relativeDogger Bank. The artificial intelligence is ly short period of time as your COH also deficient in the strategic game, as the grows. If you are playing in real time, this computer does not expand quickly or effigets especially annoying, as the clock is ciently, and at the lower levels of difficulty ticking and meanwhile each of your other does not expand at all. settlements will, no doubt, be accumulatTo top off all of my complaints, many ing lots of other things for you to do as commands seem to require multiple clicks well. of the mouse to register with the program. 'This problem is exacerbated by the fact I have no idea why this should be the case, that the computer doesn't do a very good nor am I sure how you would even projob of prompting you when new orders for gram this into a game, except to deliberateresearch or construction are required. ly torture the helpless saps playing it. Nothing along the lines of, say, I have no idea how games like this get CIVILIZATION, where the various tasks are created, let alone why they see the light of quite manageable. day. Without redeeming features, and I found real-time combat to be much with no recognizable potential for fun, too fast also, although I'm not sure that it there is quite simply, no reason to spend makes any difference. Combat takes money, time, or effort, on this product. place on a tactical map, also difficult to read, with a limited number of units. APPEAL: For those who feel comAside from the problems reading the map, pelled to pick up another tactical combat is greatly hampered by CIVILIZATION clone. the game's abysmal artificial intelligence. PROS: There is a patch. In virtually every situation, the computCONS: Too many er sends its forces straight at the defend to list here. ers, although to its credit it doesn't always Essentially, this is not a game, it's a charge with its long-range artillery in the spreadsheet provanguard. Perhaps the silliest battle! gram augmented fought was a Jutland-style slugfest with bad graphics and a nice cardbetween battleships circa World War I. board box. Controlling the Germans, the computer Too Little, Too Late -Magic has released several patches for DESTINY, the most recent of which addresses not only repeated crash problems, but also some of the more annoying aspects of the game interface. While these changes help, they cannot salvage the basically flawed game. In fact, in many ways the patch draws attention to the initial weakness of the program. The version 1.35 patch gives the option to upgrade the map resolution, albeit at the expense of additional memory. (Given the low initial resolution, one has to wonder why extra memory is necessary just to get this game into the same ballpark with other strategy games.) Considerable attention has been given to reducing the micromanagement necessary when improving your Centers of Habitation. You can now filter out obsolete improvements and units, and the dialogue boxes open to the most recently used category, saving a few mouse clicks. A governor feature also allows players to have the computer control the expansion of each COH. While well-intended, this feature leaves the gamer with two choices: mindless tedium through micromanagement, or mindless tedium through the computer's control of your empire. CC FEBRUARY 1997 "


"THIS REVOLUTION WILL BE TELEVISED. Tonight and every night. A full hour of prime time programming about the digital revolution. News about computing technology from the human point of view. 70 Every night at 10pm and 1am Eastern time, 7pm and 10pm Pacific time on MSNBC, the 24-hour cable news channel. Also on the Web at www.thesite.com zif-Davis Television "


"STRATEGY CLOSE COMBAT Combat Class STRATEGY / WARGAMES Strategies For Going Head-To-Head In Microsoft's CLOSE COMBAT by Patrick «Zippo» Miller LCIO Corse Cooledgerowa Dune Dohori HD or years, flight sim ergrenadiers snuff jockeys liave gone out a last-ditch online, blasting American armored each other from attack. Saved the virtual skies replays of battles and recording allow armchair their exploits with gencrals to analyze gun camera their successes and \"films.\" In confailures and share trast, if wartheir moments of gamers wanted competition glory with others. with live opponents, they had In the head-toto play via e-mail or find a head arena, CLOSE friend for a modem-toCOMBAT can be modem connection. brutally unforgivTwo-player CLOSE COMBAT Tivo-player CLOSE COMBAT SURPRISE! Hidden snipers and recon teams act as trip-wires, alerting you to ing. Playing against has dramatically changed this. your opponent's intentions before it's too late to react. the game's artificial Playing the game head-to-head intelligence (AI) via an Internet TCP/IP connection, war from Normandy. They can experience should be viewed as a training exercise gamers can now find an opponent at a exhilaration when their Cls blast for that most dangerous and unpremoment's notice and engage in real through a German defensive line and dictable of opponents, a human being. time World War II ground combat roll it up from the flank or breathe a sigh The purpose of this article is not only based on the 1944 American breakout of relief when their battle-scarred panzto get you up and running to play jo agood For more CLOSE COMBAT strategies, visit our Web site at www.zdnet.com/ gaming. Getting Some Online Action DE ER Adedi AFP IS LEO The Virtual Lat e s CLOSEFOMENT 1-800-521-2243 Zone erhaps the fastest and easiest Once two players are on the table and way to play CLOSE COMBAT Online 2009.. have decided their scenario preferences, is through the Microsoft the host clicks on \"Play.\" CLOSE COMBAT Network's Internet Gaming Zone then loads and the connection is automatat http://www.zone.com. To use this free site, ically established. There's no need for you must have the commercial version of players to know their IP addresses. After CLOSE COMBAT (not the demo) updated to verthe battle is completed, closing the game sion 1.0a and be running Internet Explorer 3.X will take you back to the Zone's CLOSE (available free from Microsoft) as your Web COMBAT Web site. browser. For those who don't care to run At this site, there are 12 gaming tables,\" a Internet Explorer but are looking for list of players currently online and a chat area online action, check out Close Combat IN THE ZONE Finding Close COMBAT Opponents and makthat allows players to exchange messages. Central on the Web at http://www.coming two-player connections is a breeze on the Microsoft You can either join a game hosted by another bat.org. This excellent site provides a Network's Internet Gaming Zone. The online chat room player or host a game yourself. The host wealth of information on two-player gamlets you make battle plans and swap war stories. selects the scenario and the settings used. ing and offers tournament play, links to Clicking on an empty table makes you the host while clicking on an o ther CLOSE COMBAT Web sites, details on Internet relay chat (IRC) occupied table enables you to join the host's game. channels, FAQs and strategy tips. t ydex deyee Net Mercy CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"CLOSE COMBAT REVIEW CLOSE COMBAT online (sec sidebar), but also to provide you with tips on strategy and tactics that can help you make a respectable showing when you're pitting your skills against an online nemesis. strategies and tactics you can employ in your online CLOSE COMBAT battles. They can, however, serve as a useful foundation upon which to build Slashing Shermans for the Americans. They have more infantry and a higher proportion of automatic and semiautomatic weapons. Combined with an edge in armor, the Yanks are capable of unleashing a much higher volume of fire than the Germans. Attacking on a narrow front, if successful, can lead to a quick and decisive victory. However, this type of attack can play directly into the hands of an experienced opponient. If the German commander quickly spots the American player's point of attack, he can shift forces to that area and contain it. A few strategically placed machine guns and antitank teams can quickly tum an American offensive into scrap metal. To improve your chances, be sure to pin the German forces and interdict their likely avenues of reinforcement. For example, if there's a road running east and west across the map, the Cerman player will probably move his u nits across this road to reinforce his flank. A tank, half-track or machine gun leam firing down this road can disrupt his reinforcements. STRATEGY / WARGAMES COCIDO w96 BOLD, DECISIVE ACTION Three Shermans traverse open ground to outflank the German defensive line for a decisive victory with a minimum of casualties CERCA THE MORALE OF THE STORY Inflicting casualties and seizing objectives are an important part of the game, but lowering the morale of the opposing force is just as important, if not more so. Therefore, knowing how to lower your opponent's morale while maintaining yours is essential. Because the game models troop reactions to combat stress, one of your goals should be to place as much stress as possible on the opposition. Stress is increased when troops are under attack from tanks and artillery or being ambushed, encircled, outnumbered or pinned in the open. Stress is reduced when your troops ambush or outnumber the enemy, their unit cohesion is intact, and they're under your orders rather than orders from the AI. Recon is another key element of twoplayer CLOSE COMBAT. The more you know about what your opponent is doing or trying to do, the better off you are. On the defensive, you must determine the enemy's main point of attack, ensure that you have adequate forces to halt it and spot opportunities for counterattacks. On the offensive, your initial goal should be to probe the enemy defenses to determinc the locations of machine guns and anti-armor weapons. Three-man recon teams work best for this. Your reconnaissance efforts must be aggressive ly followed up with supporting fire from tanks, infantry and mortars to pin the enemy units and defeat them. The worst way to discover your opponent's antitank weapons is with your tanks. WHAT GERMAN SUPERIORITY? At point-blank range in close quarters, even the humble M4A1 Sherman is a viable threat, as it shows here by icing two German StuG IIIGs. SHERMAN SHORTCOMINGS? While the American armor is inferior to the German's, the closeness of the terrain tends to diminish the German advantage, allowing very few opportunities for them to engage at longer ranges. The M4AI Sherman, armed with a 75mm gun and machine guns, is very effective against infantry. At close range, its gun can penetrate all but the thickest German armor from the front. The 76mm gun on the MIO Wolverine and the M4A3 Sherman can effectively engage nearly any German vehicle from the front, with the exception of the Jagdpanther. Avoid at all costs sending American armor into areas that haven't been cleared of enemy infantry. 'lle Cermans have a wide variety of antitank weapons, but for the Americans, the best antitank weapon is another tank. Losing your tanks leaves your infantry dangerously exposed to enemy armor. Bazookas are seldom as numerous or as effective as Cerman infantry antitank weapons. These tips by no means provide a comprehensive overview to all the possible CO24 AMERICANS ON THE MOVE The Americans are on the offensive in nearly all scenarios. This generally makes their side more difficult to play because the terrain favors the defender. There are two primary ways to attack: either on a broad front or on a narrow front. In most cases, attacking on a broad front is better PAYING THE PRICE Don't send your Shermans into unfamiliar territory without infantry support. Set up a combined arms attack so your tanks fight the enemy's machine guns and rifle teams while your infantry and artillery fights his antitank teams and antitank guns. FEBRUARY 1997 CG "


"BLINK YOU'RE SCRAP METAL VIDEO 01996 Ang e rved. All products are bears and Eject from your HAWC, steal another. Bol-jacking is relatively legal here. Wage war in everything from icy fundra to blistering desert. We suggest wearing layers. registered trademarks of their respective Storm the enemy guard towers; try to avoid being turned into a red sinewy pile. Destroy the enemy's HAWC delivery system and cut down on the number of missiles headed your way. Communicate with wingmen via radio; share amusing anecdotes about global warfare. A c CR E EN SH T s Best Buy.CompUSA. Computer City Software Etc. "


"THOMSHOEMANAND TATHINE G-NOME pushes real-time 3-D action over the edge. On the other side, you'll find tactical weapons of war: treaded assault tanks, swift hovercraft and massive multi-legged HAWCS. Scromisle through more than 20 intense missions. Realistic 3-D graphics start you into the action. Gameplay doesn't end when your vehicle is destroyed. Eject from one HAWC. Stealunother and infiltrate enemy lines. Capture a Meson-Pulse Cannon and turn your enemy to scrap metal. And they can This fun and games. Command more than 20 HAWCS (Heavy-Armor Weapons Chassis). Survey the battlefield from your virtual cockpit with \"hologrophic targeting and damage displays. . Experience the original soundtrack by Emmy award-winning composer Chris Boardman using the superior DirectSound uudio. Join in 8-ployer network bottles. With LEVEL 1-800-556-0307 Download the G-NOME demo at www.7thlevel.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #120 "


"HINTS & TIPS WOODEN SHIPS AND IRON MEN STRATEGYZ WARGAMES The Naval Academy A Treasure Trove Of Tactics For The Age Of Sail by Bob Proctor Cerah OODEN SHIPS AND IRON MEN (WSIM) is sure to lure even the most landlocked wargamer onto the open seas, but it won't do to lose your first naval battles while getting your sea legs. There are basically two ways to win in WSIM: board the enemy ship and capture it in hand-to-hand fighting force the cncmy ship to surrender by inflicting the maximum number of crew or hull hits. Hits on guns or rigging will NOT force a surrender TWO WAYS ABOUT IT Consider how you match the enemy in key characteristics. Compare the size and quality of crews; if you have a large advantage in crew strength, then boarding is the surest way to victory. If you don't start with a major advantage, watch for one to arise during battle if the enemy takes heavy crew hits. Be careful, however, if your crew quality is lower than your opponent's. An Elite crew of 100 is equal to an Average crew of 300 or a Poor crew of 500! If your opponent has the advantage in crew strength then you must fall back on gunnery for your victory. Compare the firepower of the two ships by counting GO EAST, THEN WEST, YOUNG SAILOR Here, zig to the the gun boxes on the status east and then zag to the west, bringing your guns to bear screen. Just count one side, on fleeing ships. Aim for the rigging, unless your prey is either port or starboard. close to surrendering. First count the long guns (bigger boxes), which is the firepower at Raking increases the amount of damage more than 600 yards. Then add the car you do, and prevents the enemy from ronades (smaller boxes) to get the firepow returning fire since none of his cannon er at ranges under 600 yards. If you have point directly forward or aft. the advantage in long guns, plan to stay Just remember that while you're get800 to 1200 yards away. The most chal ting yourself positioned at one end of the lenging situation is when you are more enemy, he'll be able to turn 90 degrees powerful at close range but have inferior and give you a full broadside. You should crew strength; trying to fight a gun battle expect to take a broadside or two while al ranges of less than 600 yards and avoid getting into raking position. The excepbeing simulancously grappled is a real test tional case is when the enemy has taken of your merit as an officer. so many rigging hits that he loses all maneuverability. Then you can CONTROLLING THE BATTLE approach from a safe direction (generally One of the most important tactics to upwind) and blast away until he hauls remember is to keep the Weather Cauge. down his flag. This suggests the interestThis means making sure you stay upwind ing tactic of standing off and shooting at of your opponent (see the sidebar). his rigging until you've dismasted him, Sometimes, despite your best efforts, and then moving in for the kill. The you'll be in a situation where you are problem is that rigging absorbs lots of hopelessly outgunned and outmanned. hits, and he will be shooting back. In Short of running away, your best bet is to order to keep him from aiming at your find a way to fire at your opponent while hull and crew, you can stay more than preventing him from firing back at you. It's 1200 yards away, which forces him to called \"Raking Fire,\" and it means shootaim for rigging as well. It helps if your ing at either end of a ship (bow or stern). crew quality is better as the crew memDIVIDE AND CONQUER These two British vessels can employ crossfire to get more rakes, but they may get so far apart that the Constitution can close with one and defeat it before the other can provide support. CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"..... Play to win and save yourself some money. Covoring intoractive & Multimedia Entertainmont COMPUTER COMPUTER CAMADALING GAMES RATED EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! DOOM ISU SAVE UP TO Feature Reviews Pagan Ultima 21 Dragonsphere Great Naval Bailes Il AEGIS In-Dept Strategies F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Preview Aces of the Deep Secrets of the Computer Game Developers Make the ultimate move M for serious gamers who know the score when it comes to buying computer gaming magazines. Subscribe to Computer Gaming World now and save up to 47%! Score points and cosmic savings now with Computer Gaming World. We're worlds apart from any other computer game magazine.  One year/12 issues $27.94. YOU SAVE 41%!  Two years/24 issues $49.97. YOU SAVE 47%! Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. Every monthly issue brings you exclusive first looks at the hottest, newest games... the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive environments. Plus winning strategies, master clues, in-depth reviews all the help you need to pump up your system and play out your fantasies on this planet and beyond. CALL NOW TO SAVE UP TO 47% 1-800-827-4450 To ensure savings, mention this code to the operator who answers your call: 4795. "


"HINTS & TIPS WOODEN SHIPS AND IRON MEN bers will shoot more accurately. It is tempting in this situation to load chain shot, which doubles damage to the rigging, but that has a maximum range of only 600 yards, and your gun crews will hold their fire until in range. The Weather Gauge STRATEGYZ WARGAMES CONSTITUTIORI WE PLAYING IT SAFE Tacking upwind sets up a high-percentage medium-range rake. n important tactic from the Age of Sail is the Weather Gauge: getting upwind of your opponent. It allows you to control the range since you can sail downwind rapidly when you want to while your opponent can only sail upwind very slowly. Here, U.S.S. Constitution has the weather gauge against HMS Africa (a 64-gun ship of the line!). The wind is blowing from south to north, so Africa is close-hauled and cannot turn south toward you. The ships both have 14 gun boxes per side, but Africa outguns the frigate 12 to 8 in long guns, so Old Ironsides needs to stay within 600 yards (1 grid square equals 100 yards). The safer move in this situation is to tack upwind and attempt to sail across her bow for another rake. If she turns east, you still have the weather gauge and can maneuver for a stern rake. The more daring move is to turn downwind, knowing that Africa will only sail about 200 yards upwind if she holds her course. This would give you a bow rake at closer range with 10% more of the crew on the guns. Knowing this, Africa's captain is likely to move east to avoid the rake and hit you with a broadside. ADDING MORE SHIPS First and foremost, keep your ships in a line. This gives every ship an unobstructed field of fire on both sides and protects the ships in the middle against rakes. The formation is called the \"Line of Battle\" and is where the name \"Ship of the Linc\" originates. You must give orders yourself for each ship to maintain the line; auto-pilot is of no use until you are ready to break formation and enter into melee. Having more ships does not give you any new ways to win. You still have to pound away from a distance or close and board, although you can now consider a combination of the two. Maneuvers with a line are much more unwieldy than with a single ship, cspecially if some ships are faster than others and are always backing sails to try to keep position. Consider making separate lines for ships with different sailing qualities. Some useful tricks become possible with multiple ships and you should watch for opportunities to use them. The first is to let your leading ship absorb all of the punishment while your line closes the range. It will be a target for every enemy ship but the rest of your fleet will arrive unscathed. Another tactic is to split your forces so that if the enemy turns to fire broadside at one group, he gets raked by the other. You can try this in the scenario \"Old Ironsides' Last Fight.\" Here, the British have two smaller frigates whose combined firepower is slightly greater than the Constitution, although they have no long guns and must stay within 600 yards. It's a very difficult scenario for the Brits, but they can use crossfire to get more rakes. This, in essence, is what Nelson accomplished at Trafalgar, breaking the Allied line so that a third of their ships (the \"van\" or front) were carried downwind. Using superior crew quality, the British were able to board and capture most of the rest before the van was able to join the melee. These battles aren't easy to win by any means, but if you heed our tactical advice, you'll have no trouble recording victories of your own in any battle in the Age of Sail. THE BOLD MOVE Turning downwind can set up a close-range bow rake, but leaves you open for a broadside. LINE-BREAKERS A classic use of the weather gauge is at Trafalgar, where Admiral Nelson, aboard HMS Victory, leads the British line, delivering nasty raking fire to the French-Spanish line, before boarding with superior crew. CG ce FEBRUARY 1997 "


"computer HD FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION IS AS EASY S 123 1. Fill in your name and address and check off 2. Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions, the ads or articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge. CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Void after May 31, 1997 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name | CGW 297-4 YOU Pleled? (Check One only) Check He only) 01.SOPE high school or les 010nce a Wet 2. Gradualed High School 02. Once every two to three weeks lllllllllllllllllll] 03. Some College of Technical school 3. Once amonth Title Telephone (4) Gradualed Colena 04. Once every two to three months 5.Post Graduate School 6. Once very four Lo Six months 6. DOHCPayPal ULTILIITTI 2. Computer tu aligned is | Check al that apply) 6. Where are you most likely to purchase games? Company Name 1.BM Compalibile (Intel standard) Check all that apply) 02. Daclntosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain 03.  Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 5. Direct from yenlo: 04. Dedicated game machine 3. las merchanising store 06 Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your and others in household) lavorite type 3. Haul. whilevel? (Check one only) of game? (Check one in each column) 01.Power PC | YourseOtherlother? 2. Pentium (566) 01. Strategy State | Zip 03. 2. Parialiay 04.  3. Role Playl 05. 286 04. Brain Teasers 5. Card4Please Send inte a one-year (12-15Slue) subscription to Computer Garning World for S27.94 4. Do you own ur lan lo by In rel5 months) 6. Spot CD-RONT Check one only) U.S. price), all other Countries add S16.00 for additional postage 07. Action/Arcade DL.DDwn 08. Educational 02.0 Plan to buy (6 months) In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 619-829-1692 09 Adventure | City "


"FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE Commutes PO BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 Illull . I IIIIIIII "


"ADVERTISER INDEX FREE PAGE R.S.# 120 248 151 292 290 360 595 SES E # 106 176-177 4-5 142 30-31 383 389 264 as 174 368 370 17-18 388 180 191,193 94-95 s %m%5%%%-smww & N FREE PAGE R.S.# COMPANY PRODUCT 228-229 65 Looking Class Technologies British Open Golf 259 Matrox Graphics, Inc. Matrox Mystique Maxis Full Tilt 2 Pinball! 196-197 Maxis Sim Copter C5-C7 Maxis SimGolf Microforum Soul Trap 192 MicroProse Master of Orion II Microsoft Sidewinder Camepad Microsoft Sidewinder Joystick Mindscape Final Four 87 50-51 362 Mpath Interactive MPlayer 260 NEC Technologies Computer Systems New World Computing Heroes II New World Computing Wages of War NRI Schools NRI Schools ORIGIN Systems, Inc Privateer 2 Philips Media Net Zone Philips Media Surface Tension Philips Media The Art of Flyfishing 134 Playmates Interactive Entertainment MDK Playmates Interactive Entertainment Powerslave 288 Psygnosis, Inc. Discworld 2 243 112 R&C Games Used Game Software 245 Ready Soft, Inc. Deus S3, Inc. S3d acceleration chip SEGA Entertainment Sega Rally Championship 266 SEGA of America Emperor of the Fading Sun 21 Segasoft Space Bar Sierra On-Line Betrayal at Antara Sierra On-Line Cyber Cladiators Sierra On-Line Hunter Hunted Siera On-Line Leisure Suit Larry 7 117 Sierra On-Line Lords of the Realm 11 18-19 Sierra On-Line Nascar 2 46-47 Sierra On-Line Shivers II Sir-Tech Fable 110-111 Sony Playstation Camage Hearts 238 Spacctec IMC Corp. Space Ob 168 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Star General 205-207 237 Strategic Simulations, Inc Warwind 118-119 Syquest EZFlver 230 C2-CHI Take 2 Interactive Software Callahan's Crosstime Saloon Take 2 Interactive Software Jet Fighter III Talonsoft The Age of Sail The Avalon Hill Game Company Cave Wars The Avalon Lidl Game Company Over the Reich ThunderSeat Technologies ThunderScat 271 UBI Soft, Inc. Pod United CD-ROM Mail Order Products V Communications System Commander 146-147 369 Virgin Interictive Entertainment Agile Warrior Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer:Red Alert Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer: Win 95 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Grand Slam 167 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Lands of Lore: Guardians of Destiny 142-143 376 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Scorched Planet 159 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Toonstruck 154-155 377 ZDNet NetBuyer 109 PRODUCT C-Nome Links IS The Crow: City of Angels Deadlock Jack Nicklaus Test Drive: Off Road A-10 Cuba MechWarrior Mercenaries Mail Order Products A Fork in the Tale 3D Proturbo Multimedia Speakers beZerk Daggerfall SkyNet Diablo Settlers II Mission Disc Koala Lumpur: Joumey to the Edge The Last Express Marathon 2 Family Ad Board Games Budget Software Mail Order Adult Role Playing Games www.cdmag.com/chips.html CD-ROM Terry Bradshaw Football 97 Real Sound, Graphics, Speed NOIR Monster 3D The Neverwood Arena Power F1 \"Tomb Raider Sacred Mirror of Kofun Falcon MACH V Mail Order Products Id Anthology Introduction Quake Scorcher Shadow Warrior NCAA Basketball Timelapse Titanic Audio Equipment Battle of Alexander Harpoon Classic 97 The Reactor Touchdown Descent to Undermountain Dragon Dice Fallout Fragile Allegiance MAX Realms of the Haunting Reloaded Starfleet Academy WingMan Warrior COMPANY 7th Level Access Software, Inc. Acclaim Accolade Accolade Accolade Activision Activision ActSoft, Inc Any River Entertainment ATI Technologies Bazooka (SAS) Berkeley Systems Bethesda Softworks Bethesda Softworks Blizzard Entertainment Blue Byte Software Broderbund Broderbund Bungie Software CH Products Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Columbia House Core! Creative Labs, Inc. Cyberdreams, Inc. Diamond Multimedia Dreamworks Interactive Earth Link Eidos Eidos Enteractive Falcon-Northwest Camer's Gold GT Interactive Software GT Interactive Software GT Interactive Software GT Interactive Software CTE Entertainment GTE Entertainment CTE Entertainment Harman International Interactive Magic Interactive Magic Intergraph Computer Systems Intermark Corp. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Logitech 87 203 SE 153,199 34-35 60 164-165 152 236 275 107 208A-B 242 mal 240 382 175 170 74 = GES 391 123 120-121 222-223 354 226 355 69 138-139 163 58-59 63  244 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD mail Order Mann Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone u Local Stores don't always have the games your looking for or the expert advice you need. Take a few minutes to stop the courteous and experienced salespeople in the pages of Computer Gaming World's Mail Order Mall. THE MARKETPLACE H R&G GAMES DON? CALL TO SUBSCRIBE TODAY! MISS THE NEXT COMPUTER LIFE! PO BOX 5008 Glendalo Hts, IL 60139 We Buy & Sell New & Used IBM Games & Hindbooks Top Dollar paid for newer games. Check or 10% more for credit usualy processed in just 1-2 days. Call for prices before sending games. More games in stock cal for prices. ***Used Games Rebel Assaut 2 CD 7 Guest CD $19 Shivers CD 11 Hour CD $29 Silent Hunter CD AH64D Longbow CD $28 Sient Thunder CD Angel Devoid CD $21 Space Quest 6 CD Anvl of Dawn CD $21 Spycraft CD Apache CD $22 SU 27 Flanker CO Bad Mojo CD $32 Star Trek Final Unity CD Cacsar 2 CD $29 Stonekeep CD Command & Conquer CD $29 Terra Nova CD Conqueror 1086 CD $22 Time Commando CD Crusader no Regret CD $32 Torin Passage CD Crusader No Remorse CD $22 Under A Kiing Moon CD D CO $26 US Navy Fighters CD Daggerfall CD $33 Warcraft 2 CD Dark Forces CD $28 Witchaven 2 CD Deadlock CD $29 Wing Commander 3 CD Doom 2 CD $28 Wing Commander 4 CO EF2000 CD $24 Weardry Gold CD Earthsicge 2 CD $26 X-Wing Col CD Fit Pg Sp Football 96 CD 522 Zork Nemesis CD Full Throttle CD $22 **New Games Fury 3 CD $20 Afterlife CD Gabriel Knight 2 CD $29 Civilization 2 CD Hoxen CD $26 Command & Conquer CD The Hive CD $19 Com&Com Red Alert CD Hyper 3D Pinball CD $29 Crusader no Regret CD Need for Speed CD $24 Final Doom CD $35 NHL 96 CD $25 Mochwar2MercenariesCD $42 Pandora's Directive CD $32 Time Commando CD $39 Police Quest 5 CD $29 Warcraft 2 CD Free UPS Shipping with purchase of $75 or more Call 1-800-525-GAME Canada 630-980-9995 Fax630-980-9996 http://members.aol.com/RG GAMES/index.html Email rogames@aol.com Visa/MC/Discover/Ann Express, Cashier Check, Money Order Accepted Mon-Fri Sam-9pm CST Shipping UPS 55, Airborne $11 . All games must have original boxes, disks or CD & manuals (NO COPIES) in good condition, working. Seratch & virus free. Any unacceptable games will be retumed at your expense $5 ups per box Prices subject to change & availability. ComputerLife INSTANT INTERNET Every month COMPUTER LIFE is packed with answers, clear-cut Information, practical tips and how-to's everything you need to wring more power and pleasure from your machine. To stay on top of it all you've got to subscribe to it. So call today. It's a better deal at a better price FREE software, too when you subscribe to COMPUTER LIFE! Get Start! FREE BONUS SOFTWARE * WHEN YOU CALLI CALL 1-800-926-15 All you DD is call to subscribe. DON'T miss the FREE softy CIRCLE READER SERVICE #112 "


"SAME DAY SHIPPING! ABSOLUTELY THE BEST Snited CD ROM SELECTIONS ENTERTAINMENT AVAILABLE! COMPLETE PENTIUM SYSTEMS AS LOW AS $1599 OVER 10,000 TITLES IN STOCK DAILY! CALL US NOW FOR A FREE CATALOG! CALL 1-800-864.8334 Visit Our HOT Website at www.unitedcdrom.com SOFTWARE FREE TODAY! SOFTWARE WITH EVERY PURCHASE! I WARCRAFTS ARBA Scorchers ZPG: You are placed in the midst of an evil futuristic dictatorship, Great Games where as a former assassin turned good you attempt to solve the ZPG mystery of your former identity. 51977 SCORCHER: Screaming through a white-knuckled world of shadows & danger, you must pit your skills against a pack of high-speed Scorcher SA rivals where ultimately, only one will survive. 51305 51305 40 AREA 51: As a soldier in the elite S.T.A.A.R. forces, you must penArca 51 $ A 4 etrale alien forces al Area 51 & eliminate the threat of the deadly 51974 alien infection that has spread through the base. GT Interactive SUPER RADIO ADDITION: Interactive music videos, songs & games lead learners from basic skills, such as counting objects to complex addition problems by recognizing place value, regrouping & mental computation GOLDEN GATE: The treasure of King William is your obesession. From journals & letters to enigmatic omens, the clues lead you to either for tune or doom through the colorful city of San Francisco. PHONICS ADVENTURE SINGALONG: Featuring Learning Pals characters, art & music, motivating rewards, solid content & proven educational techniques. Includes language arts, math & social studies. Mor Buys Super Radio $9 0 55032 Golden Gale $2 5 53564 Phonics 53501 Panasonic Panasonic WARCRAFT I TIDES OF PYST DARKNESS An interactive parody With powerful inspired by the allies, terrifying Davidson best selling PC creatures & inge adventure nious weaponry game of all the struggle for the dom time. Also includes ination of Azeroth con enhanced CD single, tinues over land, sea & plus two members-only web sites 44436 44436 44 55412 55412 13 air PA RP 99197 BUY ONE & probability, tractions. Heroes YOUR WIMAT MIGHTYN NUMBER HEROES 100 Zillions COSMIC GEOMETRY NUMBER HEROES: Introduces problem solving, patterns & logic, oddiLearning Games tion & subtraction, multiplication, division & probability, fractions, geometry, interpreting graphs & charts. 54368 Zoo ZILLIONS: Introduces problem solving & reasoning, using a CHOICE number line to understand number relationships & counting, count Zillions ing money & moking change, + and facts & story problems. 54369 3$363 COSMIC GEOMETRY: Builds a foundation for geometry. Introduces the Geometry attributes of shapes & solids, constructions & transformations, 2D & 54366 3D coordinates, length, perimeter & area, surface area & volume. Edmark ARWIND LECITH A M1A2 ABRAMS HARPOON CLASSIC '97 Operate in a crewman's With new displays position as driver updated & added gunner, or tank scenarios & a commander & fight teht YOUR more intuitive opproach, potential war. Harpoon '97 will zones, the Persion4 4 continue to test Gulf, the Balkans your growing or the Ukraine. INTERACTIVE expertise! 54237 MAGIC 54255 INSIDE THE SAT & ACT 97 by Princeton Review Prep for both college admissions tests. Twice as much video instruc tion, includes College Counselor with doto on 1,200 colleges. in any of these CHOICE INS 53103 26 WAR WIND: Venture into the wilds of an alien world inhabited by rancorous beasts. Fight, trade & plunder for sovereignty WorWind is an epic battle for reunification & freedom through domination, liberation & revenge. STEEL PANTHERS I MODERN BATTLES: Get ready to rumble. Game play is fun, easy & exciting. Explosive SVGA graphics & intense animation help you feel the destruction, MASTERPIECE COLLECTION: Includes 6 megahits: Dark Sun Shattered lands, Woke Ravenger, Ravenloft, Stone Prophet, Genie's Curse & Menzoberranzan. STAR GENERAL: You are in control of a multiplanetary force to take back the galaxy from six steadily encroaching races. The fate of hundreds of worlds is in your hands. 4 Great Titles Steel Panthers Il $ 50633 Masterpiece $ Star General $ 46348 50452 Mindscape MISTERPIECE TOLLECT inte Interactive Derelopers Kit GENERAL War Wind RICHIE SAMBORA by Enteractive Learn to play rock guitar like Richie Sambora os he shares his personal photos, videos, guitars & anecdotes in a musical multimedia adventure. SAT 50450 Guangan DAKSH $20 54121 22 LINUX DEVELOPER'S KIT Includes 10 CDROMs for Linux: Red hat 3.0.3 New Slackware 96 (3.1), Perl 5.003 ELF Kernal 2.0.13, Debian 1.1.17 & more. 52767 Pacific Hi Tech LINUX GAMES 2 Experience the latest amusements available for the game developer's preferred platform. A must for all Linuxers interested in gameplay from develop ers to players. Works with the latest kernel (2.0) and Slackware releases 54895 NEW! * While supplies lost. Shipping charges apply to free offers. *Orders received as late as 9:30 pm (CST) for 2nd day all Call for other deadline times, Special offers, item availability and prices may vary according to formal and are subject to change without notice. All prices in U.S. dollars. Not responsible for inadvertent errors. Au MAIOR CREDIT CARDS VISA --BUCOVE CODE WO2 ACCEPTED Business Hours: Mon-Fri 8am-10pm: Sat 8am-5pm; Sun 12pm-5pm. Mail Orders to: 800 United CD ROM Drive, Urbana, IL 61802 CONTACT US! CompuServe: 76043,1605 Fax back 1-217-352-8123 Fax back 1.217.00 America On-Line: UNITE Fax orders 1-217-337-8531 BBS 1-217-352-9654 Int'l orders 1-217-337-8532 "


"-AOtt $32.95 More Games 21 & Over More 21 & Over Light House $35.95 $35.95 BAK Madden 97 Bundles $39.95 Interactive MechWarrior 2 $29.95 Bacchus Six Pack $31.95 Fantascenes $34.95 Mech Warrior 2: Mercenaries $38.95 Deep Throat Gids 1 4 $36.95 Hot Leather $31.95 Megarace 2 $34.95 Dirty Debutantes 6 pack $38.95 Intimate Possibility ACTION ON CD ROM $38.95 Mortal Kombat 3 531.95 New Machine 6 pk. Latex $36.95 Nascar Deluxe $35.95 1 or 2 $35.95 Net Erotique $29.93 Hot Games $36.95 Platinum Six Pack $38.95 Need for Speed SE Nightwatch III $31.95 Romsoft 3 pk Mpeg $29.95 11th Hour $39.95 $29.95 Nemesis $36.95 Outpost 69 Romsoft6 Pk Vor 2 $38.95 Pandora's Poker Palace Age of Rifles $39.95 $36.95 $37.95 NHL 97 Sexy Six Pack $38.95 $38.95 Perfect General 2 Peeping Pete AH-64 Longbow $36.95 $32.95 $38.95 Seymore Six Pack $38.95 Quake Anvil of Down $38.95 Porno Poker $34.95 Up & Cummers Six Pack $36.95 $37.95 Rebel Assault 1&2 ATF $37.95 Sex 1.V. Vol. 2 VCA Six Pack (Plug it In) $38.95 $34.95 $37.95 Road Rash Battle Cruiser $38.95 Sex Worm Beavis & Butthead S.W.A.T. $28.95 Seymore Butts 2 $37.95 Virtual Stupidity $37.95 Shivers $27.95 & Over Sorority House $34.95 C&C Covert Operations $24.95 Silent Steel $28.95 Interactives Sorority Sex Kittens $34.95 Civilization 2 $38.95 Spy Craft $26.95 *$Troids $36.95 Space Sirens 2 $34.95 College Slam $19.95 Star Control 3 $38.95 Carmen $26.95 Time Warp $34.95 Command & Conquer $36.95 Steel Panthers $29.95 Cat Fight $31.95 Vampire's Kiss $32.95 Deadlock $37.95 Stonekeep $31.95 Chameleons $28.95 Virgins 1,2 or 3 $27.95 Duke Nukem 3D $34.95 Syndicate 2 $38.95 Club 21 $32.95 Virtual Director $28.95 Dungeon Master 2 $26.95 Time Commando $38.95 Club Catarina $31.95 Virtual Golden Eye $32.95 Full Throttle $31.95 Warcraft 2 $36.95 Crystal Fantasies $28.95 Virtual Las Vegas 2 $31.95 Grand Prix 2 $37.95 Warcraft 2 Expansion $23.95 Cyberxperience $49.95 Virtual Sex 2 $36.95 Heroes of Might & Magic $38.95 Wing Commander 4 $38.95 Dirty Debutantes 2 $31.95 Virtual Sex Shoot $36.95 Hind $38.95 WWF Wrestlemania $22.95 Diva X $37.95 Virtual Valerie 2 $38.95 Indy Car Racing 2 $29.95 Zork Nemesis $28.95 Dream Machine 2 $38.95 Virtually Yours 1 or 2 $29.95 Leisure Suit Larry Collection$28.95 HUNDREDS OF TITLES IN STOCK MUST BE 21 TO ORDER ADULT CDS CATALOGS & DEALER'S LISTINGS AVAILABLE Como C.O.D. MESON ORDER NOW! 1-800-560-6234 VISA CIRCLE READER SERVICE #245 I STOSO GAMER'S GOLD WE HAVE OVER 2,000 TITLES! 34 WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES To Sell Us Games or Make Inquiries Call: 1-800-514-2637 12-5 Mon-Fri CST In Canada, call 605-339-2060 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 (include your return address & FAX no.) 19 ATF-CD 11th Hour-CD $26 Fade to Black-CD $19 Shlvers-CD 7th Guest-CD 19 Fantasy General-CD 27 Silent Hunter-CD A10 Tank Killer 2-CD 29 Flla Soccer '96-CD 25 Sim City 2000-CD Afterlife-CD Front Page Footbil 196 25 Some 3.5 available AH-64D Longbow-CD Full Throttle-CD 22 Space Bucks-CD Allled General-CD FX Fighter-CD 15 Space Quest 6-CD American Civil War-CD 33 Gabriel Knight 2-CD 35 Spycraft-CD Anvil of Dawn-CD Hardball 5-CO 27 Star Control 3-CD Apache-CD 27 Heroes of Might & Mole 26 Star Trek Final Unity Ascendancy-CD 19 Hexen-CD 22 Steel Panthers-CD 34 Hint Books-Call $4 & up Stonekeep-CD Bad Molo-CD 34 Indy Car Rcing 2-CD 34 SU-27 Flanker-CD Batlleground: Gllysbry Jagged Alliance: Odly 30 Terminator: Futre Shek Breach 3-CD 15 Links 386-CD 17 Terra Nova-CD Caesar 2-CD Lords of Midnight-CD 10 The Dig-CD Clv Net-CD 19 Mechwarrior 2-CD 29 Tio Fohter Coll Ed.-CD Civilizatlon 2-CD 34 Mission Forco: Cybr Sto 34 Time Commando-CD Close Combat-CD 25 Mortal Kombat 3-CD 26 Tony LaRussa BB 3-CD Commnd & Cnguer-CD Mysl-CD 22 Top Gun-CD Conquest New Worl Nascar Racing-CD 29 Torin's Passage-CD Conqueror AD 1086-CD 24 Need for Speed-CD 30 Treasure Quest-CD Crusader No Amrse-CD 27 NFL Quartrock Club 22 Trophy Bass-CD Cyberla 2-CD 35 NHL 96-CD 25 Virtual Karts-CD Cybermage-CD 27 Pandora Directive-CD 34 Virtual Pool-CD Dark Forces-CD 25 Panic in the Park-CD 15 Warcraft 2-CD Deadlock-CD Panzer General-CD 19 Warhammer-CD Descent-CD Perfect General 2-CD 22 Wing Commnder 3-CD Descent 2-CD PGA Tour Golf '96-CD 27 Wing Commnder 4-CD Duke Nukem 3D-CD 29 Phantasmagoria-CD 22 Wooden Ships, Im Men Earthsiege 2-CD Police Quest 5 Swat-CD 29 X-Com 2: Trror of Deep Earthworm Jim-CD Rebel Assault 2-CD 25 Z-CD EF2000-CD 28 Ripper-CD 35 Zork Nemesis-CD Elder Scrolls 2-CD 35 Robert E.Leo Civil War 29 CALL FOR MORE TITLES F22 Lightning Il-CD 32 Shannara-CD 27 CURRENTLY IN STOCK! 27 19 WE SELL USED IBM GAMES Call for current title availibility 1-800-377-8578 10-9 Mon-Sat, 12-5 Sun CST Most items shipped same day. $5 Reg./$9 2nd Day Air VISA/MasterCard/Discover/Money Orders/Cashiers Check 32 PATH 24 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota  57105 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #93 "


"800-699-4263 Source Role Playing Games CHIPS & BITS INC. Source 10837 POB 234 Dept 10837 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net Visit our NEW Online Catalog! www.cdmag.com/chips.html OF CONSPIRACY PLAYERS HANDBOOK Dungeons& Dragons CALL OR CTHULHU Para Malaya W.. . \"CONSPIRACY X In a world of dark secrets. the only certain ty is nothing is what it seems. The president may not be human. The sign carrying paranoid on the street ranting mind control satellites may be right.$20 ADVANCED DUNGEON & DRAGONS PLAYERS HANDBOOK is an indispensible encyclopedia of spells, rules and more. Everything the player needs is here to guide you to a world of heroic adventure. $20 'CALL CTHULHU Find an expanded H. P. Lovecraft background. See new illustrations and gain new skills with expanded weapons data unlocked from all three supernatural chaotic Eras. $18 'NETHERIL: EMPIRE OF MAGIC Journey back 5.000 years Visiting the archWizards of Netheril. View fantastic floating cities and enclaves of magic. Travel to a time where magic was raw and powerful. $25 STEVE JACKSON'S A Richard Garlield Game GURPS ROLEPLAYING GAME 'GURPS' The most flexible roleplaying system ever. You can adventure in any world you can imagine. All rules carefully organized and indexed and cross-referneced. You can create wactly the character you want to play. $20 'MAGIC THE GATHERING: MIRAGE The majestic civiliza tion within boasts magical traditions dating back countless eons. Beneath the burning sun what power can you draw from the potent forces. 'STAR WARS' This roleplaying game plunges you into the breakneck thrills and pulsepounding excitement of the great est space fantasy of all time! Face overwhelming odds, impossible challenges. May the Force be with you. 'SHADOWRUN' In the world of 2053 megacorporations want something done, but they don't want to dirty their hands. Your existence is not listed in any database and the demand for your services is high. $20 SELECIONED . . . . TEVE JACKSON GAME 60 Tradable Game Cards $8 $21 M 6H .U. LE BATTLETECH MPIRE \"RIFTS' Nearly 30 character classes, superscience and high technology bionics, armor and weapons, transforms the Earth where magic is reality and supernatural charac ters from the rifts stalk human prey $21 WEREWOLF: THE APOCALYPSE' These are the final days, the signs are clear. Humans live corrupted the Earth killed the trees choked the air poisoned the soil. There is no place lo hide, the end is upon us. Want to play? $24 \"VAMPIRE: THE DARK AGES Takes you to the nights when kine truly had reason to be afraid of the dark. The Kindred of this bygone age ride the dark as lords & play their games with the heads of Europe. $24 BATTLETECH is a 30-loot tall engine of destruction bristling with enough firepower to level a city block and you're in drivers seal. Welcome to 31st century where war is a way of life. $2.50 G FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG HORROR RPG SCI-FI RPG SCI-FI RPG CARD GAMES $14 $20 Battletech Dr Who Magic The Gthening Alliances Magic The Gathering Mirage Magic The Gthering Visions Middle Earth Monty Python Holy Grail Mythos Boosters Star Trek X-Files $12 $11 $14 AD&D 2ND EDITION RULES AD&D Core Rules $54 Combat & Tactics $17 OM Guide $16 Monstrous Manual $20 Players Handbook $20 Skills & Powers $17 Spells & Magic $19 AD&D ACCESSORIES Arms & Equipment S15 Chronomancer S11 Complete Elves $15 Complete Humanoids $15 Complete Necromancer $15 Complete Ninja S15 Den of Thieves Encyclopedia Magica $20 1. Tyrant Monst Comp Annl3 $18 Player Packs $16 Sages & Specialists $17 Sea Devils $17 $11 Wizard Spell Comp 1 521 World Bidr Guide $17 AD&D ADVENTURES Dragon Mntn Dlx Adv $25 Eye to Eye $11 Four from Cormyr $17 Gates Firestorm Peak $17 Rod of Seven Parts $27 AD&D AL-QADIM Arabian Adventures S15 Corsairs of Great Sea $15 Land of Fate $16 Secrets of the Lamp $15 Sha'irs Handbook $15 $15 AD&D BIRTHRIGHT Blood Enemies $15 Book of Magecraft $17 Cities of Sun $15 Domain Sourcebooks $7 Legends Herokings $17 Warlock Stonecrowns $9 AD&D DARK SUN Dark Sun Cmpon $25 Defilers & Preservers $14 Mind Lords Last Sea S17 Psionic Artifacts $17 Thri-kreen of Athas $13 AD&D FORGOTTEN RLMS Drow of Underdak $13 Faiths & Avatars $18 Forgotten Realms Cogn $25 Heroes Lorebook $17 Netheril Empire Magic $25 The North Undermtn Trilogy 3 $6 Vilhon Reach $14 Velo G A Thing Magic $17. Volo Guide Dalelands $13 Warrior & Priest $18 Wizards & Rogues $13 AD&D PLANESCAPE Campaign Setting $25 Doors to the Unknown $11 Guide Astral Plane $13 Harbinger House $11 Hellbound $21 On Hallowed Ground $21 Planes of Contlict $25 Planewalker's Handbook$17 Something Wild $11 Uncaged: Faces of Sigil $17 EARTHDAWN Barsaive Campaign 521 Denizens 2 $15 Earthdawn $25 Earthdawn Companion $15 Magic $15 PENDRAGON Beyond Wall Pendragon$10 Blood & Lust $14 Land of Giants $18 Pagan Shores $14 Pendragon 4th Ed $19 Perilous Forest S14 Savage Mountain $14 SKYREALMS OF JORUNE Gire of Sillipus $12 Innocents of Gauss $10 Skyrealms Jorune $17 Sobayid Atlas $15 WARHAMMER FANTASY Apocrypha Now! $11 Doomstones 1 $18 Dying of Light S12 Enemy Within 2 $13 Realms of Sorcery $15 Warhammer Fantasy $19 AD&D RAVENLOFT Bleak House $21 Childrn of Nght: Vamps $13 Death Ascendant S11 Death Unchained $11 Forged of Darkness $11 Ravenlott Cmpgn Set $25 Requiem: Grim Harvest $25 ARS MAGICA Adventure Value Pack $16 Ars Magica 3rd Ed $20 Medieval Handbook S16 Pact of Pasaquine S11  $10 Wizard's Grimoire $15 CASTLE FALKENSTEIN Book of Sigils $14 Castle Falkenstein $25 Comme il faut $12 Memoirs of Auberon $17 DICE POLY MEGATUBES Opague Sct 53 Pearlescent Set Transparent Set S5 Twinkle Set DICE SPECIALTY DICE Alignment Dice Set $2 Armor Die Critical Die Fumble Die Hear Noise Die Hit Location Die Weapon Die $1 DRAGONLANCE FIFTH AGE Dragonlance 5th Age $21 Heroes of Steel $15 Last Tower Ralstiin $17 CHANGELING Changeling $21 Changeling Screen $15 Kithbook: Trolls $11 Player's Guide $19 CHILL Accessory Pack Chill $19 Companion $15 Voodoo Sourcebook $12 MAGE Book of Shadows Dreamspeakers Mage 2nd Ed Mage Tarot Deck VAMPIRE Book of Nod Clan Books Dice The Dark Ages Vampite 2nd Ed. WEREWOLF Bastet Tribe Books Dice Freak Legions $12 Werewolt WORLD OF DARKNESS Combat Gypsies 513 Midnight Circus WRAITH Dark Reflect Spectre $10 Dice $5 Player's Guide $11 Wraith $24 CONSPIRACY X Aegis Handbook $17 Atlantis Rising Black Book $14 Conspiracy X Cryptozoology $15 Devil in Deep Blue Sea $7 GM Screen $13 Homecoming $14 Nemesis CYBERPUNK 2020 Aaaka Brain VIII s Chromebook 4 59 Cyberpunk 2020 $17 Listen Up Prim Screwhid 59 Streetfighting S10 FADING SUNS Byzantium Secundus $15 Fading Suns $22 Forbidden Lore $13 GM Screen GURPS Autoduel Compendium Dinosaurs $15 GURPS Rulebook $20 Goblins $18 Robots $14 Voodoo $14 HEAVY GEAR Badlands Sourcebook $17 Character Compendium $20 GM Starter Kit S25 Heavy Gear $25 Northern Vehicle Comp $20 Tactical Field Sprt $16 Technical Manual $15 MACROSS 2 Macross 2 $11 Sourcebook 1 Spacecraft Deck 1 Spacecraft Deck 2 Spacecraft Deck 3 $9 RIFTS Rifts $21 World Bk 11 Coalitn Wr $18 World Bk 8 Japan $17 World Bk 9 So Amer 2 $17 ROBOTECH Invid Invasion REF Field Guide 513 Robotech 511 Sentinels $14 Zentaedi $7 SHADOWRUN Awakenings 513 Companion Grimoire Missions $12 Shadowrun 2nd Ed. $20 Threats $15 Virtual Realities 2.0 $15 STAR WARS Alliance Int Reprt $13 Classic Adv 1 S15 Galaxy Guide 12 $13 Live Action GM Kit $13 Live-Action Adv $15 Miniatures Companion $13 StarWars Revised $25 TRAVELLER Aliens Archives Starships Traveller $16 $17 $10 513 $13 Aldra All Purp Cult Nuku Battle Angel Blue Seed Bubblgum Crisis Burn Up W Devil Hunter Yokho Dominion Tnk Police Dragon Hall Evangelion Genocyber Ghost in the Shell Gunsmith Cats Hero is Greenwood $25 $16 $25 S21 Shaman $15 $10 $15 $18 $5 $16 $17 $22 $24 $24 tria $13 $1 $20 $15 $12 $1 CALL OF CTHULHU Call of Cthulhu S18 Cthulhu Live $15 Encyclopedia CthulhianaS10 Keepers Compendium $11 Keepers Screen $13 The Golden Dawn $13 Ye Book Monstres II $10 Lodoss War Macross 2 Movie Maldiver Oh My Goddess Power Dolls Project A-ko Princess Minerva Robotech Slayers $16 $25 $18 $18 $12 $15 1 Vis MC and Discover accepted. Checks neid 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. GOD $8. Price, availability, offer subject to change at any time Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges Defectives replaced with same product. All sales final Call for details. Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment and per item basis The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the per item\" charge is Perret Per Order Per Shipment charged once for each item ordered and the \"per shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. Par Item U.S. Mart 7.10 Days $1.00 $1.00 $1.00 Eederal Express 2 Dry $2.00 on U.S. M I 2 Days $1.50 $1.50 Federal Express $4.00 $4.00 Mall To Canada 4.7 Days $2.00 $200 Mall To The World 7.14 52.00 $200 $6.00 "


"With NRI training in Computer Programming, you can... Name Your Price!* Bonus Internet Training! f you think computer programming is hot today, just look at the forecast for tomorrow and for many years to come! The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that by 2005, computer-related employment will jump by an estimated 60% nationwide for trained programmers with as many as 400,000 NEW jobs opening up! Now, with NRI training, you can get the in-demand skills you need to build a top-paying career or business of your own in this highgrowth, high-opportunity Netscape field! Navigator Microsoft -05 POWI VISUAL BASIC RICARIBBULU AIPATE Windows95 VISLAT BASIC *Those with up-to-the-minute skills can almost name their price. The Washington Post, June 4, 1996 In as little as a year, you can become the highly skilled computer programmer today's companies seek -and see your NRI training literally pay off! In fact, according to the Washington Post, annual starting salaries range from $32,000 all the way up to $47,000 in some cities for those with expertise in today's hottest programming languages! Train with a 133 MHz Pentium processor-based multimedia PC, featuring... 8 meg RAM 1 gigabyte hard drive Super VGA color monitor 8X CD-ROM drive with sound card 28,800 baud fax/modem Visual Basic Power C Windows 95 Netscape Navigator Web browser And more! Now, with NRI's new PC Options Plan, you can keep up with late-breaking advances in technology by upgrading your computer system at special student rates. You'll get all the details shortly before your computer is scheduled for shipment. It's NRI's state-of-the-art guarantee! Master today's hottest languages! NRI's step-by-step lessons and hands-on programming projects help you first master the design concepts used every day by successful PC programmers. Then, with the support of your experienced NRI instructor, you quickly move on to learn how to design, code, run, debug, and document programs in three of today's hottest languages BASIC, C, and Visual Basic plus you learn to generate fully functioning Windows 95 programs. And you do it all using the powerful Pentium\" computer system included in your course. Learn to tap the power of the Internet Send today for your FREE catalog Now your course includes bonus training in If the coupon is missing, write to us at the PC Communications and the Internet. Using NRI School of Programming, 4401 Connectithe Netscape Navigator Web browser we cut Ave., NW Washington, DC 20008. Or... provide, you can effortlessly move from one CALL 1-800-321-4634, Ext. 2269 site to another as you explore the vast reYou may even contact us through our World Wide sources of the Internet and World Wide Web. Web Home Page at: http://www.mhcec.com SEND TODAY FOR FREE NRI CATALOG! Powe Schools 4401 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20008  Check one FREE carcer catalog only Multimedia Programming COMPUTERPROGRAMMING Mastering Microsoft Office Networking with Windows NT Webmaster Visual Programming in C++ OR GET YOUR DEGREE Microcomputer Servicing New! AAS in Accounting Desktop Publishing with PageMaker New! AAS Degree in Bookkeeping and Accounting Business Management Windows 95 SNetscape Navigator please print To make it even easier to progress through your course, NRI'S 24-hour TeleGrading line allows you to get instant feedback on your lesson exams, and our new OnLine Connection lets you send e-mail messages to your instructor, download supplemental information, and more! CIRCLE READER SERVICE #378 Address City/State/Zip A Division of The McGraw-Hill Compatics Accredited Member, Distance Education and Training Council 5 586-6297 "


"800-699-4263 Source Board Games CHIPS & BITS INC. Visit our NEW Online Catalog! www.cdmag.com/chips.html Source 10838 POB 234 Dept 10838 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net WARHAMMER SAATA Axis Allies Sanse, Santan \"DIE HANSE' Sail across the length ol medieval Europe as a mer chant of the Hanseatic League. Battle the North Sea, encounter pirates and blockades as you make you way home with your valuable \"STAR TREK THE NEXT GENERATION COLLECTIBLE DICE GAME' You will be able to choose from either the U.S.S. Enterprise NCC1701-E, or the Borg Sphere. Take center seat on the Bridge of the Federation Star Ship or as Commander of the Borg vessel act out their collective mind. The game plays fast and furious. $13 Limited Quantities 'WARHAMMER 40,000* You fight deadly futuristic conflict with all the essential elements including detailed miniatures of the 2 rival armies, the heroic Imperial Space Marines and the Brutal Space Orks. $50 \"AXIS & ALLIES' Decide the fate of a nation and the destiny of the world. The Balkans have fallen. Pearl Harbor has been attacked. Wake Island is in Japanese hands and Rommel has the British on the run! goods. $55 $23 NEMY NECROMUNDA GeLSDUS TIE 'THE THREE DAYS OF GETTYSBURG' is a totally new look at the battle, a view that brings players even closer to the action, even more deeply into the decisions that make Gettysburg one of the most playable of all battle games. $49 CU \"ENEMY AT THE GATES Covers the period from Nov. 19. 1942 to mid March 1943. There are numerous wo and one map sce narios, covering operations Uranus. Little Satum. the German Relief and the famous backhand blow.\" $39 \"HANNIBAL' As a Carthaginian player, you have Hannibal to lead your armies of elephants and mercenaries against the mighty Rome. As a Roman, you will right to hold off the hordes. The Mediterranean is your battlefield $82 The Na c ht \"NECROMUNDA' In an underworld of anarchy and violence, rival players control gangs of fighters who must balde it out amongsta 3D landscape of ruined buildings, soaring gantries and walkways laid over a table top. $44 W e beople Gunel Diely adore Alexander Theslacedonian Art of War EMPIRES ARMS \"1830 THE GAME OF RAILROADS AND ROBBER BARONS Recreate the development of the railroad system. Build an empire, managing your company for the long term or loot companies for maximum quick profits. $20 'ALEXANDER THE GREAT contains four of the Tamous Macedonian con queror's most famous and deci Sive balles, chosen to highlight the development of the Macedonian Art of War. Fight the battle and not the system. $33 'EMPIRES IN ARMS' is a game covering the major elements of diplomacy and warfare during the Napoleonic Wars of 18051815. You are the absolute monarch of a major European power. $27 TWOOD 'WE THE PEOPLE' You lead the fledgling forces of the Continental Army, playing your strategy cards to move your troops or gain political control over the colonies, while your opponent deploys the Brilish forces. $29 BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES $34 $19 $28 $42 $16 $38 ncy $42 $19 $18 $23 $22 $21 $24 WORLD WAR II 1914 Second Front S29 ASL Mod Jatkosota $10 ASL Mod Kampfope 2 $27 ASL Mod Leatherneck $9 ASL Solo Rules $29 Advanced Squad Ldr $38 Advanced Third Reich $38 Afrika Korps $18 Air Bridge to Victory $17 Antio $19 Army Group Center $24 Avalanche: Invan Itly $27 Axis & Allies $33 Axis & Allies Cntrl Pwrs $30 Axis & Allies Max Adv $10 Axis & Allies Mid Est $16 Axis & Ally WW2 Exp $14 Balkan Front $26 Battle over Britain S21 Blitzkrieg in South $29 Britain Stands Alone $23 Campaign to Stalingrd $29 Carrier War $25 Command Sea Plyrs HB 55 Command Sea Relarce $9 D-Day Decision in France $15 Eastern Front 2nd Ed $49 Empire of Rising Sun $41 EuroFront Fire in the East $58 For Whom Bell Tolls $54 Lost Victory $23 Luftwaffe Mustangs $17 Over the Reich $30 WORLD WAR II Pacific War Panzerblitz Piercing the Reich $29 Raid on St. Nazaire $19 Rise of Luftwaffe $19 Rommel at Bay $22 Rommel in the Desert $27 Run Silent, Run Deep $24 Squad Leader $23 Third Reich $19 Up Front $19 Victory in Europe $14 Victory in Normandy $11 Victory in West Frnce $26 War at Sea 2 Kit $13 World in Flames Dix 590 GENERAL WAR Air Superiority 59 Alamo Battle of Alma Black Death Blood & fron Camp, Fredrick the Great $24 Geronimo $32 High Ground $22 Kolin Fredrk Defeat $34 Lion of the North Quebec 1759 Roarks Drift Russia At War $25 Texas Revolution The 45 $25 The Kings War Thirty Years War Quad $27 Thundrin Guns $18 Zorndort $19 $15 ANCIENT FANTASY MEDIEVAL NAPOLEONIC SCIENCE FICTION STRATEGY 4 Battles Anc. World $21 Challenge Lion Lord $25 Age of Chivalry2 Battle Dresden 1813 $25 2038 Advanced Civilization $25 Alexanders Generals $33 Dark Blades $25 Crossbws & Cannons 2 $33 Eagle Empire Borodino $29 Alpha Omega S19 Air Baron Ancient Empires Drag Dice Feral $6 Crusades 11 Eagles Empire Friedln $26 Awful Green Things $17 Blackbeard Ancients $25 Dragn Dice Mage Sum $12 Cry Havoc Emperors of Europe $33 Battlespace 519 Britannia $19 Barbarians $33 Dragon Masters Cry Havoc: Castle $3 Empires in Arms $27 Battletech Civilization 529 Battles of Alexander 533 Dungeon Cry Havoc: Village Field Command Blood Berets Colonial Diplomacy $42 Caesar Civil Wars $38 Hobbit Adventure $29 Cry Havoc Fortid City 512 Jena Car Wars Deluxe S21 Deluxe Diplomacy Emperors First Battis $25 Leviathan $16 Cry Havak: Holy Land $3 La Bata Mnt St Jn Dk 562 Citytech $25 Diplomacy Hannibal Magic Realm 23 Henry V $28 La Bata d'Albuera $27 Critter Tek $12 Enemy in Sight $12 Siege of Jerusalem Titan Ironsides $28 La Bata de Quatre Bras $31 Fed & Empr Spec Ops $9 Feudal Taliti S22 Warhammer Fantasy $50 Richard the Lionheart $30 Napoleon Waterloo Cmp S27 Federation & Empre Dix $38 History of the World $27 CIVIL WAR Warhammer Quest $50 Samui Napoleon at Austerlitz $18 Fury of Clansmen $29 Kingmaker $19 1864 Year of Decision $29 Wizards Quest $17 Samurai Blades $22 Napoleon on Danube $19 Gateway to the Stars $22 Lords of Sierra Madre $34 Across 5 Aprils Xanth Siege Napoleon's Battles $23 Hacker 2 $16 New World Aprils Harvest $24 LEISURE / FAMILY Viking Raiders $25 Napoleon's First Battle $24 Interstellar Wars $19 Pax Britannica $18 Army Heartland $36 Alibi MODERN Napoleon's Last Battle 525 Kill Zone Republic of Rome $29 Blue & Gray $25 Assassin $15 2nd Fleet Napoleons Ital Camp $22 Merchant of Venus $25 Stocks & Bands S19 Campaigns Civil War $19 Blind Justice $19 3rd Fleet $27 The Emperor Returns $28 More Cosmic Encntrs $26 Tournament Terrace $29 Civil War Candidate $19 6th Fleet $23 Victory at Waterloo $21 Necromunda $44 We the People S29 Gettysburg $15 Escape from Colditz $35 Across the Suez War & Peace $21 Ogre Miniatures $13 VIETNAM / KOREA Gettysburg 3 Days July $39 Facts in Five $16 Aegean Strike $19 RAILROAD Roadkill Battles Forgotten War $36 Hallowed Ground $42 Gangland $16 Central America $19 1856 $37 Star Fleet Battles $25 Platoon 515 Here Corne the Rebels 523 Gangsters Crisis Korea 1995 $29 Australian Rails $20 SFB Star Fit Missions $11 Rolling Thunder In Their Quiet Fields $22 Grand Prix $19 Crisis Sinai 1973 British Rails SFB Tactics Manual $11 Silver Bayonette $15 In Their Quiet Fids 2 $25 Greed $13 Firepower $23 Colorado Rails $17 SilentDeath DIX $42 WORLD WAR I Tronclads Hexagony Flashpoint: Golan $29 Empire Builder $25 SilentDeath Rulebook $15 Aces High Lee Takes Command $22 Power Lunch Flight Leader Eurorails $25 SilentDeath Sunrunners $10 Aces High Amer. Aces $24 No Better Place Die $24 Restaurant Harpoon Box Set $41 Express Space Hulk Aces of Aces Pwthse $19 Raid on Richmond $21 Robo Rally $33 Harpoon Data Annex $18 Freight Train Space Marino Fight For Skies $21 Roads to Gettysburg $24 Roborly Armd & Ongrs $25 Harpoon Rulebook $15 Great Western Railway $36 Starforce Terra $32 Great War at Sea 1 Sam Grant $42 Settlers of Catan $30 Light Division $24 India Rails $20 Starship Captain $26 Knights of the Air Strwall's Est Bitle $25 Sherick H Adv Gasight $16 Main Battle Tank Iron Dragon Starship Troopers $29 Landships Stonewall Jackson Way S27 Sherlock H Westend $20 Mid-East Peace $16 Rocky Motn Rails $13 Stellar Conquest $19 March to Victory $40 Stonewall in Valley S29 Sherlock Holmes $20 NATO $13 Tracks to Tellunde $42 W H 40K Battles $16 Richtoten's War Three Days Gettysburg $49 Sherlock H Card Game $16 Speed of Heat $36 Trainsport Austria $17 WH 4OK Epic Hive War 529 Wings War of the Rebellion $28 Spices of the World $18 To Ait $19 U.S. Rails $13 Warhammer 40K $50 World War One $11 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH, COD $8. Price, availability, offer subject to change at any time. Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges. Detectives replaced with same product. All sales final Call for details | Per (Order Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the \"pur item\" charge is Per Shument charged once for each item ordered and the \"per shipment\" charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. Per Item CIRCLERGADER SERVICE #256 $13 $19 $22 $32 $9 $24 $16 $13 $11 $17 $50 S19 $19 $27 $18 $25 $30 $19 $30 Standard US M 7 10 DO Priority Federal US. MI Express 23 DS 2 Day $150 200 Federal Express Day 200 Mud To Caraca 4-7 Days 200 MiTo The World 7-14 Days $1.00 200 BASTIDO "


"AGE.SAIL REAL TIME This ain't the Loveboat! Naval Warfare Experience all the grandeur and pageantry of the Tall Ships era...then blow 'em out of the water with a good stern rake! Wage war as one of 11 countries with over 2000 ships of every rate, from Spain's massive 130 gun ship of the line to England's swift 10 gun Rise through the lowly ranks to Admiral with 4 complete campaign games and 100+ historical scenarios covering the years of 1775 to 1820. OGBO ORODOGASDITORICILO Diabolical Carnivores of Free Time UN W DODO Pit your captain skills against a salty computer opponent, or take on your best friends in Head to Head play via a modem. TALON www.talonsoft.com EROR Orders only call 1-800-211-6504 "


"Source CHIPS & BITS INC. 800-699-4263 10850 800-699-4263 Song POB 234 DEPT 10850 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net Shop our Online Catalog at www.ccmag.com/chips.html HURRY HURRY HURRY SOFTWARE CLEARANCE! WHILE SUPPLIES LAST! BATTLES OF DESTINY DAWN PATROL Immerse yourself in the age of aerial combat, when pilot skill and intuitive aerial tactics meant the difference between Victory and defeat. Climb into the cockpit and transport yourself back to the time when the death defying Aces were masters of the skies. $12 STAR TREK:JUDGEMENT RITES Captain's log stardate 6238.4. You have no doubt that you are being watched. By whom or what is not determined. How can your sensors suddenly report life forms on a dead planet? Beam down to mysterious worlds and encounter strange adversaries that are not logical $14 Conquer the world. Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state-of-the-art global conquest simulation. Unleash you awesome power against the computer or other players. It's simple to play but only a true master will reign. $12 Insane Closeout Reductions! IBM ACTION IBM ARCADE IBM REFERENCE IBM SIMULATION IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES $19 $19 $19 $15 $19 $6 $19 $15 $10 $19 S6 $15 $15 $15 $10 $10 Microcosm Never Mind Royal Flush Pinbti Sink or Swim Sleepwalker Thexder 2 W95 Wild Stroots Zoop $9 $16 $19 $12 Backlash Captain Quazar W95 Castle Wolf 3D MD 2 Cyber Mage Fade to Black Magic Carpet Gold Operation Carnago Quake Shareware Spectre VR Tek War Terra Nova Total Ruin 11 $19 $16 $9 $19 $6 $19 Beer Hunter Field Guide ESPN Inter Soccer Everywhere USA Gda Flying Warbirds Getting into College Let's Draw Caricature NFL Yearbook Nine Worlds Print Artist 4.0 World Atlas $12 $14 $15 $12 $19 $12 $12 $10 $15 $12 $14 $19 $12 $19 $18 $9 $19 $15 $19 $6 $16 $14 $19 $19 $9 $19 $19 $12 $18 IBM BUNDLES $15 $19 $19 $20 $10 $20 IBM ROLEPLAYING $19 Mechwarrior 2 NetMech MetalTech:ES Speech Precision Approach Privateer Real Weather Pilot Rod Baron/A10 Tnk Kir Ronogado Sea Wolf Seal Team Seal Team Silent Hunter Patri 1 Silent Hunter Patri 2 Star Crusader MD Strike Commander Tank Tank Commander Net Ultrabots Ultrabots Wing Comm 2 Deluxe Wing Comm Academy Wipe Out Wolf Pack World Circuit World Circuit $15 $15 $16 $15 IBM ADVENTURE $10 $19 $19 $19 $4 $12 $15 $12 $9 $6 $19 20 Wargame Classics Five Ft Ten Pk 1 Five Ft Ten Pk 2 Jet Pack Might & Magic Trilogy Mystery Collection Pinball Gold Pak Pnzr Gen Surt Gd Bndi Power Hits Battitch Prince Persia Collect Star Control Collctn Take Ten Top 50 Games Treasures Pack Turning Point $16 Battles of Destiny Civilization Command HQ Conquered King SD1 Conquered Kingdoms Detroit Empire Dix Mstr Ed Empire Dix Scenario 1 Fort Apacho Grandest Fleet Jagged Alliance Jutland Koshan Conspiracy Machiavelli the Prince Master of Orion Perfect General Piratos Gold Realms Rules of Engagement Sabre Team Sert City SimCity 2000 SD1 Star Legions Syndicate Plus Theme Park This Means War Unnatural Solection Warlords Warlords 2 X-Com UFO Defense $19 $19 $19 $19 $19 $19 $19 $16 $19 $19 $19 $16 $15 $19 $19 $16 $16 $12 $19 $19 $15 $16 $15 $12 $19 $19 $12 $12 $15 $15 $19 $15 $16 $19 $12 $12 $10 $19 $19 $19 Aegis Banzai Batt Napoleon SD6 Charge Light Brigade CincPac Midway DDay Begin of End Defend the Alamo Fields of Glory Fifth Eskadra Fifth Fit Scen Mod 1 Fleet Med Flight Cmmd 2 MB Gry Grgsby's Wr Rssia Harpoon 2 Harpoon Class Harpoon DS 2 High Command Line in the Sand Marianas Turkey Shoot Pacific Storm Solomon Panzer General Rebel Chrg Chicamagua Red Sky Morning Rommel at El Alamein Steel Panthers Cmpgn Task Force 1942 Typhoon of Steel UMS 2 Planet Editor V Victory Market Grdn V Victory Utah Bch V Victory Velk Lki Wargame CS2 SD1 Wargame CS2 SD2 Wargame CS2 SD4 Wargame CS2 SDS Wargame CS2 SD7 Wargame CS2 SD12 Wargame CS2 SD13 Wargame CS2 SD14 $16 $9 $12 $15 $9 $9 $14 $16 $15 $15 $19 $19 $15 S19 Alien Legacy Champions of Krynn Curse of Azure Bonds Cyberjudas Dark Queen of Krynn Dark Sun 2 Dark Sun Online W95 Death Keep W95 Doath Knights Krynn Disciples of Steel Dragon Lore Knights Xent NR18 UG Moga Traveller Zhodani Might & Magic 3 Pools of Darkness Ravnilt 2 Stn Prop Secret Silver Blades Shadow Sorceror Star Trek TNG: A Final Unity Tales Magic Prop Shad Thunderscape Ultima 7 Series Ultima 8 Pagan Ultima Underworld 2 Ultima Undrwid 1 & 2 Unlimited Adventures IBM SPORTS $19 $19 $15 $12 IBM EDUCATIONAL $4 $19 $9 $19 $9 $15 $16 $19 $19 $12 $19 $9 $12 $12 7th Gst 2:11th Hour Demo Alone in the Dark Biatorge Blackthorne Chaos Continuum Entombed Fortress Dr. Radiaki Fortrss Dr Radiaki Gabriel Knight 1 Inca 2 K07:Princeless Bride Knights Xent NR18 UG Lost Fls Shrik Hims Morph Man Norvos of Stool Noctropolis Nomad Primortals Prophecy Psychotron Realms of Chaos Relentless Return of the Phantom Rex Nebular Rex Nebular Riddle Master Lu Savage Warriors Simon the Sorceror Spellcasting 101 Star Trek 25th Anniv Star Trek Judgment Ris Starship Swap Tom & Jerry Under Killing Moon Wetlands Where's Waldo Wolf Hunt Be Hunted $15 $16 $19 $16 IBM TRADITIONAL $15 $15 $19 $19 $19 $9 $3 $9 $19 $15 $15 $9 515 $12 $6 $15 $15 $17 $19 $9 $9 Amazing Learn Games Destination Mars Dinosoft Typing Tutor Dyno-Quest Eager To Learn EcoQuest EcoQuest Mario's Fundamentals Quarky Quaysoo Turbo Sierra Schl Hse Englsh Sierra Schl Hse Math Sierra Schi Hse Science Toonworks Universe Virgil Reality $15 $12 $9 $15 $9 $15 $16 $12 S12 $19 $15 $15 $15 $19 $12 $12 $12 IBM SIMULATION IBM HINT BOOKS $9 $9 $9 $10 $16 $14 $9 $19 $13 $19 S19 $19 $19 $19 $19 $16 $19 S9 APBA Sideline Sports Avalanche Intractive Blood Bowl ESPN Sports Shorts Hardball 3 Play Disk Internati Sports Chal Jack Nicklaus Jack Nicklaus ClipArt Jack Nicklaus SE C1 Jack Nicklaus SE C2 Jack Nicklaus Tour Col Jordan in Flight Links Pro 10 Prairio Links Pro 11 Devils Is! Links Pro 13 Troon N Links Pro 15 Pelcn Hill Links Pro 16 Val Halla Links Pro 386 Links Pro 386 Golf Links Pro 8 Cast Pines Live Action FB Microleage Personal Golf NFL Coaches Club PGA Tour Golf Gold Serious Soccer Sideline Sports Sport Accolade Grt 2 Sporting Trianglo Tony LaRsa BB2 TD 93 Tony LaRussa BB Unnocess Roughnss 95 Unnecessary Roughness World Hockey 95 I E BACKISSUES . $14 $16 $19 $19 $19 $8 $12 . $9 $12 $12 $12 $14 $19 $10 $9 S6 $9 $19 $19 $9 $10 $12 3D ! Arcade Action Kit $12 Bridge Olympiad $16 CD Romix 2 Prima $6 Casino Gambler Kit Chessmastr Online W955 15 Dinosaur W95 $19 Elements GamePack 2 Hoyle Blackjack W95 $15 Hoyle-Poker W95 $15 Hoylo Solitaire W95 $15 Mind Grind $12 Origamo $14 Paparazzi $19 Pool Master $12 Power Poker $15 Prof Zany Giveaways S6 Prof Zanys Jokes $6 Puzzls of Tribyte W95 $19 Pyst $15 SNL 20th Anniversary Solitaires Journey $16 TV Guide Crossword $12 Take Your Best Sho! $14 Ultima Trivia $16 Ultimate Family Games $19 Unicorn W95 $19 Universal Neverlock $19 Vegas Games 95 W95 $19 Video Game Solut 2 $9 Virt Roality Studio 2 $6 Virtual Snooker $19 Virtual Vogas $13 $19 $9 $9 Aces of the Deep Air Cmbt Paclic 1942 Air Warrior Airpower Assault Rigs Cyber Paco Dawn Patrol Delta V Evasive Action Falcon 3 SD1 Fght Tar Falcon 3 SD2 Mig 29 Falcon 3.0 Fighter Wing Flight Sim Toolkit Flight Unlimited Fly the Grand Canyon Great Nav Batt Scene Great Naval Battles 3 Grey Wall Gunship Hi Octane Indy Car Racing Lawn Mower Man Lightspeed Maximum Overkill MD2 IBM ARCADE $16 $19 Adventures Willie Beamish S6 Blackthmo Official Strat Guide Champions of Krynn Civilization Network Conquest of Robin Hood Curse Azure Bonds EcoCuest Empire Deluxe Gold Rush Inca 2 Indy Jones Graphic Adv. Inherit the Earth Lords of Rings Manhunter San Francisco Matrix Cubed Microsoft Golt Power Monger Secret Silver Blades Sherlock Holmes Consling Det. $9 SimEarth $12 Sky Realms of Jorune Spaceward Ho! $10 Star Crusader Star Reach Master of Orion $12 Strike Commander I.E. Episode 2 I.E. Episode 3 I.E. Episode 4 I.E. Episode 5 1.E Episode 6 .E. Episode 7 I.E. Episode 8 I.E. Episode 9 I.E. Episode 10 LE Episode 11 I.E. Episode 12 I.E. Episode 13 I.E. Episode 14 1.E. Episodo 15 I.E. Episode 16 LE. Episode 17 I.E. Episode 18 I.E. Episode 19 I.E. Episode 20 I.E. Episode 21 LE. Episode 22 $3 $14 $16 $19 8999 $19 $19 $12 59 $12 5th Dimension Airborne Ranger Astro Rock Boavs Bithd Luti Tags Bvs & Bithd Cig Drks Bvs & Bithd War Takes Creepers Drug Wars Gorg Lode Runner Metal & Lace NR18 UG $19 $9 $19 9 $19 $19 $9 $15 $14 IBM SCREEN SAVERS $9 $16 $9 $14 $9 $19 $12 59 Lawn Mower Man Screen Svr $9 Screen Toyz Latrina ScreenToyz Stitch ScreenToyz TNT Tad $5 $9 $9 1997 CHIPS & BITS, INC Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. COD S8. Price, availability, offer subject to change at any time. Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges. Defectives replaced with same product. All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the \"per item charge is charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment\" charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. Standard Priority US M US MS 7-10 Days 23 y $1.00 $1.50 Sito 15 $1.00 $1.50 Federal Express 2 Day $2.00 Federal Milo Mato Express Canada The World D ay 4-7 Days 7-14 Days $4.00 $2.00 $2.00 10 9 00 900 $200 $2.00 $6.00 CGW297BUDGET: S M Per item $200 "


"Www.netbuyer.come —and get it! N R Netscape: Welcome to Net Buyer Trusted reviews from Zift-Davis on screen Ser Wowll 40,000 products. NetBuyer Search for Products fox All computer products listed ist easy-to-search categories Get Buying Advice o Onr editors help you find tire e right prodnct for your needs Vendor Special Offers Great weekly deals from EP vendors and manufacturers Side by Side Comparison i Compare product specs, a fentires and prices Shop and Compare more than *40,000 Computer Products from over 180 Vendors, and Get Expert Buying Advice from Ziff-Davis Information about NetBuyer At last! y Re s taurante WIN! $500 Where is the computer industry heading? Click here for directions. ZDNet NelBuyer Die 630 Visit and you can register to win now! Computer Shopper introduces NetBuyer, the best one-stop, online shopping service for computer buyers —and it's free! Now there's one super web site where you can shop with confidence and ease. With over 40,000 computer products and more than 180 vendors, NetBuyer is a direct shopper's paradise. A few smart moves of the mouse and you search and compare products, check specs and prices, gel advice from the experts at Zill-Davis, cash in on weekly specials and order what you want direct from vendors online or on the phone: From a world-class system to cables and adapters, you can search foril, lind it. compare it and buy it without leaving your desk or testing your patience. It's a last and powerful tool. Come see today. The service is free! Go to the World Www The time to eat weekly twist u voluto SIRCLE READFR SERI 377 "


"ORDER NOW! Check out our HOT online catalog! www.cdmag.com/adultsonly.html NOW 800-273-7910 PO BOX 14 DEPT 10836 HANCOCK, VT 05748 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 SOURCE 10836 INTERACTIVE MOTION STILLS $22 Vartal Victor $19 319 $25 $19 $42 $40 $45 $29 $19 Vixen NEJSI VIRTUAL VICTOR the new master of Oterotica, starting in Sirens tile Pleasure Dume Features Include a stunning mavjable user friendly 30 world, tser con trobable Vocal simuator and last erotic auxe-style antion with multiple positions that change on command you are in full control of Victor's movement speech and positions $42 $15 $39 \"DREAM MACHINE 2 As a lone hacker mankind is counting on you to destroy the government deployed NetVirus which has taken over the dream machine. where people fulfill their sexual desires. Your reward the hottest sex man can experience. CD $49 $49 $25 $29 Adult Image Library Adult Pict Liur 4 Asian Pearls 3 Bankok Beauties Beautiful Nudes Beverly Hi Call Girls Busty Babes 4 Celebrity Nudes Domin-A-Trix 2 Elite College Girls 2 Erotic Playground Japanese Pearls Latin Lust Ropes & Chains Tabloid Beauties Thal Bondage Tokyo Glamour Girls $34 $24 $24 $16 516 $39 528 Sas CAS EL GUNTASY $29 $19 519 $28 $24 A NTERACTED $29  $25 549 GAY $32 $37 $36 346 \"CRYSTAL FAN TASY Venture through the cave of lust anul finu the secret crys tal Interact with the sexiest young Jewels of the MacDaddy harem. Take snapshots of the girls and play with them in your own private portfolio Six highly interactive. three dimen sional gorgeous babes! CD $25 DIVA X:REBECCA After dropping off your friend at the air port. you clasice upon a lost beauty who quenes for your assistance. \"Do you know how to get to the Avalon Agency?\". She asks in a sexy French accent. Being the gentleman you are, you kindly offer hier a ride to her destination. Her eyes engage in silent conversation With yours. From there the adventure Begiris! CD $38 Batohus Six Pack (Gay)$45 Bike Bang $20 CM CHI TV Hunks Home Boys 2 $24 Manhunt $18 Men In Motion $32 Nice and Hard 2 Prime Beet $24 The Gay Outdoors $36 $16 $14 522 VHS ANIME $38 DIVAX $16 SLIPER DULT 6 PAK! \"ROMSOFT 6 PACK Double Down. Doors of Passion 2 Sensuous Girls in 3D, Massive Melons, Touch Me, Feel Me and Private Screenings are what you'll get in this sexy 6 pack! 6 CD'S $32 MICHAL NINN'S LATEX THE GAME Find yourself in a sprawling retrofuture city of Alphaville-with no way out. Your goal: Explore every OOK and cranny of the desolate town for clues that will eventually lead you to the climax of the game. $44 $24 $21 2069 Orient Sox Odys 566 Anat Rom 2 $42 Asstrode Buat Cherry CUS Crystal Fantasy Cyber Photographer 529 CyberXperiano $49 Designer Bodies Diva x Ariana Dlva X Robecca Doll House Dream Machine 2 $49 Duke Screw em Eros 2 Eros 3 $24 Fantasy After Dark 535 Fun House Girlfriend Donna Heide House Hot Slots Tataract Snymoro BL2 $49 Interactive Sex Threy 546 Internat Strip Poker $22 Intitate Journey $24 Intimate Posts 539 Japan Interactive 544 Latex Mind Teater 2 My Mistress Net Erotique Neurodancer $39 Nice & Hard Nick Steele P1 $39 Miglitwatch tat2 $39 Mintvatch int 3 Outpost 69 Pandora's Paka Palace 535 Passion Poker 529 Penetration $19 Penthouse 144 Penthouse 1A 5 Penthouse IA 6 Pleasure Zones 33 Poker Party 545 Pom Mat Porno Poker Pomiris S24 Private Investigator $49 Private Pier Park Private Pist Park 2 S49 Rodney Rubber Show $29 S urat Pervert 2 564 Sesso N Stones $19 Sex TV 2 $25 Sex With Semua Shock The Game $49 Spar Sirens Space Sims 2 $29 Strin Fighter Strip Poker Pro 2 Strip Tease Texus Table Dance The Warp Ultra Slots Ultra Vixen VCA 6-Pack VCAS Sex Vampires Kiss Vous Playtvanse Villas Vegas Nite 2 $25 Virtual Director Virtual Golden Eye $44 Virtual Sex $39 Virtual Sex Shoot $44 Virtual Valene 2 $36 Virtual Victor Voy Yours 2 $17 Advestote kid Amorous Asia 612 $15 Asta $27 Asian S $16 Babes histrata? $25 Bangkok Nights $24 Bertam $16 Best of Vivid $24 Black Bock Biack Foxes $28 Blond Justice 3 Blondige $24 Er  $16 Bungle and Clyde $16 Borderline $19 Buttmns Bub Butt Bbes $45 Casey Swes World $29 Citristy to the Wild 9:4 Deep Thirt Gris 4Pk $52 Damon School Conc! $20 Dason Passion $25 Dripping With Desire 817 Fantascones 529 Fantascenes Anal Fame Friction Gesha's Secrets 516 Bir $16 Heidi's Girls Exposed 515 Hist Of Blue Movie $15 House Sleeping Beatitas $12 Defense of Sivanah $16 Jade Palace $19 La Blue Girt 4 Making It Mong A Tros $26 Mystique Orient 2 New Machine PK2 544 Drental Dunes Dental X-Press Peep Show 2 $32 Peeping Tom $19 Pheonix $16 Private Collection Racquelin Wild Pornsoit Six PK 2 $22 Room for Rent $32 Savarinah Superstar S24 Secret Garden 2 $19 Seduction of Suki $19 Select a Pet 2 Seasuous Summer $25 Sex 2 $24 Sex Games $24 Sexual Instinct : $17 Sexy Horses 2 $25 Sexy Six Pack $35 Seymore Bt My try G $18 Seymore Butts Go Nuts $18 Suymore Six Pack $39 Seymur Bts Bustin Out $18 Southern Beautius 2 $32 Speedster Strippur Nurses $25 Superstars of Porn $24 Superstr Japan Porn 2 839 Sushi Bar Girls $29 Swedish Erotica $15 Taming of Savannah $15 Tokya Nightlife $48 Tokyo Nymphs $14 Ultimate Tokyo $29 Ultra Sex I Ultra Sex 2 $12 Virgens Vol 3 $39 White Wedding $16 Woman to Woma $26 XXX-Trema 2 $19 $44 $22 $32 Adventure Kid $24 Angel of Darkness Countdown Dark Warrior Demon Beast Invasion $24 Dragon Knight Dragon Pink $24 Elven Bride $24 End Of Sunutar F3 First Loves $24 Guy, Awakning Devil $24 Ls Blue Girl La Blue Grl Gift BX $98 Magical Twilight New Angel Twin Dolls Weather Rant Girl $52 $46 The A Pule $24 $32 $24 Fleidis $23 $28 VHS MOTION Dlouse $36 529 RAVIDIV uns UUE STARS \"HEIDI'S HOUSE is the mos! stimulating CD game ever played and is automatically designed to change each time you play it offering dozens of combinations for hours of fun CD $36 JADE PALACE Save our beautiful damsel-in-distress by finding the missing jade s and defeating the evil wizard. Enjoy heart-stopping rewards along the way. Animated with mind-boggling 3-D environments and hour long professional hardcore video specifically filmed, this game will blow you away. CD $19 S40 $12 $24 $15 $24 TOVIMIE FATALE FEMME FATALE FOR WINDOWS Build your dream girl with Femme Fatalel A hot adult ligsawl Features include, a long Tantalizing ALL NUDE full motion striptease video. Also 250 hot 24 bit images of 62 girls used with included puzzle Loadisave game, BMP, PCX, GIF, TIE DIB, TGA, WAV audio and more. CD $23 BEVERLY HILLS CALL GIRLS' Paya grand and be a man! Meet the Beverly Hill Call Gids you could never afford This superhybrid dise will blow your mind. You caught alimpses of them in the press, now reach for your mouse and make them come alive CD $15 'SEXY SIX-PAK LOSO yourself in hours of erotica with Interactive digital video. This incredibile money saver la $150 value) delivers to you six of the hottest adult CDROM tities released by Digital Playground. The Bartow Affairs, Baby's Got Burt, Inferno. Onpping with Desira. Erotic Virtual Sampler and Elite European Models. CD $35 $16 Aladdin X $26 Alice in Parintand $26 Bad Guris 4 $15 Black Studies Blonde Heat Coming of Age $12 Cousin Betty E-Threr Extra Testicle $15 E..and Lots of $15 First Time Lesbians $15 Hamlet $29 Hanky Panky $15 innocence Lost $15 Lesbian Nymphes SIS Lusty Adventurer Max the Naughty Doo $22 My Fi : Panty Raid Passenger 692 $26 Passion $26 Pink Lagoon $15 Sex Symbol $15 The Babysitter $12 Young Lust $15 $15 $15 539 $15 $19 Atwory $42 $29 $35 Buy 2 Adult Titles From the List Below and get the One of Equal or Lesser Value FREE! Amateur Photo Gallery, Crystal Fantasies, Tabloid Beauties, Phone Sex, Net Erotique, Swingers Worldwide, Taste of Erotica Sampler, Glamor Girls & Eruption. Request must be made at time of purchase. Quantities limited. Offer subject to change or cancellation at any time. Ellective Jan 15. Feb 30 1997. 'STRIP POKER PROFESSIONAL VOL. 2 combines the action of 5 Card Draw Poker with some very distferent table stakes. Era Claire, Sherry and Lana are 4 gorgeous opponents who are Willing & able to bet it all for the chance to beat the pants off you! CD $29 LOS CUPS & ITS INC Teder Express Visa MG and Discover accepted Chacks held 4 weeks MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. COD 58. Prices availability of bact to change at any times Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges Defectives replaced with same product All sales final Call to details Shipping and handling charges calctrated on a per order, per shipment, and not to basis. The b order charges charged aceptardar place and the perite charge is charged once for each item ordered and the Der shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you Standard Priority US Mat USM 7-10 D 2-3 mars $100 $1.50 Federal Express 2007 $200 Mad To Canada 470 $2.00 $200 Mal To The World 7-14 D $12.00 $2.00 Per Order baschinman Per item $400 $4.00 $2.00 $1.00 $1.50 $200 "


"HALL OF FAME elcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for untold hours. HIGHLIGHTS FALCON ALTH FIGHTER SH HECROPROSE F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER FALCON 3.0 MicroProse, 1988 Spectrum HoloByte, 1991 ublished before the government's real-life he Falcon line has always been announcement of the F-117 A, F. 19 Spectrum's flagship, and the long-awaitSTEALTH FIGHTER hearkens to an earlier ed introduction of FALCON 3.0 was no age, that pre-FALCON 3.0 era when most exception. FALCON 3.0 was the first jet combat air games on the computer were closer to simulation to offer a truly realistic flight experience, souped-up arcade experiences than real simulations. Though its gloss advancing the state of the art, not just in terms of the basic flight model, but is somewhat faded now when compared to more recent Gouraud-shaded simu: in the detailed simulation of advanced radar instruments and techniques. lators, F. 19 STEALTH FIGHTER still offers one thrilling ride, a reminder that The graphic treatment was also impressive (remember, this was some 2-3 MicroProse once ruled the simulated skies. Without today's multifunction joy. years before SVGA graphics). FALCON 3.0 further distinguished itself by being sticks and throttles, pilots of the mythical F.19 had to manage with keyboard the first to offer the padlock view, an improvement added because the overlays and hot keys; yet the game still provided challenges unique to flight design team actually flew in some aircraft and noticed that you don't stare simulations of the day. Although the F-19 was adequately armed (free-fall and straight out the front of the cockpit at all times. guided bombs, Vulcan 20mm cannon, and over a half-dozen missile types for FALCON 3.0 introduced the useful wingmen that we now take for granted, land, sea and/or air), the electronic profile and stealth elements were so well along with the first truly dynamic campaign design for a detailed flight sim. done that it was often more fun to avoid a dogfight than to engage in one. So, And while the computer opponents may seem tame now compared to those even considering the holes in the simulation-the real stealth fighter wasn't yet of EF2000 or LONGBOW, the game offered the toughest Al routine of its time. built--the game took on the nature of a \"thinking man's sim,\" a real departure Moreover, FALCON 3.0 was one of the first games to support multiplayer net: from the reflex-heavy simulators of the time. The missions in particular work play, and the design team integrated follow-on products into the were particularly well-designed, as they involved sneaking around through human to human challenge of modem and network dogfighting. Now, some a variety of enemy defenses. Perhaps the most intriguing thing about the five years after its initial release, the game is still on store shelves-a testa game was how surprisingly similar it was to actual desert Storm sorties ment to its quality and advanced design. years later. Maybe MicroProse will give us an F-19 Il someday? Modern Inductees ALONE IN THE DARK MASTER OF ORION Inductees Prior To 1989 (I-Motion, 1992) (MicroProse, 1993) BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR RAILROAD TYCOON BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) (Dynamix, 1993) (MicroProse, 1990) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) DAY OF THE TENTACLE RED BARON DUNGEON MASTER (FTL SOFTWARE, 1987) (LucasArts, 1993) (Dynamix, 1990) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) DOOM Sio MEIER's CIVILIZATION EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) (id Software, 1993) (MicroProse, 1991) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) FALCON 3.0 THEIR FINEST HOUR GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) (LucasArts, 1989) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) (Dynamix, 1993) (LucasArts, 1990) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) GUNSHIP TIE FIGHTER M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) (MicroProse, 1989) (LucasArts, 1994) PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) HARPOON ULTIMA VI SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) (Origin Systems, 1990) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) KING'S QUEST V ULTIMA UNDERWORLD THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) (Sierra On-Line, 1990) (Origin Systems, 1992) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) LEMMINGS WING COMMANDER I & II ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) (Psygnosis, 1991) (Origin Systems, 1990-91) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) LINKS 386 PRO WOLFENSTEIN 3-D WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) (Access Software, 1992) (id Software, 1992) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) M-1 TANK PLATOON X-COM ZORK (Infocom, 1981) (MicroProse, 1989) (MicroProse, 1994) CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"PATCHES omputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. New patches are in red. Battlecruiser 3000 AD V1.01c: The latest patch-release 2-in this ongoing saga will actually allow you to begin playing the game, but don't go in with lofty expectations. DOS/4GW video hardware and mem: ory settings conflicts. Combat is smoother, now that the shift + no longer gets stuck. Warcraft II-Beyond the Dark Portal V1.33 Patch: Orcs and Humans alike will appreciate the fixes for incompatibility problems with old saved games. Expansion Heroes and the Draenor tileset are now available in the Map Editor. This self-installing archive is only for American versions of the game. Check for new patches on this month's disk. Civilization II V2.42 Update: This prevents crashes with auto set tlers, help and Civilopedia screens, in addition to many other tweaks. If you have V2.41, the only addition is that heralds will now animate if you are using 32-bit video for windows. Lighthouse Patch: The light does shine more brightly: palette thrashing is fixed; lock.ups in dark domain are banished; the error opening resource 65535/v56 in submarine cavern is corrected. The dark side is that you have to start the game over. ZDNet Deadlock V1.2: If you barely meet the system requirements, this smoothes your path to planetary conquest. Do not use this file for any demo version Madden Football '97 1.1: Fixes the QB/RBITE freezing or running in place after the snap, and will enable you to update rosters. Doesn't help the Al or poor gamepad support, though. Wing Commander IV Win 95 Upgrade: Ol' Bluehair might raise an eyebrow, but this will update an existing MS-DOS installation of Wing IV to the Windows 95 version. Confederation commanders are encouraged to check the read.me file: this also requires Microsoft's DirectX2! These patches can usually be downloaded from the major online networks (CompuServe, AOL, ZDNet) and Computer Gaming World's Web site (http://www .zdnet.com/gaming) but can also be obtained from individual software publishers' Web sites or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. Drumbeat PowerMac Update V2.04: For PowerMacs running V2.0.3 only, V2.0.4 contains over 180 changes, including a governor, which should keep those ships out there from skittering around like water bugs on faster machines. Be sure to read the \"What's new...\" document. MechWarrior Mercenaries V1.05 Patch: All clans will benefit from this latest upgrade from Activision, which repairs a number of mech deficiencies X-Wing Update: Owners of the floppy disk version can now fight the Empire in digital sound, without the Dark Side of the Force locking the game up. Dune 2 Sound Update: If you've returned to this real-time favorite, the update allows for the use of two sound cards simultaneously, and enables daughterboards such as the Waveblaster. Nemesis CD Patch: If your gaming nemesis has been a failure of the game to recognize your CDROM drive in DOS, this patch from Sir-Tech magically clears up the problem. Just be sure to check out the read.me text file. Shattered Steel V1.03 Upgrade More mech mania can be had with this latest patch from Interplay. Front Page Sports Baseball V1.1 Patch: Corrects some errors, but leaves many others hanging over the plate Gabriel Knight 2 Mac V1.1: This Mac-only patch includes an interpreter update which fixes \"Unimplemented Trap\" error mes sages, random lockups and all other known issues. Star Trek Judgment Rites V 1.01 Update (Mac only): Mac users with 32MB of real RAM, or Macs with two monitors, will find this patch more helpful than Mr. Scott during a Klingon attack. Publisher Web Sites Many patches are available directly from the publishers, at the following sites: Accolade: http://www.accolade.com Activision: http://www.activision.com Apogee/3d Realms: http://www.apogee1.com Atomic Games: http://atomic.com Bethesda: http://www.bethsoft.com Blizzard: http://www.blizzard.com Bullfrog: http://www.ea.com/bullfrog.html Domark: http://www.domark.com EA: http://www.ea.com EA Sports: http://www.easports.com Epic MegaGames: http://www.epicgames.com id Software: http://www.idsoftware.com Interactive Magic: http://www.imagicgames.com Interplay: http://www.interplay.com LucasArts: http://www.lucasarts.com MicroProse/Spectrum HoloByte: http://www.microprose.com Microsoft: http://www.microsoft.com Mindscape: http://www.mindscape.com New World Computing: http://www.nwcomputing.com Ocean: http://www.ef2000.com Origin: http://www.ea.com/origin Papyrus: http://www.sierra.com/papyrus Philips: http://www.aimla.com/games Sierra On-Line: http://www.sierra.com Spectrum HoloByte: http://www.microprose.com SSI: http://www.ssionline.com Take 2: http://www.take2games.com/main.html Virgin: http://www.vie.com Hoyle Solitaire Patch: Allows you to play the Windows version with out a sound card. The Incredible Machine 3 Mac Patch: Any Mac puzzle-meister having problems saving, restor ing, and playing homemade puz zles, or beset by weird window siz ing, lockups or other technical issues, will find their Rube Goldberg dreams less of a nightm are with this comprehensive patch. Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games V1.12 Update: Mercs now speak up when they are spoken to. The F9 key will update the number of enemies in \"sector\" view, and modem dialing has been fixed to include asterisks and long phone numbers Third Reich V1.21 Update: Mein Herr, we need concern ourselves with neither the Russian \"deselect unit\" bug, nor the freeze-up in Win95, any longer. Answer \"ja\" to any prompts to overwrite Jane's Longbow Patch: Your Longbow will now crash less due to FEBRYARY 1997 "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING POLL A MONTHLY SURVEY OF CGW SUBSCRIBERS ach month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of pre VIDUS months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your experience. OOKE JAJKEN SCORE 8.60 825 8.25 8.08 TOP ACTION GAMES GAME COMPANY Duke Nukem 30 Apogee Erisader. Mo Remorsa EA Origin 13 The Need For Speed SE The Need For Speed SE Crusader: No Regret EA Origin Quake id Software G Dark Forces LucasArts Doom id Software 8 The Need For Speed EA 90 Descent II Interplay EWJ 1&2: Whole Can O' Worms Playmates 8.05 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAME COMPANY Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra Pandora Directive Access Spycraft Activision Full Throttle LucasArts Zork Nemesis Activision Under A Killing Moon Access Star Control 3 Accolade Phantasmagoria Sierra The Dig LucasArts Star Trek: TNG, Final Unity Spectrum HoloByte SCORE 8.37 8.29 7.84 7.57 7.39 7.36 7.32 7.30 7.09 7.07 7.95 7.79 7.76 7.67 7:49 7.38 D G TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES GAME COMPANY You Don't Know Jack Berkeley Systems Incredible Toons Sierra Incredibile Machine 2 Sierra Monopoly Westwood/Virgin Larimings Paintball Psygnosis Gearheatis Philips Treasure Quest Sirius Publishing SCORE 8.05 725 7.17 6.86 van CNP TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Wing Commander IV EA/Origin 8.57 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 8.49 Mechwarrior 2 Activision 8.36 Wing Commander 3 EA/Orgin 8.26 AH-64 Longbow Origin 8.22 EF2000 Ocean 8.02 Silent Hunter SSI 8.01 U.S. Marine Fighters EA 7.99 Advanced Tactical Fighters EA 7.78 10 Nascar Racing Sierra 5.89 5.59 4.30 7.76 MARC RATE LINKSELS TOP SPORTS GAMES GAME COMPANY Links LS Access NHL Hockey 197 EA Sports Triplepiay '97 EA Sports NHL Hockey 96 EA Sports Madden '97 EA Sports FPS Football Pro 96 Sierra NBA Live '96 EA Sports NBA Live 195 EA Sports PGA Tour Golf 486 EA Sports Farly Larussa 3. 96 Stormfront Studios SCORE 8.75 8.59 7.79 7.78 7.76 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME coMPANY Warcraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard Warcraft II Blizzard Civilization 11 MicroProse C & C. Covert Operations Westwood/Virgin Command & Conquer Westwood/Virgin Heroes Of Might & Magic New World Computing Master of Magic MicroProse Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech Warlords II Deluxe SSG SCORE 9.07 8.97 8.84 8.56 8.46 8.08 8.07 8.03 7.87 7.78 6 DC vow 7.75 7.65 7.60 7.49 7.46 TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY Daggerfall Bethesda Height & Magic: Clouds of Xeon New World Computing Anvil Of Dawn New World Computing Stonekaeg Interplay Ravenloft: Stone Prophet Albion Blue Byte Wol Sanctuary Woods SCORE 7.75 7.63 7.37 7.06 6.80 6.23 6,21 an WN TOP WARGAMES GAME COMPANY Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI Steel Panthers SSI Panzer General SS Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft Robert E. Lee Civil War Sierra Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft Flight Commander 2 Avalon Hill Perfect General II QOP Age Of Rifles SSI SCORE 8.83 8.51 8.38 8.20 SS! 8.19 7.83 6 7 8 9 10 7.52 7.08 7.06 6.84 CG FEBRUARY 1997 "


"TOP 100 GAMES ERME COMPANY TYPE BOORT EAME T HEART E TYPE STORE 3 Civilization Steel Links LS en 10 5 B Wine Comfort C&C: Covert Operations Steel Panther WE 20 72countant 13 Patter General 16 Calriet Knight 2. 15 Nachwar 2 * STE S S O EAL DO there are n o W EES RP AD 937 456 THE R I a 19 AH-64 Lengum 28 Battlegmunksio 21 Robert E. Lee Civil War 2720 n lighten Sierra m ent WG 8.19 The Need For Speed SELEZ E A Crusadero Bonel l en S ie AG 721 20. 72000 t her EART 7612 130 31 32 33 DS. Marina Filters O Quake dagged Alliance Spycralt he AB 7.B 35 Dark Farcas Hastnity or An 17 37 Avruceri Tactical Fighters AD AB 206 705 NE Warlords Il Deluxe 40Wastar Racing Withlon 27 Doom IT 43 FPS Football Praise Daggertall Warcraft 46 F-22 Lightning II 47 The Heed For Speed 48 Fantasy General 49 NBA Live 198 50 Might & Mastic: Clouds Di Xeen ST BEAR NovaLogic SI 7.71 ST 836 Games th Red = New Game SALE "


"MARTIN CIRULIS what Chwot, ME man What's The Deal With... Getting Excited? Bes them really shook me to the core of my gamer's soul. Of course, my first thought after this epiphany was to question whether being a critic has just jaded me beyond redemption, and, while this may be true in a small way, upon further introspection I discovered that there were still things that would hush my puppies should I ever come across them. y the time you read this, the Christmas season buying frenzy will be over-and more importantly, the flood of new software will slow to a trickle. Oh, there will still be a few hot items that missed their December deadlines, and the one or two casualties that won't make it onto the retail shelves until next Yuletide, if ever...but for the most part, the deafening hype roar will have died down-at least for a couple of months, before picking up steam as we gain on the E3 show. As spring approaches, the myriad screams of \"This is the next big thing for (fill in the genre) games!\" will begin again. Looking at the mound of blazingly hyped software piled high on my desk at the beginning of December, I find myself won. dering if any of these games will turn out to be the phenomenon they all claim to be. Well, all the nominees are not in yet, but you know what? I don't think there's a hall-of-famer in the bunch. Oh, don't get me wrong. There are some very cool games out there this season, in almost every genre of com puter gaming-STEEL PANTHERS 2, AZREAL'S TEAR, MOO2, NHL '97, and QUAKE, to name a few titles with some serious hard drive hang-time for me. But I can't honestly say that any of CC If I've got a backpack with 50 rockets in it, then I want to be able to go through that door. in my friends' faces again. To get excited over a first-person shooter, I'm going to need to see a bit more \"envi ronment\" involved. And I mean more than flying and cracks in walls that bust open when you blow them up; need a total environment where I can affect everything and nothing is \"wall. paper.\" Sure, the key card may be important, but if I've got a backpack with 50 rockets in it, then I want to be able to go through that door instead or through the wall beside it, for that matter. And if the explosions bring down the ceiling and crush me, or start a fire that suffocates my character, all the better. One's own stupidity should be at least as dangerous as the enemy. In CRPGs, I'm impressed with work like DAGGERFALL and I'm hoping DUNGEON KEEPER and DIABLO will make dungeon hacks the social experience they were meant to be...but I won't be really as thrilled as I was playing ULTIMA IV until the form begins to resemble the books and stories they are supposedly modeled after. Even the weakest D&D novelization has more going for it than the thinly dis. guised \"go there, fetch that, talk to them\" routines that are still the back bone of these games. The technical sophistication is out there now; designers could bring to bear some of the subtleties and scale that have made High Fantasy a reading staple. More characters, more subplots that aren't FedEx runs, and more betray als that aren't as obvious as Darth Vader lurking in the Vatican. And for the love of Tolkien, I need to see some more interesting properties being optioned out there. Where's my CRPG set in Jack Vance's dark fantasy worlds or the military intrigue of Cook's Black Company books? I realize it costs a bit to pay a writer for the use of intellectual property, but Feist's Betrayal at Krondor should prove that it's usually worth it. Across the other genres, I think things can be done that would be truly exciting. Races with utterly different technologies, in \"spaceploitation\" games. Hockey and basketball games that have players that act like the names on their jerseys. Adventure games without any gratuitous «puz zles\" that are there just to kill some time, and so on. I may be getting a bit jaded, but there are still a lot of things that and most gamers, I suspect) would love to see. Being derivative isn't a crime if you just go a little far. ther with it. So in the long run, what does it take for me to get excited about a game these days? What do I need to go along with the pretty pictures, the multimedia databases, and the endless hype? The same thing that did it for Darwin. A little evolution. For instance, I think Nukem and QUAKE are nice twists of the form, and certainly a hoot to play networked but regardless of the horde of \"QUAKE/NUKEM Beaters\" being touted and previewed left, right and center, it's going to take a leap beyond cooler graphics and more weapons to get me to start shoving copies of a 3D shooter Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Zift-Davis Publishing Company. One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one-year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. CC FEBRUARY 1997 "


"Jack is Back! The Course Designer From Tee to Green This is the Course Designer that created all 5 Nicklaus-designed courses in the game! Use the Designer to re-create your favorite course! Import, modify, and play courses from previous Nicklaus games! Challenge golfing legend Jack Nicklaus The Golfer of the Century on one of his own signature courses! Play with friends across the room or around the world via serial, modem, LAN, and the Internet! introducing Jack Nicklaus 4 Featuring Colleton River Plantation, Country Club of the South, Muirfield Village, Cabo del Sol, and Winding Springs. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #290 "


"The Course Designer WEMA B ASE DE SA Coed te cilathing tiller Input the basic details of a course from a real scorecard-the \"Wizard\" automatically routes each hole. Click and drag on its shape Choose from a variety of templates, or create your own shapes. Changing terrain is as easy as click-and-drag. 4 $10 The result: a new bunker \"Is it live or is it...?\" Our Course Designer is so true-to-life, it's hard to tell the difference! This image is of the 3rd Green at Country Club of the South. The left half of the image is from the Course Designer; the right half of the image is an actual photo. 22 A ch 1x Tele2 173 20.122 Choose from over 100 different types of trees, bushes, rocks, and other objects! The Hole View of the new bunker. "


"The Approach Shot From Tee to Green The Tee Shot Pop-up displays are optionalleave them off for the purest golfing experience. New \"Intensity Control\" reproduces the dynamics that shape the shot. \"Club up and swing easy\" for control or a low trajectory; \"swing hard\" when you want spin and distance. Every shot flies, bounces, and rolls true to the game, with the best ball physics model in existence. Courses are accurate to within 6 inches! 4-bit color lets ou view your und at resolu ons and color epths as high s your system ll support. Multiplayer play is fully supported, including recorded rounds, shared keyboard, serial, modem, LAN and Internet play. Play all of the best golf formats: stroke play, match play, skins, shootout, gross tournament, net tournament and \"side games\" like \"Bingo, Bango, Bongo\". Replay shots from unlimited camera angles, from ground level, or up to 300 feet in the air! The fastest screen redraw times on the PC allow the camera to automatically switch to the landing in full-screen, from varying viewpoints! Weather can change in the middle of the round, and natural wind variations and every possible turf condition add to the challenge! round The Green With beautiful, high-speed graphics, a true physics model, more realistic swing meters, better putting, and unlimited camera positions, Jack Nicklaus 4 is truly the game every golfer has anticipated! Call 1-800-245-7744 to order direct eparate hipping nd putting eters naximize ontrol Round the reen Look for the Jack Nicklaus 4 playable demos in select Our new approach magazines or online at 9 http://www.accolade.com more realistic. Mow lines on For hints and tips on Accolade products, the green help call Accolade Direct 1-900-454-HINT. you read the contour. $0.99/minute. If you are under 18, please get your parents' permission before making this call. For enhanced gameplay, this optional grid floats down and drapes itself SOLO over the green, clearly showing all PLUS high and low spots. WINODWS 95 Jack Nicklaus 4 PC CD-ROM ACCOLADE ack Nicklaus 4. Accolade, and the Solo Plus logos are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. 1996 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are of their espective owners. Screenshots from pre-Alpha version of the game. Actual screen shots may vary. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #290 "


"PRIVATEER2 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #231 Time to get back to business VWIGGOL THE DARKESDXC PRIVATLER 2 STRAP IN TIGHT SE 132 AND JUMP INTO THE ULTIMATE SPACE COMBAT TRADING EXPERIENCE ORIGIN We create worlds An Electronic Arts Company 1996 ORIGIN Syami, Inc. All rights reserved. Privateer. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks, and the Origin logo is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts, "

