Number 30

August 1986

FEATURES
American Dream
A Management Simulation

Phantasie II
A Review

Industry Update

12
Steve Estvanik
16
Scorpia
24

Many New Titles on the Way

The Kobayashi Alternative Revisited
Scorpion's Tale Takes Another Look

And The Winner Is...

30
Scorpia
35

Generic Game Design Contest Winner

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

5

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Sports Scoreboard
GBA Championship Basketball, et al

Amiga Preferences
Information for the Amiga Gamer

Commodore Key
Information for the Commodore Gamer

Macintosh Window
Orbiter and Flight Simulator

Atari Playfield
Silent Service, et al

20
Rick Teverbaugh
26
Roy Wagner
28
Roy Wagner
36
Frank Boosman
38
Gregg Williams

Over There !42
British Computer Games

Leslie Bunder

Reader Input Device

45

Game Ratings

48

100 Games Rated

Software Country
9713 Santa Monica Blvd, Ste 204
Beverly Hills, CA 90210
213-278-8450
CHESSMASTER 2000: A very
nice new entry into the ranks
of chess programs. 12 different levels of play; the computer will make 1 move every
7 seconds at level 1 - 1 move
every 3 minutes at level 10.
Large library of openings.
The disk includes 100 classic
games. Excellent screen display can be viewed in two or
three dimensions. Gives hints
for your next move. Teaching
mode displays all squares to
which a selected piece may
move. Can be played as player
vs player, player vs computer
or computer vs computer.
Apple, Atari, C64/128,
Amiga, ST. Circle Reader
Service # 23.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
415-571-7171
ULTIMATE WIZARD: Run,
jump and climb through a
world of treasures, sorcery
and creatures in this arcade
release. 100 levels provided,
plus a construction set to create your own challenges. 10
different magic spells, 20
different monster types and 4
treasure types. C64/128. Circle Reader Service # 24.
Mindscape Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
312-480-7667
THE AMERICAN CHALLENGE: A match race sailing
simulation puts you on-board
the sailboat, controlling sail,
rudder and centerboard as

your instrument panel monitors wind speed, wind direction and boat heading. Eight
courses to race. One or two
players. Includes a 45-rpm
record with a sailing tutorial
on one side and an original
song about the America's Cup
on the other. Apple, IBM.
$39.95. Circle Reader Service
# 25.
BOP'N WRESTLE: Arcade
wrestling simulation. Use the
joystick or keyboard to control Gorgeous Greg, Angry
Abdul or one of eight other
wrestling stars. Choice of
moves such as the "atomic
drop" and "pile driver". One
or two players. C64/128. Circle Reader Service # 26.
SHADOWFIRE GAME
CHANGER: If you own the
game of Shadow f ire then this

program will give you total
control over that universe.
You can use the changer to
change saved games or create
completely new ones. C64.
Circle Reader Service # 27.
Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
818-886-5922
THE NEVER ENDING
STORY: Real-time, graphics
text adventure. Original film
music, split-screen display.
The world of Fantasia is in
peril and you, Atreyu, have
been chosen to fulfill this
generic adventure. Apple
64K. Circle Reader # 28.
MIND PURSUIT: Yet another
trivial pursuit variant. Six
categories, three game options
and three difficulty levels. Up
to four players. Hi-res
graphics. Additional questions
disks available. Apple 64K.
Circle Reader Service # 29.

Manhattan Software
PO Box 148
Peterborough, NH 03458
603-924-9998
CASINO CRAPS: Gambling
simulation. Contains all the
bets and all the odds of the
game of craps. IBM 64K,
monochrome board. $35. Circle Reader Service # 30.
Activision, Inc.
2350 Bayshore Frontage Road
Mountain View, CA 94043
415-960-0410
MURDER ON THE MISSISSIPPI: Graphics and text murder mystery set on a Mississippi riverboat. The player
must guide two detectives
throughout the boat searching
for clues and examining suspects. Completely joystick
driven. CLUE on a boat. Apple, C64/128. $39.95 and
$34.95 Circle Reader Service
# 31.

Firebird Licensees Inc.
PO Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446
201-934-7373
COLOSSUS CHESS IV: Sophisticated chess program.
Supports all rules of chess including under-promotions and
draws by repetition. Two and
three dimensional video displays. Classic game library on
program disk. Maximum of 12
ply lookahead, otherwise you
can set the difficulty level by
determining time computer is
permitted for each move. Apple, C64/128. $34.95 Circle
Reader Service # 32.
FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD: Hi-res graphics
adventure/arcade game. As
the documentation states, "The
ultimate goal of Frankie is to
become a complete person and
to achieve this you must reach
the top of the Bar Charts
(when the word BANG will

light up) and achieve a score
of 87,000 Pleasure Points.
This combination awards you
the minimum requirement to
search for the Special Door the Door to the Ultimate Experience - the heart of the
Pleasure Dome." Well! We
certainly can't say it any better, despite numerous attempts
at singles bars. C64/128.
$34.95 Circle Reader Service
# 33.
Reality Development Corp
Univ City Science Center
3624 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
BUSINESS SIMULATOR:
This is a very complex business simulation that is descended from a mainframe
program. One or two players
will make business decisions
that allow their start-up companies to grow into multinational corporations. Your
computer competition is four
real-life companies (such as
Apple and Tandy) which are
said to reflect their actual
business strategies. There are
five levels of decision making

and each is extremely realistic
and detailed. The entire
package represents the equivalent of a college-level course
in business administration.
IBM (256K, 2 drives). Circle
Reader # 34.
Woodbury
127 White Oak Lane
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
201-679-0200
PLAY WRITER SERIES: A
collection of four programs to
assist the would-be author in
each of us. MYSTERY,
TALES OF ME, ADVENTURES IN SPACE, CASTLES & CREATURES. Each
program allows you to write,
edit, illustrate, print and bind
your own book. The computer
asks questions and offers suggestions to aid your creative
process. Each package contains a hard-cover book
jacket, colorful stickers and
full page illustrations. A
unique set of programs that
are designed to reinforce
reading, spelling, grammar
and vocabulary skills. Apple,
IBM, C64. $39.95 each. Circle
Reader Service # 35.

Micro-Novels
2808 S. 12th St.
Milwaukee, WI 53215
THE RETURN OF STAR
VOYAGER & SHERLOCK
HOLMES STRIKES AGAIN:
A dual-sided set of text adventures. Each game runs in
RAM, which speeds up play
(no disk access) but does limit
the available vocabulary. The
player must remain "in character" to succeed. Atari.
$17.95 plus $2 shipping
(available only by mail). Circle Reader Service # 36.
Advanced American Computer
PO Box 2099
Dearborn, MI 48123
313-565-1400
TRIVIA 85: Graphic trivia
quiz game. 8 categories, 3
levels of play, 4,500 questions.
Differs from "standard" trivia
in that no dice are rolled,
only player strategy and
knowledge will determine the
winner. Does include bonus
and danger squares. Three
diskettes. Apple, IBM. Circle
Reader Service # 37.

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
415-479-1700
BREAKERS: A science fiction text adventure. A realtime world, where the action
continues even when the user
does nothing. 1,500 word vocabulary. Game characters
react to your own character's
level of knowledge. Apple,
IBM, ST ($44.95). C64/128
($39.95) Circle Reader # 38.
SCIENCE TOOLKIT - MASTER MODULE: Turns your
computer into a sophisticated
science lab. Users perform
real experiments using the
two included sensory probes
and the four on-screen instruments (thermometer, light
meter, timer and strip chart).
Suggested for grades 4-12.
Apple. $89.95 Circle Reader
Service # 39.

Epyx, Inc.
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
408-745-0700
WORLD KARATE CHAMPIONSHIP: Arcade graphics
game transports players to
eight different international
locations for competitions
against the computer or another player. Players may use
up to 17 karate moves against
tougher and tougher opponents, from White to Black
Belt. Tests of skill and endurance between levels. One
or two players. C64/128,
Atari. Circle Reader Service #
40.
Cheapware
4038 N. Ninth St.
St. Louis, MO 63147
800-642-6524
GRAMARCY: A computer
program that plays a familiar

word game. Take a word,
such as "readers", and find as
many four letter (or greater)
words that can be created
from the root word. Read,
dear, reeds, dare, seer and so
on. There is a time limit for
each round. A good game for
increasing vocabulary skills. I
used to play it during church
(on pen and paper, obviously)
when I was about eight years
old. Mama didn't appreciate
the theory of vocabulary skill
acquisition, but see where it
can lead? You too can learn
to write for prestigious gaming mags and have fame,
fortune and femininity adhere
to your persona - just for the
price of a simple game. IBM.
$50.00. Circle Reader Service
# 41.

AMERICAN
DREAM
THE MANAGEMENT SIMULATION'

Name:
System:
# Players:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

by Steve Estvanik
No starting in the mailroom in this "game". You
start right at the top and the challenge is to stay
there. In this management simulation play you begin as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of a
robot manufacturing company. All the functional
departments report to you and you have varying
degrees of control over their operations. For example, in production you can decide whether to open
or close factories, or schedule overtime. You can
also control the amount of inventory stocked for
the various components. This is done, as it should
be, at a high level. You deal with long range planning, not day to day operations. Similarly, you decide the budgets for Research and Quality control,
but cannot affect their daily workings. You also
have decisions to make in Engineering, Finance and
Sales & Marketing. Only then can you relax and
read the memos generated by your managers in response to your actions.
Jim Zuber has engineered one of the best user
interfaces I've encountered in any game. A combination of windows and graphs and menus guide you
through your decisions. A spreadsheet function is
included to help with calculations. The game loads
easily and you can start playing without reading the
manual. The latter is recommended, though, if you
hope to do well. The documentation comes in the
form of a large-format bound paperback which not
only describes the rules of the game, but also contains several useful chapters on business fundamentals and strategies.
Each game turn represents one month. First you
receive memos from your staff. These range from
quarterly reports on general financial indicators to
pleas for more research money from your Engi-

American Dream : The Management Simulation
IBM & compatibles
One (or several taking subordinates' roles)
$124.95
Jim Zuber
Blue Chip Software
Britannica Learning Corp
PO Box 77186
San Francisco, CA 94107

neering department to suggestions from Production
on how to improve plant production. Fear not if
you're not at home in these areas, you soon will be!
From the main screen you can switch to the individual departments.
There is plenty of help for your decisions. Besides individual screens for each department, you
have immediate access to dozens of graphs showing

historical trends and indices. Most decisions are
multiple choice, thus encouraging trial & error if
you're unsure. Unsure of the effect of research on
your market share? Raise or lower their budget,
then graph them on succeeding months to follow
the effects.
Moving from one screen to another takes minimal keystrokes. For the most part this is appreciated. However, one keystroke can also quit the
game without saving. One keystroke can also send
you on to the next month, sometimes before you've
completed your turn. These choices should have
been isolated to prevent large-thumbed players
from hitting them so often.

Many of the decisions you need to make are intuitive, such as marketing budgets and sales price.
Others, such as safety levels for inventory, or production scheduling are less so (but these are well
documented in the user manual). This game will be
an excellent introduction to business practices and
procedures. It's especially useful to those who need
an overview of the various departments modeled.
The game is being advertised as a corporate training tool. In this area, I'm not as confident of its
value. While it's fun to play, the decisions lack
something of the real world. Inflation changes and
competitors prices vary, but no new products are

introduced. The financial section in particular is
limited. (You can discount receivables, postpone
payables and repay loans.)
There is an Environment section that can be
changed to customize the game. However, most of
the 45 variables don't really affect the game. For
example, 17 of the variables are managers' names
and components' names. Another 10 control which
reports are displayed. Changing the product from
robots to toasters won't change the fact that you are
still dealing with a manufacturing process that takes
raw materials a,b,c and d, combines them to make
subassemblies E and F and then finished product
G. The main differences will be seen by changing
such things as interest rates and labor rates. The
Environment Editor, while a good idea, doesn't really open the game up to true customization.
Strateg y Tips
It will take awhile to exhaust the possible strategies in this game. You can pursue short term or
long term goals of profitability and productivity.
There are no clear victory terms.
The best goals would be relative ones in which
you match your performance in several key areas
against other players or your own previous games

place, far from prying eyes. With hope in your
heart, and confidence in your abilities, you leave
the small town of Pippicott and begin your quest.
Naturally, the quest is not an easy one. There
are dungeons to explore, amulets to obtain, scrolls
to read, a princess to rescue, and, of course,
monsters to fight. You will travel beyond the
material plane to the dreaded Netherworld before
this adventure is over, and your visits there will not
be pleasant ones. Every step of the way is fraught
with perils for the unwary, and death can come all
too soon.
However, those of you who have played the
previous game, Phantasie, may have a slightly easier time of it. Phantasie II is almost exactly the
same in terms of game mechanics, spells, combat,
etc. In fact, the manual that comes with Phantasie
II is the very same one that comes with Phantasie.
The few small differences are noted on a card included with the game. This has both good and bad
points.
The good points are that anyone who has played
Name:
System:
Price:
Author:
Publisher:

Phantasie II
Apple, C64
$39.95
Winston Douglas Wood
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Ferronrah. An island shrouded in mist and mystery. Once proud and beautiful, now cut off from
the rest of the world by an evil black fog that
hangs over it, the curse of Nikademus. No one has
left or entered the island in forty years. Do people
still live there? Has it been overrun by the foul
minions of the Sorceror? No one knows. No one
dares to know. Except, perhaps, the bravest of adventurers, willing to risk all to put an end to the
curse, willing to cross the ocean and enter the
dreaded mist to see what lies beyond.
So once more the call to battle is sounded, and
once more you gather to your side comrades to
journey with you to Ferronrah and beyond. Perhaps
they will be the tried and true friends who were
with you when you faced the wrath of Nikademus
in Gelnor and broke his power there. Or perhaps
they will be new comrades, drawn from Ferronrah
itself, inexperienced, but courageous and eager to
free their homeland from the dominion of the evil
sorceror. No matter; time is short, and you must be
on your way to find the source of the curse, an almost indestructible orb, hidden in some secret

Phantasie can jump right in and get started quickly,
with perhaps a brief scan through the manual to
refresh the memory. You already know what to expect, pretty much, and how to deal with many of
the monsters, most (but not all!) of which you encountered in the previous adventure. The same
character classes are available, and no new ones
have been added.
The bad points are that, as the game has not really been changed in its essential programming,
some of the more tedious routines from the original
Phantasie have been brought over, most notably the
infamous Distribution and Selling rigamarole. I had
hoped that Phantasie II would have a more sophisticated method for selling unwanted items, but this
is not the case. You still have to go through the
dreary chore of assigning all items from the collective pool of objects, selling those you no longer
need.
Also as before, the program is unable to divide
properly when you deposit money into the bank.
Try it some time. Take one character with 100 gold
pieces to the bank and deposit the money. Only 99
gold will be put into the account; the 100th gold
piece simply disappears somewhere, never to be
seen again. If you had 600 gold, and six characters,
each would similarly receive 99 (and you would
then be out 6 gold).
The most disappointing aspect of Phantasie II is
that it is not really a true continuation of Phantasie.

While you can indeed transfer over your characters
from the original game, they will be stripped of all
their good weapons and armor, most of their gold,
and almost all of their experience points. Thus they
start the game as level one characters. However,
there is a small advantage to carrying them over to
the new game: they DO still have some gold and
experience, enough to bring them up at the start
(with training) to about third level. And their attributes are not changed (although hit points will
be). Therefore, if you have played the original, by
all means transfer the characters (it's simply a copy
of course; you won't lose the characters on the
original disk); it will give you a bit of a head start
in the game.
Ferronrah is smaller than Gelnor, being only 9
screens in all, and the island has only four dungeons and six towns. Fortunately, this time, most of
the screens are filled in, and you don't have to
walk over every inch of ground to see what's there.
Dungeons and towns are immediately apparent.
Also, there is a town near each dungeon, which is
helpful for long-term expeditions.
The Netherworld is a separate area, reachable
only in one special way, and has two levels. Each
level, in turn, has two towns and two dungeons. As
you might expect, the dungeons in the Netherworld
are the hardest ones to get through, especially
Pluto's Menagerie (more on that later).
As in the original game, it is in the dungeons
that you will find the information you need to fulfill your quest. There are 14 scrolls, labelled A to
N, and each of them is important. Make sure you
write down what they say before selling them off.
Also make note of what the various inhabitants tell
you, and what you may find written on walls. It is
vital to go through each dungeon thoroughly, or
you may miss a valuable clue.
These dungeons have the same format as the
original game: when you first enter, the area is a
white blank, which fills in as you move around.
The dungeon status can be saved when you leave,
and it is usually best (unless you made a bad mistake) to save what you have done so far, as most of
the dungeons will require more than one expedition
before you're finished with them. One VERY important thing to keep in mind: ALWAYS finish one
dungeon before proceeding to the next one! The
program can only save ONE dungeon at a time.
Therefore, if you save the Kobold dungeon, then
go on to the Castle dungeon, and save that one, the
Castle dungeon will over-write the Kobold town.
Thus if you return later to the Kobold village, you
will find it blank again.
Combat has not changed at all, except for the
addition of characters being able to throw rocks.

Your party is ranged in one line across the bottom
of the combat screen, and the monsters appear at
the top. There can be up to three ranks of monsters, and some of them can hit from as far back as
the third rank. While your party generally gets the
first chance to hit, this is done on an individual
basis, and so several monsters may get in a blow or
spell before some your characters do.
There are individual combat options for each
party member: they can attack with a weapon, cast
a spell, throw rocks, or parry. Retreating, however,
can only be done at the beginning of each combat
round; once fighting has begun, you must wait for
the resolution of the current attack before trying to
run (which is not always successful).
Fighting is not always necessary; sometimes you
can bribe monsters with gold to leave you alone,
and on occasion, you can simply greet them, and
they will greet you in return, meaning they are
more or less friendly and will not attack. This is
randoml y determined, however, and the same mon-

sters who greeted you before may be unresponsive
the next time you come across them.
Recovering after a fight can be done in several
ways: healing potions will restore lost hit points, as
will healing spells. Staying at the inn in town will
restore all hit points and also renew spell points. In
addition, there are inns scattered across the countryside, but staying at one of them costs money.
Getting through the game will take time and
patience, and also a bit of thought, as some of
those dungeons are tricky. At the beginning, try to
avoid outdoor encounters whenever possible. The
real goodies are always to be found in dungeons, so
don't waste time fighting outside them unless necessary. About eight times out of ten, you can bribe
monsters to leave you alone. This works (at least in
the Apple version) even when you have no gold at
all. So, if you are on your way to a dungeon, just
beg for mercy whenever you have to. It costs
nothing (because you have no money on you), and

you will arrive at the dungeon in good shape. Of
course, it may be a little different on your way
back, when you have gold on you. Then it's up to
you to decide whether or not fighting is worthwhile. Just keep in mind that monsters always take
gold, never weapons, armor, potions, or treasures.
Speaking of goodies, always take whatever is
offered to you after you win a fight. Even if you
can't use it or don't need it, you can sell it. Selling
treasures and unneeded equipment is a good way to
increase your bankroll. As your characters' experience goes up, so do the training costs, which is the
primary use for gold.
The four dungeons on Ferronrah are all of different levels. Start with the Kobold village just
outside Pippicott, which is the easiest one. It's a
good idea to have one of your fighters learn the
Monster Evaluation spell as soon as possible. Then,
each time you enter a new dungeon, cast the spell.
This will give you a rough idea of what level monsters you'd be up against. You don't want to be
sending your level 5 characters up against level 10
nasties!
Monsters in dungeons are of two types: wander-

ing and fixed. Wandering monsters can happen
along any time, anywhere. Fixed monsters will always be found in the same place; once you've defeated them, they're gone and won't return, provided you save the dungeon status when you leave.
Bribing fixed monsters will NOT make them go
away; you have to wipe them out.
When exploring dungeons, go one step at a time,
and test all walls along the way. Otherwise, you
could easily miss a secret door. Always talk to
someone when given the opportunity, but keep in
mind that not everyone will tell you the truth. Visiting the oracle in the Kobold village is costly, in
more ways than one, so be sure all party members
have a good number of hit points before you make
the attempt.
In time you will reach the Netherworld. Be
aware that the transportation spell will NOT take
you from Ferronrah to any of the towns in the
Netherworld, even though you may know their
numbers. You can only transport between the two
towns on the same level. Also note that getting
back from the Netherworld is tricky: leaving Black
Moor (level 1) will bring you back to Ferronrah,
but leaving Demoniac (level 2) will put you outside
of Black Moor.
The first level of the Netherworld has the Imp
Caves and the Impling Hatchery. In the Hatchery
you will find a room with 12 pools; all have different effects and entering one of them is crucial to
winning the game. However, you don't know which
one it is (they all look alike), so a little judicious
experimenting is called for. Just keep in mind the
sign at the entrance.
On level 2 you will find Pluto's castle and
Pluto's Menagerie. I suggest reading scroll L before
attempting the castle. And if you should run into
Pluto himself, well, too bad, because he is, as far as
I can tell, unkillable. So be careful in there!
The Menagerie is the nastiest of the dungeons. It
sits in the middle of a large lava pool, and is not
easy to reach. Read scroll I for some helpful information on how to get to the Menagerie with the
least amount of damage (walking in lava is VERY
painful). When you are ready for this dungeon, load
up on magic potions. Fill every available slot if you
can, because you will be needing a good many
spells, both along the way and inside.
Each time you walk through lava and take
damage, stop and do a health check. Heal anyone
who has 50 or less hit points. Use any healing potions you have first, then switch to spells. The
maximum damage from lava is 50 points (actual
damage is random), so anyone who has more than
50 can survive at least one more step. Heal only

enough to keep everyone alive on the trip, and then
outside the Menagerie, get everyone up to a decent
number of hit points.
Inside the Menagerie, you will find one long
corridor that leads to a wall with buttons. This
corridor is heavily trapped, and you can expect at
least one encounter about every two steps beyond
each trap. Monsters here are top-level, so don't
waste time, use your strongest spells to get rid of
them quickly. Most of the time, your fighters won't
be able to do much; success will depend more on
your spells than anything else. By the way, you will
need to make at least two trips to this dungeon
(sad, but true).
Those buttons, by the way, will randomly teleport you to another area of the dungeon. The same
button may take you to more than one place; there
is no method to them. Be prepared for heavy
fighting each time you arrive at a new location.
As a last resort, whenever you find yourself in a
really serious situation, such as having most of your
party wiped out, you can simply reboot the game at
that point. Each time you leave town, your characters are saved there. If you reboot the game, they
will still be there. Of course, any treasure,
weapons, armor, experience, etc. acquired after
leaving will be lost, but your characters will be
alive and well, with whatever they had when they

were saved. However, if you're in a dungeon when
things get tough, try to get at least one character
out alive, so you can save the dungeon status, and
not have to go through the same battles twice.
When it's finally over, and the orb has been destroyed, you can sit back and enjoy the ending. It's
really cute, and is far more than the usual "Hurray
you won, the game is over" message that is all too
typical of many games. However, there is a serious
side to the ending, too, which seems to promise a
third (and final?) episode in the Phantasie series.
Phantasie II comes on one double-sided disk.
Although the game is not copy protected, you may
encounter difficulties in making playable copies. I
was not able to make a working copy (or even read
the disk) with either Apple's COPYA program, or
Nibbles Away II. Of course, there is nothing wrong
with playing on the original disk; however, there
were occasions when I wished I could make backups of the dungeon disk since only one dungeon
can be saved at a time. Other than this, everything
worked perfectly, including the transfer of my old
characters from Phantasie.
Bottom line: Although flawed in certain aspects, Phantasie II is an interesting, and overall
good, game of the RPG type; if you liked the
original Phantasie, you won't want to miss this one.
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

Rick Teverbaugh
There have been so many new sports releases
since the last column, that under normal circumstances it might be hard to know where to start. No
so this time.
Gamestar's GBA Championship Basketball: Two
On Two is that remarkable a release as to dwarf
nearly everything else we will cover this time.
Certainly the game owes much to Electronic
Arts' One On One, but it builds upon that groundwork so successfully that it can't be considered a
clone by any stretch of the imagination.
First of all, the game is a full-court simulation,
even though only half the court is represented at
any given time. But since there are virtually no fast
breaks, it does boil down to the same half-court
premise, with one important difference. In GBA (as
the name implies) you have a teammate. He can be
under computer or human control. If you're playing
solo, the computer will control two players working
against you and the one working with you. When
playing with a friend, he can control a player on
the opposing team or the teammate on your squad.
Whether you're playing with a human- or computer-controlled teammate, the talents of your team
are variable. You can choose between inside and
outside shooting or a balance of the two. You
choose between jumping ability and quickness or an
even distribution and the final choice is ball control
vs. the ability to steal the ball from the opposition.
A human teammate would then make those same
choices. If you have a computer-controlled mate,
you can choose from several players with famous
NBA-sounding names and abilities.
Once those choices have been made, you can advance to league play. There are four divisions in
league play from the easiest to the hardest. Each
game takes about 30 minutes and a league season is
six games. If you're at the top of your division at
that time, you'll go into the playoffs.
In actual game conditions, you'll pick what you
want your teammate to do on offense and defense.
You'll have five different choices on offense and
four on defense, all selected by joystick. Once into

your offensive end of the floor, you control the
player by moving the stick.
A quick tap of the joystick button when you
have the ball, will send a pass to your teammate.
That same tap will get you the ball when your
teammate has it (and not even Magic Johnson gives
the ball up that easy). A longer press of the button
will cause the player to jump for a shot. Timing
the release of the button at the top of his leap will
increase the percentage chances of success.
Many of the sport's true talents are necessary to
succeed in league play. You need to work with
your teammate rather than playing too much oneon-one. You need to make defensive switches and
block out on those boards.

To work on the many phases of the game there
are several practice modes including; shooting, HO-R-S-E, one-on-one and around the world.
I have only two complaints with the game. Both
related to the joystick. It is very easy to tap the
button, intending to pass, but end up shooting if
you're finger lingered too long on the button. It is
also easy, if you're standing still when you pass the
ball, to get the ball passed right back. That's not
bad unless you choose that moment to begin a cut
to the hoop. Then the ball will go harmlessly and
frustratingly out of bounds.
The game is currently available only for the
Commodore 64/128, but will be out for other systems later in the year. It sells for $34.95 and is
quite a bargain for hardwood fans.
The cleverly titled Football, from subLogic, is a
nice enough game. The game system is much easier

to implement than many recent efforts, but the
graphics are only average (detail of the field is
missing). It is very easy to tell which of the eleven
players you're controlling, but it's much more difficult to tell your players from the opposition and
that is vital when trying to decide whether to zig or
zag through a congested area on the field.
On-field action is controlled by the joystick, or
by two joysticks if you are playing with a human
foe. The screens are set up so that you opponent
has to choose his play at the same time you choose
yours. He doesn't really have the time to pay attention what you're doing and if he did, the selections
are cleverly not detectable.
The game comes with two teams of fictional
players, but you can ad just the player ratings to
conform to some real or imaginary team.
Not only is it easy to make play selections, but
controlling the on-field execution is also simple.
For instance, when you run the option, press the
button twice before the quarterback and fullback
cross paths and the fullback will get it. Hit it twice
before the QB gets to the halfback and the HB will
accept the pitch. Do neither and the quarterback
will keep it. After you pick the receiver on a pass
play, merely hit the button twice when you you
want to pass the ball. If you hit the button only
once and add movement of the joystick, you'll select a secondary receiver.
When on defense you start out controlling the
free safety, who is often completely out of a running play. This is a problem since I like to get my
uniform dirty on every play. You do have a chance
to alter the player of control at the start of each
play, but think quick because there's only two seconds once the field appears to make that choice.
The game sells for $39.95 and is available only for
Commodore 64/128 owners.
Bop 'N Wrestle is a game with some stunning
graphics. It is also a well-timed release now that
championship wrestling is now a network staple.
But, unfortunately, it is a game that tries to do too
much.
The joystick is used to control the grapplers.
Against the computer the game moves to quickly
for a mere human to compete successfully. In the
two-player mode, the game is woefully slow and
has little of the spontaneity and almost free-form
feel of its real-life counterpart. There are at least
30 different offensive moves which can seem overwhelming.
You start out in the one-player game as Gorgeous Greg and try to work your way up the ladder

of contenders. There are points awarded for doing
damage to your opponent. In the one-player mode,
you will need to pin your foe before the time limit
expires. If time expires, you lose. A good way to
practice is to select the two-player mode, then
leave one stick unattended. But against the computer, you'll find it all ends much too fast. Once
you're on your back against the computer, say your
prayers.
Last time, you'll remember I covered Leader
Board and Golf's Best golf games. Well, both games
have new courses available. Golf's Best offers St.
Andrews as a second choice to Pinehurst No.2. This
Apple game is still one of the finest on the market.
St. Andrews is a bit easier than the Pinehurst
course, but it does offer better graphics, the choice
of what clubs you'd like to carry and wind to the
original package.
Leader Board's new disk is called Championship
No.1 and it is indeed tougher than the original set
of four included in this Commodore challenge.
Judging distances becomes a necessary talent instead of merely a luxury.
The folks at Avalon Hill have also been busy,
releasing a Masters and Pebble Beach disk for their
Tournament Golf. The game and the courses are
available for both Apple and Commodore owners
and I heartily recommend either version.
Moving on to baseball, there are two good pieces
of news to pass along. First of all, Micro League
Baseball has released an additional disk that will
allow you to print a box score and compile stats for
either or both teams.
Now for the bad news. When the box score in
printed, there is no score by innings. Then, when
the stats are printed, you get a complete list of
names and about a third of each player's stats, instead of each player's line containing all the stats.
You'll need about three takes to get complete player
stats. so, it's a mixed blessing.
The other piece of good baseball news centers
around the upcoming game from Lance Haffner. A
rough draft of what he is going to do reveals a
good knowledge of stats and how they apply to the
game, as well as an understanding of the drawbacks
of some of the most popular computer games on
the market. When the game is finished, look for a
complete review here.
Also look here in the coming months for a peek
at what the Consumer Electronics Show had to offer sports fans and a review of Spin Out, a computer slot car racing kit from Cygnus. See you then
and be a good sport.

A lot has happened in the world of computer
gaming since our last issue. The Consumer Electronics Show (held in June) and Origins: The National Strategy and Adventure Gaming Convention
(held in July) were the settings for numerous game
releases and announcements.
THE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW
The Consumer Electronics Show (CES), held in
Chicago during the first week in June, showcased a
number of new computer game releases.
Avalon Hill Game Co. announced a September
release of the computer version of their extremely
popular board game, Dr. Ruth's Game of Good Sex.
Good Sex will initially be available for the C-64
and IBM with the Apple and Atari versions "to
follow". The board game is for "2 to 4 adult couples" but there are special rules that allow one couple to play (isn't a single couple the most traditional
way to go with this sort of thing?). Overheard the
following month at the Origins convention: "He
could not be here, he is working on the rules for
the solitaire version of Good Sex." Hehehe. You can
imagine the sort of puns that were flying around
the CGW offices when we began to speculate on
the computer version of the game: "Number of
players: 1 to 3 depending on sexual preference";
"Joystick required"; etc., etc., etc.
Accolade announced a mid-July release of Ace
of Aces, a hi-res graphics game in which you pilot
an RAF Mosquito over enemy territory to engage
in air to air battles, and bombing runs against V-1
rocket bases, U-Boats, and enemy trains. The
graphics are impressive. Accolade's Ace of Aces
should not be confused with Nova's Ace of Aces
picture book game which is a wholly different
product.
Electronic Arts has been busy. They announced
seven new titles for the Apple II, eleven new titles
for the C-64, as well as titles for the Amiga, Atari
ST, Atari 400/800 and IBM. The Apple titles include: Thomas M. Disch's Amnesia (an interactive
text adventure written by award-winning sciencefiction author Thomas M. Disch); Battlefront (the

latest release from EA's affiliate, Strategic Studies
Group. Simply put, this Apple II 64K WWII game
looks great. A must buy for Apple wargamers.
Major review coming); Chessmaster 2000 (a very
powerful chess program with "the world's largest library of opening moves". A stunning 3-D perspective is an available option in this program); Murder
Party (This program allows you to host a murder
mystery party of up to seven people. Your computer generates all the materials you need--invitations, instructions, clues, etc.); Ogre (announced at
CES and released at Origins, this is the computer
version of Steve Jackson Game's very popular
board game of the same name. Ogre is an incredible powerful cybernetic tank that attempts to crush
a small band of armored defenders. Ogre is published by Origin Systems); Timothy Leary's Mind
Mirror (EA describes this program as "part tool,
part game, and part philosopher on disk, Mind
Mirror is a provocative game perfect for parties or
social gatherings"); and Scavenger Hunt (the latest
design from the fruitful mind of Dan Bunten
(M.U.L.E., 7 Cities of Gold, etc.). In this half computer game/half board game up to four players use
humorous animated robots to hunt for strange items
like the digital donut or a transistor taco). The C64 titles include all of the above plus Arch-Mage's
Tale (Bards II) (the sequel to Bard's Tale); Autoduel (based on the best-selling Car Wars board
game, this one is is published by the Ultima folk:
Origin Systems); Moebius (fantasy role playing with
martial arts, also from Origin Systems); and Ultimate Wizard (an arcade game with 100 levels).
Also announced by EA were Business Simulator
for the IBM (see Taking a Peek); Age of Adventure
for the Apple and Atari 400/800 (a repackaging
and upgrading of two Stuart Smith games; The Return of Heracles and Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves); Marble Madness (now scheduled for a
July release on the Amiga); Ultima III is now
available for the Amiga and Atari ST.
Special Sneak Preview: Chris Crawford's latest
Macintosh game, with the working title "Patton &
Rommel Go One-On-One" was shown at CES but
was not included in EA's list of near

future releases.
Intellicreations (aka Datasoft) announced a
September release of the computer version (Atari 8bit, C64, Apple II) of the popular board game 221
B Baker Street, a graphics/text game in which
players attempt to solve "the most intriguing cases
ever faced by Sherlock Holmes".
Microprose announced a September release date
for Gunship (AH-64A Apache attack helicopter
game) and a Fall release for Destroyer Escort
(described as "the surface version of Silent Service"). Both games will run on the C-64, Apple,
Atari, and IBM.
Mindscape released The American Challenge: A
Sailing Simulation for the Apple and IBM. You
control the sail, rudder, and centerboard as you sail
seven increasingly difficult courses which climaxes
with the eighth and final course--a simulation of
the America's Cup race. A contest for owners of
the game has been set up. Eight top finalists will
each win a modem and then compete against each
other to win a trip to Perth, Australia, to watch the
next America's Cup race in 1987. Mindscape also
announced a June release of the IBM version of

Balance of Power.
The most exciting products we saw at CES were
a new line of games under the title Cinemaware.
Distributed by Mindscape, this series is being published by Master Designer Software (for the Amiga,
Macintosh, and Atari ST).
Unfortunately fully playable versions of the
games were not available (this is typical for CES
product demos). We were, however, very impressed
with what we did see. The following information
comes from the press release on these games and
seems to be an accurate description of the products
as we saw them: "Cinemaware interactive movies
combine classic movie themes and characters with
sophisticated computer graphics. Although the
themes vary from gangsters to medieval knights to
space-age warriors to Sinbad the Sailor, all are designed as role-playing games with the player's onscreen character growing, changing, and adapting
each time the game is played. Because the programs
are nonlinear, repeat plays aren't tired, predictable

Continued on pg. 46

Amiga Preferences

Roy Wagner
After the initial sea of game clones for
the Amiga the tide has shifted to a small
puddle of new items. The biggest wave
rolling in so far was Arctic Fox and the
next sighted "big-one" is Marble Madness
from EA. It seems to be out there
somewhere in the distance. On the horizon
are Jet from subLogic and others from
Sierra and EPYX. We all keep waiting to
see how each new release tops the other in
appearance and performance on the
Amiga.

2K of memory. These grew quickly with
binary expansion from 2 to 4 to 8 to 16 to
32 to 64 to 128 to 256 to 512 to 640 to
whatever. (Funny how 640 just does seem
to fit that progression.)
Well now we have "home" computers
to equal those formidable giants of olden
days. Some of the very cult producing
games that resided on these giants have
made their way to our very computers.
The first to appear were several variations
of Star Trek. This was followed by the
classic
e of Adventure (which appeared
under several other names).
Another classic "graphic" adventure is
now available. This game started off with
the name Rogue. It became so popular

Only In Your Mynd
Now available for your home computer
is Mynd Walker from
Commodore/Synapse. From the
preliminary version I have seen, this is a
very interesting and complex game.
Probably the first three dimensional
adventure game for the Amiga. The
graphics and sounds are sensational. The
music that accompanies the game play is
very bizarre, as is most of the visual
appearance of the game. If you are into
wandering around mazes, this one will be
like nothing you have ever seen.
Another Type of Game
Also available for the Amiga, is
Mastertype from Scarborough. Definitely
an educational game, it teaches you how
to type or improves your current typing
abilities. This one challenges you to learn
by requiring you to protect your home
space ship from enemies attacking you
from four directions. It has several options
giving you different ways to learn or test
your skills. The program is very well
presented using excellent graphics. It
contains records for each person using it
and has an excellent set of online tutorials
and help screens. This product is excellent
and highly recommended for training those
fingers to play those Infocom games faster
and for all other typing activities.
From The Land of Giants
A long time ago (in computer time) a
game appeared for the mainframers. You
know those big room filling electrical
giants of computers that once were far
more powerful than anything around.
Then came the mini-computers posing an
idle single functional threat to the mighty
giants. A few years later came the
homebrew computers that stepped in with

the simple character graphics to more
sophisticated images. Most user groups or
public domain libraries have the game and
source available for a nominal cost.
Rogue has just appeared on the
commercial market from EPYX. It's
presentation is very nice graphically, albeit
the graphics are very tiny. It retains the
flavor of the original games where a single
dungeon level can be displayed on the
screen. All images, be they monsters or
items of interest are the size of a single 80column character. Even with a good
analog RGB monitor, the image definition
is hard to discern. The game has no sound.
It can be played using mouse-menu or
keyboard.
The premise of the game is to
transverse 26 levels with several rooms at
each level to seek out an amulet at the
deepest level and get out again. In doing
such, you must contend with numerous
monsters with greater strength at each
lower level, potions, traps and keeping
yourself healthy. The game can be saved,
but if you die your saved character is lost.
(Note: it is possible to copy your saved
character file for later use as needed. This
is done outside of the program using direct
DOS commands.)
I found the Amiga versions of Hack
and Rogue to be remarkably similar in
appearance. Hack was more humorous in
situations and comments. Rogue was
certainly much more refined in
presentation. These are both early entries
of graphic adventures for the Amiga.
Three For One

that the name got locked up for
commercial distribution, for large
computers, many years ago. The original
version as it floated from one mainframe to
another was often modified and essentially
rewritten or "hacked" into a different game
from the original Rogue This new game
with it's evolutionary modifications came
to be known as Hack, the latter is in the
public domain.
Both Rogue and Hack use very simple
character graphics and display techniques
so as to maintain compatibility with a wide
range of computers and typically dumb
terminals.
Both of these popular games remained
on the larger computers until recently. The
Amiga version of Hack appeared very soon
after the Amiga was released. The early
version used character graphics to depict
the many rooms, tunnels, characters and
items that make up the game. A new
public domain version has now converted

Another classic (this time from the
early days of the C64) that has just been
released for the Amiga, is the Temple of
Apshai trilogy from EPYX. There are
three separate games/areas to explore,
each with four levels with 40 to 50 rooms
per level. A character is created with the
various adventuring attributes, armed and
armoured, potioned and elixired. Then off
to explore for treasure, hidden rooms,
monsters to battle with, and to seek
fortune and experience. Movement is
handled easily with the mouse. All other
actions are done using single letter
keyboard commands. The use of sound is
minimal (footsteps). Graphics are
excellent. There still remains some of the
early redisplaying of rooms as you move
from one to another. (We all have now
come to expect smooth graphic scrolling
when moving from one point to another.)
For simple exploring adventure and
mapping this fills the need. It is a good
introduction for beginning or younger
players. There are no puzzles to solve.

Commodore Key

The British Are Coming...Again!

Roy Wagner
Gamemaker, Gamemaker, Make Me A Game
There have been several programs released to
help you write your own games. The first was
probably the Pinball Construction Set by Bill Budge
and the Adventure Construction Set by Stuart Smith
from Electronic Arts. There have been several
"write your own" text adventure games. White
Lightning came in from England to help create arcade type games using a Forth like language. This
last program made it possible to write some excellent arcade type games. However, learning to use
the program was fairly complex.
But now from Activision, one of the top producers of arcade games for the Commodore 64/128,
comes Garry Kitchen's Gamemaker: The Computer
Game Design Kit. This package is an excellent set
of menu driven tools that help you easily write
your own high quality games. It starts with a master Main Menu of commands that handle program
editing. Nearly all program lines can be entered
using a joystick as you lay back in a comfortable
chair. Other specialized programs are loaded when
selected from the menu. These include: SceneMaker
for drawing background game scenery, SpriteMaker
for creating those objects that will be animated or
be used for collision detection, SoundMaker to produce sound effects, and MusicMaker to provide a
musical theme score to your game. These tools provide you with all you need to produce a game like
Pitfall or Chopper.
The documentation for this product is outstanding. It comes complete with several tutorials on all
phases of game writing. The programming language
used is structured. It is very easy to understand if
you have a working knowledge of of BASIC. The
games you write can be passed along to friends who
do not have the kit (a blank disk is even included
with the package). If you come up with something
really special, you might even send it to Activision.

The British software is finally making a big
showing in the US marketplace. It started nearly a
year ago with Mastertronic software for $9.95, but
that never seemed to really make it. Then a few
months ago we had a lot of cassette based software
that did not make it. I don't think that they realized that 97% of the Commodore systems in the
USA have disk drives. Not many even remember
that Apple and IBM once had a cassette option.
Well, the British are coming again. This time
they may make it. Several new games have come in
from Firebird. Elite, a very good 3-D space game,
and Colossus, a good chess program are both being
received quite well by the reviewers and customers.
Their new Music System series is said to be the
best yet for the C64/128. (Probably the most popular music program currently is the Sidplayer from
Compute.)
Firebird has also released a number of new
games. These are packaged under the name Silverdisk: 2 games in one pack. The titles include:

Booty & Cylu, Willow Pattern & Chimera, Gerry the
Germ [Named after our circulation director no
doubt] & Microcosm, Runestone & The Helm, Sabre
Wulf & Underwurlde, and Rasputin & Chicken
Chase. There is even a Silverdisk package that in-

eludes two wargames: Battle of Britain and Battle
for Midway. There is a wide range of quality in
these games, but what makes these games unusual is
the reasonable price (two games in each $19.95
package). Generally, these games are good for several days of fun. Then pass them along to a friend.
I particularly liked Willow Pattern's visual appearance.
Mindscape has also introduced a package of
three British games. These are Brian Bloodaxe,
Revelation, and Quovadis. They are joystick arcade
games. All three are in one package. Another single

flying a simple helicopter to states, capitals and
cities. Our score is based on how quickly we find
the correct location. A flashing area indicates that
we are near our goal and aids us greatly when we
have no idea where that goal is and must search
for it. The program is fun and certainly teaches us.
Ironically the program comes from Holland.

British release from Mindscape is Spell of Destruction, a 3-D graphic adventure that is very challenging. The manual provides you with a step-bystep walkthrough for the first of many puzzles that
you must solve to explore over 70 areas. I found
the use of keys 1 and 2 to scroll through spells a
bit awkward. I would have preferred to see them
use the cursor keys. Also the graphics seemed small
because they only used a small portion of the
available screen. An interesting game.

Here And There
Two nicely done geography (read that educational) games are available that help us or our children know more about states, cities and countries.
Map USA from RadarSoft (c/o ACK Inc. 655 John
Muir Dr. E411, San Francisco, CA 94132) has us

World Geography from BobCo (200 7th Ave.,
Suite 111, Santa Cruz, CA 95062 features a fascinating display of the earth spinning at great speed.
We can select from major areas of the world or
from all of the world. The spinning globe stops
with a blinking area identified. That area is displayed on the other half of the screen as a relief
display (different colors identifying land types). We
are then asked a set of multiple choice questions.
Continued on pg. 44

Kobayashi Revisited
Here we are at the tail end of summer, enjoying
lazy days before the annual Great Autumn PreChristmas Rush of New Games (and if word from
CES is correct, there should be some neat new
games out in the late fall). But don't let me keep
you standing at the door, come in, sit down, make
yourself comfortable. Fred is off at the annual
Grues Convention (held, as usual, in the Dark
Room of Colossal Cave), but the dwarf behind the
bar is adequate. So relax, drink up, and we'll take a
second look at a game that had a few flaws the
first time around.
My original article on The Kobayashi Alternative appeared in the March '86 issue of CGW. At
that time, I mentioned the many problems found
during game play, almost all of these due to inadequate programming. The article ended with the
possibility that a revised version of Kobayashi
might be forthcoming, one that would clean up the
defects of the first version. Well, that new version
IS out, and the news is not good, especially for
Apple owners.
This is a real shame, as it is quite evident that
Simon and Schuster, the game publishers, are sincere in their desire to put out a quality product.
When the complaints about the bugs and poor documentation came rolling in, they did not ignore the
situation, but went ahead to correct the deficiencies. Alas, it was not enough, at least not for
the Apple version. Bugs continue to plague the
game, and one in particular may cause great frustration to players. This major bug I call the
"Kornfeld Effect", in honor of my friend Tracy
Kornfeld, who, with great persistence, managed to
track it down to visiting the planet Orna.
We had suspected that Orna (a planet of no real
significance in the game) might be the trouble spot,
and indeed, Tracy's exhaustive experiments proved
it to be so. Simply put, visiting Orna will later
cause some of your items, such as the phaser,
communicator, and tricorder, to disappear. It also
causes the Rird device (without which you can't
finish the game) to vanish as well. Obviously, that
is a big problem. The simplest way to avoid it, is to
stay well away from Orna.
Unfortunately, this is easier said than done. The
new documentation with the game contains a sort
of "walkthru", which takes you to one of the planets, showing you what commands are used, as a

training example. Guess which planet they are using for this example? Right, Orna! So right off,
anyone with the Apple 1.1 version is in trouble. So
if you have the 1.1 Kobayashi, and have already
visited Orna, start over again, and don't go there.
And if you know of someone who is playing it,
spread the word on this bug. It will make life much
easier all around (oh yes: you still can't get the
shuttlecraft repaired, whichever version you have).
Of course, by avoiding Orna, you won't be able
to obtain the highest possible score. One way to get
around this is to visit Orna next to last, before you
go to the Protostar. Then, it won't really matter if
your equipment disappears, although you are taking
a chance with the Rird device, which might vanish
on you. Save the game before you go to Orna, if
you want to try this.
Another problem spot is Andorgha. While you
won't pick up any useful information there, you do
have to blast the enormous tractor beam that holds
you in orbit. Ordinarily, this would not be troublesome, except that finding the true location of
the beam is rather difficult. There is a large island
with a mountain, and the tractor is located to the
east of the mountain. However, whatever spot you
beam down to east of the mountain, you get a
message that "You notice in the area: Installation".
This, of course, is not true. The tractor beam is
only in one spot. But you will get those messages
wherever you beam down, including WEST of the
mountain! Finding that tractor beam has now be-

come a lifetime quest. The difficulties are compounded by the fact that, as you walk around the
area, you get no further messages about the installation. Terrific. You end up playing a guessing
game as to where that tractor beam really is, and
waste a lot of time and effort doing so. With that
in mind, I will save you a little frustration. When
in orbit around Andorgha, don't even bother to
visit the surface. Lock ship's phasers on 7500.2500,
and blast away a few times. It will take several
shots, but the tractor will be destroyed, and you
can go on to better things.
By the way, if you look in the hints section of
the new manual, they give several surface coordinates for Andorgha. Two of them are incorrect, and
beaming down to them will put you in the helium
sea. These incorrect coords are 10005.6480 and
10620.9640. Stay away from them. And if you
should decide you want to see what's down there,
remember to be VERY careful when walking to the
east. You will NOT get any warning messages as
you approach the sea, and may find yourself dead
before you realize it. It only happens when going

east. It also happens on Hastorang, when you are in
the vicinity of the moat. This was a problem that
showed up in the original version, and is still with
us. So watch where you're going.
Another problem I encountered was with Bhrffy
(who comes, of course, from the planet Bhrf, one
of the unknown ones). Bhrffy has a special ability:
he can sense Klingon ships. Anywhere, anytime.
Unfortunately, in the one situation where he is
supposed to be useful (at Rird), he was also
frustratingly silent. Sigh.
Aside from bugs, there is also the matter of
skimping. It seems that the most care and attention
was lavished on the IBM version. For example, you
may have heard rumors of a Klingon space station.
Well, there IS one, but you won't find it in the Apple version (it's on the space station that Sulu and
his crew are being held captive, although you can't
do anything for them until the end of the game).
Further, the new docs indicate that there is a
Quit command in the utilities section, which allows
you to end the game and gives you your current
score. You won't find that on the Apple, either.

The only way to stop playing is to turn off the
machine (or boot something else). You also can't
change the settings of your phaser, although the
manual says you can.
Speaking of the new manual, overall, it is
MUCH better than the little folder that came with
the original version. The docs now give you a complete list of the crew on board, the phrases that
aliens will understand, examples of the commands
and how to use them, a complete explanation of the
special function keys, and a sealed hints section in
the back, in case you get really stuck. In other
words, everything that they should have told you
the first time. Still, better late than never, and the
new manual is really quite helpful (so long as you
avoid those Andorgha coordinates).
For those of you who may not have the manual
(which comes with the new 1.1 version), some help
and hints on making it through the game. First,
here are the nine phrases that aliens understand
(although they may not always respond to them;
tricky creatures, aliens): "Hello", "Who are you", "I
am Kirk", "We are friends", "We come in peace",
"Have you seen Klingons", "Where is [insert name
of missing person]", "Can you help us" and "Can
you understand me". Aliens will not respond to
anything else.
Regarding planets, there are 10 known planets at
the start of the game. There are also five unknown
planets, plus one special location, whose coordinates
you must ferret out and visit. To save time, I will
only mention those that are important (ie, have
useful information of one sort or another). Remember, tho, that your score will be higher if you visit
every planet (except, of course, Orna!).
Achir: Wear your spacesuit, and wander around.
Make careful note of what the Harapha tells you.
Malakiyy: The ship is more important than the
transmitter. Use your tricorder.
Khut: Find the city and look for the crowd.
Listen carefully to the Khuti.
Tshio: Freeing Spock is the first item on the
agenda. He thinks like they do, so keep in mind the
Vulcan's special abilities. Then look for an energy
source.
Klusos: Before beaming down, ask the computer
for data on crewmember Naraht. The northern
mines should be your destination.
Hastorang: Talk to the wizards.
The unknown planets (again, only the important
ones):
Bhrf: Visit the Recreation area before beaming
down, and don't go empty-handed.
Ascella: The planet itself has nothing, but

something special may show up after you return to
the Enterprise. However, don't linger in the area.
Rird: Very important place. Don't get triggerhappy; not everything is what it seems here. Bhrffy
may or may not be helpful. Once the Klingon is
destroyed (check your phaser strength!) you can
rescue the Rirder pilot on the surface.
Space buoy: Have the message analyzed. Remember the buoy is a communications device.
Protostar: Listen carefully to Spock, and remember Tshio. Check the Engineering area for an important item, and then head for the Transporter
Room. Time is short here, so save the game before
you set course for the protostar.
The planets I haven't mentioned either have no
information at all, or else what they do have is
"background stuff", which helps you to understand
what is going on, while not actually getting you any
further towards your goal. When you have been to
all the planets (except Orna), you will have the
complete picture.
Overall, I can't say I'm happy with the revised
version. Again, there seems to have been an inadequate amount of play-testing, which let two severe
problems (as well as several minor ones) remain in
the program. While I have yet to play any game
that was 100% bug free, the problems in both Apple versions are simply too much. Simon and
Schuster's attempts to fix the original are laudable,
but lacking competent testing, have not made much
difference, and in this case, have even made things
worse. Insofar as the Apple 1.1 version is concerned, I cannot recommend it. Other versions
(most notably, the IBM), I have heard, do not contain quite so many flaws, and are more playable.
Try before you buy.
Well, that's about it for now. Remember if you
need help with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups
and Clubs menu).
GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable (type:
SCORPIA to get there).
Source: Send SMAIL to ST1030.
Via U.S. mail (PLEASE enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope if you want a reply!), send your
questions to:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

And The Winner Is...
In our April issue (#27) we sponsored a tongue-in-cheek generic adventure game design
contest. For those of you that missed it, we repeat the details:

We were pleasantly surprised at the number of interesting submissions we received. However,
the two most interesting "adventures" came from the same person: Daniel Antolec of Monona,
WI. Unfortunately for Daniel, first prize in this contest was an all expense paid trip to Monona
Wisconsin! Tough break Daniel! Here are his two entries:

Entry #1
The Mayor's sister's third cousin's ex-father-in-law's
half twin has been kidnapped. For whatever reason you are
the only one who can save the kidnapped jerk. Although
your background as a cereal box label proofreader and
part-time atomic scientist indicate that you would be out
of your mind to go on this perilous quest, you go forth.
You are opposed by the evil downtown parking meter maid
who has sent, to attack you, armies of evil creatures such
as terrible two year olds with runny noses and sticky lollipops, radioactive cannibalistic bag ladies wearing mismatched socks and pointy toed high heeled boots, and
overgrown mutant sonic eggplants from a distant invisible
parallel galaxy, vacationing for the summer. Along the way
you must figure out certain puzzles such as: making a DNA
molecular model to scale, using colored plastic beads; answering the question, "Why do doughnuts have holes?";
performing field sobriety tests for State Troopers in a
snowstorm while wearing bikini briefs and reciting the
preamble to the Constitution backward, in morse code.
Although you start your quest with only the clothes on
your back and a pocketful of Monopoly money, you can
buy such weapons as a model T45 super-magneto atomic
powered slingshot with night-sights, a +472 magic sword,
or a self-propelled mithril laced flyswatter with multiple
neutron bomb warheads, and eventually learn such magic
spells as: "Ye Olde Income Tax Evasionne",
"Transmutation To A Perfect Likeness Of Elvis Presley",
and "Magic Missiles Which Seek Out Editors Who Don't
Publish Your Contest Entry!".
In the end you are victorious and are ready to go into
Generic Adventure XXIV, etc.

Entry #2
The Holy Hoover Upright has been lost. For whatever
reason you are the only one who can find the lost vacuum
cleaner. Although your background as a tax advisor to Al
Capone, mechanical engineer for the Edsel and public
opinion consultant to the "let's Make A Susan 13. Anthony
Dollar Coin Committee" indicates that you would be out of
your mind to go on this perilous quest, you go forth. You
are opposed by the evil Middle East arrogant madman fanatic (choose one) who has sent, to attack you, armies of
evil creatures such as wimpy overstuffed plastic garbage
bags which leak disgusting smelly liquid all over your feet
when you try to carry them to the curb on Wednesday
mornings, mutant Berserker little old ladies with tiny nervous yippy dogs that like to bite you in the calf, and acnefaced Neanderthal drug crazed teenage grocery bag packers
who always put the carton of eggs under the watermelon.
Along the way you must figure out certain puzzles such as,
"Why are baseball players paid more than the President?",
"Does it make a noise when fish burp underwater?", and
"Why are Superbowl game winners called 'world champions', when they never play teams from another country?".
Although you start your quest with only the clothes on
your back and a checkbook from an overdrawn account,
you can buy such weapons as a slightly used Sgt. York antiaircraft defense system, missile resistant plastic garbage
can cover +1 shield, and a bag of colored Bozo the clown
water balloons, and eventually learn such magic spells as:
"Read Physician's Handwriting", "Understand Auctioneer's
Speech", and "Believe Politician's Promises".
In the end you are victorious and are ready to go onto
Generic Adventure Meets Godzilla, etc.

MACINTOSH WINDOW

Frank Boosman
In this issue we look at two interesting simulations. In the case of Orbiter, from Spectrum
Holobyte, the subject is a flight on a Space Shuttle,
from pre-flight checks at Kennedy Space Center to
roll-out at Edwards Air Force Base. Flight Simulator, written by Sublogic and distributed by Microsoft, puts you behind the controls of a Cessna, a
Lear Jet, or a World War I fighter.

TO SLIP THE SURLY BONDS OF EARTH
Have you ever been playing a computer or arcade game with a space motif and thought to
yourself, "Wouldn't it be fun if there was a realistic
space game? Say, a game about the Space Shuttle?"
If you have, or if your childhood dream was to
become an astronaut, then you'll definitely want to
look at Orbiter, Spectrum Holobyte's new Shuttle
simulation. In it, you can climb into the crew compartment of your very own Shuttle; launch yourself
into space; deploy, retrieve, and repair satellites;
take spacewalks in the Manned Maneuvering Unit
(MMU), land safely (or perhaps not, depending on
your skill), and more.
Orbiter works somewhat differently from most
Macintosh applications; instead of overlapping windows, it has four tiled windows, each taking up
one-quarter of the screen. One of the windows is
always an overview of the Shuttle's instrument
panels; you can zoom in on a particular section by
clicking on it and then the quadrant of the screen
you'd like it to be displayed in. The full complement of instruments is available: you can control
your engines, operate the Manipulator Arm, check
your position over the Earth, and even run preloaded programs on the Shuttle's computer system.
Most of the controls are easy to operate and quite
intuitive; a notable exception was the control for
the Manipulator Arm. I found myself growing quite
frustrated while trying to use it, and I'm sure that
had I been operating the real thing, I would have
thoroughly destroyed it. Luckily, the designers of
Orbiter provide a control to automatically grab
nearby objects with the Arm, sparing players from
the necessity of operating it manually.
As I said, Orbiter starts with pre-flight checks at
Kennedy Space Center, although you can also begin
the game in orbit or on landing approach. Mission
Control speaks to you, both literally and figuratively, talking you through pre- and in-flight sequences. One of the Shuttle CRTs available for
viewing can be configured to display messages from
Mission Control; optionally, your Macintosh will
speak these messages, a nice touch. A list of corn-

puter programs which can be run on the Shuttle is
provided in the manual; before liftoff, Mission
Control will instruct you to execute some of them
to prepare the Shuttle for launch. You will also
need to adjust certain controls both before and
during flight. Your Macintosh will rumble as you
start your engines and clear the tower. Within a few
minutes, you'll be in orbit, and ready to accomplish
your mission.
Like the astronauts, you too can work in shirt
sleeves as you move to the rear instrument panel,
where you can observe your cargo bay, use the
Manipulator Arm, and check and deploy your payloads. If you like, you can suit up in the MMU and
fly outside of the ship. Your mission will vary from
flight to flight; you may find yourself deploying a
secret military payload, the Space Telescope, or
even rendezvousing with a space station. Future
missions may be more military-oriented; your
Shuttle is equipped with laser weapons.

How is Orbiter as a simulation and as a game?
As a simulation, it's excellent. The people at Digital
Illusions--the designers of Orbiter--put a lot of
thought and detail into their game. It has been said
they wore out more than one copy of The Space
Shuttle Operator's Handbook during the design of
Orbiter, and that rings true. The Shuttle is replicated on the Macintosh with incredible accuracy. If
you're a budding astronaut, you could do a lot
worse then play this game until you know it inside
and out. About the only thing missing from Orbiter
that's on the real Shuttle is the zero-gravity toilet.
When it comes to looking at Orbiter as a game,
though, things get a bit more difficult. As strange
as it may seem, a lot of flying the Shuttle is boring--a lot of pushing buttons, running computer
programs, and the like--and it shows. Much of
your game time will be spent watching the Shuttle
fly itself. Of course, you can learn to fly the Shuttle manually, but if you do, let NASA know: I'm
sure they have a position available for you. Orbiter
is not a grip-the-sides-of-your-seat, sweat-running-down-your-forehead game. But if you really
want to know how the Space Shuttle works or re-

live some of your childhood fantasies, then Orbiter
is just the ticket.
Before I move on to the next game, I would like
to say something about Spectrum Holobyte: I commend them for releasing Orbiter without copy protection. It's a big step for them, and an important
experiment for the computer gaming industry. Orbiter is now one of only three major
non-copy-protected games I know of; the others are Macinooga Choo-Choo, reviewed here last month, and
NFL Challenge, which (currently) is only for the
IBM PC. If enough people support Spectrum
Holobyte in their test, we may see many more
games without copy protection. Meanwhile, write or
call the other major Macintosh game manufacturers--Electronic Arts, Mindscape, and the like--and
tell them you would like to see them remove copy
protection from their games. And no, I'm not going
to preach to you. You already know what kind of a
person you are.
DARING YOUNG PEOPLE
AND THEIR FLYING MACS
Many people have called Flight Simulator (FS)
the most successful computer game ever produced.
This may or may not be true, but certainly FS is at
least one of the most successful. In any case, it
seemed like it would only be a matter of time before a Macintosh version would be released. The
time is here. How much use has Sublogic made of
the Macintosh's high-resolution screen and highspeed 68000 processor? The answer is...
Quite a bit, actually. After playing FS on an
IBM, an Apple //e, and now a Macintosh, I can tell
you that playing the Macintosh version makes me
feel as if FS has finally been unleashed. Instruments that were once fuzzy and indistinct are now
clear and readable; the old reliable Cessna has been
joined by a Lear Jet; excellent digitized sound is
sprinkled throughout; and best of all, instead of
small amounts of wire-frame scenery, there's lots
of scenery, and it's all solid-looking and shaded.
Another plus for FS is its excellent documentation; you get a thick, typeset manual (similar to
Microsoft's manuals for Excel and the like), along
with a quick reference card. The manual teaches
the basics of flight, including some of the complexities of modern flight, and it also includes
nicely-done aviator-style maps of all the flying
areas defined on the disk. Were all game manuals
this good!
Of course, FS has its faults as well. While playing it on my 512K Mac, I encountered more than

one system crash, although never in the middle of a
flight. Also, unlike Orbiter, FS is heavily copyprotected, although a provision is made for making
one backup copy. Perhaps its worst fault, though, is
the non-standard system routines. Menus, windows,
and dialog boxes look and work differently than on
other Macintosh programs, and not for the better.
Apparently, Sublogic wrote their own system routines to facilitate easy transfer of FS code to different machines (such as the Amiga and Atari ST),
and their routines really dim in comparison to the
standard Macintosh routines. There isn't much of
an excuse for this; Sublogic should have taken the
time to customize FS for the Macintosh.
As a game, FS is exciting. Flying beneath the
Golden Gate Bridge was a big thrill, and really had
me sweating. FS wins as a simulation as well; the
flight characteristics of the Cessna and Lear Jet
seem realistic, and the instrumentation is complete.
Since I have little space left I'd like to say
something about the difference between reviewing
a game from a relatively small company (such as
Spectrum Holobyte) and reviewing a game from a
large company (such as Microsoft). When I needed
a copy of Orbiter for review purposes, I called
Spectrum Holobyte and was connected to an extremely pleasant lady by the name of Karen Sherman; not only did she give me all the information I
needed, but she expedited a copy of Orbiter to me
so you could read about it in this issue. When I
needed information about FS, though, it was a
different story. I first called Sublogic, who developed the game. The lady in marketing whom I was
put in touch with told me that since Sublogic had
sold the game to Microsoft, I should talk with
them, and besides, she hadn't even seen the version
herself. Calling Microsoft was a mistake; I talked to
three separate people before having my number
taken and being told my call would be returned.
Now my review is due and my phone still hasn't
rang, which means you don't get the information I
was trying to get. And here you thought reviewing
games was fun!
KEEPING IN TOUCH
I encourage your comments. You, the reader,
can help me to make this column as good as it can
be. You can write to me at: 4568 Georgia St. #2,
San Diego, CA 92116. Or you can reach me at the
following electronic addresses:
MCI Mail: fboosman
BIX: frankb
Until next month, keep playing those games!

Atari Playfield

Gregg Williams
Summer is usually a lazy time, but I've certainly
been busy with a lot of Atari 800 and ST software.
It's early June as I write this, and all the major
vendors are promising 'Really Neat Stuff' at the
impending Summer Consumer Electronics Show. Of
course they won't divulge any details, but several
big game companies are promising translations of
their bestselling titles to the Atari ST.
Silent Service
Sid Meier's designer's notes on Silent Service,
MicroProse's WWII submarine simulation, in the
March, 1986 issue of CGW piqued my curiosity, so
I got a copy and started playing it. Naturally, I take
such glowing reports with a grain of salt, but, after
playing with this game for many hours, I have to
admit that this game really works. In fact, it's one
of the best simulations I've ever seen, providing
that magical and usually unobtainable mix of high
playability and authenticity. Though I'm not overly
interested in conventional wargames, this one, with
its mix of wargame and real-time graphics elements, continues to hold my interest. Add to that
twelve scenarios of three different complexity levels, seven different "reality level" choices, four
different skill levels, and a detailed but readable
manual, and you have a game that always has
something to offer.
The game is a sophisticated simulation of U.S.
submarine activity in the Pacific during World War
II. You control your submarine through keyboard
and joystick activity and (simplifying a bit here)
four different screens: the map (which summarizes
all your knowledge of your and your enemy's positions), the bridge (where you can visually sight
enemy ships if your ship is on the surface), the
periscope (visual sighting plus additional data while
your ship is no more than 44 feet underwater), and
the instrument panel (which monitors 15 different
variables, including such important things as how
many torpedo tubes are ready and how far you are
above the ocean bottom). You can zoom in or out
on your map, showing your sub and any sighted
enemy ships (or their last reported position) at one
of four levels, ranging from a 5-by-8-mile closeup
to the entire Western Pacific.

Your mission in this game is to find and destroy
as many Japanese troop, oil, and cargo ships as
possible while avoiding being destroyed by the
Japanese destroyers that are (usually) escorting the
ships to their destination. Submarines can be devastating when they have the element of surprise.
But, once surprise is gone, they are vulnerable
vessels that can suddenly change from hunter to
hunted. So your role as captain is to decide how
and when best to attack so as to maximize your
destructive capacity while minimizing the risk to
your ship and crew. This is a difficult task that involves simultaneously monitoring your environment,
maneuvering, and trying to outguess the enemy. It's
not easy!
One of Silent Service's best features is the threeleveled structure of scenarios that allows you to
"ease into" the simulation without too much anguish. The first level is Torpedo/Gun Practice,
which gives you four old cargo ships to shoot at;
this gives you a chance to learn your way around
your ship without enemy ships coming after you.
The second level, Convoy Actions, gives you six
short historical scenarios of limited scope and increasing difficulty and danger; think of them as
"day trips." The first, for example, has you hunting
down an unprotected but moving ship in daylight;
the next-to-last has you attacking a guarded convoy
at night.
The final scenario level is the most detailed and
most satisfying: the Patrol Scenarios. Like the Convoy Actions, they simulate historical situations in
the 1942-1944 period (each year brought subtle but
important changes, like better torpedoes and ship
hulls). Here, though, your objective is more openended: patrol a given section of the Pacific theatre
and find and sink as much tonnage of enemy shipping as possible. These scenarios usually last over a
month and have two alternating phases: a patrol
phase, where you move your sub across the Pacific
at a rate of about four (real) seconds per (game)
Continued on pg. 41

Atari Playfield (cont.)

(Cont. from pg. 38)
day, looking for Japanese craft; then the combat
phase, which is similar to a Convoy Action. I'm
still not doing too well on those--it's frustrating to
find potential targets, only to lose them because
they can move faster than you can.
One of the most interesting problems this game
has solved is that of the time scale. Submarines
could go for weeks without sighting the enemy,
then stay up 36 hours fighting one or more protracted battles. Mr. Meier's elegant solution is the
accelerated time of the patrol phase and, during the
combat phase, the ability to speed up the time scale
by up to four times faster than "real time." This
solution allows you to experience the scope of a
campaign without sacrificing playability.
The graphics and sound are better than average
and support the illusion of realism. Our thanks go
to Mr. Meier and to Randall Masteller, who did a
good job of the Atari translation. Overall, this is an
excellent game and a good buy.

Short Reviews
Remember the old Star Trek games, with
10-bygridsofpace,tkrsnd"Kfo
Klingons, where the game wasn't real-time and you
could ponder each move at your leisure? Okay,
imagine such a game, but with sound, limited
graphics, more commands, color displays, and a
long-range scenario that makes the development of
your character as long a process as it is in Wizardry--now you have Star Fleet I, newly translated
for the Atari 800 ($49.95, from Cygnus, P.O. Box
57825, Webster TX 77598; (713) 486-4163). It looks
well done and may be the kind of game you're
looking for.
If you're in the mood for some inexpensive,
relatively good circa-1983 video fun, you might
consider Smash Hits #1, 2, or 3 ($16.95 from Big

Ben Games, 1765 Maple St., Suite 4, Northfield IL
60093; (312) 251-8668). Each contains five arcade
or adventure games, which they claim are hit games
from England. I bought set #1 and was pleased
with two out of five of the games: Firefleet is
vaguely similar to Caverns of Mars, and Dan
Strikes Back has problem-solving elements that remind me of Lode Runner. Five arcade games for
under $20 (including postage)--not a bad deal, really.
Next Month
So many games, so little space! Next issue I'll
cover: the Atari 800 version of Star Raiders II,
from Atari (good but not great); Orbit (looks good)
and Colourspace (a great light show), both Atari
800 recreations from Antic Software, and the 800
and ST versions of Music Studio, from Activision
(also good but not great). Until then, remember-one-seventh of your life is spent in Mondays.

Over There!

By Leslie B. Bunder
Hello and welcome again to Over
There!, the column that gives you all the
latest news, views and gossip coming out
of England.
Thanks to all of you who have written.
Your comments and opinions are most
welcome. If you should happen to write an
interesting letter I might even get a piece
of the latest English software sent over to
you.
Letters should be addressed to: Leslie
B. Bunder, 50 Riverside Close, Cuckoo
Ave., Hanwell, London, W7 1BY, England.
If you wish a personal reply, enclose two
international reply coupons and I'll drop
you a line from England very quickly. I am
glad to hear that you readers out there are
enjoying my column, there is so much very
good software now coming out of England
that should be seen. In fact, I'll go as far
as to say, that at the moment, English
software leads the world. Why not let me
know what you think about that statement. Do you agree or do you disagree?
As you may have already gathered
from reading past copies of Over There!,
English software houses are obsessed with
producing software that is licensed from
films, books, pop groups, etc. I am not so
sure if this is good or bad, what do you
think? You may remember, a while back
the game Back To The Future produced
by Electric Dreams (part of Activision(UK)) was given Game Of The Month,
well I hear it is not to be released in
America, I do not know the full reason but
it seems very silly considering the film was
a box office smash, and would sell very
well as a computer game in the States.
Anyone from Activision (USA) want to
answer this? I am most interested to hear
from you.

GAME OF THE MONTH
Two different games get the nod as
Game Of The Month this time.
The first is Way Of The Tiger produced by Gremlin Graphics.
You play the role of Avenger, a Ninja
warrior, and must battle against the evil
forces that exist.
There are three types of fighting: Pole
Fighting, Unarmed Combat, and Samurai

Sword Fighting. Each type of fighting
features different backdrops and scrolling
effects and is a real enjoyment to watch.
The animation is possibly the best I
have yet seen on any home computer and
this game has set the standard for others
to follow.
The Way Of The Tiger was developed
on the role playing books of the same
name. My advice is simple, check out this
game as quick as you can. The Way Of
The Tiger runs on the Sinclair Spectrum
48/128, Amstrad, MSX and Commodore
64/128.
My other Game Of The Month is
Uridium from Hewson, if you like fast
shoot'em up games containing excellent
graphics and breathtaking gameplay, then
you should check out Uridium. Uridium
runs on the Commodore 64/128.

NEWS, VIEWS AND GOSSIP
'Tubular Bells', the album composed
by Mike Oldfield has been turned into a
Software program by CRL. The program
runs on the Commodore 64/128 and features over 25 minutes of non-stop music.
A commodore 128 version of The
Rocky Horror Show is all set for release
from CRL. The game features high quality
graphics and the plot of the game is very
closely connected with the film and play.
Guess what was voted 'Game Of The
Year' by the judges of the British Micro
Awards: A game called Jet Set Willy 2 - a
mediocre copy of 'Manic Miner' and feature graphics that were popular 4 years
ago.
There are quite alot of 'Marble Madness' style games now released in England.
First off was Gyroscope from Melbourne
House running on Sinclair Spectrum
48/128, Amstrad and Commodore 64/128.
Then came Spindizzy from Electric
Dreams running on Amstrad, Commodore
64/128 and Sinclair Spectrum 48/128, and
finally is 'Quazatron' from Hewson running
on the Sinclair Spectrum 48/128.
'Quazatron' is a real addictive game and a
favorite of mine.
Once voted as one of the worst movies
of all time, Attack Of The Killer Tomatoes
is now a computer game, which is quite
good. It is produced by Global Software
who promise to release some more games
based on awful movies including the classic
The Wild Women of Wongo. Hopefully,
the games are better than the film, it can't
be any worse.
Ever wanted to take part in some of

the games they played in medieval times in
England. Well, if you do you can courtesy
of English Software with Knight Games
running on the Commodore 64/128. You
can take part in 8 events including Swordfighting, Archery and Crossbow. Great
graphics and atmospheric music make this
an excellent and worth having game.
O.K., now is the time to spill the beans
on the English software house who will be
producing some sort of adventure or arcade game based on the best selling book
The Hunt For Red October. I've been
trying to get an 'official' confirmation on
this information, but I've managed to
narrow down the field to a few software
houses who could market it. They are,
Domark, Electric Dreams/Activision,
Ocean/US Gold or Mosaic. My guess is
Domark as when I questioned MD
Domonic Wheatley (a relative of the author of the same name) he said "We've expressed just an interest in the book, nothing more than that". Watch this space for
further information. Remember you read it
first in Over There!/Computer Gaming
World.
Lots of games are being released for
the Commodore C16 and plus 4. There are
two major Software houses producing good
software for it: Anco and Tynesoft. If you
want further information about their software write to them enclosing two international reply coupons at the address given
below.
Have you ever had an urge to fly a
Harrier aircraft, well now it is possible if
you've got an Atari ST or Commodore
64/128, as Mirrorsoft have produced Strike
Force Harrier.
Spitfire 40 is a flight simulator with a
difference. You control and fly the plane
the RAF used to save England against the
AXIS powers. Spitfire 40 from Mirrorsoft
runs on the Commodore 64/128, Atari
XL/XE and Atari ST.
Rebel Planet the fighting fantasy book
is now an adventure produced by US Gold.
Running on Commodore 64/128 and Sinclair Spectrum 48/128.
As mentioned a while ago, Scobby Doo
should be out shortly from Elite watch out
for this game which features the adventures of the lovable dog.
Here is some exclusive and hot news
surrounding pop star Simon Le Bon, lead
singer of Duran Duran and part-time
sailor. I hear that a large well known English software house have the rights to
turn the 'Whitebread Around The World
Yacht Race' into some sort of simulation
game for all home computer (e.g. Com-

modore 64, Atari, etc.) and that Simon Le
Bon may take an active role in the development of this project as some sort of
consultant. Remember, you read it here
first.
A computer game based on the classic
James Bond film Live and Let Die should
be out very shortly from Domark.
Watch out for Dungeons and Dragons
style game called Heavy On The Magick
from Gargoyle Games. The game features
large colourful and animated graphics with
over 100 locations. The game runs on
Commodore 64/128, Amstrad and Sinclair
Spectrum 48/128. Check it out.
World Cup Carnival is the official
World Cup Soccer Game and is from US
Gold. running on Commodore 64/128,
Commodore C16, Commodore Plus 4,
Amstrad and Sinclair Spectrum 48/128.
Just about every sport and pastime
has been turned into a computer game.
well now volleyball has been turned into a
computer game from Mastertronic and it's
been called Volleyball. The game is quite
nice and the price is really excellent value
for money at about 3 dollars. Runs on
Commodore 64/128.
The arcade classic Ping Pong by Konami has been turned into a computer version by Imagine. Ping Pong runs on Commodore 64/128, Amstrad and Spectrum.
Electric Dreams (they of Back To The
Future) have teamed up with their parent
company Activision in order to get some
licenses for some forthcoming movies.
Some of the movies include Aliens which is
the follow up to the successful Alien film
and the follow up film to the smash
Ghostbusters.
I hear that Activision tried to get
Michael Jackson to endorse a game based
on him, the only thing was, was that
Michael Jackson wasn't very impressed
with the way the folks at Activision
planned to do the game.
If you've got a Commodore 64/128 and
are looking for a compilation tape of the
finest games around in one package, then
Four Zap Sizzlers from Gremlin Graphics
could be for you and give you an introduction into English computer gaming.
The four games are Who Dares Wins 2' an
excellent Commando style game, Wizards
Lair a arcade/adventure style game which
though nothing special is O.K., Drop Zone
a fun to play defender style game and finally Thing On The Spring a jolly jumping
game featuring some excellent music.
I thought you might be interested to
know how much SSI games such as Combat Leader, Tigers In The Snow, etc., have

an retail price of about 15 dollars on tape
and about 25 dollars for disc. quite a bit
cheaper don't you think?
Winter Games, Dam Busters, Pole Position, Spy Hunter etc., have been converted to run on such computer machines
as Sinclair Spectrum 48/128, BBC, Amstrad. These conversions are done by a
large Software house called US Cold.
The Hobbit, the blockbusting and best
selling adventure program based on
Tolkien's famous book will be re-released
by Melbourne House. Originally released
nearly three years ago, The Hobbit quickly
established itself as a high quality program. New versions of The Hobbit are to
be released for machines including the
IBM PC, Apple and Amstrad 8526. As an
introduction to adventure playing, The
Hobbit is the adventure you should buy.
Another new release from Melbourne
House is 'Bop n' Wrestle'. I mentioned this
game a few months ago under its original
English title of Rock n' Wrestle. Well,
Melbourne House is now releasing this
game for more computers including Apple,
Atari and IBM PC. Watch out for these
when they cross the Atlantic.
Another release for the Amstrad 8526
from Melbourne House is The Lord Of The
Rings again based on Tolkien's book of the
same name. One reason why it has being
released on the 8526 is because this is
currently Britain's fastest selling computer
and also it is doing very well in the States
through the department store, Sears.
Commodore VIC 20 owners might be
interested to know that there is a new release form Llamasoft for it. Entitled Viva
Vic this is a collection of 8 new games for
the VIC 20 with 8k or 16k.

COMPETITIONS
I have a few competitions you can enter this issue.
First off, I have 50 very large and exclusive posters from a Software House
called Level 9. Level 9, specializes is producing very good and high quality adventure programs. They could be said the English version of Infocom. In order to get
your Level 9 poster, all you have to do is
write to the following address enclosing
two international reply coupons and you'll
get the posters by return post.
Level 9 Posters, 50 Riverside Close,
Cuckoo Ave., Hanwell, London,W7 1BY,
England.
I have a couple copies of World Cup
Soccer from MacMillan to give away.
World Cup Soccer is both a simulation of

the sport and also a database on every
World Cup match that has taken place.
All you have to do is answer the following
question.
When was the last year England won
the World Cup?
Send your answers to:
MacMillan Competition, 50 Riverside
Close, Cuckoo Ave., Hanwell, W7 1BY,
England. The first two correct answers win
the game which is for the Commodore 64
and is on tape. So get your answers in fast.
Letter of the Month is from Barry Bilicki, so he wins a game for his Commodore
128. So why don't you do what Barry did
and write me a letter, you never know, you
may win a prize.

SOFTWARE HOUSES
Please don't forget, that when you
write to these Software houses for information concerning their products, enclose
two international reply coupons. Otherwise, it is very unlikely that they will reply
to you. Also, when you write don't forget
to mention that you saw their name and
product in 'Over There!' in CGW.
Remember, if you are having any difficulty with any English software houses,
you can write to me and I will then look
into the matter for you. Here is the list:
GREMLIN GRAPHICS, Alpha House,
10 Carver Street, Sheffield, S1 4FS, England.
HEWSON, Hewson House, 56b Milton
Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, OXON,
OX14 4RX, England.
CRL, CRL House, 9 Kings Yard, Carpenters Road, London, E15 2UD, England.
MELBOURNE HOUSE, 60 High
Street, Hampton Wick, Kingston Upon
Thames, Surrey KT1 4DB, England.
GLOBAL SOFTWARE, PO Box 67,
London, SW11 IBS, England.
ENGLISH SOFTWARE, 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester,
M60, England.
ANCO, 85 Tile Kiln Lane, Bexley,
Kent, England.
TYNESOFT, ADDISON INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, Blaydon On Tyne, Tyne
and Wear, England.
MIRRORSOFT, Purnell Book Centre,
Paulton, Bristol, BS18 5LQ, England.
ELITE, Anchor House, Anchor Road,
Aldridge, Walsall, WS9 8PW, England.
LLAMASOFT, 49 Mount Pleasant,
Tadley, Hants, England.
US GOLD, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham, B7 4LY, England.

Commodore Key (cont.)

(Cont. from pg. 44)
We must identify the country, it's capital, language,
currency and population. And then it is off for another spin.
I found both of these games to be excellent
learning tools. The graphics of Maps USA are very
simple, the graphics of World Geography are more
elegant.
The C64 Lives On and On
More Commodore C64s have been sold than any
other home computer. [Ed. note: 3.5 million
C64/128s have been sold according to Commodore]
The C128 is very popular. Most C64 owners upgrade to it, because it remains compatible with
their existing software, yet offers a more powerful
BASIC and operating system for a small additional
cost. Be this the case, Commodore has not been
able to shut down the C64 assembly line. In fact,
the C64 has just been repackaged in a grey tone
case that is very similar to the C128 (but alas,
without a number key pad).

The C64C, as it is called, will be priced slightly
more than the old style C64, but will come bundled
with two extras. One is the GEOS program. GEOS
is loaded from disk and "replaces" the standard C64
operating system with one that is ICON and
MOUSE (a joystick will work) oriented. The use of
the C64C is now very similar to using an
Amiga/Mac/GEM system. You have access to some
very sophisticated file handling, a calculator and
notepad. WRITE & DRAW programs that function
separately can be used to merge the output from
each to a single printed output sheet. They both
operate on the current popular feature of "
what-you-see-is-what-you-get". This means that you
work on a full output page (actually only a portion
of it is displayed). What you see it on your screen
is as it will appear when printed. No special characters for options appear on the display. There are
several very nice fonts available. The draw program
is very powerful.
GEOS uses icons and pop-down menus. Every
file is saved with date-and-time and an optional
file description. The disk directory can be displayed
with icons, or sorted by name, size, or date created.
GEOS operates best with two disk drives, but having only one is not a significant problem. GEOS
comes "free" with the new C64C, but may also be
purchased separately for about $60.
The second extra that is with the C64C comes
on the flip-side of the GEOS disk (and can be selected from a GEOS menu). This is the software to
access Q-Link, the nation's largest Commodore only
(C64/C128), network service. It provides access for
Commodore owners from all across the United
States using a local phone number (for most people). Q-Link offers direct communication conferencing, email, public domain software libraries,
message boards for all areas of computer interest
(including games). It features online two and more
player games with colorful graphics. Q-Link also
offers many other non-computer areas of online
access (news, movie reviews, special interest clubs,
trivia, encyclopedia, etc.). The software with the
C64C makes it all possible for a very reasonable
connect rate. (Look for a feature article on Q-Link
and the new Q-Link game system, Habitat, which
will appear in the August issue of CGW).
Since this new operating environment is loaded
from disk and not in the ROM the new C64C is
fully compatible with all existing software. If you
are within GEOS, a menu option lets you easily
return to the standard BASIC environment where
you can enter the familiar: LOAD "*",8,1 to load
any standard program.

RID #30 (Use Card at pg. 5)

On this page a number of
games are listed for evaluation.
When evaluating a game consider
such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?);
LIFE (does the game wear
well?).
For each game you rate, place
a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate
number. Leave blank any game
which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.

Cont. from pg. 25

`re-runs' with the same solution. Cinemaware interactive movies feature the look and fell of real
film, complete with closeups, zooms, and changes
in perspective. In addition to 'adult' themes, exciting arcade-style sequences keep the stories moving.
Characters move and gesture in rapid-action revolutionary 3D graphics and express a full range of
facial expressions. Character movement is virtually
unlimited; each one can move along the props and
other characters, as in live action. Cuts, pans and
closeups simulate a real movie experience. Professionally composed original music scores enhance the
player's enjoyment." Yes, like all press release copy,
the above overstates the facts, but not by much.
The end result may well be "breakthrough in computer gaming".
The first five titles (which will be available in
fourth quarter 1986) are Sinbad and the Throne of
the Falcon, The King of Chicago, S.D.I., and
Defender of the Crown. Available in the first quarter

of 1987 will be Star Rush, being developed by our
own Bruce Webster and famed science fiction
writer Jerry Pournelle.
Speaking of the 16-bit computers; keep your eye
on Firebird, the English software company that
gave us Elite. Their new Rainbird line of titles includes Pawn, an exciting adventure game presently
available for the Atari ST (coming soon for the
Amiga and "under development" for C-64, Mac,

Apple, IBM). The graphics are among the best in
the marketplace (the British have always been very
good with their graphics). Other titles in development and worth checking out are Tracker (C-64,
Atari ST, Mac, IBM), and Starglider (Atari ST, C64, Apple II).

ORIGINS GAMING CONVENTION
Traditionally a board game and adventure game
convention, Origins is embracing more fully each
year the computer game hobby. Over two dozen
computers were available for tournament play at
this year's show which was held at the Airport
Hilton in Los Angeles. In addition, the list of
computer game related companies at this basically
non-computer show was impressive: Avalon Hill
Game Co., Compuserve, Computer Gaming World,
Game Designer's Workshop (they released their new
Rommel game finally); Microprose; Overt Strategic
Simulations (Operation:Keystone); Steve Jackson
Games/Origin Systems, Strategic Simulations, and
Strategic Studies Group.
Steve Jackson Games announced the opening of
the Steve Jackson Games Computer Bulletin Board.
The board will contain news of the world of gaming in general and Steve Jackson games in particular. There is no membership fee. For further information set your modem to 300 baud, 8 bits, one
stop bit, no parity, and dial 512-447-4449.
Electronic Arts has endorsed The Adventure
Construction Set Fanclub started by Ken St. Andre.
The goal of the club is to accumulate a central library of ACS adventures that anyone can acquire at
the low price of $5 per adventure. Electronic Arts
recently sponsored a Design the Best Adventure
Contest for ACS owners. When the winners have
been determined, all submissions will be turned
over to Ken's ACS club. What a library of adventures he will have then.
Ken also produces an ACS Newsletter quarterly.
It reports on ACS news, club holdings, theory of
good ACS game design. The first two issues will
deal with efficient utilization of the ACS editor. If
you would like to get copies, send $1 per issue
number to Ken. To get more information about the
ACS Fanclub write to: ACS Fanclub, c/o Ken St.
Andre, 3421 E. Yale, Phoenix, AZ, 85008.

AMERICAN DREAM
Cont. from pg. 13
(results are kept in historical displays for reference).
Some basic hints to start you off:
Keep your customers satisfied. You increase
your market share by reinvesting profits in quality
control and research. With a product that stands
apart in the market, you can sell at or even slightly
higher than competitors and still increase your
profits.
But do not become complacent. As competitors
watch your success, you will have to maintain those
high standards or see your market shrink.
The end of the world is coming, so prepare for
it. The game ends after six years, so drop any long
term goals during the last year. Now you can cut all
budgets and bleed the company for short term
profits. You'll be long gone before these shortsighted results are truly felt. (This is one of the
more interesting aspects of the game -- examining
the effects of policies which many American businesses have followed of rewarding short term productivity and profit increases at the expense of long
term goals.)
There are some problems with the game. For
example, opening and closing factories is too easy
and cavalier. In the real world you can't shut down
& reopen factories month by month. Not to mention labor problems, there's no way you could close
a factory one month, then start 2 new factories a
few months later.
A more bothersome problem is that if you shut
down a factory by mistake, then reopen it in the
same turn, you incur all those costs, while it was
really a typing error.
You also can not save the game then continue
with it. You have to exit and start over. It takes
awhile to load a game, but even more painful is
you can't use the old adventure-game technique of
saving before making a chancy decision. The designer may have considered this a coward's option,
but many of us lack the time to play all games as
much as we'd like, so shortcuts are necessary. Thus
if you save a game, then continue it later, you must
save under the same name. There is a way around
this: Before starting, make a second copy of the
game files on data disk by typing, for example:
copy one.save steve.sav
copy player.dat steve.dat
Then play the game as before. Now when you
want to start over from a saved position, copy these
back:
copy steve.sav one.sav
copy steve.dat player.dat

This would be especially useful if it's being used
for management training where you would want to
try many alternate strategies
Throughout this review I have referred to
American Dream as a game. The publishers more
accurately call it a business simulator. This distinction between game and business simulator becomes
concrete when you look at the cost of the program.
At $50-60 this product would have a definite recommendation as a business game. But at its list
price of $125 the product may have been priced
out of the game market.
As a simulator, however, it is an outstanding
training tool, especially for data processors and line
managers for whom the program can give insight
into the broader aspects of businesses in which they
work. If you can afford the ticket price you are in
for an enjoyable and educational time when you
"play" American Dream.

Steve Estvanik is an independent microcomputer
consultant and freelance games designer. His games
include Incunabula, By Fire & Sword, Gulf Strike
(IBM version) and The Civil War for Avalon Hill.
His Air Traffic Controller game will soon appear
on CompuServe.

Checking in at 7.62 (tied for 4th), Battlegroup is
the only new addition to the strategy top 10. NAM
continues its slide (6.88#32). Game Designer's
Workshop gets on the list at #42 with Chickamauga
As predicted last issue Phantasie II dropped out
of the first spot in favor of Ultima IV. Not
predicted was Phantasie II's drop all the way to

14th place. These wild jumps can occur with games
that have not accumulated high numbers of
responses.
Wizard's Crown made a leap from 7th to 4th
with a upgraded 7.73 rating (again, the number of
responses is on the low end).

