June 1990

Number 72

Features
Scorpion's View: Origin's "Ultima VI"

11

Scorpia's Column Offers Hints and Criticism

Sneak Preview: "Keeping Up With Jones"

16
18
19

Accolade's "Gunboat: River Combat Simulator" 30
IBM Visits The Brown Water War / Brad Bombardiere

35

CGW's Adventure Game Expert Gives Hints

38

On Tandy Compatibility and Trackball Use

Star Games' "Rings of Medusa"
Action/Adventure on the Amiga / Douglas Seacat

The Great One Gets Greater

56

Top Ad Award Winners

58

CGW's Readers Honor The Advertisers

Avalon Hill's "Legends of the Lost Realm"
20
Role - Playing on the Macintosh / Dennis Owens
Game Technology in the Near and Far Future 24
High -Technology Text Adventures and Virtual Reality

CGW Test Lab: Tandy Compatibility

48

Bethesda's "Wayne Gretzky Hockey League Simulator"

Chris Crawford's "Balance of the Planet" / Chris Lombardi

Scorpion's Mail

Sierra's "Code-Name: Iceman"
The Navy's S.E.A.L.S. For Approval / Michael Chaut

Humor, CGW and You

Balancing The Planet

44

Gary Grigsby's "Second Front" from SSI / M. Evan Brooks

Sierra Races Forward With VGA / Johnny L. Wilson

New Column: Fits and Chips

Hitler Turns East

43

Tiglon's "Decision at Gettysburg"

60

A VGA Wargame / M. Evan Brooks

Departments
Taking a Peek
Editorial/Contest
Rumor Bag
Circuit Writer (Technical Notes)
Over There (European Games Report)
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Letters
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device

6
8
14
22
28
40
69
80
80

Taking a Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd. #200
San Jose, CA 95128
DAY OF THE VIPER: The Sun League
(the futuristic galactic defence alliance,
not baseball's spring training) is in bad
shape, and you are its only hope. It
seems that Gar, the mechanoid monster,
and his minions have threatened to
destroy all living organisms. Since you
are predisposed in favor of organic life
(being of that persuasion), your task is to
maneuver around the 25 floors of a
space station, seeking out critical floppies
to install and upload back to home base.
The point and click interface couldn't be
easier. The movement perspective is
point-of-view. Auto-mapping, auto-inventory and area scans help keep things
moving along and instant object identification helps players understand the
pieces of the puzzle. "Day of the Viper"
adds thought to a run-and-shoot game.
Atari ST and Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.
HARMONY: When they say you are challenged to relax while playing this game,

they aren't kidding about the challenging
part. Being taught stress management
through playing "Harmony" is like being
taught to swim by being throw into a
pool full of piranhas. Pushing the video
balls of like colors together (before they
explode, mind you!) while avoiding collisions with different colored balls (otherwise, collisions generate new, third color
balls that start ticking away) is the gist of
the game. Until the next harmonic convergence, orb it with "Harmony"! C64R 28 ($29.95); Amiga, IBM ($44.95).
Circle Reader Service #2.
Activision
P.O. Box 3048
Menlo Park, CA 94025
POWER DRIFT: This conversion of
SEGA's coin-op arcade game plays pretty
true to form. Players race along at break
neck speeds through five different rollercoaster tracks. Rest assured, however,
that the one with the joystick will not be
the only nut loose behind the wheel (the
competition is pretty wild). C-64 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #3.

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
WOLFPACK: From the heft of the box
(and the price tag), one would expect
another top-of-the-line submarine
simulator. Instead of the strategy/wargame simulation expected, "Wolfpack"
delivers more of a strategy/arcade game
(meaning the game is not as deep—forgive the pun). It does, however, have the
distinct advantage of letting players play
either the surface ship or the submarine.
"Wolfpack" is really something to look at
(with 256 color VGA and lots of sound
support), but it is something else again
to play. Care to take a dive? IBM
($54.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Data East USA, Inc.
1850 Little Orchard Street
San Jose, CA 95125
CHAMBER OF THE SCI-MUTANT
PRIESTESS: This game is well-constructed. It generates a healthy exercise
in adventure/puzzle solving and players
Continued on page 75

Editorial

It Can Happen Here

by Johnny L. Wilson

A

lthough Nobel Prize-winning

novelist Sinclair Lewis is probably
best known for Main Street, Babbitt, Elmer Gantry and Arrowsmith, my
personal favorites are It Can't Happen
Here and Kingsblood Royal. The latter is
an ironic narrative in which an individual
who suffers from racial prejudice toward
the black population discovers, through
genealogical research, that he himself
has black ancestors. The protagonist experienced a life-changing discovery that
enabled Lewis to preach a gospel of civil
rights to his readership.
The former is, perhaps, Lewis' most
lengthy novel and it tells how a radio
evangelist was able to use the issues of
morality and national security to forge a
popular mandate and create a fascist dictatorship in the United States. As Lewis
showed how patriotic symbolism could be
distorted by a power-hungry elite and
religious fervor channeled into a political
movement, I was personally shaken. As a
high school student, reading this novel
for the first time, I suddenly realized what
Lewis intended for his readers to realize,
"it" (a dictatorship) really can happen
here. There is an infinitessimally fine line
between protecting the interests of
society and encumbering the freedoms of
that self-same society in the name of that
protection.
Now, it appears that the civil liberties of
game designers and gamers themselves
are to be assaulted in the name of
protecting society. In recent months, two
unrelated events have taken place which
must give us pause: the raiding of Steve
Jackson Games' offices by the United
States Secret Service and the introduction of A.B. 3280 into the California State
Assembly by Assemblyperson Tanner.
On March 1, 1990, Steve Jackson
Games (a small pen-and-paper game
company) was raided by agents of the
United States Secret Service. The raid
was allegedly part of an investigation into
data piracy and was, apparently, related

to the latest game supplement from SJG
entitled, GURPS Cyberpunk (GURPS
stands for Generic Universal Role-Playing
System). GURPS Cyberpunk features
rules for a game universe analogous to
the dark futures of George Alec Effinger
(When Gravity Fails), William Gibson
(Neuromancer), Norman Spinrad (Little
Heroes), Bruce Sterling (Islands in the
Net), and Walter Jon Williams

(Hardwired).
GURPS Cyberpunk features character
skills related to breaking into networks
and phreaking (abusing the telephone
system). Hence, certain federal agents
are reported to have made several disparaging remarks about the game rules
being a "handbook for computer crime".
In the course of the raid (reported to
have been conducted under the authority
of an unsigned photocopy of a warrant;
at least, such was the only warrant which
was shown to the employees at Steve
Jackson Games), significant destruction
allegedly occurred. A footlocker, as well
as exterior storage units and cartons,
were deliberately forced open, even
though an employee with appropriate
keys was present and available to lend assistance. In addition, the materials confiscated included: two computers, an HP
Laserjet II printer, a variety of computer
cards and parts, and an assortment of
commercial software. In all, Steve Jackson Games estimates that approximately
$10,000 worth of computer hardware
and software was confiscated.
The amorphous nature of the raid is
what is most frightening to me. Does this
raid indicate that those who operate bulletin board systems as individuals are at
risk for similar raids if someone posts
"hacking" information on their computer
or does it indicate that "games" which involve "hacking" are subject to searches
and seizures by the federal government?
Does it indicate that "writing" about "hacking" exposes one to the risk of a raid? It
seems that this raid goes over the line of
protecting society and has, instead, vio-

lated the freedom of its citizenry. Further
facts may indicate that this is not the
case, but the first impression strongly indicates an abuse of freedom.
Then, there is the case of California's
A.B. 3280 which would forbid the depiction of any alcohol or tobacco package
or container in any video game intended
primarily for use by minors. The bill
makes no distinction between positive or
negative depiction of alcohol or tobacco;
does not specify what primarily designed
for minors means; and defines video
game in such a way that coin-ops, dedicated game machines and computer
games can all fit within the category.
Now, the law is, admittedly, intended to
help curb the use and abuse of alcohol
and tobacco among minors. Yet, the
broad stroke of the brush with which it is
written limits the dramatic license which
can be used to make even desirable
points in computer games. For example,
Chris Crawford's Balance of the Planet
depicts a liquor bottle on a trash heap as
part of a screen talking about the garbage problem. Does this encourage alcohol abuse? In Wasteland, one of the
encounters involves two winos in an
alley. Does their use of homemade white
lightning commend it to any minors that
might be playing the game?
One of the problems with legislating art
is that art is designed to both reflect and
cast new light and new perspectives on
life. As such, depiction of any aspect of
life may be appropriate, in context. Unfortunately for those who want to use the
law as a means of enforcing morality,
laws cannot be written to cover every context.
We urge our California readers to oppose A.B. 3280 and help defend our
basic freedoms. We urge all of our
readers to be on the alert for any
governmental intervention that threatens
our freedom of expression. "It" not only
can happen here, but "it" is very likely to
if we are not careful.

Scorpion's View
"Ultima VI" As Viewed By Scorpia

Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to be
able to provide this forum for her distinctive
and, sometimes, controversial perspective.

ooking

into my crystal ball, I see
. . . I see . . . hmmm . . . I see it
needs dusting again. Well, living
in a cave does have its disadvantages
occasionally. No matter. I don't need
a crystal ball to tell your future. You're
off to Britannia once more (as if you
hadn't already guessed).

L

the familiar interface, the graphics I
had come to know so well.
In their place were a small set of
streamlined commands, a completely
new interface, a "one size fits all"
world, and graphics so totally different
that I had to look at the box again to
be sure this was an Ultima. It took
me, in fact, several days to become
used to it all.

Sitting in your refurbished living
room, watching some dismal TV program, is hardly the life of an Avatar.
So, naturally, when a strange storm
comes out of nowhere, off you go to
the little ring of stones. What else
could this be but the usual summons
from Lord British?

Every character in the party is now
visible on the screen at all times, completely and clearly delineated, in a sort
of three-quarter, down-the-front view.
Roads meander into and through
towns at one end and out the other.
You know you're in one when buildings start to show up on the screen.

Of course, the red moongate that
rises may give you pause for thought,
but adventurers rarely pause for that.
So, off you go through the gate. In
no time at all, you're tied down to a
sacrificial altar, surrounded by a small
army of Gargoyles who are anxious to
rip out your heart. There's nothing
like imminent death to really capture
your attention.
Fortunately for you, your old buddies lob, Shamino, and Dupre pop in
through another gate and stave off
the Gargoyles long enough to get
you out of there and into Lord
British's throne room. Whew! Some
calls are a little too close for comfort.
After dispatching the few Gargoyles that
slipped in before the gate closed, you
learn what's gone wrong in the land this
time. Mainly, it's those Gargoyles. No one
is sure where they come from, what
they're up to (besides no good, of
course), or why they have taken over the
shrines of virtue. Lord British himself
doesn't much care. He just wants you to
get rid of them.
Simple, eh? Maybe just a little too
simple. There is certainly more here than

The wilderness is more detailed than
ever before and gives a better feeling
of being outdoors than any previous
Ultima. Part of this comes from the
enlarged graphics and part from
seeing the occasional deer, field
mouse, rabbit or snake going by.

meets the eye and the smart Avatar won't
go into the matter with preconceived notions. Out-of-hand slaughter will not provide the solution. A lot of information
(from Britannia and elsewhere) will have
to be uncovered before the true answer
is found.
I had some very profound, mixed feelings about this game. After five Ultimas
of established style and pattern, this one
came as a shock. Even knowing in advance it would be different was not
enough to prepare me for it. Gone were
the old alphabet-long list of commands,

Interiors are also larger, to stay in
proportion with the rest of the world.
Houses, shops, cellars, etc., tend to
be quite roomy. Dungeons are,
likewise, of giant proportions, although they don't go down as far as
in previous games (perhaps, just as
well) since four levels seems to be the
maximum depth.
Just about any object in the game can
be taken, moved, or manipulated,
whether it's a pair of pliers or a
grandfather clock, and there are a lot of
items out there. While you won't need
most of them for anything, the ability to
work with them is another part of the
"real world" feel of the game.
Each person you can talk to has a
separate, unique face graphic that comes
Continued on page 66

Rumor Bag

Los Angeles, they turn
down the thermostat in
Inthe U. S. District Court
chambers to a brisk temperature and the gray stone
facades on the walls convey
an ambiance which suggests
that one has already been
convicted and incarcerated
At least, I felt that way as the
Feds led me in handcuffed
and sat me at the
defendent's table.

The
Rumor
Bag

"Nothing to worry about,"
said my attorney, "they have
to prove you stole those
secrets and they've got a very
weak case."

by F. Walker Rosenberg

As the trial started, the
prosecution accused me of,
not only, stealing industry
secrets (I like to call it being
alert), but also of endangering national security. A steely-eyed federal
agent was their first witness. He claimed
that I had leaked the story about Larry
Holland's Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe, Lucasfilm's sequel to Their
Finest Hour, planned for Christmas,
1990. He acted like the information on
the celebrated "Batwing" and ME-262 on
the German side, as well as P-38, P-51
Mustang and other pursuit planes on the
Allied side, was still classified. Well, you
never know with the government, but I
do know that the game will be using a
full 256 color palette in the game.
He further stated that they had gotten
suspicious of me when an informer overheard me say something about my
familiarity with a Soviet Pilot. Why should
they be alarmed? I was only talking about
Electronic Arts' next flight simulator, tentatively scheduled for Fall release.
My attorney began to grill the agent
more thoroughly during the cross-examination. It turned out the steely-eyed
agent also had an affinity for those steel
marbles. He continuously rolled some of
them in his hand as he answered my
lawyer's questions. "I proved he knew the
secret code," he muttered, "he knew
about 'monkey island.' I searched his
hard disk." My lawyer asked him if he
might mean a reference to Lucasfilm's
The Secret of Monkey Island, Ron
Gilbert's upcoming graphic adventure
game about pirates using the latest version of the Maniac Mansion interface.
The agent rolled the marbles together
faster. "Then, how would he have known
the countersign, 'savage empire'?" he
questioned, "He had to have meant the
Soviet Union. We're not talking fantasy,
here!" The marbles clicked together even
faster when my attorney suggested that
Savage Empire was going to be the first
release in the Worlds of Ultima series
from Origin. He seemed unconvinced as

he was presented with documents indicating that the moongates used in Ultima
lead to other places in the multiverse. In
Savage Empire, adventurers find themselves in a world of prehistoric monsters. He
wasn't even convinced by the fact that Ultima characters like lolo and Shamino
will make cameo appearances in the new
game.
"I proved he knew the code," the agent
shouted, "he even knew about Project
Quasar!" Project Quasar? My attorney
leaned over and whispered as we conferred quietly together.
"My client," announced my "mouthpiece" to the court, "suggests that you
may be referring to Virgin
Mastertronic's Quasar, a real-time game
of space conquest which stresses both
resource management and military
strategy. Is it not possible that you are
speaking of an Amiga game which is currently under development?"
"Objection," thundered the prosecution,
"Counsel is leading the witness in an attempt to suggest that every bit of
evidence against his client is related to
computer games. No one can possibly
be this immersed in such a silly hobby."
The witness was excused and the case
continued with frequent recesses so that
the judge could consider various motions
in his chambers and so that we could
quaff a few bottles of mineral water.
There was one of those coin-op hockey
games in the cafeteria and I challenged
my counsel to a game. I beat him easily
and hoped this wasn't an omen regarding his courtroom performance. I told
him not to worry about the game. After
all, it wasn't a real simulation like Wayne
Gretzky Hockey or that real detailed
game under development in Canada. It
seems that Strategy First, a Canadian
developer, has been researching an NHL

simulation for a couple of years
and is still shopping it about the industry.
My lawyer admitted that he didn't
usually play such games. He read
science fiction and had flown a
couple of flight simulators, but he
just hadn't found what he was
looking for, yet. I suggested that
Chris Roberts' Squadron: The
Space Combat Simulator from
Origin might be just what he
wanted. It is supposed to involve
teamwork and cooperation, as well
as individual pilot skill.
When the hearing resumed, the
prosecution rested their case. The
government's attorney had a wicked little smile on his face as he did
so. My attorney immediately called
me to the stand and asked me
what I thought of the proceedings.
I told him that they were unreal. In
fact, I told him that the charges
were also unreal and went on to state
that the entire thing reminded me of an
upcoming game called Unreal which will
be released by UbiSoft, the French
software company, later this year. I didn't
even have a chance to say that the action game would have great graphics and
offer some very interesting physical puzzles before the prosecution thundered a
loud, "Objection!"
In fact, he didn't even have a chance to
explain his objection before the judge
ruled, "Sustained! Witness is directed to
answer the questions only and refrain
from wasting the court's time with information with no bearing on the case."
My testimony continued and the time
for cross-examination arrived. I finally
found out why the government's attorney
had smiled earlier. "Mr. Rosenberg," he
began, "do you really expect this court to
believe that all of these incriminating references relate to computer games?" I
stated that the references were to computer games. "In that case," he continued, "explain to us how a recent
telephone call could have used the term
warmonger to refer to computer games."
I explained it as well as I could. Warmonger was a game due out in late summer from Bullfrog (developers of
Populous) and Electronic Arts. It is a
strategy game which uses realistic
graphics to depict the player as leader of
a primitive tribe which has just invaded
unfamiliar territory. The player must
balance the need for food versus the
need for defense (guns or butter?) and
the game can be played by up to four
players via direct connection.
Fortunately, the judge found me "Not
Guilty", but I get the impression that
there are now more "bugs" in my office
than those you find in beta versions of
computer games.

Sneak Preview

With Their New Multi-Player Family Game
And First Game With VGA Graphics,
Sierra Is Not Only

Keeping Up With Jones
But Trying To Forge Ahead
by Johnny L. Wilson
n order to peer into Sierra's immediate future, it may be necessary to visit the past. Remember
those days of old when only governments and huge corporations had
computers? Many families would
gather together in the evenings to
play boardgames like Careers,
Money, Money, Money and The
Game of Life. There was a sense of
togetherness, competition and
cooperation.

Keeping Up With Jones (Jones) is
a computerized tribute to those family games of old with lots of new
twists. Where the traditional
boardgames were driven strictly by chance, Jones is driven by
player-customized goals, a dynamic economic system with both
micro-economic and macro-economic effects simulated, and logical decision-making. It is further enhanced by a "racetrack" style
game board which has the rich feeling of an oil painting, digitized
animation to enliven some of the turn results, as well as random
events, and a musical soundtrack that offers distinctive themes
for each location and character.
The Secret of Your Success (Game Play)

Jones is a game for one to four players (including computer
players) in which each player defines his/her own particular idea
of success. Before the game actually begins, players are
presented with definitions (in game terms) of success in terms of:
Career, Education, Happiness and Money. Players set their individual goals and attempt to be the first player to reach their
goals.
On the first player turn, the player has the option of enrolling in
school or entering directly into the work force. The game features
nine different work locations, each with its own organizational
structure and "pecking order" of prestige and power. One can

move up at each location by virtue of
performance, education and ability.
There are also nine different educational institutions to attend which can
affect one's chances of "getting
ahead" or provide new challenges for
those who make Education their
primary goal.
During each turn, the player makes
time management decisions about
how he or she will spend their week.
One simply moves to the right location on the game board, clicks on
the location to reveal a menu of options, clicks to choose all the options
to be performed at that location for
the game week, and moves to the next location to repeat the procedure until the game clock (a dynamic icon located at the bottom of the screen which looks like a clock and turns red as time
is expended) runs out. Players go to school and/or work, purchase necessities and luxuries, invest in securities and, once in a
while, relax. Players who don't take the time to relax face two
potential problems: illness or a visit from "Wild Willy the Burglar".
Along the road to success, salaries, prices and investments will
fluctuate according to a micro-economy within the game itself.
However, this micro-economy is affected by such macro events
as a Wall St. scandal or oil crisis. The player learns of such events
by purchasing a newspaper. Then, news concerning major
events is flashed upon the screen via the typical '40s and '50s
cinematic approach of having a newspaper spin around and
around until it comes to rest and allows the viewer/player to read
the headline. About three-fourths of the way through production,
there were already more than 50 newspaper screens available
and more were expected.
Although the economy seems fairly simple to keep track of in
the course of the game, it functions in a fairly sophisticated way.
There is a wage-price spiral in operation and the decisions which
the players make in the course of a game actually affect what is
happening in the micro-economy. Further, the newspaper headlines offer hints about what should be purchased in the way of investments. The boardgames of old could not "chain"
economic/game factors together the way a computer game can
and Jones exploits this ability in creating a more realistic
economic environment.
In short, the game presents plenty of decision points for each
player in a simple, playable game. Players try to balance time and
money against possible purchases, investments and satisfaction.
The game ends when one of the players reaches the goals
he/she set at the beginning of the game. The game was
designed to be anywhere from an hour to three hours in length.
Since game length depends on the goals which the player set,
one must set lower goals in order to have a shorter game.

Sound Investment (Artistic Touches)
In addition to the lavish use of digitization in Keeping Up With
Jones, Sierra has invested quality resources in the musical
soundtrack. Ken Allen has written a musical score that offers
musical variety, establishes the "Yuppie" atmosphere the game is
designed to portray and offers some terrific musical puns, as well.
The theme song to Jones has the light bouncing rhythm one
would expect to hear for the opening of a situation comedy. It
also has an organ part that is reminiscent of The Doors in order
to place the game context in the right generation. Each player
will have a different musical theme that will play as they stroll
around the game board (It will even be personalized and selected
by the player if the design team can find enough room on the
disks.) and, in turn, each location has its own theme. The investment broker's theme is performed in a baroque style like the
hornpipe from Handel's "Water Music" (Get it, "Baroquer"?); the
unemployment office has telephone percussion in its theme; the
clothing store gets some great vibraphone work to indicate how
cool it is to wear their clothes; the pawn shop's theme expresses
ambivalent feelings and the fast food restaurant gets Barry
Manilow-style orchestration that builds up to the expected chord

graphics used on NBC: The First 50 Years. He is also the professional computer artist who handled the switches from animation
to live footage and back again for a popular Toyota commercial
nearly one year ago. Now, he is guiding a team of artists,
musicians, programmers and designers in creating a game which
they hope will capture more of the family market than any computer game has done previously.

How I Made My Fortune (History of the Game)
The history of Jones is somewhat fascinating. Sierra does not
usually purchase game designs developed outside their studios.
When the company's executives saw an EGA version of Keeping
Up With Jones that only had a portion of the present game's
framework, they got very excited about the game's potential.
They even booted up the simple EGA version and tested it out
on some couples who came over for dinner. When everyone who
looked at the game got hooked on it, Sierra knew it had a potential winner.
Still, the EGA version was not ready for prime time. It offered
neither commercially viable graphics nor the more flexible
gameplay of the current version. So, Sierra decided to buy Jones
change (I guess the composer needed a break, that day!). All of
which combines to enhance the gaming experience with a sense
of humor and whimsy.
In addition to the musical score, the graphic presentation of the
game is rather fascinating. Most of the static graphics were
painted in a similar style to the game board and digitized into the
game. The game board itself is a lavish painting, as are many of
the static items. The characters are animated from live models
and the animation itself is incredibly smooth.
That Jones, Sierra's first VGA product, offers a rich tapestry of
artistic touches should not be surprising, however. The producer
of the project is Bill Davis, an Emmy award-winner for the

lock, stock and barrel. They put Warren Schwader, designer of
Hoyle's Book of Games: Volume 1, on the project, and teamed

him with Bill Davis and Bill Skirvin. In addition, Sierra CEO Ken
Williams has been very involved with Jones from the beginning.
The Future's So Bright .. .
Sierra has been so successful in creating graphic adventures
that many of their competitors refer to their own efforts in graphic
adventures as "a Sierra-style product." Now, the successful publisher is beginning to take some creative risks in product types.
Keeping Up With Jones is part of the commitment. After seeing
this game, one really catches Ken Williams' vision of interactive
entertainment for everyone.

Humor

I dunno how this R.I.D. stuff
works...

Fits And Chips

I've been after Johnny or Chris or

somebody to tell me how games are
picked to be rated each issue. No
luck, though. I'm beginning to
suspect they have one of those little
fuzzy-ball dartboards set up somewhere—right next to the dusty boxes
of Computer Game Forum still stacked in the back room—and it has all
the names of the games stuck in
velcro on it or something.

by
Intrepid Media Critic, Dennis Owens

Anyway, I was just kicking into my
usual pitch for CGW (I'm not one of
the magazine's salespeople, but I
should get a commission as I pitch
this mag so much). The guy gave
some bogus answer for why they
won't carry magazines, and, suddenly, I latched on to what he was all
about.

Each month I dutifully sit down
and try to figure out how it was I
rated each game the previous
month... Let's see, did I give Ultima
V an "A-" or an "A"? Penguins of
Quendor!? What kind of game is
that?? Why haven't they rated Ultima VI, yet? The stores around here
have had it for weeks!

Slyly—because I'd just been playing
it that afternoon—I asked him, "Do
you know anything about The Keys
to Maramon?" (I hadn't seen it on
his shelves).

What's going on over there at
CGW? Someone testing Huxley's
hypothesis and have a bunch of
monkeys around there trying to
write the entire works of
Shakespeare?
You'd think with my "connections"
there I'd be able to find out. Maybe I
could even get a review copy of Ultima
' while I was at it.
No way.
I called the CGW secret phone number
one day (only given out to those who've
found all the solutions to Wizardry IV) to
find out the scoop, but no luck.
Chris blamed Evan; Evan blamed
Johnny. Johnny said, "Oh, Russ keeps all
the really neat software. It's, like, a publisher's perk, you know, dude." (I think
Johnny's been in California too long—
he's starting to "go native").
I'm beginning to think that Russ is really an Al program, though. I mean, who's
really seen that guy, anyway?
Show of hands?
Of course, everything would make
sense if Russ is the one deciding which
games get put into the R.I.D. rating section, wouldn't it? Maybe there's a bug in
the Al and... No. That's too scary to think
about.
I've been hearing about these computer
studies of Chaos Systems. (Mostly for the
military).
And, hey, wait a minute, there have
been a lot of reviews lately for military
games, haven't there?
Check out the Editorial in the May
issue. In fact, the May issue covered
everything from battling from a dragon's
back to fighting M-1 tanks!
Hey! I'm on to something! The real

I asked him typical questions. Do
you know anything about Breach 2?
What have you heard about military
subsidies of computer game
magazines? Do you have a cluebook
for Dragon Wars? That kind of
thing. (No smart-alecky comments
here, either. So I use cluebooks, too.
So what? Who do you think I am,
Scorpia?)

funding source behind CGW must
be--snrk. Mmfff. Pnntt.

(Ed: It is not the role of the editorial
staff to comment on policy; we carry
out policy. The current line of investigation and mindless speculation will only
be permitted to proceed if it avoids sensitive matters.]
Okay, okay. So there have been reviews
of military games as long as there's been
a CGW. This still supports my point,
though, because—owwWWW! Hey! The
arm doesn't bend that way, buddy!
All right, already!
Changing the subject!
Sheesh!
I'm outta' here!
It's off to my local software shop
("Bub's"). I was there recently—as I am
wont to do from time to time—just to
browse, to talk games, to smell the shrink
wrapping, and, while Bub and I were marveling about Hero's Quest I on the
Amiga and other hot new titles, Bub mentioned that a new store was opening
down the street.
Now, Bub knows me (unlike Russ, I've
seen Bub). I keep Bub's children in
braces with my purchases so that he
doesn't mind if I occasionally go scope
out a new scene. So, I hotfooted it over
there and scanned out the situation,
talked to this greasy-haired, pale-skinned
skinny dude who seemed to think he was
the manager, just to find out what the action would be.

His pale forehead crinkled as he
forged quickly into his banal, unscripted patter. "Oh, it's not out yet,"
he said. Bad breath. 'There's no
release date yet. You know how companies like to advertise before their
product's ready."
"Hmm. Okay. Thanks." I turned around.
Walked out. Vowed never to darken that
door again (at least, not until I'm
desperate).
What is it that makes these salesmen
either not know what they're talking
about or else not have the brains to simply admit that their distributors are slower
than a magic missile spell against 60 orcs
on an 8088 machine? I don't know. It's
probably related to the great Illuminati
plot to control the Wall Street Military Industrial Complex in this country.
Seeking answers, I read Psalm 9:1-2 (as
indicated among all that small print in
the CGW masthead). Well, it says nothing
at all there about the military. It's more
about thanking the Lord and exulting
and being glad.
Although, when you get to verse three:
"when my enemies turned back, they
stumbled and perished before thee."
Oh, hot The truth again! It will be told!!
I knew there was a connection between
the military and...
Ip! Erg! Ack!
Gakkk! .. .
Whew, when I finally reached CGW on a
secure line, I did talk to Russ. Or, at
least, a voice claiming to be Russ'.
They can digitize those things, you
know.
It might've even been an Ad Lib board!

Review

gravity and complexity of
the topics. Unfortunately,
the IBM graphics are a
straight port of the Macintosh graphics, apparently
colorized in the style of Ted
Turner's controversial
studio.

Piloting
Spaceship
Earth

Each of these screens
also lists the variables influencing the specific formula as well as the variables influenced by it. For
instance, the Starvation
screen lists world population and food supply as its
cause, and forest clearing,
overgrazing, population,
and starvation points as its
effects. Clicking on any of
these key words will call up
the corresponding screen.
In this way, the player can
trace through the myriad of
cause and effect relationships in order to understand and master them.
Macintosh users will probably find the interface to be
somewhat Hyper-textish.

Chris Crawford's
"Balance of
the Planet"
by Chris Lombardi

ow

many times have we heard
computer games extolled by game
designers for their artistic merit
and consciousness-altering potential?
"We are artists," they say. "We can
change the world with our artistic
medium, we can move mountains!" they
say. "Hrump!" most of us say, and get
right back to shooting down "Krauts" or
hacking up trolls.

H

Rarely does someone put their game
where their mouth is. Yet, Chris Crawford
(designer, editor, organizer of this and
that, as well as the most loved/hated man
in the game design biz) has designed his
latest game, Balance of the Planet,
around the hottest social issue to take
hold of the American consciousness in
quite a while.

Balance of the Planet is a simulation of
the environmental crisis. It covers the
whole mess, from recycling and acid rain
to oil spills, global warming, world starvation, and the third world's standard of
living. The entire morass of complex, interrelated issues is heaped upon the
player in the ultimate test of management skills, the ironman of crisis management.
In the fictional world of Balance of the
Planet, the United Nations has awakened
to the fact that the world is in trouble
and, as a result, has created a position
called High Commissioner of the Environment. The player holds this dubious title,
a title which carries a lot of weight. With

the title comes the power to levy taxes on
all environmentally damaging activities
and then, subsidize activities which may
benefit the simulated ecology. For example, as High Commissioner, the player
may choose to tax the crud(e) out of oil
use and use the revenues to subsidize
solar energy research. With this power,
the player has 40 years (8 game turns) to
slam the brakes on civilization's environmentally destructive slide and return the
planet to a more balanced state.
The Method Behind The Madness

Balance of the Planet consists of 150
graphic screens, each associated with
one of the game's 150 formulas. Each of
the screens contains a warm, cute illustration of the issue represented by the formula, along with a bar graph depicting
the change in the formula's value over
time. For instance, the Acid Rain screen
contains a picture of little imps throwing
pitchforks down from the clouds and the
global temperature screen is a schematic
illustrating the greenhouse effect as it
warms a frowning, sweating caricature of
the earth. The graphics are not outstanding, but their cartoonish simplicity serves
to buffer the otherwise intimidating
TITLE:
Balance of the Planet
SYSTEMS:
IBM, Macintosh(II)
REVIEWED:
Macintosh
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Chris Crawford
DISTRIBUTOR: Accolade
San Jose, CA

Understanding
Interconnectedness
Understanding these interconnected
relationships is the key to success and is
the heart of the game. They are not always obvious. For instance, a common
game strategy is to tax the life out of fossil fuel use in order to reduce its damaging effects. Nevertheless, the energy
provided by fossil fuels is absolutely vital
to industry. Industry produces consumer
goods that keep "first-world" folks happy,
as well as manufacturing the fertilizers,
pesticides, and machinery that feed "thirdworld" folks. A blind attack on industry
may disrupt the economy such that
Canadians may have to live without
VCRs, but Angolans have to survive
without dinner. A well-intentioned act of
ecological preservation may turn the
world economy upside down.
Here lies the game's message. This is
not a green radical's attack on industry.
Nor is it an optimistic industrialist's attempt to debunk the warnings of environmental doomsayers. It is one insightful
man's interpretation of the environmental
crisis presented as equitably as possible.
In order to be successful, the player must
walk the thin line between satisfying the
voracious appetite of the world economy
with the preservation of our dying ecosystem.
Of course, there are biases. But Crawford handles the issue of bias by placing
Continued on page 73

Review

Legends of the Lost Realm
Avalon Hill's Macintosh Role-Playing Game
by Dennis Owens
hus has the Messenger spoken:
"The high King returns. The faithful
are summoned to Taris-Cirinik, the
sorcerer's stronghold. The heroes of the
New Age shall arise and their fury shall
cleanse the land of the evil Malokor."

vacant (a function of the game's
graphics, to be discussed in a moment),
they are, nonetheless, crowded with bamboozlers, thieves, and braggarts who
would just as soon pick your party's pockets or accept a bribe as fight or talk.

The summonings are bold and the
words filled with hope. In a land where
hope has long
since faded, however, who shall
have the courage
to answer?

Exploring is done in a 3-D perspective
with a party of one to six characters. The
bad news is that except when the party
enters a store or
combat begins,
the graphics are
plain and unpopulated by
character images. Enemy parties cannot be
seen before their
square is
stepped on and
encounters
present tiny but
detailed views of
the opposing forces. The good
news is that
views and basic
information
about the
player's party are
always on-screen
and more
detailed information is but a
mouse-click away.

T

Legends of the
Lost Realm is a
slam-bang adventure role-playing
game for the
Macintosh, a challenge for the most
dedicated player,
and a promising
beginning for
what, apparently
(and hopefully),
will be a long line
of CRPGs set in
the fictional land
of Tagor-Dal, a
place of magic,
fear, monsters,
and great good.
Not designed for
beginners,
Legends is fully
playable on any
Mac with at least
one 800K drive and one MEG of
memory. Its graphics, though sparse, are
sharp and well drawn. The fiction base of
the story—if this, indeed, is just the beginning of a long saga—is believable and
well textured.
Subtitled 'The Gathering of Heroes,"
Legends is set in the
King's stronghold, an anTITLE:
cient but still thriving castle SYSTEM:
only recently taken back by PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
the forces of those who
PUBLISHERS:
believe in the line of the
High Kings. Stuffed with
rogues, unscrupulous adventurers, and enough
other nasties to fill the tales of many a
long evening spent relaxing by a
campfire, the stronghold's towers and
dungeons are loaded with goodies and
treasure-seekers, strange drafts, visions,
and mini-quests.
Though the castle's streets seem oddly

Interaction in
stores is carried
out by pointing
at an object and clicking to pull down a
menu. Another command will tell about
an object and still another will identify
which type of character could best use it.

Classes and attributes, with a few exceptions, are all fairly standard. Characters
may begin as any of four basic classes,
but each class has subclasses with their own
Legends of the Lost Realm
Macintosh
specialities: blade master,
$39.95
monk, ninja, witch, wizard,
David Cooke
etc. All characters have, at
and Charles Collins
Avalon Hill
least, some type of spell or
Baltimore, MD
non-magical skill. From
"light campfire" to "snare
animals," they lend a delightful suspension of disbelief beyond many CRPGs.
Multi-classes and class changes are also
an aspect of Legends of the Lost Realm.
Magic is both plentiful, simply named,
and easy to use. Spells can either be
cast, loaded into scrolls and wands to be
cast later, or even created (once the user

has become powerful
enough, of course). However, an advance in experience level, though it
does include an increase in
spell points available to
each character, does not
necessarily mean an advance in spells known.
Magicians, for instance,
must reach the fourth rank before learning second-level spells.

Make no mistake: although Legends of
the Lost Realm may seem, at least in
summary, to be a standard whomp-the-monster/explore-the-streets CRPG, the
changes it offers in the way in which adventuring occurs make the game's fiction

soar far beyond the depth and excitement most have come to expect in computer role-playing games.
The ability to buy on credit (and to extend one's financial resources too far); to
sharpen swords using whetstones; to
bank money; to carry canteens, bread,
jerky, bandages, rope, string, and on and
on; to fashion arrows out of feathers,
sticks and bits of metal; to climb walls,
and then, using rope, to pull up the rest
of the party; to fill scrolls and wands with
spells which can be used later; to hunt
for food—all these and many more characteristics make Legends of the Lost
Realm a sophisticated challenge for the
best-qualified computer adventurers.
Complaints are few, but noteworthy.
The beginning of the early versions of
Might and Magic is nothing compared
to the difficulty of getting a party started
in Legends. Party members can die off
even before the second encounter.
Even more maddening is that, once
characters die (at least, in the early
going) they cannot be revived; and, to
delete them from the roster, they must be
buried (which costs each surviving member precious gold). Survivors may find
themselves in debt even before they have
done much more than bury their fallen
comrades!
Another problem is that the game lacks
a sophisticated save/restore feature. Characters can be saved in two ways: either in
the barracks (which is frequently inconvenient) or by quitting the game and
saving the party. Then, to restore the

group, the user must either choose
"preferred group" under the Preferences
menu or "restore" in the barracks.
Sounds simple, except that levels are
often reset each time the game is turned
back on and the barracks, because of the
limitation of each character's need for
water, food, and sleep, often seem much
farther away than they should be. A
simpler save/restore system would much
enhance the game.
Also, though the manual is crammed
with important information, much is left
out, too. For example, it does not
delineate at what rate water and food are
consumed, how to behave properly in
temples, etc. Later in the game, such information becomes intuitive, but it would
have seemed to have been most useful
at the beginning, when characters are
dropping like flies.
The sparseness of the graphics seems
especially odd in a Macintosh game. One
wonders if it was really necessary to limit
the graphics this much in order to add

the appreciated details to the role-playing
system.

an easy proposition), he will take most of
it away! That's preposterous!

Finally, in what must be one of the truly
most inane additions to a CRPG ever,
Legends of the Lost Realm sports a tax
man. He hangs out close to the barracks
and, unless the party has banked most of
its gold before coming home (not always

Still, despite its problems, Legends of
the Lost Realm is a fascinating, complex,
and rewarding gaming experience. It is a
must buy for all Mac users who are
desperately wailing for role-playing
games and intricate adventures.

Legends of the Victorious Realms (Hints)

To minimize the problems of getting started, back up files 3, 4, 6, and 7 under the "LoLRM"
folder to a saved-game file as soon as each satisfactory character is created. Back up those files,
also, after each satisfactory game session is completed.
One possible starting strategy is to create a party made of three fighters, two shaman and a
magician. All of the back characters will be able to use bows and arrows and, once the party has
strengthened a little bit, one of the fighters may be replaced with a thief.
Food and water are a must. Many an unprepared adventurer has starved or died of thirst while
exploring the castle. In fact, parties should stay away from the towers until the party has advanced
a few levels, then begin in the tower in the Northeast. Don't forget to take rope, a lantern, and
reserves of food, oil and water on those trips to the towers. Also, try to use homing sticks to get
in and out of towers quickly.
At the early levels, run away from all encounters with magic-users. Also, rest the party whenever
their sleep levels reach 50%. Take turns standing guard until everyone has had at least 6 hours
sleep.

Technical Notes

The Circuit Writer
Why is it so hard
to add boards to your
computer anyway?
by Steve Witzel
Steve Witzel was leader of the team that
designed the award winning RealSound technology for Access Software and is an occasional
columnist in COW.

S

o, you finally decided to unload
your old CGA card, upgrade to, at
least, EGA in order to check out
some of the 16 color games. May you
not experience what I did.
Another Fine Mess
The other day a friend added some new
boards to his computer, which required
that he swap graphics cards with me.
Being somewhat of a congenial sort, I
agreed. What could be easier than to
remove the single phelps head screw
holding my case together (the other four
screws have been missing in action for a
number of months) and swap EGA
cards? Little did I realize the atrocity that
was about to follow.
After installing the new graphics card,
replacing the case and single screw,
reconnecting the monitor and mouse,
and turning on the computer, everything
was back to normal. At least everything
appeared normal. It wasn't until the night
before my daughter's big report was due
and I was headed for bed that screams
emanated from the library (where the
computer resides) informing me that the
computer wouldn't print. "Someone must
have disconnected the printer cable," I
thought, "this is just a one minute fix."
After 30 minutes with no noises spewing forth from the printer, it was time to
get the screwdriver. The new printer card
came with a built in printer port and
there was already an existing printer port
in the computer. A simple fix, I'll just reassign the printer port on the new graphics
card to be LPT2. This will eliminate the internal conflict and allow my daughter to
print her report. After 15 minutes of searching for the manual for the EGA card (it
didn't take long to find because it was in
the house less than a week) and reading
about the printer port, it became obvious
that trouble was following me. The
printer port was LPT1 and could not be
changed, disconnected, or mutilated!
I still had hope of getting the document
printed; little did I know. Just change the
printer port on the multi-function card, I

thought to myself, and everything will be
back to normal. If I make the original
printer port LPT2 and connect the printer
to the EGA card, everything should work
(Are you following this?). This time the
search for the manual took much longer
because the multi-function board has
been installed for almost a year. Apparently the force was with me because I found
it. A quick search of the text (obviously
translated) revealed that this was a
SMART card and it would automatically
look to see if LPT1 was in use. If it was in
use, the SMART multi-function card
would reassign its' printer port to become
LPT2. Somewhere along the line the
EGA card didn't bother to tell the SMART
multi-function card that it was using
LPT1, hence both cards were assigned to
LPT1 and neither would print.
The solution became obvious. All I had
to do was wake up my friend, rip his computer apart, get my card back and have
my daughter print her report.
My Telecomputing Experience
With the proliferation of multi-player online games and point-to-point modem
games, you may eventually run into
another problem. A few months ago, I
decided to install a modem in my computer at home. A modem has been sitting in a box at the top of my closet since
1200 Baud modems came on the
market. Needless to say, the instructions
have long since vaporized. My SMART
multi-function board is using COM1 and
COM2 for normal serial ports. All that
needed to be done is to change COM1
to COM4 on the multi-function card and
to assign the newly found modem to
COM1 and pulse dialing. The modem
was an easy project, it took only two
evenings to try all possible combinations
of the 6 jumper blocks (about 150 possible combinations).
It took only two evenings to do a job
that should have taken 10 minutes. Who
designs these cards anyway? I have come
to the conclusion that all circuit board
designers belong to the same religion.

The common belief among them is that
if they identify the function of even one
jumper on the board itself, their soul will
be damned for all eternity (what other
reason could there be???).
At the office, we are constantly upgrading pieces of computers. As the old
equipment accumulates we tend to move
memory cards, hard drives, graphics,
modems, disk drives and anything else
that can be found to other computers.
The manuals for these motherboards and
the plug in cards usually get lost. I'd
rather attend a funeral than attempt to
figure out which jumper does what. It is a
painful and time-consuming process.
Some boards cannot even coexist in the
same computer. Our TARGA graphics
board can't reside in the same computer
as the recently acquired WORM (write
once, read many optical disk) drive. It
took most of an afternoon to figure that
one out.
What Can We Do?
As consumers we must speak up. Let
computer manufacturers know that we
demand plug in cards that CONFIGURE
THEMSELVES. The technology has been
available for a long time. Why should we
be frustrated every time we want to add
new functions to our computers? Let the
computer designers be frustrated in figuring out a standard that will make our
lives easier!
CONGRATULATIONS!

At the recent Software Publishers Association Convention, Access Software
was awarded the SPA's Technical
Achievement award for the the development of RealSound, a digitized sound system that requires no additional hardware.
Since I was intimately involved in the
development of RealSound I would like
to express my thanks to all the programmers who helped on the project—you
know who you are.
NEXT TIME: What's happening in CDROM
Tips On Avoiding Frustration
Make it easy on yourself. Right now, there
are things that will help you in the future as
you grow your computer.
1. Use Labels
Label all connectors—LPT1, COM2, etc. It
is amazing how quickly I forget if the mouse
is in COM2 or COM4.
2. Secure Manuals

Put copies of all board documentation inside the case. Be careful not to block any
vent holes. Next time you need to alter something all the information is right there.
3. Fail Safe
Somewhere on the board, write the name
of the dealer where the board was purchased.
If all else fails, maybe the dealer will help.

Special Report

Game Technology for the
Near and Far Future
by Johnny L. Wilson
n journalism, one is forever tempted
to follow the doctrinaire wisdom of
whatever axiom happens to be quoted
the most at the "A" list parties. Being the
sort who tends to merge into the fringes
of conversations as anonymously as
Lamont Cranston becoming invisible in the shadows of the underworld, this editor hears an incredible amount of doomsaying. "CD-I can't cut it" (Oh? We
were impressed with the CD-I
products under development
which we saw at the SPA
Spring Symposium.); "NEC's
TurboGrafx 16 doesn't have a
chance" (Tell that to the
120,000 plus who have already
purchased the machines, as
well as those who will purchase
them when their CD-ROM unit
becomes available.); "Diskbased entertainment is dead" (We believe
there will always be a market, because
disk-based software purchasers are the
most stable customers in the computer
entertainment marketplace.); "DV-I will
never become affordable" (We've noticed
that the basic price of the chip set
has been dropping dramatically
over the past 12 months.); and
'Text adventure games will never
sell in today's market" are all comments which are bandied about in
today's climate. They are not, however, propositions that this editor
or this magazine necessarily agree
with, but they are being presented
within the industry nonetheless.

I

down art screens (Guild of Thieves and
Jinxter, for example), they just might
have a new twist on the genre.
What Anita showed us of Wonderland,
a "text adventure" game based on the

Rev. Charles Dodgson's weird and
wonderful stories, causes us to rethink
the industry's axiom. First of all, the
game is neither strictly a text adventure
nor can it be described as a graphic adventure. It is its own genre. Using a windowing system which Magnetic Scrolls

Hi-Tech Text Games
(Near Future Tech)
Of course, having heard the
grave pronouncement that "Text
adventure games will never sell in
today's market", we were understandably skeptical when Virgin
Mastertronic told us that they
were about to announce a new design
that would revolutionize text adventure
games. Still, we became rather more interested and still more curious when we
were told that Anita Sinclair's Magnetic
Scrolls was developing the product.
Since Magnetic Scrolls had produced previous products with high-quality pull-

has been developing for over two and a
half years, the game uses multi-tasking to
offer an incredible array of features.
Take graphics, for example. The
graphics are not only high-resolution
EGA, VGA or Super VGA pictures, but
many of them feature animation, as well.
In addition, one does not have to pull-

down a full-screen painting as would
have been the case in Guild of Thieves,
but can call up the graphic and size the
frame anywhere on the screen, even as
text is scrolling elsewhere on the screen.
In fact, players will even have the option
of zooming in on particular por- lions of the animated screens as
the action is going on.
Second, there are some major
changes in the way text is handled. To be sure, one can even
change the size and nature of the
font in which the story is printed
(as one could do in ICOM's
Macadventure series), but one can
also size the text window and
place it wherever desired. This
, makes it easy to call up the auto- mapping feature, compass feature, or graphics windows. In addition, one can use the windows like a
Macintosh interface in order to cut and
paste anywhere on the screen (or in an
on-screen notebook).
Third, the command interface is much
more accessible than the traditional text
adventure game. If one is unsure
what to command the program to
do, it is a simple matter to pulldown a window of possible verbs.
When this is done, only the active
(or possible) verbs are in bold print
and inactive verbs are in a faint
gray. One selects the verb and
moves over and a sub-window appears with all the possible objects
within the scene or in one's inventory which can be acted upon. If
the desired verb isn't present on
the menu, there is even a capability
for the players to select and save
the verbs that they choose to use.
The latter feature solves part of
the problem with the "reverse parser" that the program is essentially
using. In a reverse parser, the
player is given all the possible command
verbs and objects necessary to solve a
puzzle. Since the solution is, then, visible
on the screen, it is merely a matter of
trial and error to discern the solution.
Even though Wonderland uses what is
basically a "reverse parser", this userContinued on page 26

Special Report

Game Technology
Continued from page 24

definable capability enables the designers
to make 90% of the puzzle solutions readily available (without having to type commands) but leaves 10% as a major challenge for the player in which the solution
must be typed in by the player.
If one tires of using verb commands to
explore a given area of the game, one
can simply call up a compass window.
When this is done, a compass appears
with bold arrows demonstrating every possible direction the player can go and faint
gray arrows indicating the limitations for
player movement.
Another way of directing the action involves using a "point and click" method
with the graphics. All active objects (i.e.
those which can be manipulated) have accessible icons. These icons can, in turn,
be dragged between the graphics of the
locations and the player's inventory. This
can be very important since the puzzles
are basically object-oriented rather than
people-oriented.
Fourth, the auto-mapping is extremely
impressive in that one can, not only, examine the icon-based tree structure that
represents the various locations in the
game, but clicking on a location allows
the player to call up any graphic already
encountered in the course of a game.
So, if a friend comes over and wants to
see the Mad Hatter's tea party, one simply clicks on the right icon and calls up
the animation. It is also a "layered" map
in that the tree structure reflects the physical levels in the game environment (i.e.
the underground's tree is separate from
the surface, etc.).

Those who are long-term science fiction
readers may remember Ray Bradbury's
"The Veldt", a short-story in which the
children's playroom could be modified
into any environment they wanted. Those
who cannot remember that far back
should be able to relate to the "holodeck"
in StarTrek: The Next Generation. These
are fictional settings where computers allegedly changed the perspective of the
viewer/player to the point where they be-

The windowing system used to revitalize the "text adventure" genre is
programmed on a VAX development
system. Hence, the system is machine
independent, making conversions
easier for this game than most. In addition, Sinclair hints that the windowing
system is useful for more than "text adventures" and suggests that we watch
for other types of products from Magnetic Scrolls using the system.
Meanwhile, the company is firmly committed to the future of text games, underscored by the fact that they have invested so much in Wonderland, a
game four times longer than The

Pawn.
As Sinclair says, 'Text adventures didn't
die. They just became boring." She
hopes that the new windowing technology will breathe new life into a genre she
loves.

came submerged into an artificial reality
which seemed real.
This is already happening, in a limited
way, at the high tech research
laboratories at the University of North
Carolina, VPL Research, Inc. in Redwood

City, Autodesk, Inc. and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Participants can walk through threedimensional representations of buildings
which do not yet exist (testing the ergonomics and traffic flow); manipulate a
three-dimensional model (based on an actual medical scan) of a damaged or malfunctioning organ prior to operating on
it; investigate sub-atomic particles from
the inside out; walk through geological
strata; and assemble and disassemble expensive engines, parts, and technological
products without risking valuable equipment and resources. Eventually, students
will be able to virtually "become" a Tyrannosaurus Rex and experience the earth
from the perspective of a massive
dinosaur.
How does "virtual reality" work? The participant wears a pair of goggles which
are, in turn, connected to a pair of
Silicon Graphics IRIS"" computers. A
Polhemus 3Space Isotrak system rests
atop the headpiece and tracks the direction the participant turns his or her head
(with the head's position on an X, Y and
Z axis and the orientation as Yaw, Pitch
and Roll). In this way, the computers
paint stereo images that emulate exactly
what one would see if they were moving
their head in the environment being simulated. On some systems like NASA's, this
is merely a wire-frame simulation (at
present), but at VPL, one sees a multicolored environment of fully contoured
surfaces.
Of course, seeing is not necessarily
believing. One needs a way to interact
with the simulated environment, a way to
"touch" what isn't there, but seems to be
there. One approach, developed by
Richard J. Feldmann of the National Institutes of Health, is a joystring. A "T" bar
is suspended between nine taut wires
(three at each end of the 'T') which
are, in turn, connected to shaft encoders and servomotors. By moving
the "T", the differential tensions on the
nine wires is altered and movement
plus force can be measured. Using
this approach, one can use the joystring as a remote manipulator device in
order to react with the simulated objects of virtual reality or actually control robotic mechanisms at a distance.
The most common interface with
regard to "touch" is the dataglove.
Datagloves are sophisticated versions
(and ancestors) of their mass market
cousins (The Power Glove for Nintendo). Of course, the $8,800 price tag for a
top-of-the-line dataglove is considerably
out of the price range of the average consumer. Datagloves depend on fiber-optic
cables which act as sensors to detect the
Continued on page 78

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Lost In Space or Vietnam:
The Latest Games From Europe
by Paul Rigby

You control an Epic-class spacecraft
which acts as escort to the rest of the
fleet. Central to the fleet is the gigantic
Redstorm mothership, which houses your
craft and provides strike capability of its
own. Missions include hitting the Rexxon
HQ on the planet's surface, disrupting
radar installations, weaving your way
through a complex minefield, defending
the fleet supply ships from Rexxon attack
and sabotaging a mining complex. Much
of the technology that was used to
produce F29 Retaliator has been used to
produce Epic.
Available about now on the Amiga and
ST, Epic (distributed via Ocean) uses
fast, detailed solid 3-D graphics and atmospheric music courtesy of Holst's The
Planets. All sound effects are digitized,
with 64 colors present on the Amiga and
32 on the ST.
CCS, known for wargames such as Annals of Rome, is about to release
Frontline. To be available on the PC,
Amiga and ST, Frontline includes four
battle scenarios in addition to two training scenarios. From 1944, Cassino
depicts the New Zealand forces trying to
crack the Gustav Line; Guadalcanal
(1942) replays the Japanese attempt to
dislodge the US Marines in the Battle of
Bloody Ridge; Stalingrad (1943) depicts
the last stand of the XI Corps; and the
glider-borne assault on D-Day completes
the package. The game is hex-based with
very presentable graphics and an icon
control system.

he designers at Digital Image
Design are a promising lot. Their
first product, F29 Retaliator is a
ground breaking program which pushes
polygons around the screen faster than
any other flight simulation on the market
today. Digital Image Design's background is enveloped within Falcon and
Flight of the Intruder. It comes as a
surprise, therefore, that their second
product takes to the far reaches of space
with a game, initially known as Goldrunner 3D, but more likely to appear as
Epic. An apt title for a game which takes
the mission-based flight simulation and
weaves a space opera of galactic proportions around it.

Looking very much like a Cinemaware
production, Ocean's Lost Patrol takes
you back to Vietnam in 1966. You play
Sergeant Weaver who must lead the
remainder of his platoon back to safety
after being hit by the Vietnamese. There
are just six survivors, with two days food
rations, who must trek the 58 miles back
to camp. With ammo as precious as gold
dust, you will have to enter villages to
receive information on enemy troop
movements. That is, if the villages themselves are not the enemy's! Other factors
such as food rationing will have to be
considered. Consume too much food
and you'll run out before you reach
safety. Consume too little and your men
will be too weak to defend themselves if
they are attacked.

Cue storyline: Your people live in a
quiet corner of the Galaxy. A peaceful
race, everything looks rosy until a global
evacuation is required to escape the
potential disaster of the local sun going
supernova. To find a new world to
colonize, however, means crossing an ancient neutral zone. The neighboring Rexxons would surely look upon any infringement of the zone as an act of war. There
is no other option, so the chase is on!

In the traditions of the
Cinemaware-esque genre, the strategy is mixed with arcade sequences. You'll have to crawl
across minefields, take out machine gun
nests, hold fist fights with VC scouts and,
finally, take out snipers. However, even
with these arcade sequences, the crux of
Lost Patrol is still strategy. Available now
on Amiga, with other conversion likely to
follow, Lost Patrol retails at £24.99.

T

Using an enhanced version of their inhouse system "Freescape", Incentive
have announced the release of Castle
Master. Freescape is a system which uses
solid 3-D graphics, already seen in games
such as Driller, Eclipse and Dark Side.
The latter games have all been designed
as thinking adventures with logical
problems using object manipulation and
various logic puzzles (the difference being
that you actually move amongst the 3-D
world, rather than conjuring up a picture
via a text description or from a 2-D
graphic). Castle Master is set in 16th Century England in which the player has to
rescue a princess (or prince, depending
on your persuasion) from one of four
castle towers. This is not as easy as you
might think, with each tower being made

up of several rooms and floors. Never
mind the evil spirits which haunt the
place. Actually, as a subquest, you must
flush out these monsters to make the
area habitable again (who ya gonna'
call?). Castle Master could be available as
you read this on the Amiga, ST and PC
for £4.99.

Computer Adventure World
318 Kensington
Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Tel: 01144-51-263-6306
SDC
60 Boston Road
London, England, W7 3TR
Tel: 01144-1-567-7621
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd.
8 Buckwins Square
Burnt Mills
Basildon, Essex, England, SS13 1BJ
Tel: 01144-268-590-766

All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have
any trouble, contact the international
operator.

Review

THE BROWN WATER WAR
Accolade's "Gunboat: River Combat Simulator"
By Brad Bombardiere
keep telling myself that it's just
another night on this dirty river, but
this time it's different. We're going
deeper into the Delta than we've ever
gone before. Past My-Thoa to a point
where the brass thinks the NVA is using
sampans to resupply their troops.

I

We've named our PBR (Patrol Boat,
River) the "Sitting Duck", because that's
how we feel out there. The enemy could
be around any tree or bend in the river,
beading down on us with a loaded RPG
containing a round with our name on it.

scenes in VGA graphics, with real shots
of PBRs operating in VietNam and
Wagner's "Die Valkyrie" playing in the
background. There are three locations to
operate in; Vietnam, Colombia and
Panama (the canal zone). Like its
predecessor, Steel Thunder (also
designed by Loughry), the scenarios are
completed in a linear fashion with increasing difficulty factors and the player may
only proceed to the next area after fulfill-

The skipper keeps telling us, "Control
the Delta and you control the war."
Funny, when the tracers light past your
ears, you just don't hear the skipper
anymore.. .
This could as easily be a scene from

The game is built around piloting and
using the weapons of a PBR. The boat itself was designed for speed and agility in
the narrow waterways of Vietnam and
does not use propellers, instead
maneuvering through the use of water
jets (it can, therefore, operate in water as
shallow as four feet deep). It is lightly armored with an aluminum hull and is
usually armed with twin .50 caliber guns,
plus the grenade launcher (which terrorized the NVA). In fact, the designer of
the game, Tom Loughry, explains that
the water skiing scene in Apocalypse
Now was true to life. It was not impossible for a PBR crew to throw out the
ropes and ski behind this light and powerful boat.

Gunboat starts out with some stunning

The bow gunner can choose between
dual .50 caliber machine guns (slower
rate of fire, but with armor-piercing
rounds) or the .30 caliber Mini-gun (extremely high rate of fire, but ineffective
against armored targets). The mid-ship
area is the only place where one's devastating M129 grenade launcher can be located. The stern offers a difficult choice
between a single .50 caliber machine
gun (which the computer will man when
you are not present at that station) or the
potent 60mm mortar (which must always
be fired by the player, personally).
The first thing one must do is to activate all of the various ship's stations.
Searchlights are optional on night missions. The computer gunners will not actually open fire until they see the enemy.
If one should happen to hit a "friendly",
pack it in. . . Instant demotion, loss of
medals, the disgrace brought upon the
family name, etc. all await the overzealous PBR commander.

Apocalypse Now as from Accolade's
Gunboat: River Combat Simulator. Both
the film and the simulation effectively capture some of the frustration experienced
by the veterans of guerrilla actions. Gunboat is a refreshing addition to the world
of combat simulations that offers an "up
close and personal" view of river patrol
boat combat actions. In Gunboat, one
sees the enemy in a very real way. Cut
one down with machine gun fire, and
they bend over and drop like real people.
In fact, mortar rounds actually blow up
everything from trees to buildings to
water buffalo. The game play itself is
more intense than many simulations because the player has no laser guided missiles or radar homing lock-ons. It's simply
the good guys versus the bad guys
bullet-to-bullet and shell-to-shell.

vantages and disadvantages, so the
player must chose carefully.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Gunboat: River Combat Simulator
IBM
$49.95
Tom Loughry
Accolade, Inc.

ing certain objectives in the present one.
Since players have the option of choosing between active duty or practice missions (where the key strokes can be
learned), those who are of the "read the
documentation on a 'need to know basis'
only" school should try the practice
scenarios to get accustomed to the game
before reporting for combat duty.
Once the player reports for combat
duty, the role-playing shell for the game
is handled almost exactly like Steel
Thunder's. At this point, the player's service record is displayed, recorded and
kept. Then, the commanding officer offers a briefing on the situation and the
player receives his orders and proceeds
to outfit the PBR with specific types of engines and weaponry. Each offers ad-

One thing which amazed this reviewer
was the graphic look of the spotlights
dancing on the horizon as my crew searched out enemy targets. The use of 3-D
graphics are excellent, with the look
giving one an almost gut wrenching feel
of what patrols might have been like. Additionally, the chase boat view gives you
a perspective from behind the PBR, complete with full boat wake (as one steers
the boat around, the wake following it is
quite noticeable).

Gunboat also impressed this reviewer
with its random pitching and natural
movement, giving the player a true feeling of being in a small power boat on
flowing water. One quickly learns that a
high speed encounter with the rocks in
the river will sink your PBR faster than a
whole battalion of NVA's armed with rocket propelled grenades.
By the way, going to the gunner's station while the boat is traveling at high
speed may prove to be fatal. The computer pilot should probably have his
license revoked. Unfortunately, however,
there are times when the pilot must be
relied upon. In those cases, it is probably
best to throttle down to half speed and
stay on a steady course for over a minute
before relinquishing the wheel. With this
Continued on page 32

GUNBOAT
Continued from page 30
accomplished, the computer pilot might
be able to take it from there.
This is not an exaggeration. Once, after
maneuvering a PBR past an enemy armored column and on toward safety, the
reviewer left the wheel to man a gun and
return fire. In a matter of moments, the
computer pilot had turned us around and
parked the boat right next to the AFVs.
The mission did not reach a successful
conclusion, to say the least.
The long, tedious patrols, as one winds
around the narrow waterways in the direction of the objectives, are broken up by
fits of incredibly intense combat (By the
way, "tourists" will be glad to know that
along the way there is plenty of local
color; flora, fauna, monuments, etc.).
Using radar helps player's "see around
corners". Then, once the enemy is
spotted and the PBR starts to pour fire at
them, trees and buildings near them
catch fire, adding an ominous glow to

the game.
It must be understood that hitting the enemy,
as the PBR rocks
in the waves, is
somewhat more
difficult than it
will initially seem.
Aiming the mortar is especially
agonizing. At
least, one is able
to "walk" the
shots in when using the machine guns
or grenade launcher, but not with the
mortar. Of course, one must also learn
when discretion is the better part of valor
and run at full speed, putting distance between the player's PBR and the enemy.
This reviewer has experimented with
Gunboat on various IBM compatibles.
The XT's are a little slow, but by dialing
out some of the detail and using the time
compression feature, the game is functional. Gunboat is at its best, however, on
an 8-12Mhz AT machine or a 386 processor. Also, while Accolade recommends
using a joystick, this reviewer does not.
The fine adjustments to be made in steer-

ing and aiming the
mortar are not conducive to a joystick.
The keyboard is much
more accurate.
Gunboat is a simulation unlike any other
experienced by this
reviewer. It offers a
blood and guts
perspective of the war
hitherto neglected in
military simulations.
Since PBRs operated
primarily on solo missions, which is why
this situation converts so nicely to the
computer gaming environment. The
simulation aspects are not overly technical, but the combat is very intense. One
complaint is that the enemy emplacements never change (by mapping their
locations, you will find them there every
time). Also, it might be nice to select
one's own crew (like in Steel Thunder).
Yet, these are but quibbles. For those
who have tired of their flight or tank
simulators, make a splash with Gunboat,
a high speed combat "rollercoaster" ride
offering both authenticity and good old
shoot-'em- up fun.

1

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail
by Scorpia

It's time again to rummage
amongst the mail sacks (No not
those in the corner! Fred is
snoozing behind them and he
gets very peeved when disturbed!) and see what the US
Postal Service has managed to
deliver (They're getting a little better these days).
For those who have been
wondering, I generally base the
hints in this column on questions
I receive from readers. Aside
from answering them individually
by mail, I choose the most-often
asked questions for inclusion
here. That's because if five
people write to me about the
same problem in the same
game, it's likely there are others
out there in the same difficulty.
By the way, after my remarks in
the last mail column, I have
noted a definite improvement in
letters accompanied by SASE's.
For the first time in a long time,
no letter arrived without that
needed item. I hope this trend
continues, because I really don't
enjoy ignoring people's requests.
And now, on to the mail!
Wasteland: In the December
'89 Mail, I mentioned that Faran
Brygo becomes a bit reclusive
after you visit him. Some people
unfortunately thought this meant
there might be a way to see him
again. That is not the case. What

I was saying (or trying to) is that
there is no way to get to him after
that first visit where you learn about
Max. My apologies to anyone who
went off on a wild goose chase in
this matter.
Dragon Wars: Dwarves! You have
to help out those poor Dwarves. Of
course, you need to find them first.
Wander around the vicinity of
Byzanople and you might find something of interest. Until you've done
that, Roba's skull won't be of much
use to you (and if you don't have the
skull yet, you should still visit the
Dwarves and fix 'em up for later . . .
and remember, stealing isn't nice).
Finally, for those in need of transportation, there is no way around it, you
have to take on the pirates (good
luck!).
Might & Magic II: Winning the
Triple crown has caused some folks
a lot of problems. That's because the
way to do it is not obvious in the
least. Try fighting in all three arenas
on the black ticket (Naturally, you
have to fight and win!). Then, go see
the Queen. She might like you more
now.
Leisure Suit Larry 3: Seems like
Patti is having a hard time getting
across the chasm. This is not as difficult as it looks. The means of
making it over are right there. You
just need to do something with them
first . . . . Think basket. Larry has
troubles of his own, too. Apparently
he has a knife that wouldn't cut soft

butter and wonders where he can get
it sharpened. Well, maybe if he steps
in the right direction, he'll find what
he needs.
Battletech: It appears there is a
slight difference between the IBM
and C64 versions of this game in
regard to the cache. From letters I've
received, the cache is not quite in
the same place in both versions. In
the IBM version, it's on an island,
while in the C64, it's on land. My
thanks to the readers who pointed
this out to me and apologies (again)
to anyone I sent off to the wrong
place.
Neuromancer: You can improve
your skills the easy way by visiting the
Turing Registry in Zone 3. It certainly
beats doing it the hard way (grin).
For those who may be having a hard
time visiting the Panther Moderns, a

little hacking into the police files will
be of great help.
Magic Candle: Some folks are
having difficulty acquiring dream
dust. That's because only one person
has it and she's not around (bet you
noticed that, eh?). Take a trek
through Bedandigar and see what
you can turn up.
Bard's Tale I: Yep, this oldie is still
around and still giving a few people
fits. In particular, that nasty "lost
stairs" puzzle. life would be easier if
it showed up right there after you
answer the riddle, but life ain't always
easy (especially not in this game).
You'll have to go looking for the
stairs; fortunately, they're not too far
away. Sorcerer Sight is helpful in
determining the location. Try moving
to the northwest of the room with the
magic mouth.
Wizardry V: If you're looking for

the Ice Ferry on level 6, you may already have seen it. It just doesn't happen to look like any Ferry you've ever
seen before, that's all. Magic stuff is
strange that way, sometimes. Also, if
you're wondering where Evil Eyes
may be hanging out, you might try
going into the room on 6 that
negates magic. He usually shows up
soon after.
That's it for this look into the bag.
Remember if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me
in the following ways: On Delphi,
stop by the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie,
visit the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to visit the Games RT). By
US Mail (remember that SASE if you
live in the US!): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

CGW Test Lab

The CGW Test Lab Meets The
Tandy 1000 TL/2
hen CGW started getting nasty
notes on R.I.D. cards and
anonymous phone calls indicating that garners were having compatibility
problems with the TL/2 (with Tandy VGA
cards), we had trouble believing it. After
all, Tandy is a major market for IBM compatibles and most entertainment software
publishers go out of their way to make
sure Tandy machines are properly supported. So, we set up a Tandy 1000 TL/2
with a VGA card and one (count 'em)
3.5" floppy disk drive. We wanted to see
what our readers were talking about.

W

We asked for 3.5" formats of all the IBM
products covered in the last six months
of "Taking A Peek" and tried to boot
them all. We are happy to say that most
of the games out there work quite efficiently, even with this configuration. Even
some of the games that our readers said
they had experienced difficulty with functioned on this machine.
However, there are some special cases
and it is the intent of this article to alert
our readers to these potential problems.
Out of the mass of games which we
tested, there were only two games which
would not boot on the machine as configured and four that required special
treatment.
Activision's Tongue of the Fatman, for
example, does not state that one needs a
hard disk or two floppy drives in order to
"unzip" the files from the production
disks. The game works fine on one drive,
once the files are unzipped, and it looks
terrific, but one must borrow another
computer to "unzip" the files. Even those
who have one 3.5" and one 5.25" drive
won't have any trouble with the "unzipping" process. They can put the 5.25"
floppies in that drive and use the "Install"
routine to copy the appropriate files to
two different 3.5" floppies. It's a long
process, but it works.
Electronic Arts' F-16 Combat Pilot offers a similar obstacle. The packaging for
this game does not indicate that one
needs either a hard disk or two floppy
disk drives to "install" the program. In this
case, the 3.5" version of the game comes
packaged separately from the 5.25" version. Also, the "Install" program doesn't always recognize that a machine only has
one drive. Therefore, those who have
only one floppy may need to borrow a
machine with two drives and use the "Install" program to load the program onto

either another 3.5" disk (if the machine
has two 3.5" drives) or two 5.25" disks (if
the machine has one 3.5" and one 5.25"
disks). Then, using the simple DOS command ("copy a:*.* b:") allows one to copy
the files on both 5.25" diskettes onto a
720K (3.5") diskette. The game runs fine
with one drive after this has been accomplished.
The other major problem in using the
Tandy 1000 TL/2 in this configuration is
that some games simply do not recognize the Tandy VGA card. This is a temporary problem, but it is real nonetheless.
For example, Data East's Robocop and
Super Hang-On search for the Tandy
graphics mode, which is not available in
this configuration. Therefore, one must
remove the VGA card to boot these
games. According to Denny Thorley, future products from Data East will recognize this graphics mode.
Interplay had the same problem with
the initial versions of BattleChess on the
IBM. They have fixed the problem,
though, so anyone with this problem can
contact their customer service department for a new diskette.
Kyodai's Psychic War will not boot in
this configuration if one types "PW T" to
start the game or a simple "PW" (as
though one had a hard drive). Of course,
there is a quick fix here. Since the problem is that the program is looking for the
Tandy 16 color mode and the machine
has a VGA card, one must only type "PW
E" and the program will load normally.

The CGW Test Lab
Meets RollerMouse
We have found that many garners
prefer a mouse-driven interface, but do
not have the room to spare in order to
move that mouse around on their desks.
Of course, it is possible to "make do" and
place an oversize book and mouse pad
on their laps in order to play their favorite
games using the mouse interface, but it
isn't very efficient (especially when one
has to reach up and access the keyboard, it is easy to dump book, mouse
and mouse pad on the floor).
Now, CH Products has taken an old
idea, the trackball, and updated it to provide a solution for those of us who have
a space problem but prefer the mouse interface. A trackball, for those who have

not previously used them, is similar to an
upside-down mouse. So, instead of
moving the mouse around on a flat surface in order to move the ball underneath and hence, input the X and Y coordinates, one moves the ball directly in
order to input the X and Y coordinates.
This provides a smaller footprint in order
to operate it and makes for more efficient
use.
Called the RollerMouse, this trackball is
fully compatible with any program which
uses the Microsoft Mouse driver. It is
available in both a serial and bus version
for the IBM ($129.95) and is also available for the Macintosh and Apple II series
computers ($119.95).
CGWs "test lab" recently tested a RollerMouse serial version and found it to be
as advertised. We had no problem booting games which support the mouse interface and found that the four buttons
and ergonomically-designed lightweight
unit housing made it very easy to use.
We found it to be ideal for games like
Revolution '76 which use a windows-style
interface and have the player selecting
icons and menu-items. It was both fast
and precise for this style game. It was
also quite easy-to-use in terms of
point-and-click movement, as in SimCity.
The only area where we felt the RollerMouse to be a less efficient interface than
a pure mouse was in action games like
Wayne Gretzky Hockey and Shufflepuck
Cafe where one needs to use quick and
precise movement. With the traditional
mouse, one intuitively adjusts distances
on the screen in a one-to-one correspondence with how far the mouse is moved
across the table. With the trackball, one
does not have a physical distance to
measure movement against. To be sure,
the longer players use the trackball, the
closer they can come to judging distances, but it is not as clear-cut or intuitive
as with the traditional mouse. Our technicians found that experience compensates for intuitive movement, but is not
quite equivalent.
Strategy and adventure gamers who like
the mouse interface, but find their desk is
often too cluttered, will definitely want to
consider the RollerMouse as a practical
alternative to the traditional mouse (or
cleaning one's desk). Action gamers will
want to try one out before moving to this
option.

I

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 64

The Categories
Strategy (S7): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on rust person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter ego
through a storyline or series
of events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP):
Adventure games that are based
on character development
(usually involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this case,
the first listed category is
considered primary. In order to
be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of this specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Review

Rings of Medusa
Serpentine Strategy in a Fantasy Setting
By Douglas Seacat

R

evenge, conquest, treachery and
the quest for economic might
form the bulwark of this fantasy/strategy. In the game, Cirion (a
young king recently deposed from this
throne) seeks revenge on the demon
queen Medusa, who has slain his
friends and forced him into exile.
Without any resources, loyal troops, or
much money, Cirion must rebuild his
kingdom to its former glory and
destroy his enemy, Medusa. To accomplish this end, Cirion will have to
find the Five Rings of Medusa which
will grant him power and eventually
summon the demon queen herself.
Rings of Medusa is primarily a
strategy game with trading elements.
Initially, the player must develop trade
routes in order to increase his coffers,
whereupon he can either buy troops
to begin conquest or purchase scouts
to find mines for more money. Since
many cities are controlled by Medusa,
it is important for the player to amass
a large store of wealth in order to create a working plan of conquest, as armies can be expensive to equip, train,
and maintain. At the same time, the
player must be continuously searching
for the Five Rings, whose coordinates
can be found in various cities and ports.
Game Mechanics

Most of the time spent in the game is
spent either on the strategic map, or the
town menu. Upon the strategic map, the
player can explore the many screens of
the world of Medusa. As time quickly passes, the player can move from town to
town, attack castles or towns, search for
mines or treasure, or use ships to sail to
ports or islands.
In town, the player can enter a variety
of shops and other buildings. Markets
allow the purchase of goods for trade,
banks offer loans and interest rates,
temples occasionally give clues, and so
on. Of special importance within cities is
the park area, which allows the recruitment of troops for upcoming conquest.

Another method of earning money involves the use of mines, which can be
found by employing scouts. The number of scouts employed by the player
determines how wide of a radius those
scouts can search for mines, which can
then be exploited by the player. Mines
can be quite profitable once established, but require a large starting fund
(since a mining machine must be purchased, and an additional 30000 gold
is required to open the mine). For this
reason, trading must be employed initially to earn the required revenue
necessary to hire a good supply of
scouts to find such mines.

To win, the player will need to purchase
a large and effective army. However,
before that army can be purchased,
money must be raised, (and quite a bit of
money, at that). It is important that the
player trade extensively before building an
army since maintaining an effective army
can quickly eat up all profit made
through trading. Trading itself involves
the purchase and selling of different
goods from town to town, using either
ships or wagons as transportation. Unfortunately, without protection, any trading
mission can quickly turn to failure if the
wagon train happens to be attacked by
an enemy army (see Problems).
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Rings of Medusa
Amiga, Atari ST
and IBM
Amiga
$49.95
Star Games
708 W. Buffalo Ave. Suite 200
Tampa, FL 33603

Once the player manages to gather
together a large enough horde of
troops, he can actually try conquering
towns and castles. Combat is very
straight forward, with the player simply
commanding certain troops to advance
to battle at the right times and, possibly, withdrawing when too many casualties have been taken. The game includes a "negotiate" option which supposedly allows combat to be obviated
through bribery or threats, but it is this
reviewer's experience that such methods
rarely work.

One aspect of the game which I enjoyed was the variety of unit types and
races in building an army. The different
factors to consider gave a sense of depth
to the process of recruitment which isn't
often found in strategy games. This was
heightened by the fact that different races
came in varying abundance in the towns.
For example, humans are very abundant,
but not particularly specialized in anything. On the other hand, halflings,
gnomes, and zwarks make good artillery
and wizards, but are in scarce supply.
Thus, it is necessary under certain circumstances to use an inferior, but more
numerous, race for a particular unit type.
The amount of thought that went into
Continued on page 59

Review

Hitler's
"Second Front"
SSI's Strategic Eastern Front
World War H Game
by M. Evan Brooks

S

econd Front, a detailed simulation
of the German-Soviet Conflict of
World War II, is prolific wargame
designer Gary Grigsby's first entry to the
16-bit world of MSDOS. An obvious
descendant of his
War in Russia
(designed for the 8bit computers of
the mid-1980s),
Second Front is an
amazing product.
The Enigma Book
(Documentation)
The documentation may be
summed up as abysmal. In addition to
misspellings, some
incorrect formulas,
omitted help keys
and an extensive
(and not entirely correct) READ.ME file,
the manual is composed in computerese, not
English; obviously,
no one heeded
Xerxes' maxim that
"exact thinking and
exact language go
hand in hand".
For instance, a
simulation of the Eastern Front on this
scale should emphasize logistics (or the
lack thereof). The bonus/penalties for
troop's supply states are unclear and
would benefit from specific examples.
The explanation of rail building is convoluted and states that rails convert to
friendly control when the SL (Supply
Level) is four or higher, except during the
Blitzkrieg (the first ten turns), when Axis
SL must be eight or higher. Since the
German forces are at their
NAME:
logistic peak at the inception of "Barbarossa", why
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
do they need a higher SL?
PRICE:
Careful analysis of the rules
DESIGNER:
shows that captured rails
PUBLISHER:

convert to friendly control when 1-2
hexes from an operational railhead. Since
the Germans begin with an SL of 10
(which later drops to 6, illustrating the
consumption of
pre-stocked supplies), the rule
does, in effect,
say this. However, this
reviewer feels
that it should
have been stated
in plain English.
Certain terms
are undefined.
The "Aircraft
Chart" does not
define LB (although the term
"Level Bomber"
is embedded in
the main text).
Similarly, a plane
category, CAN
("Cannon"), is
not defined at all.
A careful perusal
of the manual
before printing
would have rectified most of
these errors.
Tables of cities
(with production
capabilities) and
generals (with
leadership ratings) are listed in no discernible order, hence are difficult to find.
Finally, the player "Tips and Hints" are
too abbreviated. To offer the Axis the sole
tip that he should smash Soviet airgroups
with air missions gives new meaning to
the term "de minimis". With all of the
ramifications of a strategic/operational
simulation covering multi-years of WWII
with armies deployed in corps elements,
player assistance should
have been much more
Second Front:
Germany Turns East
detailed. Instead, this is left
IBM
to the player. [In order to
0-2
assist the user, next month
$59.95
Cary Grigsby
CGW Assistant Editor Alan
Strategic Simulations, Inc
Emrich will reveal some of

the missing formulas and commands and
offer some strategies and tactics in a
detailed article].
Despite these shortcomings, Second
Front is still very playable. The documentation should be carefully read, as only actual play can reveal the many subtle
nuances that exist herein.
Color My Welt (Graphics)
Second Front's graphics are colorful
and well-done. Although they are not of
cinematic quality, they are more than sufficient for a strategic/operational wargame of the Eastern Front. [Note: the
box label failed to mention that the CGA
graphics are in monochrome]. The geography ranges from Finland (north) to
Baku and the Italian boot (south), and

Despite shortcomings, Second
Front is very playable.
from Cologne (west) to Kazan (east).
Units (armor, infantry and headquarters)
and terrain are easy to differentiate and,
as the infamous Russian winter approaches, the EGA terrain changes as the
rivers freeze and snow covers the ground.
(Note that the weather effects the entirety
of Russia in a single week, which is admittedly unrealistic; Chris Crawford's Eastern
Front {1979) showed a similar weather
change which was graduated from north
to south over several weeks). In summary, the map is broad in scope and the
graphics are more than adequate to play
the simulation. An additional consideration is that units are deployed by headquarters and corps (composed of individually detailed divisions). If one wishes
to resolve combat on a more tactical
level, he may choose from up to three
detail levels of combat reports (the most
detailed reports yield actual division level,
blow-by-blow engagements and casualty
figures down to individual vehicles and
squads). Of course, this slows the combat resolution substantially, yet it is still
an attractive feature of Second Front.
Looking for Lebensraum (Game Play)
Second Front offers four scenarios:
Campaign (1941), Campaign (1942),
Moscow and Stalingrad. Most grognards
will play the 1941 campaign as soon as
they open the box (something about "real
wargamers" always playing the longest
campaign games they can find). This,
however, is not recommended. The
smaller scenarios are excellent learning
tools and serve one well as he progresses
on towards Barbarossa. The 1942 Campaign is particularly welcome, since most
gamers will be able to determine their
prognosis for which side will achieve overall victory by the end of 1941. Thus,
games will rarely extend into the latter
stages of the war. By utilizing the 1942

Campaign Scenario, one will be able to
achieve a better conception of the later
War years.
Since Second Front offers a computer
vs. computer option, careful observation
of such a game will reveal sound initial
strategies and tactics.
As for play balance, note that "Even"
balance should only be used in a computer vs. computer or human vs. human
contest. With one player against the computer, options should be set to give some
advantage to the computer player. These
options maximize the "historicity" of the
simulation (a rational computer Al is
much harder to achieve when the computer has the burden of the offense).
With 20-mile hexes and weekly turns,
Second Front will not generally be played
in one sitting (a player could easily spend
an hour just studying his position and
pondering his orders for a single turn). A
1941 campaign should take about 12-20
hours to reach a decision point. Again,
examine the READ.ME file—one cannot
save a game unless he creates a \SAVE
subdirectory. Also, note that delay/report
options are reset to zero upon reaccessing a saved file. Therefore, be sure to immediately hit the space bar at the first air
combat result so the reports can be read
and analyzed.
Turns follow a sequence of play, with
the Axis player's turn first. The sequence
is movement, production/event variables
and combat. Since Second Front is
played in discrete turns, a two player
game could be played by each player
transmitting his two saved files after his
turn is completed.
Victory is achieved by occupation of a
certain number of enemy cities. Initially,
this reviewer was concerned over the victory conditions (e.g. is geography or
destruction of enemy military forces the
key to victory?). However, an examination
of the "Victory Cities" reveals that their
defense should involve the bulk of the
enemy military capabilities. Note that
Gorki is a victory city in the 1941 Campaign Scenario. If the Germans seize
Leningrad and Moscow, this is normally
the closest city for Strategic Victory.
During winter turns, the Soviet forces do
not garrison cities (other than Moscow),
opting instead for a counter-offensive.
This strategy can well lead to a German
panzer corps sneaking into Gorki, completely out of supply, while a significant
Russian force ignores it. This feature may
be corrected in Version 1.1 by either adjusting the Artificial Intelligence or changing the victory city to Kazan. Second
Front is relatively easy to learn to use. At
the same time, it is difficult to learn to
use well.
Mouse implementation is lacking. While
such a deficiency is not as fatal as games
where one must plot dozens of moves
per unit each turn (here, the maximum

any unit can move is five hexes), mouse
interface would have made the game
much smoother than the keyboard input.
Also, production adjustments are cumbersome; one must first check the production of a particular item (e.g. Pz II, Armored Cars, etc.) in order to determine
the particular cities and then, map scroll
to the particular cities. A "window environment" or automatic "Flash To [City]
would have been appreciated.

distinguish quality. Therefore, transfer obsolete units to the West and maintain the
more modern units in the East. Also, increase the replacement value in the
spearhead elements (note that this is
done by accessing the Headquarters and
pressing "+"; use the "+" on the numeric
keypad or else the SHIFT-+ on the keyboard since the latter is actually an =).
Note that the Order of Battle is well done,
and it is fascinating to see Soviet units
receive the coveted "Guards" title as they
gain combat experience.
Uber Alles (Leadership and Doctrine)

Reich-Thinking (Notes on Logistics)
Proper use of supply is the key to victory. While Moghilev may be seized by the
third week of the invasion by an armored
spearhead, such a thrust often will place
the armor out of supply, and an additional month may be required to extricate
and replenish the isolated armor corps. A
German capture of Moscow will devastate
Soviet replacement capabilities, and shift
the ratio of German to Russian losses
from a 3-5:1 ratio to 10-20:1.
Production should be analyzed early.
Obsolete armor and airplane factories
should be quickly adjusted to produce
war machinery more suited to the player's
needs. Similarly, the German OKW
(Oberkommando des Wehrmacht) has a
large number of unassigned divisions;
these reserves should be reassigned to
new corps, and used for anti-Partisan missions or to assist in the main offensive.
Finnish air assets should be transferred
to Army Group North after the initial air
attack, since the Finns are useless until
such time as Leningrad falls. Interestingly
enough, the Finnish air engenders great
Soviet animosity, since a computer
Soviet will attack it wherever it goes.
Most combat corps can do well with
three divisions assigned. The remainder
should be assigned to the front-line headquarters element, which will feed additional divisions in as needed. Thus, when
one has time to rest a corps, a divisional
transfer should be effected. Also, "a tank
is a tank is a tank" because certain assets
must be placed in the Western and
Italian Fronts and the computer does not

Individual leaders are present for the
headquarters elements, and should be
carefully evaluated. A German player
should immediately remove all commanders with a rating of less than "6" (on
a 1-9 scale). Individual command ratings
are generally accurate, although this
reviewer has certain reservations (e.g.
"Smiling Albert" Kesselring is rated as a
9; he did a superb job of defending the
Italian Front, but how would he have
done on the Russian steppes?). Hitler
and Himmler are both rated at a 3. This
reviewer thinks Hitler's "Stand Fast" order
in 1941 may well have saved the German
Army and hence, he should be rated
higher than Himmler. Grigsby thinks Hitler was an overall disaster.
German Player Notes: Soviet partisan
operations may appear threatening, but
rarely cause real damage. In fact, recent
historians have called the entire partisan
effectiveness into question. Even when a
unit is isolated and seemingly combat ineffective, its leader may still get a random
chance at substantially increasing the
combat effectiveness.
Soviet mechanized formations should
be isolated and reduced at leisure rather
than by mass frontal assaults in the early
months. It is quite difficult to achieve the
historical German phase line objectives in
June through August 1941, and it is very
rare to achieve a "Kiev-like pocket" in
which 600,000 Soviet troops can be surrounded and destroyed. Instead, one
achieves small (1-2 unit) pockets, which
can then be forced to surrender. While
the initial phase lines may be slower than
historical, the German Army has a tendency to keep moving. Do NOT become discouraged by early delays and seemingly
large losses (i.e. a ratio of less than 5:1).
Repeated assaults will eventually lead to a
Soviet crisis point on or about October
12, 1941 in which Leningrad, Moscow
and Sevastopol should fall. With such losses, the Soviets cannot rebound.
As the German player, do not allow the
panzers to get too far out of supply. A
narrow front advance is not optimal, and
one should access the F9 key often in
order to determine the "area control".
However, a Soviet counter-offensive in
mid-1941 is seldom tragic for the Germans. In order for the Soviet computer

to achieve a multi-hex coordinated assault, the computer compares a random
number (1-100), which must be less than
the commander's rating. Since the best
commander's rating is only a 9, it is obvious that Soviet assaults have little
chance of success (the actual percentage
may be about 2%).
The documentation notes that air elements can be used once per turn. This is
true of bombing missions, but use of Alt1 (interdiction missions) can be repeated
as often as one desires. These "fighter
sweeps" are interesting, but their impact
on the overall simulation is negligible.
Promotion List (Conclusions)
Obviously, Second Front is not the perfect wargame. However, even with the
user interface, the confusing documentation and other anomalies, it is still recommended as a mandatory purchase by the
grognard. Its multi-level of play, the "num-

ber crunching" wherein losses are taken
down to squads and individual vehicles—
all are magnets for the hard-core gamer.
The casual gamer or one not really interested in the Russian Front may find this
product somewhat tedious, but for
Recommended Reading
Sadly, Second Front lacks a bibliography.
Discussions with Mr. Grigsby have yielded the
following sources that he relied on:
Mitcham, Samuel W., Hitler's Legions, the
standard English version of the German Order
of Battle for the Second World War;
Poirier and Conner, The Red Army Order of
Battle, a similar reference for the Soviets;
Ziemke, Earl F., Moscow to Stalingrad and
Stalingrad to Berlin, a well-written narrative of
the East Front.
In addition, this reviewer would recommend:
Erickson, John, The Road to Stalingrad and
The Road to Berlin, perhaps the quintessential
English reference;
Vincent Esposito, The West Point Atlas of
American Wars, despite the title, it also covers

boardgame players who began with

Stalingrad and Panzerblitz and continued onwards, Second Front will prove
a rewarding experience.
(c) 1990 All Rights Reserved

the Russian Front in full and superb multicolored maps;
Irving, David, Hitler's War, revisionist history
at its best (worst?), in which a sympathetic
portrait of Hitler emerges;
Keegan, John, The Second World War, which
is more broad-based, but the author is always
thought-provoking;
Sajer, Guy, The Forgotten Soldier, an
autobiography of an individual Wehrmacht
soldier's experiences;
Werth, Alexander, Russia at War, the best onevolume history of the Eastern Front;
Young, Peter, Atlas of the Second World War,
a well-done war atlas available in paperback.
Also, the movie, Cross of Iron (with
James Coburn) gives a perspective of what
the Russian front must have been like.

Review
ASHINGTON D.C.—The
White House today issued the following statement, "The Russian-supported
radical terrorist group led by
Jaharah Khommini Sieb Abdul
has taken the U.S. Ambassador
to the Middle East as hostage.
They are demanding 10 Million
dollars as ransom for the Ambassador to be released unharmed.
If the ransom is not received
within thirty days, they have
vowed to shoot the Ambassador
through the head and dump his
body on the front steps of the
American Embassy."

W

rent with the world political
situation. So, one should make
sure that Westland reads the
newspaper daily. Also, players
should never forget that
Westland is always on call and
must be ready, at a moment's
notice, to serve his country. So,
he needs to check in with the
front desk on a regular basis.

The Iceman
Computeth!

Soon, it will become apparent
that Westland must contact his
commanding officer, General
Braxton. He will immediately be
recalled to the Pentagon for an
emergency briefing where the
upcoming mission will be outlined and all of the pertinent details surrounding his transportation and contacts
delineated.

Sierra's "Code-Name: Iceman"

In response, The President issued a
statement demanding the Ambassador's
immediate release. He pledged that if
the Ambassador was not freed within a
reasonable amount of time the United
States would not hesitate to take
an aggressive military stance
against the cowardly perpetrators.

by Michael Chaut

and the west should help Johnny get a
feel for the area and find out where
things are. He might even be directed to
read his magazine; check out the hotel;
or maybe, play some volleyball. As with
all Sierra games, it is advisable for the

The White House has put the 7th
Fleet on full alert and has ordered
them into the area. The formal
statement said that this action has
been taken in response to the
Soviet Naval build-up in the
Mediterranean, however, White
House sources close to the
Secretary-of-State have confirmed
that this action has been taken to
try to pressure the terrorists into
releasing the Ambassador.
In Code-Name: Iceman, the Super
Powers are pushing the world to the
brink of nuclear war and you are
the only person that can stop it.
Iceman, Sierra's latest release,
takes the player from the sunsplashed beaches of Tahiti to the
halls of the Pentagon and beyond.
As secret agent Johnny Westland, a
member of an elite U.S. Navy
SEALS (Sea, Air, Land) commando
team, the player must journey undetected into enemy territory. Using
a nuclear-powered attack submarine, a one-man diving vehicle
and scuba gear, Westland must
penetrate the electronic harbor surveillance of a hostile Middle-Eastern
nation to reach his goal, a nest of fanatical terrorists armed with advance weaponry. If that is not enough, he must follow
up his success by figuring out a plan to
rescue the American Ambassador and effect an escape unharmed.
As one begins to play Iceman, one is
immediately thrust into the world of
espionage and intrigue, complete with
beautiful women deadly adversaries and
highly sophisticated technology and
gadgets. As the story opens, players find
their characters on a well-needed vacation. At this point, players should try a little exploration. Moving both to the east

In order to win the game, players will
have to repair, pilot, and plot the course
for a futuristic nuclear attack submarine. This mixed genre game
combines an adventure format with
a futuristic nuclear submarine
"simulator." This mixture of adventure and simulation should provide
an additional dimension of enjoyment for Sierra's adventure game
fans. In addition to the usual exploration, this game will require the
player to guide this advanced stealth
sub across the globe and into combat with enemy warships.
Perhaps the nicest result of this
submarine sequence is that it helps
to provide the player with a sense of
total control as Johnny Westland
navigates the Atlantic and prepares
to penetrate the enemy harbor. He
is ultimately responsible for infiltrating the harbor zone and avoiding its
security devices.

player's character to take, look at and
read everything he sees (in some cases,
items he doesn't see). As Westland, the
player should check out the bar, have a
drink, and dance with a lady (The animation in this scene is terrific and, after all,
he is on R & R.). Don't forget, that as a
secret agent, part of the job is to stay curTITLE:
CODE-NAME: ICEMAN
SYSTEMS:
IBM
Sound Boards: Roland
Ad Lib, IBM,
CMS and Tandy Sound
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Jim Walls
PUBLISHER:
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

In the course of the game, players
should learn about working
hand-in-hand with other branches of the
government (including the C.I.A.).
They should also become familiar
with Navy terminology and the
facets of decoding scrambled messages. Above and beyond all else,
the player should learn Defensive
Submarine Warfare Strategies as
well as effective weapons and when
to use them. When in doubt about procedure, it is helpful to refer to the U.S.S.
Blackhawk Technical Manual which is included in the documentation.
Sierra continues to upgrade and
develop its technology as can be seen by
some new innovations made to their
proprietary language SCI (Sierra Creative
Interpreter). First of all, they have improved the parser control features and
added more "point and click" interaction.
Beyond the interface improvements,
Code-Name: Iceman also supports over
ten (10) different sound cards. This
Continued on page 52

I

ICEMAN
Continued from page 48

enables Mark Seibert's composing talents
to really "come to the surface" with a
musical score that is simply spectacular.
Deciphering
The Code
(Conclusions)
Written and
designed by

Police Quest
creator Jim
Walls, Code-

Name: Iceman
is basically a
linear game. In
order to win
players have to
accomplish one
task after
another. Players
will find that
there are a lot of layers to this game.
After all, there is the normal adventure
game rigors that Sierra fans have come
to know and love and now there is the
extra added perplexities of a submarine
simulation.
Overall, the "Sub Simulator" is exciting.
Although not as complex as
thoroughbred simulations, this sequence

Classified Information
(Warning: Specific Hints)
It is important to visit the bar while in Tahiti
and to take Stacy back to her room for KISSES and "whatever". Have Johnny talk to her.
She will tell him that she has lost an earring.
Be sure to have him find it (She offers a clue
about where to look.).
Once Westland is underway on the sub, it is
important to remember that it is the Executive
Officer's responsibility to insure the operational
status of his vessel by inspecting and cycling
all equipment in the four (4) main areas of the
sub (i.e. Control Room, Machinery Room, Torpedo Room, and the Engine Room).
When the submarine captain locks Johnny's
orders in his safe, make sure Westland gets
the combination. He will need the briefcase at
a later point to aid in decoding the C.I.A. radio
messages. When looking at the microfiche, A
= Army, N = Navy, AF = Air Force and M =
Marines. Since "N" stands for Navy and the
number next to it is 3, you must add 3 to
each number in the radio message. The number is derived from the codebook found in
Westland's quarters. These numbers will give
you the page number, line number and word
number of the primary and secondary words.
Once the player has the key words, they must
be fed into the computer which may be found
in Westland's quarters. Remember, all coded
numbers are in the range of 0-9. If a number
goes over 9, the player must use what's left
over and start counting again from 0.

offers a real-life quality due to the fact
that it is interlaced within an adventure
game. On the down side, there are a
couple of points where a little less attention to detail would have given the game
more playability. Specifically, the iceberg
navigation sequence seemed too long
and quickly became boring. The battle se.
quences however, combined with the exploration of the sub and the need to
repair damaged equipment definitely
helped to bring
the pace back
up to speed.
Aesthetically,
the game has
much to commend it. The
artwork
provided by
lead artist,
Sheryl Loyd,
certainly adds a
flair and
panache to the
game.
Finally,
players will find that some of the puzzles
are quite difficult. Fortunately, it is not
one of those adventure games that can
be completed in a couple of days.

Code-Name: Iceman has a lot to offer.
If you are a regular Sierra fan or simply a
regular guy/gal who likes James Bond
Movies, this is a game that you will
probably not want to miss. CGW

When inspecting the machine room, have
Westland examine all the machines. He must
become familiar with the lathe, drill press, and
the grinder.
When playing Boss Dice, beware, the game
only lets the player save twice. It seems that
the odds skew towards the game and not the
player. Fortunately, the saving grace of the
dice game is that one does not have to play it
through to the end. The reward at the end of
the sequence is an electronic device that will
provide easy access to the harbor, later in the
game. Yet, the clever player might find
another way.
When under attack from enemy warships,
the player should not forget to dive deep and
run silent. The Blackhawk is equipped with the
latest in electronic noise eliminating
transducers, so one should reduce speed and
wait until the enemy fires his weapons. They
will not be able to find the Blackhawk if the
sub is deep and quiet enough. Then, when the
enemy is close, "lock on" to his ship and fire
the Blackhawk's torpedoes. Of course, one
should not fire weapons when the enemy is
too close because doing so will give away the
player's position. The enemy warships must
be destroyed before they are maneuvered
directly over the sub. It will take three (3) hits
to sink an enemy ship.
Also, do not overlook the use of decoys. The
player should use them when enemy torpedo
impact is imminent or when the player needs
to fire weapons and enemy torpedoes have
been launched.

Contest

The "Great One" Gets Greater
Bethesda's "Hockey League Simulator"

N

ow that Wayne Gretzky Hockey allows players to center the lines of

regard to personnel decisions, one is not
taking a shot in the dark, since HLS
provides the same statistics/ratings for
minor league prospects as for the NHL
personnel.

their favorite NHL teams and
score against their most hated rivals,
what more could hockey fans ask? They
could feasibly ask for the chance to play
a full season of the most realistic hockey
simulation available, complete with the
capacity for: keeping individual and team
statistics, consumating player trades,
making personnel and roster decisions,
developing league schedules and allowing the computer to play the games
which the players themselves do not wish
to play. If that is what they would ask for,
their wish is Bethesda Softworks' command. The Hockey League Simulator
(Amiga—$29.95, IBM—$34.95)
(hereinafter HLS) allows players to
manage their own leagues and incorporate actual games of Wayne Gretzky
Hockey into those leagues.
The good news is that HLS offers its
own play value. Even if one did not want
to play out any games using WGH, it is
fascinating to play general manager and
abstract a season for one's favorite team.
This reviewer had a marvelous time trying
to make the Quebec Nordiques into a
competitive NHL team. As GM, one can

As coach, one has the opportunity to
set lines (even strength, power play and
short-handed lines, just like in WGH).
The program even features an Al to act
as "coach" in setting the lines for the nonhuman coached teams in the games
which are to be abstracted by HLS rather
than played out in WGH.
The bad news is that HLS does not
offer an artificial intelligence to simulate
the other general managers. So, if a
human general manager wants to consummate a trade, it is necessary to toggle
another team to human control and
make the trade himself. Thus, there is no
"check and balance" in the trade
mechanism if one happens to be simulating league action in solitaire mode.
establish the budget for the hockey club;
fire the coach, when necessary; and activate players from the minors to compensate for any injuries among the rostered
players (or allow the veterans some time
in the minors for "conditioning"). With

With the ability to handle all of one's
league statistics, import results of WGH
games into the HLS, and capacity for
making GM-style decisions, HLS is a
must for the computer gamer who likes
hockey. CGW

WIN A Trip to Los Angeles and Meet Wayne Gretzky!
Join with Bethesda Softworks and Computer Gaming World in our search to find the
finest managerial mind in professional hockey
today.
Announcing the Hockey League Simulator
competition. The top 50 entries will receive a TShirt and the grand prize will be a trip to Los
Angeles to attend an L A. Kings game and
meet Wayne Gretzky.
All you need to do is use the Hockey League
Simulator to design your own "Dream Team".
After recruiting the ultimate hockey squad,
simply send in a copy of your team disk to
Bethesda Softworks. In December, 1990,
these teams will be pitted against each other in
a single elimination play down tournament.
When the shaved ice settles, we will have one
Supreme Manager and his Championship
Team.

HLS Competition Rules
1. Participants use the Bethesda Softworks'
Hockey League Simulator and the 87/88 NHL
DataDisk (included in the HLS) and design
what they think will be professional hockey's
most competitive squad.

a) Your team must contain 20-25 players,
have 3 centers, 3 left wings, 3 right wings, 6
defensemen and 2 goalies. You can include up
to eight additional players at any position. The
computer will draw upon these players as
needed.
b) The overall team strength, shown by the
team editor function of HLS cannot exceed
1,800 points total. If you choose to include
fewer players of greater strength and, because
of injury, your team falls below 20 players,
Bethesda will sub in scrub players with an over
all rating of 55 points.
c) You can make NO changes to the ratings
assigned to players in the 87/88 NHL DataDisk
included with HLS. Any change to these ratings
will result in immediate disqualification.
d) Teams should be saved and named, using
your first initial, middle and last initial. The file,
where your "team.doc" is stored, should be assigned the same name.
2. All entries must be postmarked by Novem
ber 31, 1990 and should be sent to:

HLS Competition
Bethesda Softworks
P.O. Box 7877
Gaithersburg, MD 20898
All disks received become the property of
Bethesda Softworks and cannot be returned.
3. Your disk must be clearly labeled with your
name, address and phone number. To be
eligible to enter, Bethesda must have your warranty card on file. You are allowed to return
your warranty card with your entry.
4. The play-down tournament will start
December 1, 1990. The winner will be notified
prior to December 24, 1990. The trip to L.A. to
see the Kings game and meet Wayne Gretzky
is scheduled for late January, 1991. There will
be 250 runner-ups who will receive an "I participated in the 1990 Hockey League Simulator
tournament" consolation prize.
5. Results of the tournament will be reported
in Computer Gaming World "The Definitive
Computer Game Magazine".
6. Employees, or the families thereof, of
Bethesda Softworks, Media Technology, Ltd.
and Golden Empire Publications, are not
eligible to enter. Void where prohibited.

Announcing ...

CGW's Top Ad Award Winners
Last January CGW sponsored its
second annual TOP AD Awards to
honor the best advertisements in the
computer game industry. Forty nine
companies joined in the competition.

get a check for $250 and a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World.
Congratulations to all our winners. See
you next January for the Third Annual
CGW Top Ad Awards.

CGW readers were asked to vote for
the best advertisements in the issue.
They were asked to "consider the
graphics, copy, and overall impact" of
each ad. To encourage readers to
vote for the best ads (instead of their
favorite games contained in the ads) a
prize of $250 and a lifetime subscription to CGW was offered to the contestant who came closest to picking
the exact order of finish. Over 700
readers voted.
In the "Full Page or Spread"
Category top honors went to Koei for
their two page spread "Experience
Japan's Greatest Strategy Simulations". Bill Swartz, then Marketing
Director at Koei, hired Vince DeNardo,
then art director at Computer Gaming
World, to design the ad. CGW readers
approved of the result with their votes.
Bill has since moved on to Mediagenic
and Vince has defected to Interplay. (It
should be interesting to see what
those two companies come up with
for the Third Annual Top Ad contest
next January). Meanwhile Koei continues to run the award winning ad,
apparently still drawing well.
Lucasfilm Games came in a close
second in the full page category with
their beautiful and informative "Battle
of Britain. Up Close and Personal" ad.
Third place went to Access Software
for "Crime Wave" (five screen photos
and a vulnerable blond babe). You
may recall that another "blonde babe"
ad won in 1989's contest (Accolade's
"European Rush Hour Ad").
In the Fractional Page category SubLogic and Microillusions again
proved that four color ads out pull
black and white ads. Sublogic's striking UFO ad dominated Top Ad voting
in this category. Microillusions
"Scooby Doo/Spacewaste" four color
layout was a distant second. Coming
in third place (for the second year in a
row) was Cyborg Games for their
"The Next Empire" ad.
Sau-Wing Yu of Seattle WA correctly
picked five of the six winners. As
CGW's Top Ad Voter, Sau-Wing will

Fractional Page Winners

1st: SubLogic
961 pts

2nd: Microillusions
611 pts

3rd: Cyborg Games
Full Page Winners

1st: Koei
453 pts

2nd: Lucasfilm
429 pts

3rd: Access Software
313 pts

253 pts

Rings of
Medusa
Continued from page 43

this area of the game is greatly appreciated.
In addition, the game has a pleasant appearance. The topographical map is
pleasing to the eyes and allows easy
recognition of the various towns, hills,
and other landmarks. The town menu is
similarly sharp, with the various shops
easily identifiable.
I also enjoyed the inclusion of mines as
a potential source of income. This feature allows players who have already
amassed considerable savings to use
their money to further increase their
profit, while saving themselves from the
tedious process of trade.
Bad Points
Unfortunately, while the graphics are
polished, the rest of the game is in
marked contrast to the graphics. Trading
is extremely difficult due to the fact that
the player can be attacked at any time,
virtually without warning, and lose all his
goods. The manual states that this can
be avoided by purchasing scouts to point
out enemy armies at a distance, but this
is impractical. The player initially lacks the
funds to purchase the necessary scouts
to explore an area wide enough to provide adequate warning. Also, even if one
spots an army, it cannot necessarily be
avoided.

Perhaps, the greatest weakness in
Rings of Medusa is lack of realism. The
game seems to have received little
playtesting, as glaring oversights in
credibility are apparent. For example,
while cargo takes up space in wagons
and ships, every type of cargo takes up
the same amount of volume. Thus, a
huge Mining Machine takes up the same
amount of space as a single sheet of
parchment! Also, the player will quickly
note that he is the only active force in
the entire economy. As the years pass,
goods will continuously be produced,
and soldiers continuously multiplied. In a

few dozen years, the amount of soldiers
in the "Park" awaiting recruitment can
double or triple the population of the entire town. At the same time, towns which
previously boasted 50 or 60 horses will
have amassed 300, 400 or more.
One must also consider the poor handling of time within the game. There is
no time limitation built into the game
since the player can continue playing for
hundreds of game years without penalty.
Also, the game interface is poorly
designed. Movement on the map, accomplished via the mouse, feels very unnatural as the marker on the map follows
a literal line to the mouse, rather than allowing the player to trace his path to his
destination. In the same vein, the passage of time in the game is much too
fast. Several days can pass before the
player can even get his mouse ready to
send his people to the next town. Since
armies must be paid every month, this is
very annoying. It would have been much
better had the game based time on actual distance traveled, rather than realtime. Further, the game refuses to recognize a second drive, which makes saving
the game an arduous, disk-swapping task.
Frankly, this reviewer can find no way to
recommend Rings of Medusa. While the
game has a promising premise (a fantasybased strategy game), and decent
graphics, the entire design seems unprofessional and plagued with problems.
Rings of Medusa is highly unrealistic,
lacks a good interface, and seems to lack
playtesting. All in all, Rings of Medusa
seems an unfinished game with a need
for a major overhaul.

Review

Decision At Gettysburg
First Wargame from a New Company
by M. Evan Brooks

D

ecision At Gettysburg (DAG) is a

system to determine unit position, a map
with such coordinates might have been
more appreciated.

"strategic simulation" of the most
famous battle of the American Civil
War. Geared to the "hard-core"
gamer/simulationist, this product is one of
the first "traditional" wargames to appear in
VGA-graphics. As such, the unit counters
and terrain are extremely attractive. However, the question remains: is the beauty
only skin-deep or is this simulation at the
cutting edge of computer simulation?
The advertising campaign of DAG pits it
squarely against SSI's Gettysburg: The
Turning Point. Although both products
cover the same battle, they do so from entirely different perspectives (DAG covers a
more operational area [147 square miles]
while Gettysburg: The Turning Point is
more oriented to the actual battle itself).
Perhaps more importantly, SSI's product
was designed for the 8-bit computer in
1986. While board game design may
evolve at a slower pace, computer simulation designs generally reach functional obsolescence within two years. Thus, the
comparison between these products is
somewhat misleading.

Documentation

Overall, the documentation is marginally
adequate as to play mechanics and less
than adequate in the areas of
operational/tactical guidelines and historical
perspective.
Graphics
There is no question that DAG's
graphics are striking. Units are crisp and
easily discernible, and ground terrain/vegetation is colorful and clear. However, the entire playing area comprises fifteen "maps", thereby entailing much
scrolling to view and move troops. Further, when the border of the visible screen
is reached, an annoying flicker results as
the map "redraws" itself.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The documentation of DAG is a total of twentyone half-pages along with an attractive reproduction of a nineteenth century map of the Gettysburg region. As
such, it covers the basic mechanics, but offers few examples and
no real elucidation of the meeting engagement that has, historically, become known as the Battle of Gettysburg.
Since this simulation covers the 147-square mile region around
Gettysburg, it is a rare experience to encounter a battle unfolding
reminiscent of the historical battle. However, one now has the opportunity to use the Southern cavalry in a better role than Jeb
Stuart's "Glory Jaunt" around the Union flank in Hannover.
Of course, utilizing this additional capacity for strategic planning
also means that the meeting engagement may well occur miles
from the historical battlefield. While SSI's Gettysburg game also
generated a different orientation than the historical battle, its
smaller map scale compelled a slightly more "familiar" feel. This is
not to say that DAG's perspective is erroneous, but rather to
point out that one engages in a classic meeting engagement in
the vicinity of the Gettysburg battlefield rather than necessarily
over the actual historical terrain.
The hard-copy map included with the program is virtually useless. While it does give an overall perspective of the AO (area of
operations), it is difficult to read and even more difficult to use
with the simulation. Since the simulation uses an X-Y coordinate

Decision At Gettysburg
IBM with 640K
1-2
$49.95
Jeffrey R. Wickersham
Tiglon Software
4308 S. Peoria Avenue
Tulsa, OK 74105

DAG takes every bit of RAM available.
When the documentation orders one to
remove all terminate-and-stay-resident
programs, it does mean all—even a
mouse driver will cause the program to
abort upon loading as it "unzips" itself.
Also, terrain is noted to the nearest one hundred
feet. Since this is true, one wonders why a full digit
height (i.e. "300"') could not have been used rather
than the "xx" of the program (i.e. "3xx").

Finally, when exiting the program, the graphics
mode changes to a much less crisp resolution in a "C-prompt".
One may resume normal mode by rebooting or typing "mode
C080". This reviewer was impressed by the initial graphics appeal
of DAG, but the limitations in the remainder of the program
make the overall conclusion less attractive.
Game Play
After the attractiveness of the initial screen displays, the first
thing one notes is that unit movement is solely by keyboard input
(arrow keys). Since the overall playing field is equivalent to fifteen
(15) screens, this can quickly become tedious. Also, when
moving an entire corps, accomplishment of this by individual
division/brigade can be an exercise in patience.
DAG is a "real-time" program. Time marches inexorably on, and
the unwary commander may well lose track of important events
occurring in other areas of the battlefield. Fortunately, one can
pause the program in order to catch up. While this partially
defeats the "real-time" perspective, it does make the game more
playable.
Units may be displayed as always visible or hidden. While the
grognard will utilize the latter option, this reviewer strongly recommends the use of the visible option in a learning mode.

Note that DAG is for one or two
players. To some degree, this is not
extremely significant, but it does
prevent the player from using a computer-only mode to discern playing
tactics.
Also, the addition of some miniscenarios might have encouraged a
better user-facility with the program
(e.g. Chamberlain and the 20th
Maine's stand, Pickett's Charge, or
even the historical second day deployment).
Subtitled "A User-friendly Strategic
Simulation", DAG literally begs for
mouse implementation. This
reviewer's discussions with company
president Robert C. Knudson led to Tiglon's recognition of certain modifications which would make the program more "user
friendly". These are currently in process and include a two player
modem version, as well as an escort command (in which the
player will have "the option to identify other units in the immediate area of the escort unit. These units will follow along the same
path and speed as the escort unit . . . " The escort version should
be available momentarily (Version 1.2) and registered owners will
receive the mouse version when it becomes available.
Certain other anomalies should be noted. Time literally ceases
between 8:30 PM and 5:00 AM. While little fighting actually occurred in periods of darkness during the war, entire corps were
moved up to the battle lines. This may also be taken into account in later versions. Finally, victory conditions are based upon
destruction of the enemy army, i.e. the first army to become
demoralized (after circa 35-40% losses) will be defeated. General
Robert E. Lee did not intend to fight a pitched battle in the hostile Northern environs. Instead, his excursion may be more akin
to a raid in force. His main objective was to threaten the North
and obtain foreign recognition for the Confederate cause. Such
recognition could well have achieved Southern independence
and led to the establishment of customs borders along the
Mason-Dixon line. Thus, from a strategic perspective, the destruc-

RECOMMENDED READING LIST
Esposito, Vincent J., West Point Atlas of American Wars gives
an excellent map perspective of the army deployments leading
up to and during the battle itself.

Michael Shaara's The Killer Angels is an eminently readable
novel about the Battle of Gettysburg—both historically accurate
and touching.
Shelby Foote's The Civil War: A Narrative, Volume 2, transforms factual history into fascinating prose.

Hattaway and Jones' How the North Won offers both history
and analysis of why the South lost its bid for independence.

Also, although Martin von Crevald's Command in War does
not cover Gettysburg or even the American Civil War in particular, it does cogently analyze the difficulties inherent in meeting engagements which took place before the invention of radio
communications.

tion of the Army of the Potomac, while
desirable, was not worth the risk of the
loss of the Army of Northern Virginia.
As the simulation unfolds, the South
must quickly destroy the Union forces if
they expect to achieve a coherent and
viable defense. Union forces must trade
space for time, as they seek to
counteract the South's initial manpower advantage. However, battle tactics must be carefully implemented. For
example, cavalry charges against
emplaced infantry and artillery are
predestined for defeat.
The player should pause the game to
examine his unit status. Combat results
occur only when units are in contact
and the player will often realize the brittleness of a particular unit
only when the message, "!!! Warning: One of your Major Units
has been completely crushed" has been received. Judicious
game pauses and relief in place will lead to battlefield success.

Decision At Gettysburg is the first product from a new company. It attempted to do much and has actually achieved some of
its objectives. The fact remains that it is currently cumbersome
and awkward. However, its designers have shown a willingness to
correct many of the deficiencies and, when this is done, DAG
may well be one of the best operational computer wargames
released. However, until version 1.2 is released, one can merely
wait

Review

All That Glitters Is Not Iron
UBI So ft's Iron Lord
by Allen L. Greenberg

I n all of computerized medieval
gaming-lore, there beats no
heart more tortured by diversity
than that of the Iron Lord. If the
Iron Lord had any friends (which, by
all accounts, he does not), they
would probably call him "Iron." His
description on "The Dating Game"
might go something like this: "Iron
enjoys archery, gambling, arm-wrestling, horseback riding, solving other
people's problems, and making
plans to send his uncle to hell." He
is a young man, in the unenviable
position of having lost his ancestral
estate, as well as the dominion over
the surrounding province to his murderous uncle. Following the death
of Iron's father, a sympathetic family
friend carried off "baby Iron" to be
reared and trained as a knight. Iron
Lord is the story of this knight as he
returns to his land and attempts to
raise an army to contend against his
uncle's demonic followers. It's a
computer game in which moments
of intense arcade pressure alternate
with adventure and decision-making.
The Field of Honor (Gameplay)

any time after Iron has recruited a
bare minimum of soldiers. However,
it unfolds more quickly and easily
when Iron has secured at least eight
or nine regiments in the first phase.
The player is allowed six moves per
turn, alternating with the computergenerated uncle's forces. The
strength of each regiment, as well as
the result of each confrontation, is
graphically displayed in the screen
corner as the phase progresses.
The third and final phase, which
might have been called "blight at the
end of the tunnel" is an arcade exercise which seems removed from the
story which precedes it. Iron
wanders through six sequential
mazes gathering keys, weapons and
mystic shields. In between the
mazes, he faces space-invaderoid
demons which will kill Iron provided
they can penetrate the entirety of
the mystic shields.
Iron Lord's graphics are fairly impressive. The color palette occasionally seems limited, but the
overall result is pleasing nonetheless. The program also plays a
pleasant variety of medieval music
(in stereo where available) which is of
the same high quality as the
graphics. In addition to the music,
the program produces some digitized
grunts and other sound-effects to go
along with the action.

The game is organized into three
TITLE:
Iron Lord
phases, the first of which finds Iron
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Atari ST,
sitting on the doorstep of the guttedand C-64
REVIEWED:
Amiga
out ruins of his family manor. From
PRICE:
$39.95
there, he can find a half-dozen other
PUBLISHER:
UBI Soft
locations to visit, in addition to the
DISTRIBUTED BY:Electronic Arts
San
Mateo, CA
castle. With a few pieces of gold in
his iron pockets, the young deposed
Although adventure and strategy
lord can begin the difficult job of finding followers to help orare important parts of Iron Lord, the gaming emphasis is clearly
ganize an army. Most of the characters he will encounter are
on arcade action. These sequences include an archery tournapreoccupied with problems of their own and are not interested in
ment in which the player selects a precise angle of firing and
dropping these in order to go to war, even if it is against an army
then simulates pulling back on the bow string. There is also'an
from hell. To gain the attention and respect of these people, Iron
arm-wrestling sequence which may wear out more than one joyswill find it necessary to enter and win some athletic tournaments.
tick, and sword-play with an assassin which is also quite demandThe hero must combine his success with some careful decisions
ing. A game of dice makes for an opportunity to win some spare
in order to come across as a perfect leader. Only in this way will
gold. All of this take place, as does most of the adventuring, in
Iron secure the oaths of fealty necessary to emerge victorious.
the first phase of the game.
The game's second phase is misleadingly referred to as the
"final battle" (It is misleading because there is a confrontation
which follows it). This phase is a movement/battle operation in
which Iron's regiments are spread out like chess pieces opposed
to the evil forces of his uncle. This second phase may begin at

Foul, Varlet! (Complaints)
The primary problem with Iron Lord is that it is, at times, very
Continued on page 65

IRON LORD
Continued from page 62

sluggish. The program may not be installed to a hard drive or
into memory. Hence, the detailed graphics move frustratingly
slow from the floppy disk onto the screen. Many sequences must
reload over and over again each time Iron makes an error in
judgement or fails in an arcade endeavor. It is also necessary for
the hero to return to his home castle in order to save or restore a
game in progress. This process slows things down even more for
the player who chooses to use trial-and-error to solve a puzzle.
Finally, The documentation devotes too much space to the
story which sets the scene for Iron Lord, and too few pages
describing the demands of game-play. Some further description
of the arcade action would have been particularly appropriate.
The little which is present is often unclear.

The battle with the assassin is probably the most difficult arcade
section in the program. Rapid movement of the joystick is necessary to out-maneuver the opposition. Players should particularly
avoid any inactivity whatsoever during this section and keep
Iron's sword moving at all times.
The arm-wrestling sequence also demands extremely rapid
back-and-forth movement of the joystick. The controls for this sequence are so sloppy that players will be sorely tempted to perform some artificial method of speeding up the movement of
their joystick (like disassembling it and operating the switches
manually).
The Marshal's Judgment (Conclusions)
Purists who dislike having their favorite genre of software-entertainment intruded upon by another may find Iron Lord irritating,
while gamers who are easily annoyed with unnecessary disk access may want to simply avoid the trouble. Nevertheless, it
presents an entertaining story and offers reasonable enough
gameplay so that most players will want to play the game
through to the story's conclusion. In summary, Iron Lord is an
above-average combination of adventure, strategy and action
gaming.

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's
View
Continued from page 11

up when conversation starts. No two
people look alike. However, in the fullsize view, there are only a few different
representations. So, at times, it's necessary to look around at people until you
find the person you want (you see his or
her face when you "look at" someone).

so large that even magic gems don't
show you the whole level (that's big!).
Machine speed is another problem,
which generally impacts the game when
the party moves around. The more extraneous animation (animals or people
moving, birds flying, etc.), the slower the
response to movement of the party. At
times, this can be excruciating, especially
in dungeons, when the program is
moving a number of creatures around (a
flock of bats or insects, for example). The
one good thing about this is: if you suddenly slow down, you know there's something out there waiting for you.

The new interface supports mouse or
keyboard input. With the mouse, you
click on one of a set of icons below the
main viewing area on the left hand side
of the screen. Using a keyboard, you
would hit the appropriate letter key for
the command you want. Function keys 18 replace the party stats in the upper
right window with the stats or inventory
for an individual member; and arrow keys
are used to scroll through the inventory
(which can be large for a strong member).

On the whole, this new graphic system
reproduces "real world feel" extremely
well, once you get used to it. However,
there is a debit side: the very size of the
world makes some travelling rather
tedious, especially on the sea. While
there is a quick and easy way to visit any
major town or shrine (see Hints for more
on this), some places can only be
reached the hard way, on foot or by boat,
one step at a time (and that can be a lot
of steps).
Dungeoneering has much the same
drawback. Caverns and passages are so
much larger in scale that exploring can
become very time-consuming. I really
missed the small, compact dungeons of
previous Ultimas. Now, the dungeons are

You can break off combat at any time
and try to run away, if the situation gets
out of hand. Some monsters will try to follow you, but others will give up the chase
after a short while. You'll find out which is
which pretty quickly.
One problem with combat is that a
monster may be in spell or missile range,
but not clearly visible on screen. Sometimes, if you look hard enough, you can
see some movement at the very edge of
the screen, but this is easy to miss. They,
however, can see you quite nicely, and
you may find yourself hit with a spell
before you even know there's trouble.
After combat, searching the remains (if
any) is necessary to find treasure. This is
usually in the nature of mundane
weapons and armor, some gold, and the
occasional ham or loaf of bread. If a body
yields several items and what you want
happens to be on the bottom, you can
simply push the stuff you don't want
aside. You aren't forced to take and, as a
result, drop unwanted items.

Items not used very often can be placed
in bags or knapsacks to reduce inventory
clutter. Clicking on the bag or sack
shows the contents, which can, in turn,
be taken out again, or moved to another
member of the party. Any item, in fact,
can be moved from one person to
another, provided the recipient won't be
overburdened.
Yes, the days of the "pooled inventory",
when you could carry around countless
items, are gone. Each character has a
maximum weight load, in both equipment and items carried. This limit is
based, naturally, on strength. You can
wear/wield armor and weapons up to
your strength in weight, and carry two
times strength in items total (that includes your weapons and armor!).

others. Experimentation is necessary
before you find out what is best for your
team. Against a mixed group of opponents with a powerful monster in their
midst, "Command" will ensure that
everyone directs their attacks at the
greatest threat. For lesser opponents,
rear guard with missile weapons and Assault for the front line fighters is usually a
good combination. My own preference,
though, was to keep control of everyone.
Old habits die hard.

Since the world has changed, so,
naturally, has combat. No more combat
screen displaying your people on one
side and the evil critters on the other.
Things aren't quite so nicely arranged
these days. The bad guys can come at
you from almost any direction in the
majority of encounters.
A new feature allows you to preset combat behavior for each member of the
party, giving them the ability to fight individually. They have the ability to take
up positions automatically at the front,
flanks, or rear; retreat from harm's way;
or go out and take on the nearest (or
strongest) opponent.
However, they will follow this setting exclusively, regardless of what may be actually happening. If you have Dupre, for
instance, set to guard the flank, that is
what he does, even if the Avatar up front
is being pounded into hamburger. Fortunately, even in the midst of fighting for
your life, you can change the behavior to
something more practical, including
"Command", which gives you complete
control over the member.
The presetting, therefore, works well in
some situations, and not so well in

The best thing about combat is that
much of it is discretionary. How many
times in a CRPG have you walked out of
town, taken a few steps, and found
monsters breathing down your neck (or
biting into it, as the case may be)? You
get rid of them, take a few more steps,
and sure enough, more monsters.
That's silly. If so many of them were
roaming around, the world would have
been overwhelmed a long time ago. That
doesn't happen in Ultima VI. The outdoors are virtually encounter-free. There
are a few of them (troll bridges, for instance), but hardly enough to even
bother counting. Mostly, you just have to
avoid the occasional snake, and keep a
guard when camping out to warn of wolves or similar natural critters. The real
monsters are where they should be,
down in the dungeons.
What this does is free you up to concentrate on getting things done, not fighting for your life at every turn. It is a
tremendous relief, not to mention a leap
forward in CRPG's generally, to be able to
Continued on page 68

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's
View
Continued from page 66

get on with the main goals of the game
without a lot of excessive combat.
You will still be doing a fair amount of
fighting, since this is how experience is
gained for level advancement. Still, it will
be happening more at times of your own
choosing, when you feel ready for it, not
when some random number generator
decides to kick off an encounter.
Magic has a new style, too. First, you
need a magic book to record your spells.
Then, of course, you must buy spells and
put them into the book (you do start with
a few). Having reagents is still necessary,
but now the game premixes them for you
(based on your spell
book), which is very
handy. Finally, in order to
cast a spell, you need to
hold the book in hand
(one hand; you can still
have a weapon in the
other).
There are also many
new spells in the arcana.
Yet in some ways, this effort seems wasted. The
only really capable
magician in the party is
the Avatar, who gets two
times Intelligence in
magic points. Everyone else who is able
to use magic gets only half "Intelligence"
in points. In other words, there is no one
of the Mage class to join your party.
Conversations with the locals have been
greatly enhanced. Now, talking to them is
almost like talking to real people. Some
of them have nothing crucial to tell you,
but they will go on and on, just as real
folks do (heh). Personality really comes
through, too, whether someone has a lot
or a little to say. Even some of the party
will get into the act. lolo, Dupre, and
Shamino occasionally break into a conversation with comments or remarks of
their own.
Better yet, there is a "help" feature in
the game, that highlights most of the important keywords in a person's verbiage.
So you no longer need to guess what
words out of a paragraph's worth (or
more) are the right ones to use. Much information can be gained quickly by using
this feature, with far less frustration. You

can turn the "help" off, but it's really better to keep it on.
There is a drawback with talking to
people; it's called Waiting for
So-And-So". Everyone has a schedule that determines when they get up, when they go
to work, when they eat, and when they
go to bed. Not everyone has the same
schedule, either. Some are early risers,
others get up late.
It can become frustrating as you wait
for a merchant to finish lunch so you can
buy an important item, or for a bard to
get out of bed so you can ask him a vital
question. Waiting around, with nothing
else to do (especially in the latter stages
of the game), is very irritating.
Another irritation was "busywork".
Busywork is something (often a long sequence of actions) that you do to achieve
a goal whose rewards are not equal to
the effort expended, and/or do not advance the plot of the game. In this case,

the busywork is the pirate map.
You learn very early in the game that
Mariah needs the second half of a stone
tablet to translate a book that lolo is dragging around with him. Eventually you
find out you need a pirate map to tell
you where to look for it. There are eight
pieces to the map that you have to find.
This would be okay, if you found out
something really vital, or if, at least, the
pirate treasure was very good. Unfortunately, the treasure turns out to be
rather bland. The contents of the book
are interesting, but not crucial to the
game's solution and, later on, you can
learn the language and read the book for
yourself anyway. Additionally, the person
Mariah tells you to consult (after the translation) is someone you have probably already heard of and talked to.
It would have been far better if there
had been fewer pieces, say four. The
time involved then would have been
much less and more in keeping with
what you learn from the book. Otherwise,

it would have been nice to have the book
contain some critical piece of information, making the long and winding trail to
the tablet be of greater worth. As it is,
you could skip the entire pirate map business and never notice the difference.
Plot. I haven't said much about plot up
to now and it's the storyline, not dazzling
graphics or a fancy interface, that really
determines the quality of a game. Does
Ultima VI measure up in this respect?
You bet your sweet bippy! There is a
solid story here, although a little shaky in
some respects (the sudden flatness of the
world is hard to believe, for instance).
The second trilogy (IV-VI) is tied together;
there are echoes of the first with cameo
appearances by our old friends Mondain,
Minax, and Exodus; and the finale continues the tradition started with IV, the
non-violent ending.
The land of the Gargoyles is very nicely
done. That's all I will say, since much of
the game is built around
finding out about them
and what it is they really
want. Obviously, they are
more than they appear,
but it is up to you to discover in your many journeys through the worlds.
Busywork, slowdowns,
and long walks aside, Ultima VI: The False
Prophet is a very good
game. The world is more
real, and more sensibly
put together. Little "bits"
enhance this, such as
mice and snakes fighting
it out in the wilderness,
and the midnight brawls in some of the
taverns. The interface is easy to use
(once you get the hang of it), travel to
most of the major points is effortless, conversation is more life-like, the graphics
are remarkable, and the story wellthought-out (it is not easy to bring
together three games that were not
specifically designed as a trilogy in the
first place).
If you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways: On Delphi, visit the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie, stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (Remember to enclose a selfaddressed, stamped envelope if you live
in the US): Scorpia, PO BOX 338, Gracie
Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Continued on page 74

Letters

Letters from Paradise
Loom and Doom

Loom was a major disappointment.
CGWs review should have said pointblank that the game was deterministic
and linear, not just "easy." I spent $40.00
for six hours of play! No exploration at all
. . . just follow the dangling carrot.
Chris Weaver
Louisville, KY
The Loom review was an excellent
piece of work—an excellent piece of
work—quite a pleasure to read.
Jon Brock
Greenville, SC

Actually, Loom has not yet been
"reviewed" by CGW. The "Sneak
Preview" in April was an advance look
at the game with particular attention to
the style of game and design philosophy
underlying it. Frankly, the sneak preview
did state that the game was deterministic in that it stated, "The game is
'directive', . . ." and " . . . the player often
has the illusion of freedom, . . ." (CGW
#70, p. 14). The preview also noted that
the way magic is handled was directive
when it quoted Brian Moriarty as stating, "If it is not important, you can't
touch it." (p. 16). The information in the
sneak preview was evidently clear
enough for the following readers.
The "Loom Sneak Preview" gets an "F"
because of paragraph 2. [Ed: Mr. Lund

apparently objected to the statement,
"No, this is neither a description of the
radical right holding the United States
hostage, fundamentalist evangelicals
holding the reins of our educational and
religious establishments, nor the last vestiges of Communist Party members
preparing for a counter-revolution."]
Carl Lund
Bruno, MN
Starting a game review with several
paragraphs of fictional "atmosphere" rarely adds to my enjoyment of the article. In
fact, I find it a bit annoying. The "Loom"
review (Ed: preview] introduction, on the
other hand, was excellent. It drew the
reader into the article in a thoughtprovoking way.
John Joerr
Cincinnati, OH

The fictional introductions are intended

to do more than simply set the stage. At
their best, they are intended to convey
something about the game's fiction, flow
and play. For example, "Breach of Conflict" (CGW #70, p. 34) begins with a
narrative that actually describes a combat encounter in the game. It even references the important attribute and time
factors which need to be observed
during the combat. They are not intended to simply fill space.
Singapore Slings A Rebuttal
I have just finished reading my April
issue of Computer Gaming World (#70)
and would like to reply to Ernest
Claridge's letter about his visit to Singapore.
The Funan Centre has two floors that
have computer software stores on them
and many of them sell pirated games.
However, there are also many stores
which sell original software. In fact,
across the road, there is another mall
with Telahin Enterprises, which is where I
obtained my subscription for your
magazine. This particular store was featured in a recent issue of CGW and has,
several times, helped raid stores which
sell pirated disks.
Singapore has a lot of stores which sell
pirated disks, but also many which are
devoted to selling original software. I
think that Ernest's letter is saying bad
things about Singapore and, especially
the Funan Centre, and I do not want
others who are coming to Singapore to
expect every shop to sell pirated games.
Dylan Herbert
Singapore

Actually, Dylan, we are aware of and
wholeheartedly applaud the efforts of
Telahin and others in Singapore to
reduce the flagrant piracy we lamented
in our reply to Mr. Claridge's letter. No
disparagement of Singapore nor the
Funan Centre, in general, was intended.
We wanted to broadside the "pirates",
not the port.
Formal Persuasion
Please don't let your writers say, "This
reviewer" anymore. It drives me nuts. A
simple "I" is fine. Trust me.
Eric Kirchner
Florence, KY

Although CGW occasionally allows an
informal conversational style when the
subject matter or reviewer's perspective
warrants it, this editor prefers use of a
formal style whenever possible. In particular, the magazine's voice attempts to
eschew, with a very few exceptions,
reviews and other features which read,
"First, you do this and then, you do that.
You always avoid this and that." By adding a limited formality to our style, we
continually remind ourselves that we are
addressing an adult audience. According
to our demographics, we are apparently
succeeding in addressing that audience.
Hoist With Our Own Harpoon
In your April issue, you reported that

Harpoon (Version 1.1) is bug free. It is
not. In the bigger games, it will still crash
when you try to compress time.
Perry Riechmann
Valmeyer, IL

The strategy notes on page 20 (CGW
#70) state, "Harpoon (Version 1.1) has
been released, virtually bug-free and
with smaller memory requirements." Although you are technically correct that,
since the adjective "virtually" literally
means "truly", we stated the program is
bug free, please note that the current
usage of the adjective means "practically" (Harper Dictionary of Contemporary
Usage, p. 477). Witness the article on
"Virtual Reality" in this issue as another
example. We regularly use virtual and
virtually as a "weasel word" to avoid
blanket statements. Mr. Brooks meant
that most of the bugs had been corrected.
I enjoyed Mr. Brook's article, "HARPOON: Tactics & Strategy" in the April
issue. I would, however, like to correct a
mistake in the article. Mr. Brooks states,
"In reality, a submarine cannot cease
movement; like a shark, it must keep
moving in order to maintain trim—a complete cessation of movement would force
either upward or downward movement."
In reality, submarines have variable ballast systems which allow the Diving Officer of the Watch to flood or pump water
into or out of the boat. The water collects
in tanks and adjusts the weight of the
boat. The boat should always be neutrally
buoyant. This allows the boat to slow to
0 knots when needed.
Submarines also have hovering systems

to help maintain neutral buoyancy at 0
knots. The hovering system uses a computer to sense the vertical motion of the
boat and adjust the boat's variable ballast
to maintain depth. This system helps
during loss of propulsion casualties when
the boat is forced to 0 knots.
While under the polar ice cap, you also
use the hovering system. Submarines
use a maneuver known as ice picking.
You slow the boat to 0 knots under a
thick part of the ice cap. The hovering
system is adjusted to maintain a slow ascent. The boat will push up against the
ice and settle. In this position, you become lost in the noise of the ice.
Submarines, then, do use 0 knot
speeds. They occur inadvertently as
casualties or intentionally as tactics. In
either case, the systems are in place to
handle and exploit this ability.
Glenn Kenney, LT USNR
Boston, MA

Point/Counterpoint of Purchase

Working in a software store gives me
the golden opportunity to try out new
game releases. To date, I find that CGW
is the most accurate of all magazines concerning the trends in the computer
gaming industry. Keep up the good
work! Thanks.
Christopher S. Purdy
Appleton, WI
I used to use your magazine to help me
choose which new computer games to
buy. But lately, it seems that the games I
see in the "Taking A Peek" section have
been on the shelf for many weeks, if not
months. Let alone the regular review, like
on Breach 2, which I've had for several
months.
I know lots of new games come out
every month, but it seems you're falling
WAY behind. I hope you can "catch up"
soon.
Rick Weindel
Citrus Heights, CA

We are thankful that there are folks
who appreciate the job CGW does with
regard to covering both trends and
games in the entertainment software industry. However, there are some unfortunate trends which mitigate against
prompt coverage. First of all, we do not
include a game in the "Taking A Peek"
section of the magazine until we have a
production copy in our hands. Since
several companies ship review copies to
the press up to two weeks after they
ship the games to the stores and the earliest they can appear in the magazine is
a month and a half to two months after
we get them, there is a necessary time
lapse. Rest assured, however, that the
appearance in "Taking A Peek" means
that the products are "on the market".
We do try to keep you current, however,
with Consumer Electronics Show
reports, buying guides, surveys and
sneak previews. In fact, most people
think we tend to have the most timely
coverage available.

I

Balance of the Planet
Continued from page 19

the issue in the player's hands. He allows
the player full access to all of the game's
variables and makes it possible for the
player to change the potentially biased
factors. Each of the 150 formulas in the
game has an optional background
screen which explains the mathematics
and reasoning behind the formula and allows the player to alter the variables with
the click of the mouse.
For instance, if the player feels that
nuclear power is a safer and more viable
option than popular opinion or Crawford
presents, the player can change the variables to reflect that view. The player can
alter the probability of nuclear accidents,
the amount of damage a radioactive
release causes in terms of lives and the
rate at which nuclear energy becomes
more widely used.
It is a sneaky, but powerful solution to
the problem as it adds another level of
value questioning and creation. Several
of the equations call for determining the
value of a human life. It may be offensive
to some to consider a point value for a
human being, but as Crawford states in
the documentation: "If we can't make life
and death decisions on a rational basis,
how then can we make them?"
A provocative caption on one formula,
typical of Crawford's gadfly nature, reads,
"Here again I am asking you to place a
value for the life of a human being. In
this case though, the human being in
question is poor, lives in a faraway place
and speaks a strange language. Perhaps
his life isn't worth as much?"
Seeing Through Nuke-Tinted Glasses
In addition to creating their own biases,
players can play using pre-created biases.
By loading the Pro-Nuclear, Environmen-

talist, Industrialist, or the Third
World perspectives, the player can
manage the world from that point
of view. When playing the ProNuclear scenario, nuclear energy
is the panacea for the world's energy needs and its dangers are minimized. Or, when playing from the
Third World perspective, success
lies in meeting the needs of the
poor majority on the planet. Playing each scenario gives one a broader
view of the differing factions in the environmental battlefield.
Ecology 101
Balance of the Planet is a tough game.
The average score for a first game is
around -10000 points, in other words,
complete failure. This is intentional. Crawford does not want people to think that
they can sit down and solve the world's
problems in a half hour. This evil wizard
of consumption combined with pollution
will not fall with the stroke of a broadaxe
and the blast of your favorite wand. This
wizard is very big, very ugly, and, in this
fantasy universe, nothing is ever black
and white.
Of course, the game is a tremendous
educational resource. The documentation is a wonderful. It is practically a
textbook of environmental issues. It
makes interesting and informative reading and bears Crawford's distinctive style
throughout. We must compliment Crawford on its thoroughness and clarity.
Instructive Criticism
Is Balance of the Planet fun? No. It is,
however, a game with a message —a
game designed to affect change in its
players. It is the most explicit example to
date of the game designer/artist's
view of the computer as
a tool for social change.
It is a fulfillment of this
messianic agenda and, in
that sense, it is the
closest thing to "art" to
be sold as computer
entertainment. This
game is simply not going
to have you leaping out
of your chair and throttling your CRT in excitement, but it may well
change the way you live
in regard to your world.
At the very least, it may
get you to think about it.

Frankly, Chris has missed an important
point. Before you can educate, you must
entertain. You must engage the player as
fully as possible. Only during those peek
gaming experiences (that only the great
games provide) where you lose track of
time, where all of life's priorities suddenly
lose precedence and you have the
gamer's entire attention, are they receptive to any message the designer may
have. Without this engagement, the message has no power.
Balance of the Planet is a noble effort.
It has very important concepts to teach,
but it is just not fun. It is not a gaming
experience that engages one as a gamer.
Indeed, at times, it seems more like a
bunch of formulas that have a secret
combination that can only be deciphered
by educational but boring iteration. You
don't know how much I want to say that
BOP is a wonderful game. After all, it was
wrought from wonderful intentions and
has an important message. Further, I
respect the designer for having the
courage to risk everything for his convictions. Still, if the game is not fun, it simply wouldn't be right to endorse it for
garners who expect to be entertained by
their entertainment software.

Scorpion's
View
Continued from page 68

A Lost Scroll of
Britannian
Wisdom
Ultima VI Tips
As Told By Scorpia
Lore of the Ubiquitous Arachnids (Special Bug Note): Early releases of Ultima Vl
are known to be definitely buggy. Problems include bizarre graphics, vanishing inventory
items, and game freezes, lockups or crashes
at certain points or under certain conditions.
You should check your version of Ultima VI by
using control-V after booting the game. The
number should be 3.2 or higher. If it's less
than that, you should return the game to
Origin for replacement (especially if it's 1.7).
Geographic Orientation: The first thing to
do (after helping yourself to whatever you
want from the castle), is to learn how to use
the Orb of Moons. It can take you to any of
the eight major towns and shrines, and cuts
down enormously on travel time in the game.
Altogether, there are 24 positions for the red
moongate. Make sure you find them all (two
of those positions will not actually take you
anywhere, but it's nothing to worry about).
When you know how to get around quickly,
visit Yew and buy some swamp boots for your
party. These nifty items allow you to walk safely through swampy ground, thereby preventing poisoning. In Moonglow, you should buy a
sextant. This invaluable instrument, when
used with the latitude and longitude lines on
the cloth map, will always give you your exact
position in the world. It is especially helpful for
relieving your mind on long ocean trips, proving that you're really moving (grin).
One place you should get to early on is
Cove. Very important information can be
learned here. The difficulty is the proximity of
the Shrine of Compassion and its attendant
Gargoyles. You may want to try sneaking in
by skiff along a water route when you get
close.
Since there is no real difference between a
ship and a skiff, except for the ship's cannons,
it makes sense to do your water journeys of
all kinds with the skiff. The skiff, while heavy
(25 stone!) can be picked up and taken with
you. There are many places in the game
where having a skiff with you can be of great
help. Poor Dupre, as the strongest member at
the time, was elected the Official Skiff Bearer
of the party. It took up half his inventory allotment, but it was definitely worth it.
Enlisting Adventurers: Who you have in
the party (aside from the trio of Shamino,
lolo, and Dupre) is up to you. Most of the

people ready to join will be of the fighter
variety, I could find no true mage in the game
to become a member. Even Mariah wasn't interested (well, maybe she had enough last
time out).

that). On the verge of completion, I was
forced to camp and camp and camp, waiting
for the moons to go down so I could get back
the one (good thing it was only one!) stone I
had buried early in the game.

On the other hand, offensive spellcasting is
not all that necessary in most instances. The
majority of opponents can be handled quite
nicely with good old hack-and-slash, and perhaps a judiciously-cast spell or two. Two
weapons that I found surprisingly effective
were slings and boomerangs (this obtained
only from Gargoyles).

Lore Of Strange Encounters: When you
go into the pirate cave after the pirate
treasure, be certain that you have either a
powder keg (you need only one) or the "Explosion" spell. If don't one of those, your trip
will be in vain and you'll have to do it over
again. This cave, by the way, is not the same
as the one in Buccaneer's Den.

They were especially good against minor crit
ters such as bats, rats, wolves, spiders and
the like: the sort that are easy to kill but you
hate to waste good arrows and crossbolts on.
Slings never run out of ammunition, and
boomerangs always come back (the closest
thing to the beloved magic axe of yore in the
game). You can even use these in close-up
combat, avoiding the need for quick weapon
changes in many cases. Against something
really powerful, such as dragons, however,
you will want weapons with better damage
ability.

You might have a problem with
Ephemerides and lenses. Whenever you ask
him about lenses, his response is "what sort
do you want?" and the conversation only goes
in circles from there. It is best to stay off that
subject until the proper time, to avoid frustration.

The Dragons of Destard:The dragon cave
(Destard) is full of tough, mean, nasty critters.
The dragons are not pushovers. They have
strength in excess of 50 (yours can only go up
to 30), are fast, somewhat resistant to spells,
and fond of casting their own ("Chain Bolt", in
particular).
A few of the latter and you can be in trouble
pretty quickly. Unless you're going in there
specifically to fight for experience, stealth is
the better way to go around. Invisibility rings,
and the Mass Invis spell, are the best means
of getting your party through intact
Arcana: Speaking of spells, you don't need
to have all of them to finish the game. In fact,
I didn't use too many myself. Most useful in
general were Heal, Great Heal, Unlock Magic,
Dispel Field, Fireball, Lightning Bolt, Detect
Trap, Untrap, Telekinesis, Disable, Mass Invisibility, Vanish, and Pickpocket. Explosion is
handy if you don't feel like lugging powder
kegs around.
There are only four people who have spells
for sale, and none of their spells overlap. So,
when you find someone with spells, "buy" in
each circle to see what they have for future ref
erence. Also, check out the prices of their
reagents, so you know who has what and for
how much.
Be careful when you drop things off for
storage. It's tempting to use Lord British's
castle, but too many items in the area can
cause some to vanish, and may even prevent
you from winning, if it's a unique object that
disappears. Apparently, this is a pretty honest
world and anything you leave in a town will always be there when you return. So don't be
afraid to cache a few things in Britain or
Jhelom or wherever. Just remember where
you stored the stuff!
Ultimate Wisdom: NEVER BURY A
MOONSTONE! You may be inclined to put a
few in places that can't be reached with the
Orb (such as Buccaneer's Den), but don't do
it! At the end of the game, you must have all
eight stones together. If any are buried, you
will have to wait until both moons are down
before you can retrieve the stone. That can
mean a long wait (bet you wonder how I know

By the way, the glass sword is back. It is a
pretty potent weapon that can only be used
once, but delivers a devastating shot of 255
points worth of damage. This time, there are
a number of them in the game and they can
be extremely helpful when facing a dragon or
similar tough opponent However, I do advise
you to hold on to one of them. You'll need it
for something special late in the game.
Captain John in Gargoyle Land is very important Until you find him, you won't be able
to do much on the other side of the world. He
is not easy to locate, since he camps out in a
dungeon. Search for him among the mountains far to the southeast of the Tomb of
Kings.
Of the three Shrines in Gargoyle land, only
Diligence is likely to give you any problems.
Here is where having a Wizard Eye or X-Ray
spell is extremely useful. Otherwise, you'll
have to be very diligent indeed to find what
you're looking for.
Looking for dungeons on the cloth map can
be difficult I advise a bright light and a magnifying glass (really!). All dungeons are located
in mountains, so concentrate your efforts
there. They look something like black
splotches (the dungeons, not the mountains!).
There are more than the usual seven this
time, so look carefully.
Some nice things and a lot of spider silk can
be found in the Spider Cave southwest of the
Abbey. The spiders are not especially difficult
opponents, and the webs can be broken by
hitting them with a weapon (any weapon).
Floor traps in some dungeons are a problem. They can not be revealed with Detect
Trap, or undone with Remove Trap. Searching or digging where you know they are does
nothing. Someone has to walk over it At that
point, the trap becomes visible, and can be
pushed aside. Spikes are not movable (although visible); however, the Vanish spell will
get rid of them.
The ghost in Skara Brae is something of a
red herring; neither I nor anyone I know to
this point who has finished the game was able
to do anything about him. If anyone does
manage to solve the murder, I'd like to hear
about it (the Seance spell did nothing here).
Finally, in the Ultima tradition, Smith the
talking horse is still not worth visiting (unless
you don't have anything better to do). His "information" is not in the least important

Taking a Peek
Continued from page 6

are rewarded with additional character
abilities as they successfully struggle
through the Five Ordeals, et al. The
storyline, though short is fairly well knit
together and the game features good
enough graphics and sound so put an
Amiga through its paces. Amiga
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
NORTH & SOUTH: Picture the epic
grandeur of the hit mini-series and rest
assured that this game is the furthest
thing from it. Based on the French comic
book "Les Tuniques Bleu", "North &
South" offers arcade fun for the strategy
game minded (or vice versa). The game
offers zero to two player options with multiple difficulty levels and quick and clean
play that features plenty of options,
scenarios and variants for everyone. In
fact, a pure strategy variation is even
available for the wargamers among you.
About as historically accurate as Mr.
Peabody's "Wayback" machine (remember the episode with General Sherman?),
"North & South" is twice as fun as a barrel of Lincoln logs. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
LHX ATTACK CHOPPER: If you're looking for an arcade-style helicopter game
with great graphics and sound, LHX
could be the game for you. It is easy to
learn and use, but it is not the simulation
it purports to be. IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.
LOW BLOW: While other games (notably the coin-op hit "Punch Out" and
Accolade's "TKO") also allow you to
progress up the ladder to fight for the
championship, the beauty (or ugliness,
depending on one's point of view) of this
game is the added dimension of fighting
dirty. Using simple interfaces, each boxer
has a dirty trick up his sleeve (or in his
boot, as kicking is allowed) to go along
with the swings and jabs. Use the dirty
trick too often, however, and the fighter
is disqualified. The graphics, animation
and sound are all top caliber. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #8.
SKI OR DIE: There's no fight like a
snow fight. This arcade package of winter
sports games is a youth-oriented action
cartoon. Downhill skiing (with hairy
stunts), snow 'tubing against the infamous Lester, Acro Aerials and snow
boarding join the snowball fights as you
encounter punk penguins and bunnies
with chainsaws. If you're hip, dude, this
game is loads o' snow blown fun (totally).
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9.

Interplay Productions
1575 Corporate Drive
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
FUTURE WARS: What a recipe! Take a
present day person, throw them into a
time machine and hurl them back into
the Middle Ages in "time" to discover a
typical ultimate-threat-to-mankind scale
galactic plot, complete with evil alien
beings. Then, push that character
through the paces of saving the human
race. This is all a matter of course while
involved in "Future Wars". The all-mouse
interface is certainly simple to use, and
the soundtrack is even available on CD!
Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#10.
Intracorp, Inc.
14160 SW 139th Court
Miami, FL 33186
SECURITY ALERT: The boss was very
relieved to hear that no one in the office
has what it takes to be a thief (but playing this game could certainly teach you).
This real time game pits the player
against over 1400 mazes filled with
roving guards, hidden cameras, infrared

beams and many other gadgets designed
to create player paranoia. Options and
challenges abound as players must really
think like thieves to succeed! C64-128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
Miles Computing, Inc.
5115 Douglas Fir Rd. #1
Calabasas, CA 91302
AQUANAUT: This is a classic arcademaze game using the familiar assault
against an underwater alien stronghold
theme. Some strategy is involved in picking a route and, of course, there is the
climactic confrontation with the
ultimate-bad-guy at the end of it all. Amiga
($49.95) Circle Reader Service #12.
Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA 93614
CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT: Sierra
quality meets the Arthurian legend in the
search for the Holy Grail. The storyline expertly weaves Christian and Celtic lore
together into a fascinating mosaic of
mystery and myth. As Arthur, players try
to succeed where three knights before
them have failed. Rescue the knights,

Taking a Peek

find the grail, and then, it's chalice time!
The Mark Seibert soundtrack adds a marvelous Celtic ambiance. IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.
SORCERIAN: A hit Japanese arcade/role-playing game imported to the
United States, "Sorcerian" just does not
have the Sierra feel to it. While the variety
of screens is nice, the Japanamation
aspects of the game and the arcade-style
graphics just don't measure up. The
scope of the adventure might be there,
but where is the computer role-player
with the patience to sit through an epic
arcade game? IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.
Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada, B4V 2X6
BATTLE TANK, BARBAROSSA TO
STALINGRAD: If you're familiar with SimCan wargames, you know that they don't
offer anything in the way of graphics. Instead, all of the information is presented
in text format with laminated map cards
and grease pencils to help the player
track the movement of forces. Set during
the first two years of the Germany's World
War II invasion of Russia, "Battle Tank"
gives the player the feel for commanding
small units on a grand tactical scale.
Reports are received (often through
static) from the various platoons and companies under a player's command and orders are issued to them. Information is
presented via report screens, but with no
graphics and sound, something seems to
be lost on a tactical scale. IBM. Circle
Reader Service #15.
MALTA STORM: This is a nice wargame
for those who enjoy in-depth strategy.
Reviewing intelligence reports, setting national priorities and watching the grueling
blow by blow losses of valuable ships and
airplanes can really get a strategyoriented wargamer going. Many options
confront players each in each phase to
provide an interesting and challenging
game. IBM. Circle Reader Service #16.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
675 Almanor Avenue
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
WATERLOO: This British import packs
a lot of interesting features. While, technically, a wargame, it plays more like a
"battlefield simulator". The player commands either the French or Anglo-Allied
army on that fateful June day in 1815. As
Napoleon or Wellington, dispatches are
received from subordinate generals and
orders are issued to them. The graphics
offer the players a commander's-eye view
of the battlefield. Orders are issued by
typing in command words in simple sentences as the colored squares and rectangles of infantry, horses and cannons
do their dance of death. IBM and Amiga
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #17.

UBI Soft
511, Sir Francis Drake Blvd. #C
Greenbrae, CA 94904
PUFFY'S SAGA: This cute little French
game has you playing the role of a
bouncing, pseudo "Pac Man" like ball
(either the male Puffy or the female Puffyn) through a "Gauntlet" like multi-level
arcade-style maze. Puffy opens his mouth
and shoots arrows at the various
monsters (many of whom are also right
out of "Gauntlet II"). In fact, this bit of
French software is similar enough to
"Gauntlet" to feel familiar and comfortable with, yet different enough to be enjoyed for its own challenges and puzzles.
Vive la difference! Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #18.
Virgin Games
18001 Cowan
Irvine, CA 92714
CONFLICT: Good morning, Prime Minister. It is January of 1997, and you are
the new head of the Israeli government
(the old head was assassinated—great
job security, eh?). Your task is simple
enough, force hostile neighboring states

to collapse and, in so doing, preserve Israel. Military and political options are
simply and clearly presented, but nuclear
research is where it's at if you really want
to threaten those diabolical neighboring
countries. This is a fascinating game with
a definite pro-Israeli bias. It plays here,
but it won't play in Tehran. IBM ($14.99).
Circle Reader Service #19.
NY WARRIORS: Yet another of the
standard arcade warrior vs. the hordes
shoot 'em up. There is plenty of violence
as the player dodges the bullet(s), picks
up better weapons, and generally rains
down death and destruction upon the
gangs of New York in an attempt to get
to the World Trade Center before the evil
terrorists set off the nuclear bomb
planted therein. One of the new "MegaGames" from Virgin, this game is a virtually intact replica of its Coin-Op Arcade version. One and two player options, requires 1 meg. Amiga ($49.99). Circle
Reader Service #20.

Special Report

Game Technology
Continued from page 26
fingers flexing while the Polhemus tracker locates the gloves position threedimensionally. In this way, the user can
reach out and manipulate the objects of
the "virtual reality".
Yet, some were not convinced that the
touch of "reality" was complete
enough. They wanted to give a tingling sensation at each fingertip to
simulate the feeling of actually encountering an object. One company,
EXOS, builds the Dexterous Hand
Master. They have mounted computer controlled motors at each joint
of this skeletal frame glove. The user
places his or her hand in the glove
and the computer program will cause
those motors to push back and simulate the resistance one encounters
when a solid object is touched or
grasped. VPL has experimented with
this forced-feedback approach, but

has not made this standard equipment.
When (and if) these types of systems
ever become consumer items, the possibilities for game play are incredible. No
longer would role-players have to settle
for a one-dimensional perspective of that

fantasy environment. Instead, they would
explore three-dimensional dungeons and
castles. Science fiction garners can take
on the size, girth and attributes of an
alien being and see the entire drama of
the game unfold from the proper visual
perspective. Wargamers can command
an American Civil War gun battery from a
three-dimensional ridge and experience
the blinding confusion of counter-battery
fire from a first person perspective. A
gamer who wants to experience the
swashbuckling world of the Three Musketeers might be able to hook up to a
network and, via forced-feedback and a
"virtual reality", fight it out with the
Cardinal's guards, appropriately played
by other garners.
Consumerdom is probably more than
a decade away on these products, but
the possibilities are tantalizing enough
that gamers can dream. In fact, one
can almost imagine an amusement
park to exploit these possibilities in the
meantime, sort of a Star Tours meets
"virtual reality" attraction. All we have to
do is dream.

Reader Input Device

Conversions
Received

Artura (Arcadia) Amiga
Batman (Data Fast) Amiga, C64, IBM
Block Out (California Dreams) IBM
Breach 2 (Omnitrend) Atari ST
FaceOff! (Gamestar) C64
Ferrari Formula One (EA) IBM
Grand Prix Circuit (Accolade) IIGS
Monday Night Football (Data East) C64
Omni-play Basketball (SportTime) IBM
Omni-play Horse Racing Stable
Owners Module (SportTime) Amiga
Omni-play Horse Racing Track 2 Support Disk (SportTime) Amiga
Planet of Lust (Free Spirit) IBM
QIX (Taito) IBM
Search for the Titanic (Capstone) C64
Starflight ( EA) Amiga, Mac
Super Hang-On ( Data Fast) IBM
The Ultimate Casino Gambling Simulation (Capstone) Amiga, Apll, C64
Vigilante (Data East) C64

