"Spellcasting 301 . Spear of Destiny King's Quest VI $3.95 $4.95 Canadian Number 102 COMPUTER 100 Games Rated January 1993 GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine Electronic Arts' Ultra Hot (UltraBots Also In This Issue: Air Bucks Conquered Kingdoms Great Naval Battles Quest for Glory III Wayne Gretzky 3 o29074 121581 "


"Surar of Destiny Holtenstein 3D Graphic Adventure 11 30 T! ILLIT LLCTWO FIGOR SCORE DUES T HEALTH ARO 36% 23 TLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH AM10 172 83 FLOOR 9 SCORE LIVEST 2800 3 REATYWANO 80% 93 |   :fa  ,  Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Pavimes! spectacular VGA virtual reality system A breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Sam \"the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #79 "


"A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley WZARFYI: CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT LADIVA FAGLILE CIFK brand PELES TINAGALDEN Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping True Point & Click Mouse Interface. Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #136 "


"Features: COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 8 Ultra Bots Exclusive Coverage Johnny Wilson Proves That War Is What You Mech of It A King's Quest Vl(th) Sense? Chuck Miller Gets Under the Scalp of Missing Heirs 2 Carusoe-ing For A Bruising Gilligan has Nothing on Dynamix' Johnny Castaway A Note in the Bottle from Alan Emrich & Johnny Wilson Accolade's Summer Challenge Leaps For The Gold Reviewer Gordon Goble Checks for (Foot) Faults Sierra's Clueless Gobliiins Chriiis Lombardiii Buys Them A Vowel The Quest For Glory Series Takes a 3rd Turn Players May Not Mind A Couple of Lumps of Cole In Their Stockings As Dug by Jeff James Bela Lugosi Lives On In Plan 9 From Outer Space By Alien Abductee, Charles Ardai Is Jack Nicklaus Golf Driving You Bunkers? Mark Willett Guides Course Designers Through the Rough UltraBots pg. 8 A Composer's Symposium on Sound Support Donald Griffin Explores What's in the Cards & Gives Sound Observations External Vich Surveying the Realms Virgin Games Sallies Into Strategy Gaming By Jeff \"The Conquering Commentator\" James Heimdall — The Party Viking? Ragnarok n' Roll With Allen \"Bjorn To Be Wild\" Greenberg MicroProse's B-17 pg. 148 Evan B(r)ooks A Flight on Air Bucks A Solvent Review for Soldiers in the Fare Wars The High & Dry Way to Fly Stealthy Strategies for Happier Landings In Air Bucks By Jennifer Schlickbernd Learning From The Prophecy of the Shadow SSI Reaches Out For New Role-Playing Converts By Jeff \"Voice In The Wilderness\" James How Do You Spell Excitement? N-H-L-P-A Hockey! Electronics Arts Shoots and Scores on the SEGA As Glossed Over by Zamboni Drivers Chris Lombardi & Alan Emrich NHLPA Hockey '93 Pg. 90 94 A Different Slant on Wayne Gretzky 3 Gordon Goble \"Checks\" Out Bethesda's Latest 100 The Deciding Point is a Spear of Destiny Back To the Bunker on Another Wolfenstein 3-D Mission Bryan Walker Takes a Careful, Reviewer's Aim 104 CILI KA DO Making One's Mark in Darklands Fighting For One's Reputation Part II of Sam Baker's Strategy Guide Charles Ardai Takes a Spring Break Legend's Spellcasting: 301 Works Its Magic Through Another Naughty, Sophomoric Rump (Er, Romp) 110 Great Naval Battles pg. 136 Page 4 Computer Gaming World "


"TM THEY'RE BACK!!! with new skills, for a new world... EKITCS * 12 BRAND NEW TRIBES OF LEMMINGS, EACH WITH THEIR OWN SKILLS SKIERS, SURFERS, BONGO PLAYERS SNAKE-CHARMERS & MORE * PUZZLING PROBLEMS WITH HILARIOUS ANIMATION Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN THE TALISMAN * 8-WAY SCROLLING * ENHANCED SOUND SUPPORT WITH DIGITIZED LEMMING VOICES production designed by DMA DESIGN * RIVETING GAME PLAY IN THE LEMMINGS TRADITION Tel: (617) 731-3553 Fax: (617) 731-8379 Circle Reader Service #119 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 124 Phone Stone GEnie's Gemstone Ill Gets Reappraised By the Pawnbroker of Panache, Johnny Wilson 128 The Consumers Strike Back! CGW's Annual Top Ad Contest is Launched And Will be Decided by Our Readers Computer Wargaming World 134 Red Baron Mission Builder in the Crosshairs Becoming the Ringmaster of the Flying Circus A Review of Dynamix's Toolkit by Doug \"Flying\" Fick 136 Naval Miniatures on a Microcomputer? SSI's Great Naval Battles in the North Atlantic Sails With Nautical Nuance By Johnny \"Range Finder\" Wilson \"I'll Meet You At Midway\" A Rip Roaring Replay of A Carriers at War Scenario By Michael \"Nimitz\" Peck and Carlos \"Yamamoto\" Gomez 142 148 B-17 On Target? Reviewing MicroProse UK's Flying Fortress Simulator Flak Fired by William Shefski 154 Having Conquered Kingdoms At Your Feet Alan Emrich Previews the Latest Offering from QQP And Sees Magic in the Strategy Gamer's Future Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Editorial Assistant Caitlin Ackelson Ad Manager Jim Messing Subscriptions Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672.910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28,00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per ycar. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe(76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B Genie: CGW Subscription Dept. 1(800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 158 Advanced Squad Leader Meets IBM A Game Assistance Program Lends Support to a Wargaming Classic By Richard \"10-6\" Savage Gunship 2000 Over Islands and Ice A Helicoptor Gunship Flight Simulator Supplement Reviewed by Bryan Walker 166 Reviewing the Fronts in Theatre of War Tim Carter Witnesses A Strategy Gaming Spectacle 170 Talons & Claws in Operation Fighting Tiger Spectrum Holobyte Gives a Boost to Falcon 3.0 An In-flight Review by Tom \"Crash\" Basham 174 Garage-Built F-16? Mike Weksler Straps into Homemade Cockpits for Flight Simulators Departments: 30 Scorpia's View: Clouds 116 Letters from Paradise of Xeen 130 The Rumor Bag (Artis Fartis) 48 Over There: European 132 Computer Wargaming Software Report World Editorial: Roger Scorpia's Tale: The Keating Interview Summoning 178 Taking a Peek 68 Best of the Rest (Shareware) 190 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games CGW Stock Watch: Sierra 192 What's Hot! 84 Company Profile: QQP 193 CGW Hall of Fame 108 Conversions Received 194 Editorial Software Returns 8 Page 6 Computer Gaming World "


"GO AHEAD. INDULGE YOURSELF. THE ULTIMATE DRIVING GAME CAR DRIVER Test Drive Ten of the Best IBM Serpeces, linli Oybelli Harilahi Tare e 400 Line Hi-res 256 Color VGA Graphics 2 Player head-to-head play via modem or network -ELECTRONIC ARTS Now's your chance to test drive ten of the world's sleekest, fastest exoticars on ten of America's most breathtaking highways and race courses. You choose: will it be the Porsche 959, Ferrari F40, Corvette ZR1, Lotus Esprit Turbo, Eagle Talon, Toyota MR2, 1957 Ferrari Testarossa, Mercedes Cli prototype racer, Shelby Cobra, or Lamborghini Countach? You can't even afford the insurance on some of these cars. We're offering you the keys and unlimited mileage. To order: Visit your local retailer or call I (800) 245-4525 anytime. Car and Driver is available for IBM and compatibles for $59.95. IBM screen. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp. By Lemer Research. Car and Driver is a registered trademark of Hachette Magazines Inc., used under license by Electronic Arts. The inademark of the respective products are the prices of their respective corporate owners, all of which have no attiliation with Electronic Ans, This product is not endorsed or pronored by any of the respective automobile manulaturen. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"Skepplug lubo TurBillus Bus A Sneak Preview of Electronic Arts' UltraBots by Johnny L. Wilson INGVAR uring the last incursion of the alien cometoid, that 60 year cycle of conquest and destruction where robots (straight from the minds of Japanime screenwriters) destroy everything in their paths (faster than \"The Dirty Pair\" can even manage to destroy whatever they are trying to \"save\" in a given episode), earth's survivors were able to assemble 120 nuclear devices and direct 10 of them at each alien base. The nuclear devastation was great enough to conquer the conquerors and the gigantic 18 meter tall Humanoids, 22 meter tall Net Builders (Scorpions) and smaller Scouts (15 meters high) sat silent. Now, humanity has assembled clones of the alien robots, clones which give humanity an equal playing field with the cosmic threat. Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress» that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. Player BattleTech (on GEnie), MechWarrior (available in Activision's new Bat00000 tleTech value-package) or perhaps, even RoboSport or CyberEmpires. Yet, both the fictional set-up and the style of play is different than one finds in these similar tributes to Japanese visions. BattleTech, in all its permutations, reflects the feudal ideal that still has adherents in modern Japan. Chivalry's code of FRES PALJOONAS PLAY honor, loyalty to one's house and the glory of battle are all part and parcel of the entire package. Though strategy may be coordi in its cyber-tribal warfare. Naturally, nated (particularly in a Multi-Player Bat RoboSport (like Muse Software's RobottleTech battle), the battles are more like a wars and Origin's Omega before it) series of one-on-one encounters in a far stresses programming one's robots in adfuture list than a set-piece battle. RoboJox vance of the attack. In UltraBots, the ememphasizes more of the sport of one-on phasis is on the aspect of participating in one encounters against one's opponents a fluid military operation where one and Cyber Empires features a different makes dynamic decisions and can even style of play (overhead view action-style) control the robots via a remote console TRAIN This Is Not Your Father's Centurion OBATS SYSTEMS TARGET ACQUIRED PLASMA CANNON RENED SEEKER ARMED PLASNA CENNOM PENED SEERER ARNED LIFSP :0002 POHER: 100% HELH: 100% TCOMP:06 CONH:OK ENGAGING Naturally, the player is given the responsibility for defending the survivors of Earth against the alien threat. Of course, careful readers of CGW will remember that UltraBots, a game which NovaLogic was originally developing for Data East and is now releasing under the Electronic Arts label, uses some of the hottest 3-D rendered technology we have seen in the last couple of years. They will also expect a game where the players will enter the cockpits of these 3-D robots in order to engage in battle with these similarly armed alien forces as in a half-dozen games before it. Further, the player is apt to be reminded of the robot battles of a dozen Japanime episodes/films; the \"B\" movie RoboJox; the \"people and paper\" and/or miniatures games of RoboTech and BattleTech; or the computer games, MultiMA ETL  -888 SEEKER PLASMA TARGET: HU-057 RANGE: 4921 BEARNG: 000\" : LOADINE PLASMA: LOADING BERKPH & WUSTHAH (MAP CLOAK ECM TIGER Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"Sneak Preview STUSORS UTSURLIGE CARRIER LO RECIO ZOVE COHOY (literally moving from cockpit to cockpit manoids are used for long-range offenas the battles progress). sives and the Net Builders are used to In UltraBots, players select their battles extend the net and create defensive posifrom the Situation Room (command centions behind mine fields. Hence, the 'bots ter) screen which depicts a global map and in this game are inherently designed for all of the active hot spots where the aliens teamwork and tend to provide less of a are likely to prosecute their attacks. The \"shoot-'em-up\" and more of a tactical player determines where to fight (i.e. challenge. This, of course, can be good and which scenario to play); the ratio at which 17. W ITH THE bad. energy is expended upon powering the Net Profit And Loss robots (and base), repairing the robots and 2 maintaining a power reserve; what robotic The strength of the game design is that armament with which to outfit each robot; so as not to disorient the player. Each there are many ways to win each battle and and which robot(s) to command manually. cockpit has a three-dimensional outside the encounters with alien robots tend to be Then, the player can step into the cockpit view-screen to depict the terrain in the more dramatic due to the detailed modelof any active robot. actual direction in which the player's robot ing found in their depiction. The weakness Unlike many of the games mentioned is headed and a smaller viewscreen which of the design is the fact that more of the earlier, UltraBots does not contain a wide provides a camera view at alternate angles. challenge in some encounters revolves variety of robot models. Corresponding to The entire cockpit is point and click, so around finding the enemy than facing off the light, medium and heavy classes of that one can run every system, handle against said enemy. When the graphics are robots (with many different designs) to be every control and fire every weapon by a large portion of what makes the game found in other games, UltraBots' game positioning the cursor over the switch, \"hot,\" one would certainly like to see more handle, arrow, indicator or button and toe-to-toe action in the battle sequences. click the mouse. Combining these point Of course, my experience of having to and click controls with the hot graphics blast enemies away at long range may offers a lot in combating the player's dis have been due to inexperience in other belief. areas. One very nice feature about UltraBots as opposed to the predecessors in the genre is WILONIT REVIEW that one can access a dynamic, tactical UNIT DESCRIPTION map of the battlefield without having to TRE, NE MORE THAN THE LIFE GLOMER A TELITY ALONG lose the immediate environs from one's IMA viewscreen. In both Multi-Player Batile Tech and MechWarrior, one had to lose FLASH the visuals on the enemy 'mechs in order PHYSICAL SPECS HEIGHT: 18 METERS to scan the map to get the overall perspecARMAMENT fiction precludes variety (.e. the survivors PRIMARY SCEKER tive on the situation. In UltraBots, one gets copied the three types which the aliens lost BETENSIVE carrer the map in a small screen in the midst of to them). So one has the option of choosthe cockpit console while still being able ing: a fast-moving, lightly armored Scout to view the active robots closest to the IMATI UNITIES with a small cannon and one Seeker currently controlled robot in a larger (guided missile) port and a host of defenscreen which depicts the outside view. In Another striking difference between the sive capabilities; a medium Humanoid short, one can eat one's cake and have it BattleTech/MechWarrior style of combat with a Seeker and plasma cannon (with too. Further, the 'bots in UltraBots have and that to be found in UltraBots has to do two kilometers and four kilometers of more than one way to look at the world. As with targeting. Gamers manually target range, respectively) and limited defensive in any sophisticated weapon system, there vulnerable spots in the former, while more capacity, and a heavy Net Builder with its is a thermal camera as well as a visual realistic far-future targeting systems take rapid-firing cannon, homing missiles and, camera to provide guidance for the vehi away that option in the latter game. Unformost importantly, capacity to lay mines cle's pilot. tunately, one of the true joys of the former and or net relays. Ultimately, the balanced but limited seObviously, the Scouts are used for light was the capacity to slice off an arm with a laser or rip a leg out from under a 'mech lection of robots means that the probes and reconnaissance, while the Huwith a well-placed missile. In the program can manipulate multiple latter, one simply targets like a SROSTER robots with the same images and well-trained police officer and ID SPEKET not be required to tie up significant 7-UIS CAMPOH blasts into the \"body mass\" of the amounts of hard disk space for difLTHERMAL OR enemy robot. Those who expect MAPFINCON ferent robot files. Since the proRADAR:OH COMPUTER:OH UltraBots to serve simply as an gram generates three-dimensional updated MechWarrior will be PLASMA:ON SEEKER:0 terrain on the fly and manipulates 02 DOMMAND POWER 99% sorely disappointed in this aspect existing three-dimensional modof the combat. HELM: 100% els, the sneak preview copy only STATUS IN OUT The good news about UIrequired 5 MB of disk space (a far traBots is that the battle isn't neccry from the 12-15 MB games to DETAIL:UNIT HU-123 essarily over for a robot when it LOCATION: IN FIELD CORDERS be found in the latest games to be CONTROL: ENCRCING G STATUS is all shot up. Remember how the GO MAP found in some genres). player could allocate power from DAMRCE: 000% GREMOTE PROX: 100% Each cockpit looks different, but the net to repair robots? Well, as RECALL features enough of a similar look long as a robot is within the net's ON-ECHO COM CREW: 1 PILOT TARGETING MARI 13:21 NET RELAYS 25 09 HUMANOID HUMANOIDS 00 02 UNITHU-123 SCORPIONS 00 00 VVVVV SCOUTS 00 01|| PONER RESERVE ONEY 12 HEADING: KM/H COM Page 9 January 1993 "


"Sneak Preview influence, it will automatically be repaired. This means that one can have a robot shot up early in the battle and have it return to the fray in a little while after the enemy 'bots have moved on. Since the repairs can only take place within the influence of one's own net, there is a definite strategy regarding how one places the laser relays that cause the net to function. Where the battles really work is where the player struggles to expand the net (the power grid), then draws the enemy robots into a minefield or ambush. In the preview version, the enemy Al is just aggressive enough to blunder into these traps and one gets the satisfying experience of a wellplanned victory. Where the battles can get SSSS 50 frustrating is when a light probe is taking place and the player is frantically jumping from cockpit to cockpit in an attempt to locate the enemy. Then, every time the targeting computer locks onto a robot, the gamer gets the warning message that he/she has locked onto a friendly target. 'Bots Before My Eyes Whatever one's feeling about the gameplay in UltraBots (and it is certainly different than we originally expected it to be) may ultimately be, it is clear that the game features: the most impressive terrain and robot graphics ever seen in the genre; tactical considerations (as well as some limitations) that are distinctive from other games in the genre; and more of a feeling of small unit military actions than has been seen in other robot games. NovaLogic (developers of the game for first, Data East, and then, Electronic Arts) has raised the stakes for simulation graphics and has proven, with both UltraBots and their upcoming Comanche: Maximum Overkill helicopter simulation, that they are going to be a major player in first person perspective, three-dimensionally rendered simulations from this time forward. CGW BERGUS GO TO UNIT TOTTEN GOES TO GO 74 39 SOUND MASTER II Advertisers List Access Software 70-71 Accolade 61 Adanac Command 138 Amtex Software 117 Apogee Software ASCII Entertainment Aztech Systems Bethesda Blue Valley Software CH Products Cape Cod Connection Cerebel Info. Arts Chips & Bits 99, 101, 103, 105 Colorado Computer 146 Computer Express 125 Compsult Computability Covox Creative Labs CWI Products DC True Software Deltax Gaming Digital Dungeon 123 Disk-Count Software 129 Disney Software 109, 111 Electronic Arts 7, 81, 82, 83 Enchanted Horizons 28, 122 Flagship Magazine 114 Flying Dutchman Games 126 Formgen Genie 189 General Videotex 179 Gosselin Computer Impressions 91,93 In-Line Design 181 Inner Circle Software 151 Interplay Keyboard Commander 126 Koei 183 Konami 75, 147, 149 Lance Haffner Games 74 Liberty International 185 LucasFilm Games 187 Maelstrom Games 102 Media Vision 145 Midi Land 143 Microleague Sports 140-141 Microprose Software 15, 21, 29 Mindcraft Software 43, 45, 47 Mission Control 118-119 MPG Net 66-67 New World Computing 153, 159 No Name Software 173 Norsehelm Products 161 Nova Logic 157 Origin Systems 13, 196 Pandemonium 113 Paper Mayhem 156 Point of View 163 Psygnosis QOP 24-25, 32-33, 160 Readysoft Reality Simulations 88 SDJ Entrprises 160 Sideline Software 156 Sierra On-Line 49, 51, 53, SS, 57, 59, 131 Simcoarum Systems Sir-Tech The Software Company 175 Spectrum HoloByte 195 Strategic Simulations 63, 169 Supersoft 171 Three-Sixty Pacific 165, 167 Thrustmaster 150 Twin Engine Gaming 124 Viking Software 96-97 Virgin Games 17, 19,35 Zeros & Ones 177 The Most Compatible Sound Card In The World MIDI interface with simultaneous input and output. Includes PC-LYRAM music composition software. Audiophile sound quality. Low noise,  100% AdLib Compatible. precision engineered electronics. Exclusive SMULATOR\" sound file  4-watt amplifier with volume control. conversion software. Operates Extensive software tools, including \"Sound Blaster\" compatible titles, digital compression and editing utilities. WITH IMPROVED SOUND QUALITY! Supported by the largest library of VOICE COMMAND SOFTWARE. software titles in entertainment, Covox Voice Master Speech Thing business, music, and education. MIDI Maestro compatible. Dual 3-inch speakers, 6 foot MIDI cable, 8 bit DMA sound digitizer. Sample and internal speaker bypass included. rates to 25 Kbytes/sec with direct to . Made in USA by Covox -THE microdisk\" record/playback options. computer audio specialist since 1975. Your Best Choice For Multi-Media Sound. ONLY $229.95 (plus $5 Shipping & Handling) ORDER HOTLINE: (503) 342-1271 Mon-Fri, 8 AM to 5 PM PST VISA/MC/AMEX phone or FAX orders accepted. NO CODs. 30 Day Money Back Guarantee if not completely satisfied. One year warranty on hardware. TRADE-UP OFFER: Your current PC sound card brand is worth $$$ toward the purchase of a Sound Master II. Contact Covox for details. CALL OR WRITE FOR FREE PRODUCT CATALOG covox inc. 675 Conger Street  Eugene, OR 97402 Phone (503) 342-1271  FAX 503-342-1283 135 Circle Reader Service # 10 Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware...\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment «The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a Nazil Fontess In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape-or die trying. 1962 1941 LETT SETS 300 3 8 T 967 19 300 3 LUCE SHE BUSSERLALTE A 9 Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLibTM, Sound Blasterim, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing EETITA 19% 53 ELSKE 5 56003 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 INC SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), joystick, and mouse are optional, IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Adlib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #45 "


"Review The Puzzling Plight of a Princess in Peril King's Quest VI: Heir Today, y Gone Tmofrow by Chuck Miller Nollowing a very successful series of installments, the latest chapter in one of adventuredom's most popular game series is ready to unfold. Sierra's King's Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone Tomorrow looks to outdo all previous installments in quality of story line, graphics and audio, sheer number of puzzles, player amenities and overall game play. An Heir Raising Experience As the story unfolds, Prince Alexander, heir to the throne of Daventry, finds himself shipwrecked and washed ashore on The Isle of the Crown, one of several mysterious islands which provide the backdrop for this quest. It seems that young Alexander was on his way to visit Cassima, Princess of the Green Isles, when his ship went down. (It was when King Graham rescued her from the evil wizard, Mordack, that Alexander and Cassima first met, apparently, with more than a passing interest in each other.) However, upon his arrival at the Royal Palace, Alexander finds events have taken a turn for the worse. While Cassima was away, her parents became ill and died. Now, he finds her sequestered in mourning, taking no visitors. At least, that is the sequence of events according to Vizier Alhazred, the man in charge and Cassima's recent intended. His inhospitable stance toward Alexander and refusal to allow him to even see Cassima, seems more than a little strange. Determined to see the Princess, Alexander sets out to discover the true nature of the events that have transpired. Thus, the stage is set for yet another King's Quest or, in this case, that of a prince. Get That Heir Out of Your (Inter)Face One of the most difficult acclimations I have ever undergone is the transition from Sierra's old text parser to their new icon-driven one. This is not, of course, because it is more complex, but because of the loss of some of the conversational interaction and depth of personality (if only perceived as such) found in the characters resident in the game world. It seems that the move from a textual to a graphical parser has forever changed the nature of the puzzles and interactions of the past. Yet, with its demise, the textual parser has taken with it the last vestiges of the multifaceted difficulties and cumbersome nature associated with pre-graphic adventures, and replaced it with a more intuitive, user-friendly window to game interaction. It has taken some time on the part of seasoned adventurers (those who cut their teeth on text parsers) to become acclimated to the new interface, and for Sierra to begin to really exploit its possibilities. However, the new parser seems to have finally come into its own with King's Quest VI in a way beyond that of any previous offering. This is a result, in part, to the increased overall scope of the adventure and the many optional puzzles included. Such additions serve to provide a more expansive, and consequently more enjoyable, playing environment (it is nearly twice the size of King's Quest V, weighing HEIR TODAY, GONE TOMORROW in at 18MB). Indeed, this is the first of Sierra's newer adventures where I actually did not miss the character interaction of old. TV Ouest VI TITLE: King's Quest VI: Heir Today. Gone Tomorrow SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $79.95 GRAPHICS: VGA-256, EGA-16, Tandy VGA Only SOUND: All Major Sound Cards PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up DESIGNERS: Roberta Williams and Jane Jensen PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line Coarsegold, CA An Heir of Distinction It seems almost redundant to speak of good graphics in a Sierra game. The graphics are up to Sierra's usual high standard of quality, beautifully rendered in 256-color VGA and featuring some intriguing and picturesque locales to visit. Background music is also very good, providing a rich, atmospheric environment in which to explore this new world. However, I'm most impressed with ROBERTA WILLIAMS ASIERRA Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"he Thrilling Sequel to Computer Gaming World's Role-Playing Game of the Year! It's not just a dungeon game anymore! Gewonic Loborinth OF Worlds MANA UNDERWORLD The Stygian Abyss\" was hailed as the first in a new generation of fantasy adventures. UNDERWORLD II Labyrinth of Worlds delivers a new, sharply realistic look. With smoother animation, more detailed creatures and a spacious view window, it's the most realistic gaming environment on a PC. The world of Underworld Il is more varied and engaging than ever before. We've added new terrain features (like shifting floors, water currents and thin ice), new spells (like Shockwave and Portal), new and nastier traps and puzzles, and new creatures (we'll let you discover these for yourself...) AVRATRR FIGHTER ARNR Underworld Il takes you beyond the traditional dungeon environment. Deep in the earth, the Guardian's magic has cracked the walls of reality, opening the way to eight new worlds beyond Britannia: a city buried in ice, a floating castle, an ancient tomb and more... From the halls of Lord British's castle, it's time to carry the battle forward and into the LABYRINTH OF WORLDS... Actual screens may vary. BRIGIN We create worlds Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. An Electronic Arts Company A Looking Glass Technologies Design P.O. BOX 161750  AUSTIN, TX 78716 Ultima is a registered trademark of Richard Garriott. Origin and We creole worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Underworld, The Stygian Abyss and labyrinth of Worlds are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Copyright  1992 ORIGIN Systems, Inc Circle Reader Service #115 "


"Review faced with an overly perplexing puzzle, and then return to solve it at a later time. Up until the end of the game, the player is relatively free to travel between the four islands making up The Land of the Green Isles. There are even two possible ways into the Royal Palace at the game's conclusion an easy and a more difficult route. The choice made determines the parts of the palace seen by the player. the advancements exhibited in the animation department. Character movement is improved over previous efforts, offering a more lifelike appearance. Especially effective, though, is the spot animation provided throughout this newest King's Quest. Leaves on trees and ferns move realistically, indicative of a \"digital breeze,\" and water appears to lap against the shore. These little touches all help bring the game world to life. Only Her Heir Dresser Knows Many stylistic additions accent King's Quest VI. A unique introduction created by Stanley Liu of Kronos (best known for his work in Batman Returns and Lawnmower Man) features realistic 3-D perspective animation and incorporates powerful \"camera angles\" to provide dramatic effect. This six megabyte animation (based on an original design that used 1.2 GB of hard drive space) does a more than ample job of setting the background for the story that is about to envelope the player. Art and animations employed in inset boxes have also received significant attention. Other new and notable additions include a built-in help facility for the novice gamer, a brief history of past King's Quest games, playing hints for King's Quest VI and a beginner's walkthrough for the first few puzzles all available on-line from within the game. The help feature, in actuality, is an animated tutorial that walks the player through the use of the game interface and the exploration of the opening game screen. Use of icons, insets and object manipulation are fully explained, as are the mechanics of the graphic interface. Information is also provided about the song Girl in the Tower, a love ballad from King's Quest VI that will be one of the first computer game songs to be played on the radio (DEVO's \"Some Things Never Change\" was digitized for Neuromancer prior to its being released on the Total DEVO album). As part of a special marketing effort, 1000 radio stations have been provided with a copy of the ballad to play by request. A listing of these stations with their request line numbers is included in the game box. All the player need do to hear the full rendition of the song is call a local station and request it. Neither Here Nor (T)Heir Since I had played beta versions of the game prior to playing the finished release, I ran across a particular bug early on which necessitated running the game without sound and music to keep a certain action from locking up the computer (it, of course, has been corrected). This left only the IBM speaker available for sound. Gag! Ptooie! Yuck! It has been so long since I played an adventure without a quality sound card, I had forgotten how bad the emanations from a IBM speaker sounded. I could not believe what I heard, or rather, did NOT hear. Players still without a sound card should install one before playing King's Quest VI. It will be money well spent, and will greatly enhance the playing experience. The only area where Sierra adventures still lack polish and professionalism is that of digitized speech. Though there is little speech encountered in King's Quest VI, what speech there is suffers from the contrived and corny sounding voices exhibited in the CD-ROM version of King's Quest V. Professional voice actors are desperately needed. Hopefully, Sierra will make use of trained professionals, rather than their staff personnel, in the CD-ROM version of King's Quest VI that is scheduled for an early 1993 release. Though King's Quest VI supports both 256-color VGA and 16-color EGA on the same set of disks, there is no contest between the two versions. All serious gamers should have a VGA card installed by this point in time, as well as a quality sound card. It is the only way to get the greatest enjoyment from the playing experience. Heir Apparent As mentioned previously, King's Quest VI benefits significantly from a larger game world, featuring more puzzles and sub-plots than actually need to be completed in order to finish the quest. Nearly 50 percent of the total puzzles in this adventure are optional, with many having multiple solutions. To Heir an Opinion It is evident that a great deal of time and talent was invested in this animated adventure, which is, in my humble opinion, the best of the King's Quest games to come out of Daventry, and Sierra's finest adventure to date. The game world is intriguing and entertaining, and the puzzles are varied in difficulty and style, providing a rich and enjoyable playing experience for gamers of all skill levels. King's Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone Tomorrow has all the signs of becoming a classic. I guess it would be fair to say that King's Quest VI has a certain heir about it. Cow Due to an open-ended game world, no fixed order is imposed on most puzzles encountered. The player is free to move on to solve other conundrums when Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"Before you play Special Forces, you'd better put on your game face. MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE CROPROSE When your drop-point is smack in the Special Forces from MicroProse. middle of fierce enemy forces, you'd FORGES Defeat is not an option. What you wear better dress for the occasion. is up to you. That's why, in Special Forces, you're equipped with high-powered rockets. Rapid-fire pistols. Rifles. Grenades. And whatever it takes to secure your objective quickly. SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Your objective? Today it could be rescuing a POW. Tomorrow, sabotage or cutting off enemy supply lines. To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST or fill out the coupon and mail it to: Microlrose Software, Inc. But you can't do it all alone. So take along your 180 Lakefront Drive  Dept. D10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 pick of the military's elite commandos to help you. Name: Specialists who you'll have creating diversions, Address: sniping, setting off explosives, jumping enemies, City: State: _ Zip: and carrying out your master strategy. Telephone: 1992 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED AAH Circle Reader Service #101 "


"Review Islands In A Screen The Misadventures of Johnny Castaway TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: REQUIREMENTS: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Screen Antics, Johnny Castaway IBM $34.95 Windows 3.1 and VGA graphics suppon Jelf Tunnell Productions Dynamix Eugene, OR Emrich and Johnny L. Wilson illed as the world's first story-telling screen-saver cartoon, Johnny Castaway is a great launch (and subsequent shipwreck) for Dynamix' Screen Antics series. We weren't sure what Jeff Tunnell intended when he formed a smaller creative group under the aegis of Dynamix, but the first few products we've seen from Jeff Tunnell Productions look very different from the award-winning designer's other works. Gamers who enjoy the Johnny Hart style art and humor of the B.C. comic strip the phone or works off-line for a while, may find themselves disappointed. there are supposed to be enough animated Johnny usually ends up pausing after each sequences that the antics will be entertain sequence and, if the gamer doesn't touch ing for months. Johnny will always be a key, will read the disk and start another round of animated slapstick. This staggered pacing shouldn't bother the casual viewer who occasionally glimpses a sequence or two while performing other tasks, but it could be distracting to someone merely wanting to view the computerized cartoons. Also, computer users who use Photo Styler, or any other program that requires the computer to work for long periods without keyboard input, should avoid inlooking in the wrong direction or doing the stalling Johnny Castaway. Those cute aniwrong thing whenever potential rescuers mated sequences can certainly play havoc (whether yachtsmen, aviators, ghost ships with a .TIF file conversion. (Wonder how or whatever) pass by. Whether all of this we know that?) actually works as a screen saver or not is All in all, Johnny Castaway is proof debatable. Only a portion of the screen is positive that Jeff Tunnell is thinking outused for the animated sequences and much side established lines. A screen saver that of the background is static. Of course, the tells a story, no matter how disjointed or same might be said about the entire cate random, is a fascinating concept and Jeff gory of screen savers, whether fireworks Tunnell Productions has brought it to the or aquariums. computer in an artistic fashion. Fans of Gamers who want to boot the screen Johnny Hart-style comics and sight gag saver and simply view a few hours of gags lovers everywhere should love it. Cow UMUMUMMUMMUMUMMUMUMMUMMUMUMU BAES should enjoy this randomized film clip of tried-and-true sight gags in a fresh new environment. The artists obviously emulated the Hart style, as the background is minimalist (the tiniest imaginable desert island, decorated by a single coconut tree). The design team also must have been inspired by Gilligan's Island re-runs in that the title character, a marooned seafarer who regularly misses opportunities to be rescued, has an unending supply of accoutrements with which to make his island more \"civilized.» He fishes, goes diving, builds sand castles, goes jogging (in his \"three hour tour\" style jogging suit) and even entertains a lovely mermaid for dinner in his clairvoyantly packed tuxedo). The concept behind this style of screen saver is, of course, that the computer user is often surprised by the animation that appears on the screen. As the user talks on Summummum \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN... a journey into another reality. Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. VISUALIZATIONS ... $35.00. Programs for Children ... call or write. Created by an Educa. tional Psychologist. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 MuuminiMUMULE MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (after 5 p.m.) IBM/Compatibles and AMIGA RUPU URUGURUWWunununununun Circle Reader Service # 50 Computer Gaming World Page 16 "


"D U N EII The Building of A Dynasty MENJAJUJWNS LEEDUS UT 191913 Only one house will prevail. Atreides Trike. MISSILE TAN DMG ATTACK BOVE RETREAT GVHD Ure 1199 Cast: 300 EID Control all aspects of combat and construction. BUTED THIS IDSSYSTEMS Select and build varieties of installations. Acquire valuable information from your Mentat. Conquer Arrakis this fall on your IBM PC! For more information, pricing and orders please call 890-VRG-INOZ. Visa, Mastercard, American Express and checks accepted. Westwood Distributed exclusively by SCI-FI EPIC OF ALL TIME! A SIMULATION OF THE BEST SELLING GAMES DUNE Storation demark of Di ichrs teserved r enis Corporating and licensed to M/Vniversal Merchandising. Ing. 1984 Dino De Laurentiis Whitwood Studios in all tights reserved Circle Reader Service #146 "


"Review Athlete's Feats STARCRAFT Accolade's Summer Challenge by Gordon Goble TITLE: Summer Challenge SYSTEM: IBM PLAYERS: 1 10 PRICE: $54.95 PROTECTION: Code Wheel DESIGNERS: Jeff Sember, Mike Benna Mindspan Technologies PUBLISHER: Accolade San Jose, CA Woligang Terme at CE RN E469 nutarur It was a searing summer afternoon as American ironman Brock Studley strode confidently into competition. Days of exhaustive and repetitious training had led to this moment...but that was all behind him now. Once in the heat of battle, there was no turning back. Less than 45 minutes and eight events later, it was all over. Studley had performed well, perhaps better than anticipated, and in the end was bested only by Canadian superathlete Richard DeReux. The day had begun on a high note on the archery range. Studley's 107 point total after the 12 required shots had topped his own tournament record of 103, as he hit a golden bull's-eye. The American's winning ways were to continue next on the cycling oval and the standings after the first two events showed Studley with a dominating lead. Hopes were high for three in a row as the javelin competition began. Yet, Studley would crack under pressure on this day, foot-faulting twice and tossing the sleek missile almost straight up and back down through his own head on his third and final try. His woes continued on the kayak course, as the rattled American missed 10 gates on his way to finishing last. A better result than his training sessions, when an overturned kayak would most often signal his presence on the course. The main stadium was the sight for the next event, the 400 meter hurdles, and although the stumbling Studley would knock no less than three hurdles to the ground, his inherent speed propelled him to the silver medal. Studley found himself clinging to a slim overall lead as he mounted his trusty steed in preparation for the equestrian competition. Less than one minute later, a bruised and battered Studley was picking himself from the ground, being thrown viciously from his uncooperative horse. Another last place finish in the books, this feat would be duplicated in the penultimate event, the pole WINA SPECIALIZED BIKE! vault, as Studley twice ran past the take-off $1000 VALUE area and straight into the cushioned mat Contest without ever getting off the ground. EmbarDetails Inside rassed but undaunted, Studley knew he'd have to be perfect in the day's finale, the high jump, to have a chance at a top three finish. Indeed, he was up to the task, being the only competitor to clear 2.15 meters. A triple gold medal winner at this challenge, Studley finished the competition a strong second. He turned off the computer, all the while mulling over the fact that in the future, he would be going up against professional, then world class athletes. He had timidly watched them before, and although he knew performance enhancing drugs were banned from Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"Trade Up! The Game You Grew Up With Has Grown Up Too! GEZBEHNE DE 200 DO cuccLE 2 LES 2 *-= 2 2 IBM PC version WINDOWS M version MONOPOLY E LUXE ! GRIENTAL AVE HOS Bed ==2232 IBM PC version WINDOWS  version that keeps track of all previous moves and the ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules. It's more mercenary than your lawyer, shrewder than your accountant, greedier than the IRS and tougher than your granny. Get ready for the most challenging game of Monopoly you've ever played with MONOPOLY DELUXE. GO 1 GAMES Combining 90's technical knowhow with plenty of good oldfashioned fun, the bestselling board game of all time is back and better than ever with completely Enjoy the thrill and excitement of wheeling and dealing as you amass, or reluctantly part with, great fortunes buying and selling railroads, utilities and properties of all types. This game's a must for the library of any TRUE gamer or future real URPARKER estate tycoon! BROTHERS revamped levels of difficulty and greatly enhanced graphics for your computer! You'll get more deluxe for your bucks with dazzling animotion of all ten official tokens, easy as-pie interface, a game activity log MONOPOLY DELUXE with the ultimate easy-to-use point-and-click interface will be available this fall in PC and WINDOWS versions WINDOWS version features all of the DELUXE features listed above plus the added bonus of easier-to-use point-and-click interface. For more information, pricing and orders, please call 800 VRG-IND7. VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS and checks octepled. MONOPOLYSand RICH UNCLE design are registered trademarks of Tonko Corporation. Rich Undeo 1936, 1992 Parker Brothers. All rights reserved. Monopolyo 1935, 1992 Parker Brothers, Inc., a division of Tonko Corporation All rights reserved licensed to Virgin Gomes, Inc 01992 Virgin Games, Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, L. WINDOWS is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation Return your authorized version of the original Monopoly computer game to a participating dealer and receive $10 off your purchase of Monopoly Deluxe! Circle Reader Service #147 "


"Review any rank of competition, he did not think these competitors were (and, believe it or not, somewhat tiring) tapping motion.] natural humans. While one hand is furious tapping, the other lies ready to depress So goes Accolade's Summer Challenge, a game in which the the space bar, which will inform Brock to bring his throwing arm technical aspect is quick to master, but the possibility of actually back in preparation for the strenuous pitch forward. Careful attenbeating the computer athletes at any level past the amateur ranks tion to the release angle graphic on the starboard base of the screen is another story altogether. is important; the longer the throwing arm is cocked Fortunately, Accolade has back, the higher the trajectory will be. And Brock designed this game to endoesn't want to toss it too high, or too low. courage head-to-head huNor does he want to foot-fault, which he will do man competition, and that is if one lets him run too far without letting go of the where Summer Challenge javelin in question. Complete these operations in a really shines proper manner, and Brock's toss will exceed 82 Although the task of demeters, a distance which brings an ovation from the feating the defaulted comgathered throng. Do it wrong, and Brock feels the puter competition is wrath of thousands as a mutual groan of sorrow interesting, long term in(maybe disgust?) is heard. trigue is definitely enThe javelin is certainly a challenging, almost hanced by challenging up to addictive event. So is kayaking (wherein the sen10 human friends or foes in sation of being buoyed on water is most definitely any given tournament. Be CYCLING TYD evident), archery (the speed of preparation between cause Summer Challenge 0:00.005 shots counts almost as much as accuracy) and the doesn't require the talents Tournament. Becords102.00 ed: 0.0Lkech equestrian competition. Unfortunately, the 400 meof the proverbial rocket sciter hurdles, cycling, high jump and pole vaulting entist to get the basics under control, those not fond of thumbing events suffer somewhat simply because there just isn't enough through pages of documentation can have a lot of quick fun. stuff to them. As well, the inclusion of other athletes on the track After the initial fluffery and the joys of the code wheel, a Summer in the biking and hurdling events would have added a welcomed Challenge session opens with a screen allowing players to pick sense of realism. their on-screen personas — various male and feTo their credit, Accolade male athletes — from a host of competing coundoes provide replays for all tries. Up to 10 players can then each pick a name, performances in all events. choose a country, and decide on the appropriate These can quickly be saved facial graphic. The ceremonial lighting of the for future bragging rights flame follows, then it's down to business. (such as Brock's 92 meter Dirty rotten scoundrels who want to win at all javelin toss!), but are somecosts may not want to inform their buddies of this. what limited, providing but a but there are training sessions available in which a single camera angle (alplayer has unlimited time and attempts at becomthough reverse and stop acing world caliber. In most events, experience and tion special effects are natural coordination really help, an example being present). the javelin throw. Musical accompaniment is Entering the javelin arena (training and event somewhat lame — typical views are the same, with the \"camera\" positioned Accolade computer Muzack directly behind the current competitor), the armTrial Time s (hmm...what does the perchair Olympian will quickly find that a number of Tournament Records 1:02.003A Speed c ussion sound like? How operations must take place in quick succession about a very under-powered and in perfect harmony in order to taste the thrill of victory. As little guy beating on an empty Spaghetti-Os can with a small twig). in real competition, the speed of approach, timing of release and Installation is as quick and painless as to be expected, mouse trajectory of the javelin's ascent to the heavens are all critical to a support is present, and Summer Challenge can be successfully run satisfactory result. through Windows via Accolade's own little icon. A quick nod to the venen Falcon 3.0 it's not, nor does Summer Challenge erable keyboard. Here, attempt to mimic the complexity of such megaand in many of the Sumgames. Refreshing or too simplistic that depends mer Challenge events, use on one's viewpoint but for quick and easy good of the keyboard seems to times (and head-to-head at that!), Accolade has sucachieve better results ceeded. than incorporating the One final thought for those with a warped sense of joystick. In Summer Chalhumor, we harken back to the high jump pit as Brock lenge, speed is often atmakes his first attempt. Unfortunately for our hero, tained through a quick he jumped a little too early (about 20 feet before the tapping of either a specibar!), did his mandatory flop, and impacted the fied key or joystick button. ground squarely on his back. Rising slowly and in Simply put, ol' Brock obvious pain, the tortured athlete massaged his achseems to go a darn sight ing spine and exclaimed quite succinctly \"That hurt!\" MURDU ESAS faster when using the keyIt was so painful to witness that he did it again and REPLAY.UZ Inalt board for this repetitive 7777 18 Time: 120.255 again! This guy don't learn too quickly, do he? cow Speed: KAYAK ISLATE 2.00 Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the World War I strategy game it took 2500 years to perfect. Twenty-five hundred years ago the ancient wild dogfights THE CETTN Haw 11 warrior Sun Tzu wrote the definitive military and thrilling strategy and tactics book, The Art of War. Now, bombing runs at thousands of any point in years later, the battle. Actual screens may vary. MicroProse is Even more fun, you'll get to create an infinite 3. CO. OS DOLLSIDIU cu proud to present The Ancient Art of L The Ancient Art of 0039 War in the Skies, an action-packed aerial strategy game based on the writings of Sun Tzu. number of campaigns using the game's incredible campaign editor. The Ancient Art of War The Ancient Art in the Skies of War in the Skies The Wheeld War Isume te Arsion Game Through a unique combination of wargame from MicroProse. strategy and fast action combat, you'll take full 2500 years in the control of World War I air forces in historical and making, and still fictional battles. worth the wait. MAROPROSE You'll confront enemy squadrons commanded LETRON OBFTOMT Tento. CTS II by legendary military minds MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE like Kaiser SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Wilhelm II and Baron Von To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. DIO  Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name: Address: City: _State: Zip: Telephone: ( AAI Richthofen. Bomb strategic targets to move the battle front into enemy territory. And jump into 1992 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"Review Three Moe Stooges Coktel Vision's Gobliiins by Chris Lombardi The King Has Turned into a Raving, Drooling Lunatic! Like these Sesame Street characters, the Gobliiins of Coktel Vision (Part of the Sierra family\") creation have set out on a task that only the cooperative use of their individual talents can accomplish. You see, the king of the Gobliiins is being terrorized by a mysterious voodoo-magician prankster. The silly animated introduction to the game shows the poor king poked, prodded and terrorized into a psychotic state, to the horror of his previously peacefully dining family. Three Gobliiins stooges, Hooter, Dwayne and BoBo, have been sent out in search of the wizard BUDD You're Next I remember the morning my youngest sister, then four years old, made the I first step out of the egotism of the toddler years and grasped a higher human truth. Two Sesame Street furries, the Geeple and the Gonk, were in a dilemma. In a tree, high above their heads, hung a delicious fruit which neither creature could eat. The Geeple had arms naturally stuck high above its head; while the Gonk's arms were stuck down below its waist. The Geeple could pick the fruit from the tree, but it couldn't bring the fruit to its mouth while the Gonk could hold things at mouth level but couldn't reach the fruit. The two independent characters thought a moment and struck upon an answer cooperation! Through a series of contortive maneuvers they found that each could taste the nectar of shared victory over their cruelly conceived genetic endowments. Geeple! Gonk! Nectarseeds ines! GOBLINS WARNING. Contains ford puzles S t ephen COKTEL VISION TITLE: Goblins SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM PRICE: $34.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Pierre Gilhodes, Muriel Tramis PUBLISHER: Sierra Oakhurst, CA Souk, Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"Review again. This is one world where one does not want to use the Force. When one gobliiin commits such a flub, the others in the group don't hold it against him. No, they hold it against you, the player. They realize that the player holds the puppet-strings and they'll let him or her know what's on their minds. They'll gesticulate wildly, hold fingers to their heads to encourage the player to think, and non-verbally plead with the player to get his or her act together. While the player takes their advice and carefully considers the situation, these goofs will wait impatiently for the next Diamond very much in line with the Sierra protocol. The game is entirely mouse-driven and the individual actions of the gobliiins are represented by different mouse icons (a fist, an arrow, an open hand) which the player can cycle through by clicking the right mouse button. A good deal of work has been done to ensure that the player can make a single click with the arrow button and thereby move a Gobliiin to any point on the screen, regardless of whether he will have to walk in a straight line or traverse an intricate path of several ladders. A small feature, but appreciated by those who have played the earlier graphic adventures without such \"path tracing.\" The overall feel of Gobliiins it's simple interface, it's \"click-around\" exploratory nature, the goofball antics of the trio and the silly animations that abound in their world suggests a younger audience appeal. However, many of the puzzles can be quite sticky, and some require a very careful eye — occasionally causing even this salty gamer to pause and think. Younger gamers might get a bit frustrated going this one alone, but the game would make great \"lapware,\" where the older gamer makes suggestions about the next move and the younger does the clicking and enjoys the animated results. This is not to say that older gamers won't get anything out of Gobliiins — far from it. There is plenty of good fun here for the graphic adventurer enjoying a respite from the more plot intensive quests. Of course, like most graphic adventures this is a \"crack it and rack it\" game, where there is little replay beyond the few nights one will spend the first time through the game. Even so, Hooter, Dwayne and BoBo will entertain a variety of lighthearted gamers so long as these players remember that cooperation is the name of the game, and that the best fruits of labor are those that are shared. Nectarines! Cow mi NIAK, whose magic could counteract the voodoo curse and restore the king's state of mind. This Gobliiin Quest will take the zany trio through a dozen or so puzzle-filled screens of the standard Sierra graphic adventure style. Mastering the puzzles on each screen requires the use of each Goblin's gift. Hooter, a graying lesser magician, casts a general sort of spell that has unpredictable effects. Bobo, a horn-helmed ruffian, is a pugilist and all-around athlete who can climb ropes and land a solid right jab when required. Dwayne, a spry young technician, is the only one of the three that can pick up items and use them appropriately. Thus, with a punch, some item manipulation, and a little magic, the Goblins are on their way. When the Gobliiins find themselves on a new screen filled with items, creatures, and pathways they have little to tell them what exactly is the goal they seek so, a little exploration is in order. The player will pick a character by clicking on him and proceed to punch, zap, or pick up everything he can. Sometimes this hunt-and-click procedure yields fruit a new object or a change in the environmentand the overall gist of the screen's puzzle will begin to unfold. More often, the Gobliiins will end up doing something silly, like causing something to fall on their head or invoking the wrath of some creature or another. Like the old \"Three Stooges» short subjects, it is not only the offending Gobliiin who reaps whatever punishment is due, but the whole lot of them ends up paying the price. You see, the group has a general allotment of collective energy, represented by a bar on the screen, and when one member screws up, the energy is sapped. When this karmic well has run dry, the level is over and must be started TIC move yawning, shrugging their shoulders, turning back flips, chewing gum, playing with yo-yos and whatnot. All of this is entirely too cute and thus, endearing to the soft soul. The world of the Gobliiins is a cleverly created one. The puzzles mostly involved discovering strange contraptions in the bizarre fantasy landscape which will enable the Gobliiins to bypass some obstacle. Most steps toward a puzzle's solution are accompanied by a short, simple and funny animation, and one can always be sure of getting a non-verbal haranguing after every wrong step. Interacting with the Gobliins is quite easy; facilitated by an interface DE LES VELD 1 January 1993 Page 23 "


"SUNGOO Become the World's Greatest Conqueror! SA STATELLI TETETTE TELLILUTEE EEEZ OP. Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia, an untamed land of conquest & glory. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forest to your advantage as you battle across the Cascatian Realm, to become the reigning king. Just about the best strategy and tactics game you will ever play. NINE BEAUTIFUL SCENARIOS. A RANDOM MAP GENERATOR. UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH. 21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI). MODEM PLAY. COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY. RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS. SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS. The \"Conquered Kingdoms\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commordore. "


"BATTLES OOP Several dudes holistie gaming Conquer the world in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state of the art global conquest simulation. It's simple to play, but only a true master will reign in «Battles of Destiny.\" Challenging Artifical Intelligence (9 levels of difficulty) Air, ground and naval combat 22 different units to construct Modem play  Over 20 beautiful worlds to conquer Complete player history Dynamic scoring system Campaign play The \"Battles of Destiny\" computer game is IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  1992 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #121 "


"Review The Wages of War Quest For Glory III VGA EGA WAGES OF SIERRA TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Quest for Glory III IBM $59.99 Documentation Look-up Lori & Corey Cole Sierra Oakhurst, CA rn Quest for Glory II (QG2), players were introduced to Rakeesh the LionItaur (a leonine variation on the traditional centaur) and Uhura the Simbani tribeswoman. The player adventured with them in the city of Shapeir and its sinister sister city, Raseir. In Quest for Glory III: Wages of War (QG3), the homeland of these characters is the land darkened by the threat of war, so the player is soon whisked off to the land of Tarna by way of a magical portal. Upon arrival in the city of Tarna, the player learns that evil is indeed afoot. A hidden power presumably the demon released as the result of the demise of Ad Avis in the thrilling finale to QG2 — seems to be trying to get the Liontaurs, Simbani and the jungle-dwelling leopardmen to go to war. The player arrives on the scene and assumes the role of a fantasy role-playing secretary of state, shuttling between the involved tribes as a peaceful mediator and trying to bring peace to the region. by Jeff James In the original Quest for Glory, Lori and Corey Cole proved that a hybrid adventure/role-playing game could be successful. In Quest for Glory III, the husband and wife design duo challenge our assumptions about culture in the same way they challenged our beliefs about game design. Gamers are likely to discover enlightenment in \"Darkest\" Africa when they boot Quest for Glory III: Wages of War. QG3 takes Lori and Corey Cole's popular adventure series to new heights with an exotic fantasy setting littered with difficult obstacles and malevolent monsters. Gamers can bring along their favorite adventurers from the first two games in the series or start anew with one of three characters: fighter, magic-user or thief. The story begins with the player assumPage 26 Computer Gaming World "


"Review ing the role of the hero who vanquished the evil wizard Ad Avis in QG2, thwarting the evil spellcaster's attempt to unleash the evil djinni, Iblis. While the passing of any evil magic-user should give ues (I would love to see an RPG based upon the ancient Aztec civilization in South America). TORTO None may enter unless requested to do So. gamers ample cause to rejoice, it seems that the death of the evil wizard has released an even greater evil in the Quest for Glory gameworld. Specifically, a demon was released when Ad Avis met his death, and is believed to be the instigator of a war brewing in another part of the Quest for Glory gameworld. Exotic New Landscape While QG1 was based loosely on a medieval European setting and QG2 opted for an exotic Arabian tableau, QG3 offers perhaps the most exotic and intriguing backdrop in the Quest for Glory series to date. QG3 takes place on the sprawling continent of Fricana, a land patterned heavily after the real-world African continent. In this land, a humid tropical jungle skirts a large, sweltering savanna of grasslands. In the midst of the jungle are the crumbling ruins of a lost city, filled with dark, foreboding secrets of its own. The city of Tarna itself is a cosmopolitan center of activity, where a variety of fantasy and real-world cultures collide. Honor-bound Liontaurs mingle in the streets with Arabian shop keepers, while Simbani warriors, strongly patterned after traditional African Zulu, observe with watchful eyes. The world of QG3 is a rich and alluring one; a world where Edgar Rice Burrough's Tarzan would feel right at home. Indeed, QG3's exotic treatment of different cultures proves itself to be one of the most enjoyable aspects of the game. Roleplaying adventures have traditionally been centered around medieval European culture, using the same western batch of monsters (dragons and Ogres), backdrops (castles and hamlets) and conflicts (dwarves vs. elves, orcs vs. everyone). I especially enjoyed QG3's treatment of African culture, complete with a list of verbal greetings and other terms taken from actual Swahili. Non-European cultures such as the African tribal empires, Chinese dynasties and Japanese shogunates have been traditionally underrepresented in fantasy RPG's; this reviewer would like to encourage game developers to explore the rich, relatively untapped material for adventure gaming in these and other cultures. With QG3 proving that a RPG based upon a non-European gaming world can be just as enjoyable and entertaining as one that is, one can hope that this tradition continMoving the character about this rich gameworld involves Sierra's tried and true point and click interface which displays all of the commands the player can use in the game. These controls can be perused by toggling through them with the right mouse button or accessing the pop-up control panel at the top of the game screen. Icons for looking, grabbing, checking inventory and accessing disk functions are all present. Three aspects of the interface have been modified considerably in QG3. First, the speech icon has been given additional flexibility. Conversation with non-player characters in earlier Sierra titles (such as King's Quest V) were frustratingly one sided often little more than dead-end dialogues where the only control the player had over what was being said was how fast it could be read off the screen. Clicking the \"talk\" icon on a character in the game now brings up a menu of topics. Speaking about some topics may bring up other topics of discussion, allowing the player to modify the course of discussion to some degree. While a far cry from a full-blown text parser, OG3's expanded dialogue is definitely a step in the right direction. The second modification is the special action bar, which contains all of the specialized commands particular to the Quest for Glory series. This menu allows the player to access special character actions, such as sleeping, character information, fleeing combat and sneaking up on an opponent. Finally, QG3 offers a specialized menu of combat actions. Closer in appearance to an embossed tablet than a menu, it is divided into three areas corresponding to three types of combat options. Tailored individually for the Fighter, Thief and Magicuser classes, these combat menus make navigating the pseudo-arcade combat sequences an exercise in point and click simplicity. QG3's sumptuous handpainted graphics make the exotic backdrop of Tarna spring to life. Most of the artJanuary 1993 Page 27 "


"Review LON@l.12 HON 2 : 17 PORT work excels at presenting the world of QG3 in a grand scale, with towering pyramids, sphinx-like statues and thick green jungles all rendered in 256-color VGA. Adding to the visual display, QG3 sports a sound track with a broad scope of styles, ranging from driving passages filled with jungle drums to sprightly Persian bazaar music, reminiscent of snake charmers and spice sellers. Blemishes on the Landscape As polished a product as QG3 is, a few blemishes need to be mentioned. Traveling across the open savanna seems to be more difficult than it should be, with monsters attacking the player's character from all quarters. True, the character can opt to flee, and QG3 offers three levels of playing difficulty to dial down the difficulty of the arcade sequences, but regardless of the difficulty level, combat seems to occur more often than necessary. I also encountered a few minor bugs regarding conversation with some NPC's. During a nighttime encounter with Arnie Saknoosen -a gregarious, diamond-hunting aardvark -the game ghosted out all of the action icons, preventing me from leaving the area. Visions on the Horizon Minor program foibles aside, QG3 is yet another excellent product from the creative characters at Sierra. With every new release in the Quest for Glory series, designers Lori and Corey Cole have been steadily improving the line, offering gamers an exciting mixture of hard-core fantasy role-playing and traditional graphic adventure games. QG3 is far and away the most satisfying and entertaining game yet in the series. With such a commendable tradition, we can hardly contain our expectations for Quest for Glory IV: Shadows of Darkness. It will be tough to surpass the expectations generated from the excellence already found in Quest for Glory III: Wages of War. Cow PORTINIUM PORTINIUM Voted best P.B.M. game of the year at AndCon'92, National P.B.M. Convention, & Cleveland, Ohlo TECH TECH Compete with up to 99 players in either of two low-cost versions of the P.B.M. game of PORTINIUM. Players compete in a single age on the planet Glacieria with one character, one capital city and four divisions. Fierce battles are common as players pursue victory across more than 6500 map sectors. REDUCED PRICE! ALSO AVAILABLE: PORTINIUM and PORTINIUM II. Play on four time-travel levels with the original version or the new, 3-week, 10-unit format. Time-travel, minigames, player espionage units and indigenous cities are available in larger versions. No hidden costs. PORTINIUM HI or LO-TECH Remember to state game version when ordering. $5.00 per turn (4-wk turnaround) LIFETIME $25.00 setup fee includes: 198 page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide, start-up packet, free start-up turn, plus one free turn and subscription to gama newsletter. w ww . Write or call for free brochure W . ENCHANTED HORIZONS P.O. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle Reader Service #76 Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Isn't It Time You Played David Leadbetter's Greens? Tf water hazards are becoming too I hazardous for you, then play David Leadbetter's Greens. It's the 3-D golf simulation that improves your game. The golf instructor who helped Ian Baker-Finch, Nick Faldo, and Nick Price become champions can help you rise from course duffer to club pro. Under his guidance, you'll adjust stance, swing, tee, and ball positions. You'll view shots from seven different angles. And you'll even review your performance through slick instant replays and graphic hole-by-hole analysis. David Leadbetter's Greens from MicroProse. It's the computer golf game you've been wading for. Visit your local retailer, or for a free catalogue, dial 1-800879-PLAY GREENS DAVID LEADBETTERS The Intonal D Gol Simula HECROPROSE MICROPROSE ENTES EN SPARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOTWARE  1992 Microprose Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #103 "


"Scorpion's View New World's Clouds of Xeen as told by Scorpia Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial perspective. T ourth in the Might & Magic seKries, Clouds of Xeen bears a strong resemblance to its predecessor, Isles of Terra. Character creation, interface and game play are pretty much the same as in the previous M&M; if you played Terra, you'll have no trouble at all jumping into Clouds, with perhaps a quick glance through the manual as a refresher. However, Xeen is a stand-alone (of sorts; more on that later). If you've been hanging on to saves from Terra in the hopes of transferring your characters over, you're out of luck. A new party will have to be made for this one or you can use the pre-created group that comes with the game. All the usual classes are available: Knight, Paladin, Archer, Sorcerer, Druid, Cleric, Ninja, Robber and Ranger. Six characters is the maximum, though, so you will have to choose carefully which professions you want in the party. Dice are rolled for all the starting stats and you can swap values between them if you have good rolls, but they are not quite allocated where you need them in order to create a particular class. This is a very nice feature and helps to cut down on creation time. Characters you create come with no equipment at all, but the pre-created group is outfitted to a limited extent. You can save some money by using the traditional canard of stripping the original group of all their items and giving them to your own people. That will require a couple of trips into and out of the inn, since exchanging items is no longer possible once you've \"checked in.\" No doubt this was done to get around the problem of the previous game, where any object could be duplicated endlessly with a little judicious trading around. That doesn't work any more, so remember to do all your trading outside the inns. A New \"Day\" In Magic Many of the old familiar spells from Terra are here, along with some new ones. Particularly welcome are the Day of Sorcery for mage types and the Day of Protection for cleric types. These are packages that cast multiple spells at once. No longer is it necessary to cast individual Heroism, Holy Bonus spells or a mass of several Elemental protection spells. One dose of Day of Protection from a clerical character provides light, protection from all elements, and group Holy Bonus and Heroism, simultaneously. In the same fashion, Day Of Sorcery casts Wizard Eye, Power Shield (for the entire party), Levitate and Clairvoyance, all at once. Clairvoyance is a new spell, handy for little tips when deciding whether or not to attempt opening a chest or similar object. Two heads on the display will nod \"yes\" or \"no,\" depending on the situation. Both say yes when a chest is safe and has goodies inside. One says yes and the other no when the chest is trapped but contains treasure, and when both say no, it's best to leave the item alone. Of course, you can still purchase the individual spells of Light, Heroism, Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"Scorpion's View Wizard Eye, etc., so you can tailor your spellcasting to the exact situation. As you might expect, those Day packages require a lot of spellpoints (75 for Protection, 40 for Sorcery), and it would be silly to use up that many points when all you need is light or Wizard Eye. However, for those occasions when you need it all, you can have it all without a lot of fuss. Another new feature that is sure to bring cheers is the appearance of the auto-note utility. The game automatically records for you all the important information and clues that you come across during play. This includes the locations of all those neat little wells/fountains that give temporary boosts to stats, and shrines that provide daily protection against elemental powers, as well as the passwords, obscure hints, and whatnot that turn up as you ramble around the world. RE So you don't need to make any notes of your own, at least as far as those items are concerned. With the quests, it's a little different. The game does keep track of quests for you, what you have to find (or do) and where the person is who sent you out. However, the quest-tracking utility often does not record the place where you're supposed to go to complete the errand. This can be a problem if you take on several quests at once, which is an easy thing to do. People who want some mission accomplished are all over the place and there seems to be no limit to the number of errands you can accept. The quest notes faithfully record all of them, but when you look at those notes, they might just say \"Find the lost Book Of Foobar and return it to Fred at A1, X3, Y9\" with no mention of where Fred told you to look for it. Therefore, you'll have to do some note-taking of your own for the quests, at least as far as errand locations are concerned. Quests On \"Spec\" Quest items are clearly marked as such when you find them, and they go into a special inventory where you can see them, but can't touch them. There is no worry that you might inadvertantly drop, sell, or use up a special object. Once you find such an item, it's safe until you return it to the proper person. There are, however, a couple of prob their contents tend towards the lower lems with the quests. One is the fact end of the potency scale. Don't expect that you can find a quest item, or com your party to be decked out with obsidplete a quest errand, without having ian weapons and armor by the end of been sent out to do the task. For in the game; you'll be lucky to have so stance, in Castle Basenji, I came across much as an obsidian cape (the only a Scroll of Insight, which was clearly a such item I ever found). This is not to quest item, and it was a long time after say there mightn't be a few floating that before the party stumbled on the around, but they will be hard to come person who wanted it. by. This is all to the good, since it Similarly, the group cleared an area makes the better stuff you do find all that more valuable to you, and keeps of monsters, and only much later came the party from becoming too powerful across the person who had wanted those monsters cleaned out. In all these too quickly. situations, you do get the rewards for Using the town teleporters to get the item or actions performed, even around is much more sensible now. In though you hadn't been asked to per the previous game, you had to find out form the quest, so \"jumping the gun\" the \"codeword» for each town, and cerdoesn't cheat you out of anything. Still, tain other areas, before you could 'port it is unsettling, and sometimes annoy to them. That's been done away with, ing, to find yourself on these \"unknown and you only need to type in the name quests.\" It would have been far better if of where you want to go to arrive there. The party can travel to any named dungeon, castle, or town on the map that comes with the game. Some places, while shown on the map, have no names, so you'll still have to trek there on foot, but you can usually 'port to some other location nearby to cut down on travel time. Perhaps the most interesting addition to Xeen is the choice of \"Adventurer\" or \"Warrior\" mode. Adventurer mode is described in the manual as being \"less combat-intenAnker sive.\" What that means is, the requisite items did not appear in the monsters are a bit easier to kill and you game until after the party had been don't have to fight quite so many of commissioned to find them. them in most areas. There is still plenty The other problem is that the quests, of combat in this mode, however, so by and large, have little to do with the don't think you'll be able to waltz main action of the story. Yes, you do around without fighting anything. get experience, spells, money, etc., There are a lot of critters out there which help to build up your party for lusting for your blood. You'll just be the end game, but this is fairly indirect. able to get rid of them with (usually) a The quests themselves, in most cases, bit less trouble, that's all. Adventurer do not advance the plot. There are a few mode is a good choice for people who that must be completed in order to finshudder at the very thought of an SSI ish the game, but the rest exist on their \"gold box» game. own, with no connection to anything else. At the beginning of this article, I mentioned that Xeen was a stand-alone Where's Monte Haul? game \"of sorts.\" New World is planOne thing you'll soon notice is that ning an add-in sequel, The Dark Side of the mega-goodies have been scaled Xeen (sometime in Spring of '93). In way, way back. There are no longer any preparation for this sequel, there are mountain alcoves with treasures or litcertain places in the game your party tle caches buried under the snow or cannot enter the southern sphinx, the sand. The items you do pick up will Dragon and Darkstone towers, a duncome mostly from combat and chests geon in the vicinity of Nightshadow in dungeons and castles. Indeed, even and all the pyramids. TGE TE January 1993 Page 31 "


"THE PERFECT GENERAL TH GREATEST CENTUPV Quantum Quay Procucions, no 20 new and exciting scenarios for the award winning Perfect General. Challenge the computer or your friends to some of the greatest battles of our century! Gorgeous Playing Field  Clean and Simple Interface 3 Difficulty Levels LIST OF BATTLES:  Stalingrad Guderian  Falklands Bataan Malta Fulda  Suez'734 Long Binh . Suez '67  Saigon  Kursk  Shenyang  Inchon + many more \"The Perfect General» computer game is IBM PC and Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799 1991 QOP and White Woll Productions. All rights reserved, IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commodore. "


"Andrew Visscher's and Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's SOLITAIRES JOURNEY, The Game for a Lifetime!! 16 .:: GASTROENTER $ 33 OOP Quantum Qualty Productions Inc The greatest collection of solitaire games ever! In addition to the 105 individual games, there are tournaments, quests and cross country journeys for a lifetime of gaming entertainment. \"Solitaire's Journey\" ranges from the simple and easy all the way up to the strategic and challenging. 105 SOLITAIRE GAMES (Most of the world's best) TOURNAMENT PLAY (Set tournaments or create your own) 4 INTRIGUING QUESTS. SEVERAL CROSS-COUNTRY TOURING COMPETITIONS. COMPLETE HISTORY AND OVERALL AVERAGES FOR EACH GAME The \"Solitaire's Journey\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commodore, Circle Reader Service #122 "


"Scorpion's View CES C Also, for the first time in a Might & pected. Of course, you will be able to in particular the addition of the autoMagic game, the advancement of your return after you've been to the Dark notes, reducing the number of \"super party is limited. No one can go beyond Side. items,\" the separate inventory for quest the 20th level of experience. This is to On the bright side, other than some items, and the choice of two modes of ensure that the characters will not beplay, as well as others mentioned problems in getting the game to run come all-powerful prior to the arrival initially (see sidebar), I encountered no above. Game play moves along more of The Dark Side of Xeen. They can, of technical difficulties with Xeen. The smoothly, and with less frustration course, accumulate extra experience game did not crash even once and all (and fewer lost notes) than in prior enbefore the game ends, but it won't be the quests were in place and operating tries in the series. useful to them here. properly. A rare event in the game mar What still needs work, however, is It's A Plot! (Or Is It?) ket these days (and a sad commentary integrating more quests into the plot There isn't much plot to Clouds of when you have to mention specifically and having an actual story that develXeen. Your job is a that a game ran cleanly, sigh), Clouds ops as the game progresses. The Might straightforward task of and Magic series has albuilding up the party, Combat ways been weak in this finding where Xeen area. For instance, in lairs and then going every M&M game, the towns seem to be inthere to kill him. This marks a departure habitated only by shopfrom the previous keepers and monsters. If games where the ultithe residents moved out, where did they go? The mate goal was not to engage in a Foozle world is rather empty of fight, but to do some everyday people, and other non-violent acthis in turn makes it hard tion. to have anything beyond a barebones story. Given how the big A more populated showdown goes, New world, with a more solid World would do well foundation, would go a to consider sticking long way to beefing up with non-violent endthe enjoyment of the ings, or at least doing Low game. something to make the combat con of Xeen deserves a gold star to New frontation a little more interesting. In For all that, Clouds of Xeen is likely, World's quality assurance and the case of Xeen, it goes this way: if you playtesters for this outing. particularly with the new features, to please the hard-core Might & Magic have the right item, Xeen is toast; if you don't have it, your party is toast. Cloud's-Eye View fan and thanks to Adventurer mode) Overall, Clouds of Xeen has many This is ultimately unsatisfying, as some who might otherwise pass the improvements over the previous game, dragons and diamond golems are apt to game by. Cow give you a lot more trouble than Lord X ever will and the \"one shot and it's over battle» makes the confrontation Technical Difficulties, Please Stand By seem almost pointless. This is a problem with many CRPG's — not just Things did not get off to a good start thing, too, since disk access (espeMight & Magic IV — where getting to when the game refused to run after cially restoring) is a bit slow. the last battle is often more difficult installation, complaining there than taking on Mr. Big himself. It's a So, if your machine has only 2 megs wasn't enough expanded memory. pity that New World fell into this wellof RAM, and you're having trouble After many frustrating attempts to worn rut, when up to now they had been squeezing out enough expanded free up more expanded RAM (my doing quite nicely with non-Foozle memory to run the game, try booting current machine has 2 megs), I obendings. your system from a floppy that puts tained from New World a patch that the necessaries into the standard Even more irritating, after the elabo was supposed to make the game re640K, and be sure you have no TSR's rate auto-ending sequence, you have no quire less memory. lurking in memory. Do not put DOS opportunity to save the game, or go Unfortunately, that didn't help very into the High Memory Area. back to check out things you might much; I still couldn't get Xeen to have skipped over in your haste to deIf that doesn't work, you should boot. Finally, in desperation, I crestroy Xeen. If you plan on doing the obtain the patch from New World, ated a separate boot floppy that put game thoroughly, you must complete and try again. One way or another, the DOS, the mouse driver and Rapidbio all the quests and all your exploring game ought to run. Note that this into the lower 640K. That made conbefore you approach the mirror in problem does not affect all computventional memory rather crowded, Xeen's castle (this triggers the autoers, as some handle memory differand I was afraid there wouldn't be mated ending, so you're safe until that ently from others and there may also enough, but amazingly, the game did moment). Otherwise, you may find that be differences among the various excome up, and I even managed to Might & Magic IV has ended a little panded memory managers that consneak in a small (128K) abruptly and much sooner than you extribute to the problem. SMARTDRV.SYS cache. A good Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"REALMS Johsin Your froops were victorious and report very feu casualties Celoten AMAZOS NERVUTTERSTIS SROM MARUTON 1000 warriors messie skil * they are frutto feel strung 12 VE The King is dead. Long live the new King you. Endowed with the divine right to rule, your father bequeaths to you his Realm. Unfortunately, as your sphere of influence grows, so does the resentment from the rulers of neighbouring Realms. Jealousy is such an ugly thing. The fragile peace has been shattered and war rages between the Realns. Now your brief reign has become a fight for survival. The neighboring Realms are growing in strength at your expense. Do you build lines of supplies to barter with them? Or do you build arinies to battle with them? Each Realm vies to GAMES be the ultimate power. Enter the world of REALMS and you could control: OVER 125,000 SQUARE MILES OF FRACTALLYGENERATED LANDSCAPE 128 ARMIES, EACH A THOUSAND STRONG WITH DEFINABLE BATTLE FORMATIONS SIX DISTINCT HUMANOID RACES COUNTLESS FOLLOWERS AND THEIR MONEY  IN INNUMERABLE CITIES Created by the award-winning Graftgold development team, REALMS combines the intuitive playability of an arcade game with the depth of strategy usually found only in the most complex simulations. LOVE THY NEIGHBOR? OR PUT HIM TO THE SWORD? THE CHOICE IS YOURS. But there can only be one. Just make sure its yours. DEVELOPED BY GRAFT GOLD Creative Software AMIGA SCREEN SHOTS Realms is a trademark of Virgin Games, Inc.  1991 Virgin Games, Inc. All rights reserved.  1991 Graftgold Ltd. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd. Illustration by Dermot Power. SHOWN. FOR PRICING AND ORDERS, PLEASE CALL 800-VRG-INOZ. VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS, AND CHECKS ACCEPTED. Circle Reader Service #148 "


"Review Alens, Hippies And Ghouls Oh. Mu! Konami/Gremlin's Plan 9 From Outer Space by Charles Ardai AND RESURSES THE VERDE still find much to enjoy in the game but they probably won't \"get\" it any more than they get\" the movie. FROM OUTER SPACE Bus A3/A4 OLLA Listas VARPIE LTLE TALBOT KONAMI GREMLIN TITLE: Plan 9 From Outer Space SYSTEM: Amiga, MS-DOS PRICE: $39.95 GRAPHICS: VGA 256-Color SOUND: Ad Lib/Soundblaster, Roland PROTECTION; Documentation Look Up DEVELOPER: Gremlin GraphicsSoftware PUBLISHER: Konami Buffalo Grove, IL rt is in the nature of shoddy films, if they are sufficiently shoddy, to acquire the reputation of being \"so bad, they're good.\" Enjoying these films is not a matter of enjoying their intrinsic merit; nor even of affectionately indulging in a caliber of entertainment which, however obvious its flaws may be today, once passed muster with less sophisticated audiences. Rather, it is a matter of smirking at the shoddiness, of sharing a knowing wink and nudge with one's fellow smirkers in a peculiarly contemporary ritual of condescension. To say that a movie is a \"cult classic» often means that, while it offers so little to enjoy that it invites mockery, one can, if one is so inclined, at least enjoy the mockery. So it is that, 34 years after its release, director Ed Wood, Jr.'s shoestring genre stinker, Plan 9 From Outer Space, has won what passes for acclaim (in the same circles that watch such gems as Santa Claus Conquers The Martians and Rockership X-M and howl till tears stream down their faces at how rotten they are) as \"The Worst Film of All Time.\" That Plan 9 is the worst film ever made is open to debate, but not much. It is a perfect example of what will happen if an atrocious script, a tenth-rate director, wooden performers, and a virtually nonexistent budget all get assembled for a single project. Add a star, Bela Lugosi, who dies after completing only a few minutes worth of footage and a prop crew that thinks cardboard, tarpaulins, and pie-plate flying saucers can get viewers to suspend disbelief and you've got a major flop in the making. As Leonard Maltin accurately put it, Plan 9 is \"mesmerizing in its awfulness.\" However, even if Plan 9 is the worst film ever made, it is not clear that it is the \"Worst Film of All Time,\" with all that those capital letters imply. Is it, for instance, so bad that it is funny? Some people think so, but I am not one of them. To me it just seems pitiful and headache-inducing. How one responds to Konami/Gremlin's new computer game based on the film depends largely on how one responds to the movie. People who find the movie a laugh riot will probably find the game equally engaging. People who stare in bewilderment at the film's popularity will Game Plan The game is adaptation, homage, and spoof all rolled into one. The player is a private eye hired by the head of Cheapflik Studios to recover six reels of the movie \"Plan 9 From Outer Space\" which have been hidden around the world after having been stolen by Bela Lugosi's double. (Tom Mason, the poor chap who was saddled with the thankless task of finishing Lugosi's scenes after the star died, played all of his scenes with a cape over his face.) The player also has to screen the film, piece by piece, in Cheapflik's editing room to make sure that the rascally thief hasn't harmed it in any way. (The joke, of course, being that it is impossible to imagine the film getting worse as a result of being re-edited. Still, one wants to retain its auteur's original \"vision.\" Ho ho ho.) Actors from the film make cameo appearances throughout the game: Vampira appears as a clerk in a shopping mall, Lugosi's corpse turns up in a crypt, and most of the living male characters bear a suspicious resemblance to huge, pug-ugly Tor Johnson. The game's plot also has some overlap with the movie's, since the theft of the film is in some way connected with the appearance on Earth of aliens who can only be appeased by gaining ownership of the sole remaining print of the movie. None of this makes much sense; nor, one suspects, is supposed to. The storyline is a glorious mess, reveling in its own incoherence. Things happen, and as a result, other things happen and a lot of jokes are made along the way. Then, the game is over. Playing Plan 9 is a dizzying experience, though not, for the most part, an unpleasant one. The game's worldwide conspiracy of aliens will remind some players of Lucasfilm's Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders, another would-be zany adventure. The biggest difference is that this game has an excuse for being a mess also, that Plan 9 is funnier and has more of an edge to its humor. (For instance, there's the bit with Lugosi's corpse, which will make some players cringe. The game also skates on thin ice with references to Ed Wood's transvestitism and sequences in which the player tangles with hippies in Australia and Fidel Castro in Cuba.) Plan 9 is a genuinely, intentionally funny piece of work, which puts it several notches above the movie (in my opinion). Sardonic descriptions and running gags abound and, while the atmosphere is sometimes sordid («This is a small... office that smells a bit like somebody's dog got sick in it\"), the game is thoroughly enjoyable. Grave Reservations Where Plan 9 falls short is in its implementation. To begin with, while it uses a fairly standard point-and-click interface, it looks like it was made on the cheap. The most noticeable shortcoming is that only a small portion of the screen is used for the graphic window that shows what is going on. The rest of the screen is taken up with an ugly blue background, a hard-to-read inventory list, a gravestone displaying possible actions (one has 10 to choose from), and a small text area. The graphics are acceptable, but never more than that, and the soundtrack that goes with them is grating. Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's and Thurston Searfoss! ... Featured this month at Egghead Software, and Electronic Boutiques The ategy Ga Strate, (Admiral Computer Gaming World of the Nomi ear The Strategy and Tactics Game of the Decade!! strategy Best Po Game Game Players Magazine Illustration by Mare Pagodin Downs 1991 Mare Pagodin Downs Game of On the Strategi ear Chicago Tribune mpute, strategy Co Best Sy Video Games and Computer Entertainment Game AN OOP Vetrert Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. You're an admiral who was dismissed from the service and exiled from your homeland on trumped-up charges. You're given another chance by an old friend who's the head-of-state of a world power. Can you meet the challenge and regain your admiral's rank?  9 superb scenarios. \"The Lost Admiral\" computer game  1 random map scenario, with virtually millions of is IBM PC compatible. It can be obmaps. tained through your favorite retailer  15 campaign games. or ordered direct by calling!  Flagships with special abilities (In campaigns only) 1-908-788-2799.  The challenge of a very strong artificial intelligence.  An in depth officer's ranking system.  1991 QQP Productions. All rights reserved.  A thorough history of your combat endeavors. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines.  Play either side against another human or a computer. "


"Review The writing is at a high level, full of acid wit and self-referential fun, but it could have used a once-over by a good proofreader to catch missing words and punctuation. Along similar lines, place names You must seek out the aliens. esport ber of items that can be taken, but only a few that are actually useful. One is never sure what to take away from a scene; and since one cannot take everything, one is likely to take the wrong things and be forced to replay large sections of the game to correct such mistakes. Finally, there are times when it is extremely inconvenient to return to an object's orginal location to retrieve it. For instance, if one makes it to Cuba but accidentally drops the Spanish dictionary, one cannot just pick it up; one would have to go back to the studio's storeroom in the U.S. to get it again. Granted, any approach to handling inventories has its tradeoffs. Giving the player an unlimited inventory would make the game easier, and therefore shorter. It would also make the on-screen inventory isn't nearly as shoddy, does this make the game a failure?) Are the game's flaws calculated or accidental? Which would be funnier? Similarly, is there some sort of hyperobscure in-joke buried in the fact that the game's instruction manual looks amateurish and is riddled with typos, even to the point of transposing the last two digits of the publisher's hint line? (\"-HINT\" does not come out to \"-4486.\" After all, 'N' tends to precede 'T' in the alphabet.) Is this mock sloppiness or the real thing? If it's a joke, I'll say without embarrassment that I don't get it. One thing that can be said in defense of Plan 9 From Outer Space is that while Ed Wood was apparently a nut, he seems at least to have been a sincere, dedicated and original nut. As Bill Warren writes in Keep Watching the Skies!, his encyclopedic analysis of B-pictures, «[Wood] lies somewhere in the twilight zone between idiocy and inspiration, between genius and hopelessness ... Plan 9 From Outer Space ... is testimony to Wood's guilelessness he can't even make a cheap bad movie right, but he makes it his own way.\" +385Sport hub-ephone...jelydenetlenek POR EUROTUS Passport have been poorly thought out: it is bad, especially in a game with no directional commands or mapping, for there to be two different locations, side by side, called \"the street.\" (It is also confusing that inside an airport one of the movement choices is to the airport.\" by which is meant \"the runway.\") One wishes that the game were better designed in other respects as well. For example, there is no consistency in how it responds when the player does something wrong-sometimes a response appears in the text area, sometimes nothing happens at all, and sometimes a new window appears in the middle of the screen saying, \"Nope, sorry, dead end that.\" The game is not very successful at letting players know when they have done something right, either. When one finds Bela Lugosi's house, one can enter if one is carrying a certain key, but one is never told that this key is the reason one has been allowed in. Most games would contain a sequence in which the player has to use the key on the front door in order to get in, rather than simply be carrying it. This type of problem, which might so easily have been corrected, crops up over and over again in the game. Another problem concerns the way the game handles the player's inventory. That one is allowed to carry no more than eight or nine items at a time is bad enough I much prefer unlimited inventories, even if they aren't realistic. (What else in this game is realistic, after all?) Worse by far, however, is that any items one drops are instantly snapped up by \"a little creature\" and returned to the place where they were first located. The problem is threefold. First, it is not immediately obvious that the little creature is returning the dropped objects to their starting points (as opposed to, say, swallowing them), so one goes through the first half of the game terrified to drop anything for fear that dropped items will be irretrievable. Second, the game contains a large numPode more cumbersome to use, since one might have to cycle through a list of 30 or 40 items. On the other hand, eliminating all non-essential items from the game would take away some of the game's flavor, while leaving them in but making them non-acquirable would frustrate the gamer in an entirely different way. No system is perfect. Nevertheless, I doubt that the system the designers chose for Plan 9 was the best they could have come up with. Or, if it was, they might at least have warned players about its idiosyncrasies. Other Idiosyncrasies Plan 9 has other peculiarities as well which, because they mirror flaws in the movie, may have been put into the game intentionally. In the movie, for instance, the background occasionally changes from day to night and back again within a single scene. In the game, a taxi driver appears to be bald and bearded when one looks at him from outside the cab, yet grey-haired and clean-shaven from inside. Also, while the movie studio is called «Cheapflik Studios\" repeatedly, the front door says, «DCA Films.\" These \"continuity errors\" may be deliberate, but the fact that it is ambiguous makes it difficult to decide whether to laugh at them or with them. More generally, it is unclear how one is supposed to take the game. Is it supposed to be as shoddy as the movie? (Since it The game, with its smirking digs at this rather pathetic relic of a movie, is funny: but it sometimes has the tone of a schoolyard bully taking cheap shots at a defenseless victim. If a person is going to mock something for being lousy, that person had better be pretty sure that the same charge can't be applied to their work. Since, despite its good qualities, there are things about Plan 9 that are pretty lousy, some of its digs at the film that inspired it do nothing so much as highlight its own weaknesses. Yes, that's part of the joke and yes, it's worth a chuckle, but there is a level of irony underneath the laughter. The movie, crappy as it was, had elements of honesty, innocence and integrity that the game a licensed product, parasitic on an original work, full of self-aware sarcasm cannot approach. In this respect, the game attains a degree of cheapness that even the movie didn't reach, which is quite an accomplishment. Maybe 30 years from now people will sit around and laugh at it. It would be fitting and might even be intended. CGW Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"Do You Have What It Takes To Win The Crown? CASTIESTI SIEGE & CONQUEST. Xvi]. CASTIESTI SIEGE & CONQUEST. Charles dead.\" gather gold and grain, mine for iron, trade for timber and stone, research new weaponry, and pay the church for indulgences ...just a few of the fun things that go into a good, medieval day's work! A completely new military, diplomatic and administrative strategy game based on the best-selling CASTLEST Multiple computer players Ability to attack and defend Different story lines based on which personality you play Multiple ways to play and win Digitized movie footage VGA graphics and complete sound board support To order CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST\" call 1-800-969-GAME, or see your local retailer. Coming Soon on MS-DOS! King Charles of Bretagne is dead, without a clear successor to the throne. In the Middle Ages, this means WAR! It's a war you intend to win, and a crown you intend to wear. Unfortunately, other inhabitants have the same idea. CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST' is a game of medieval diplomacy, treachery, and power. To win, you must survive. To survive, you must scout the surrounding territories, defeat the native militias, subjugate the land with castles, feed and maintain the people, forge diplomatic alliances, appease the church and unite the land under your iron fist. Did we forget to mention the other power hungry barons? They're out to gain the same crown and you sit squarely in their path. CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST is a completely new game system, based on the best-selling CASTLESTM. In addition to building castles, you can now siege, attack and destroy them. Forge political and military alliances with the other computer players, or fight and conquer them in the fields or in their castles. Scout unknown territories, spy on and sabotage enemies, recruit infantry and cavalry, All throughi Bretagne and Europe, local Cords gathered their forces to stake claim A4H4P4 ATH  115 Interplay Productions 3710 S. Susan, Suite 100 Santa Ana, CA 92704 (714) 549-2411  1992 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. CASTLES: SIEGE AND CONQUESTTM and CASTLEST are trademarks of Interplay Productions, Inc. MS-DOS Screens Pictured. Circle Reader Service #83 "


"All Terrain Software The Third Part in a Series on Course Design by Mark Alan Willett let those electronic buildizers. ready, because this issue installment looks at the construcidat of terrain features from tee to green for the Jack Nicklaus Golf and Com a Desigte (UNSE) software. Of course, once a gamer gets ready to do some heavy duty construction, there is always a need for on-the-job safety. JNSE construction is no exception, so I always keep two copies of the course I'm working on, one of them as a backup. When I start each work session, I decide if I want to keep what I did from the session before or copy in the backup. It's a good practice to develop. Fairways: The Straight & Narrow? Ever wonder how the designer decides where and when to narrow the fairway? Many fairways on new courses seem so often scalloped that it is not apparent what the logic is behind the design. In fact, there are many reasons for the scalloping that should be known to the designer of home computer courses: First, stands of trees or other objects which intrude on the course are usually based in rough or heavy rough. Crossing Your Tees With rare exception, tees need to be flat horizontally. Since JNSE takes pitch, left or right, into account on its shots, a tee which slopes across its width will affect play. In JNSE, a ball which is beneath the golfer will tend to push to the right, and a ball which is above the golfer's feet will tend to pull left. So, flatness at the tee is critical and fair. After that, tees can have a downhill slope for visibility or an uphill slope that matches an uphill tee shot, but that's a matter of designer preference. In terms of appearance, designers may wish to outline their tees with a row of fairway and maybe consider a row of rough (particularly if a tee is in heavy rough terrain). This simply assists the appearance of the neatly-manicured tee which is found at most courses. Second, hills at the side of the fairway which may be so steep as to be considered impediments to a shot may be covered in rough. The point here is to help distinguish the good shot for the golfer. Third, the narrowing or widening of the fairway can add simple visual variety to the hole and to shot-making. Finally, there is the important idea of using typical shot-length to determine the narrows on the hole. Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"Course Design SENSES   !  pin    ee. -11 2 -3 -5 13 8 6-9-10 5:2 0 23 5: 09 746 8879141-10 5210 -10 65 10 10 -14 -11 -9.10 SE 5-242 -10 -7 7 9 -9 310 14 -14 -18 -11 -11 9 3 01 99 9 -8-10-11 11-13 -13 -12 -11 -12 -9 6 0 1 10 -9 10-3 10-12 -18 -10 -12 10 -10 -8 6 0 40 2 -10 910 -13 -18 -12-10 10 9 0 -9. 8 -10 -12 5 510 10 7 8 1 2 1 REXT: 0100 The Victorian  11 ARBEN HERETI MODEF4 BORTE. VI. euro PGUP pon HOME END EXIT FAC Flat tees mark this tee shot from the 11th at The Victorian. Setting elevations on a fairway bunker in ZOOM mode. Let's use a moderately-long 535 yard par-5 as an to narrow other areas that don't typically come into example. Most tee shots fall in the 250-yard range and play. fairways tend to widen at about 210 yards from the tee. Again, nothing is written in stone here. With an easy, After 250, fairways tend to narrow. This makes longdownhill drive, it might be considerate to extend that ball hitters consider accuracy from the tee and whether widening at 250 yards to allow for the roll that will be they are going to shoot beyond the 250-yard point or gained. One could even put traps or water that affects not. play on the sides at the 250-yard range. This would At 250 yards, I may put in the broadest part of the make the golfer have to decide whether to play short of fairway to give room for the tee shot to land. Since a the trouble, hit over the trouble or be very accurate at 3-wood typically plays to 235 yards, my next broaden the 250 yard range. Not a bad idea on a short par-4. ing of the fairway usually comes 485 yards from the So, by the time designers have made allowance for tee. If the area around the green is heavily protected by scalloping according to variety, hills and impediments, sand, water, and/or woods, I may wish to leave a \"safe each JNSE fairway should be just as scalloped as the harbor\" for the golfer on the approach usually at most modern of courses. about 70 yards from the green. So a third widening of the fairway might be put in at 465 yards from the tee. Head in the Sandtraps Again, this widening may be offered instead of the widening at 485, making the approach more dangerous Sandtraps are often defined by their placement or and encouraging the golfer to pull-up short. their construction. Here are some general definitions: The same idea can be applied to typical length shots Traps which are placed across the fairway or in front from the ladies' tees. JNSE uses 225 yards for a driver of the green are called \"cross bunkers.\" and 211 yards for a 3-wood as typical shots for the \"Fairway» bunkers are, to no one's great surprise, ladies. The ladies' tee is often set at 85% of normal. those which are placed in or alongside the fairway. (Pro tee at 95% of Champion, Men's tee at 90% of Most tend to be placed to the outside edge these days Champion, and Ladies' tee at 85% of Champion.) So and they are usually shallow enough to allow the golfer the ladies tee, in this example, would be set at 455 to play out of them and make progress with their shot. yards. A 225-yard tee shot would indicate that the \"Pot bunkers\" are rounded, deep traps that are often, fairway should normally widen at the 280-yard range but not always, located near the green on courses in the from the Champion tee, and again around 490. British Isles. Because of their depth and close walls, So now our par-5 broadens at 250, 280, and/or 465 they can be fearsome to play out of and 485-490. In addition, computer designers may wish Multiganis Point, More OPTIONS PLAY PERICE OSJETS SHE ODY WATER SUNKER O O O C EZ GHSS FC EFB Mulligan's Point Hole 5 BOTATE EL PALE exit D U XIT FIC FLG The heavily-trapped area in front of the green may cause the golfer to play short. Note the smooth waterline on this tricky tee shot from the 5th at Mulligan's Point. January 1993 Page 41 "


"Course Design Annamorar Hole 4 VIPin Slope: Gentle ZOOM MODE OBJECI Pin OSEO CHANGE FB Tinectortan Holes 2015-1 RUMAH 2 carro PEPSIDIOTSADO O U EXTFLO Railroad ties front the green on the 5th at The Victorian. Placing a pin into a gentle slope at the 4th at The Alhambra. \"Waste bunkers\" are usually huge expanses of sand fairway or rough going down into a trap. This is caused and, often, reeds and scrub. They are not formal bun by extreme elevation changes. You can correct this in kers because a formal bunker must have a clear begin ZOOM mode by leveling out the terrain next to the trap. ning and end. Waste bunkers may extend for hundreds of yards. In golf rules, the golfer may not set the club Hazarding Guesses On Water head down in a formal bunker, but may do so in a waste No matter how one decides to use water, elevation bunker. Though you can build waste bunkers in JNSE, changes at the water/land interface may make the wathe software does not distinguish between shots from a terline appear jagged. The secret is to keep the elevation waste bunker or formal bunker. change between land and water at the same level and \"Sod-wall traps\" are typical British Isles creations. make that level three units or less in difference, creating They are the opposite of the favored American sand a smooth waterline along any coast or pond. This wall trap. Sod is stacked in layers to build the walls. usually must be done in Zoom mode. Because the walls are green, and sand kept to the floor When elevation changes are at eight units or more of the bunker, sod-wall bunkers can be difficult to see (the land being higher, of course), it is best to opt for unless carefully placed. These can be easily simulated fronting the coast or pond with railroad ties or stonein JNSE. work. This is an option selected from the \"Build Hills\" \"Bulkhead bunkers\" are those with walls lined in option menu. Creating that eight unit difference can be redwood or railroad ties (or even stone). JNSE has no done either in Zoom mode or by using the «Sheer Cliff mechanism for the construction of bulkhead bunkers. function to assure a clean drop. Sometimes JNSE bunkers seem to have spikes of Greens That Create Envy Since the standard unit of course construction in JNSE is an 8' x 8' cell, it is very difficult to create subtle and elaborate elevation changes on the green. Nevertheless, here are a few quick tips which should help: Think of the green as being laid in with two to four planes of height. Keep variations within those planes at one to two units of elevation. Raise the outside edge of the green at least LAKE 1-unit to help prevent the ball from rolling off. To stop the green from having visual spikes (like the traps), make terrain immediately adjacent to the green at the same height or higher than the outside edge of the green. To keep things fair, only place pins that are Flat or Gentle. Do not place pins on Medium or Steep grades. Remember that the areas around those pins affect the fairness of the play also. It is entirely possible to create a Gentle pin setting that is virtually surrounded by Alps! Next month, we'll do an overview on creating objects and backgrounds. Until then, here's wishing all our readers only have aces and double eagles! Cow Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"General Tegel has plans for some covert operations. Not things he could order someone to do... but things he could pay someone to do. And, as it happens, you—and your colleagues can be bought. DE UTI lela BUT WT16 CORATION SOLDIER RHSE STOKIS.CY, BATO CERESHED OPERATORE LICET PERSON TESTNOSTI Mindcraft presents: Tegel's Mercenaries ... an intriguing concept in futuristic strategy gaming. You lead a squad of interplanetary mercenaries picked from twenty of the most notorious men, women and aliens this side of the Magellanic Clouds. Belk Otem, with his Delaser rifle and cybereye \"Smokey\" Okrara, the green-skinned, two-trunked chlorophant \"Bombshell\" Divan, «Tunes\" Krakowski, and 16 more! Start with a \"diplomatic\" mission to the ice planet of Nueva Nevada, then go wherever the general sends you next. Just remember the most important thing: you're in it for the money! When you are through with Tegel's tours of duty, strike out on your own! Use the Scenario Kit & Working Interface Developer to build missions to challenge the most hardened mercenaries. A new level of excitement, from the makers of the award-winning Magic Candle and Siege! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #104 "


"Theme Article I Don't Touch That Volume Diallll ll What's Wrong With This Picture? by Donald S. Griffin Donald S. Griffin's Company Computer Music Consulting in San Francisco, CA provides multimedia consulting to bay area businesses and has composed music for computer games from Virgin, Strategic Simulations, Comptons's New Media and Software Sorcery. He also has business relations with Media Vision, Creative Labs and E-MU systems. Don has played several musical instruments for over 20 years; composed for live instruments for 15 years, and composed for MIDI for over 5 years. He likes small, furry animals with big fangs and explosive religious artifacts. \"You know that's what I meant, Tom. It's just that I told the boss that I needed a Super Whizzo Everything Sound Card and now I've heard just about every game I can find that supports it. Frankly, they're all pretty disappointing and now I feel kinda depressed about our project. I mean, I just don't see how we can come up with a great game-enhancing musical score for The Scratch And Sniff Kill The Sewer Rat Arcade Game if those seasoned experts that did TSGSWAWSNBMBGWBTPWLFAD couldn't come up with music that I didn't want to turn off! It just looks hopeless.\" Although the preceding conversation is about fictitious characters and, hopefully, fictitious products, it does sound like conversations I have witnessed between real computer game developers. The real issue here is music. This article will suggest some philosophy and background concerning the problem of music in computer games. he Scene: Two computer game developers chatting over the industry standard brain food ... pizza. \"Hey Tom, have you heard the music in The Super Great Space War Adventure Where Some Nerd Battles Medieval Bad Guys With Brain Teasing Puzzles While Looking For A Date?\" \"No, Harry you know I always turn the volume down when I hear music in computer games.\" \"Oh I know, Tom. Believe me I do the very same thing. I just heard that the music was really good. I had the game and had just bought a Super Whizzo Everything Sound Card. So, I wanted to hear how it sounds. Well, at least I did at first. Then, it all started to sort of drive me crazy. I couldn't concentrate on the game, so I just sorta turned it down until it didn't bother me anymore.\" \"Harry, why don't you just say what you really mean. You turned the sound down until it was all the way off!\" during the time frame of the story? When viewing a space battle in Star Wars, does it ever occur to anyone that sound can't travel in space? And that Native American music in the old westerns, does anyone ever think about what great violinists those Native Americans would have had to have been to generate those sounds? The answer to nearly all of these questions is probably \"No!\" In order to make computer game soundtracks that really touch the gamer's emotional center, computer game composers simply must take advantage of this cultural pre-conditioning. They shouldn't play disco during the death scene and shouldn't launch space ships to reggae. Another problem is what I call the tune mentality. Most game developers think of music in simple, convenient, compact units that they call songs or tunes. They think of each situation as needing a simple, unique and, often, all-too-short tune. This leads to a lack of continuity throughout the game. It seems that each tune stands alone and has no reference to anything else in the game. This also leads to music being thought of as an \"easter egg\" industry slang for an amusing but non-essential piece of fluff that adds delight to a game but could just as easily be left out. The tune mentality also leads to an expectation that a piece of game music must be able to stand on its own and still be entertaining. Frankly, if anyone listens to a movie Soundtrack album, they tend to hear the music edited to sound like individual tunes, but in the actual movie there are times when the music would seem downright boring if there wasn't plenty of action Let's Go Hollywood! Currently, there is a lot of talk about whether computer games should \"Go Hollywood,\" Some think this would be a giant step backward. Others say, \"Why not? Their stuff sounds better than ours.\" I say that following the Hollywood model would do a little of both. First of all, Hollywood has created a sense of cultural expectation. It is pretty tough to compose music that doesn't borrow from our collective past. When one watches Ben Hur and sees the chariot race, does it ever occur to anyone that most of the instruments in the score didn't exist Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"Trevor Sorensen's See on STAR LEGIONS NG by Supernova Creations and Mark Baldwin NSU DV TERRE THEO From the creators of the Star Fleet series, Star Legions puts you in control of a mighty Imperial fleet invading the hated Alliance. Your warriors fight for the glory of the Empire, to earn battle honors for their legions, and to wipe democracy from the galaxy. Only the strong should survive to rule! Each new planet is a fresh challenge. Bombard it with your battlecruisers and destroyers. Assault its critical sites with your elite shock troops, then follow them with waves of heavily armored warriors. Lead your troops at the strategic or tactical level as they conquer in the name of your emperor. Then on to the next planet! Your victories bring rewards and honors, leading you to your ultimate goal of gaining the Empire's most noble rankImperial Tribune! Star Legions provides deep and exciting real-time game play in a truly advanced space war simulation with a unique \"Invasion Command Console\" graphic interface by Brett Keeton. Your legions will conquer an almost unlimited variety of planets, frozen or scalding, barren or drenched. Hours, months and years of enjoyment are yours as you command the Star Legions. MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #105 "


"Theme Article Computer game developers should learn these same lessons. Score a game, don't tune it. Use music that plays off cultural conditioning. Don't be afraid to make the music very simple and thin in parts and heavy and thick in others. If it works well in the game, it will seem perfectly natural for a 9 or 18 voice sound card to be using only one or two of its voices at a time. The generally excepted rule (which means it's okay to break it is that the density of the activity in the scene and that of the music should be opposite. \"Did he say opposite!?\" Yes, I did. That's one big reason that people turn the music off. When the movie or game demands most of one's concentration, busy music is a distraction an irritation. Movie directors will say, \"This is an important scene in the movie, but it is also kinda' dull and slow, can you add some music that is interesting?\" or they will say, \"There is a lot for the audience to follow during this chase scene, so make the music exciting but keep it out of the way.\" CREATIVE LABS, INC SOUND BLASTEREO taking place on-screen which that boring music just happens to fit perfectly. Anyone who ever views a traditional (1920-1970) stage musical has probably noticed how often musical themes come back over and over again (reprise). This is partly because of the familiarity syndrome. The first time a person hears a melody, they are almost certain not to like it as much as they will after they've heard it a few more times. Part of this effect is due to the fact that people like to sort of hum a tune in their head as they are listening to it. Naturally, they can't do this until they have heard the tune enough to remember what comes next. By playing all of the basic musical themes in the opening music (overture) and touching on them a few more times before the point in the show where the song is actually sung, they are setting up the audience to be more familiar with the tune when it is finally presented to them with full force. In computer games, both the familiarity syndrome and the tune mentality must be taken into consideration. Can the music be planned as an integrated part of the whole (i.e. with a beginning and, maybe, several alternate endings)? Can the music be hinted at several times before the big scene happens? Developers must start thinking of how the music will fit in all through the game and whether the music and the game are stepping on each other at points. The music must not be listened to as a tune but as another shadow or flash of color that adds that little bit of mood that a silent game lacks. Game developers ask for tunes. Hollywood directors ask for scores. A score is, literally, the sheets of music that the conductor uses. These pages have every note of every instrument. Scoring a movie means creating a full package of music that encompasses every moment where music is appropriate from the beginning to the end of the movie. This is very important to have. Hollywood learned their lesson about scoring a movie versus just playing a few songs at key places. For awhile during the 70s, it looked like the movie score composers would soon be out of work. It was discovered that a popular tune in a movie would boost sales of the movie as well as the record. For awhile, they went crazy. Then they realized that they had drained the emotion out of their movies just like pulling the drain plug from a bathtub. That is, it left them feeling cold and uncomfortable (and soapy). Today, the most popular Hollywood formula is to put pop tunes wherever possible and to fill in the rest with a good old fashioned movie score. Disco Duck just doesn't cut it in a suspenseful courtroom scene or during an encounter with aliens. it more or less like an OPL-2. Roland's MT-32 Synthesizer Module and LAPC-1 Synth Card essentially improve the quality of the synthesizer, resulting in a sound that is roughly twice as good but still uses the same idea. In all these cards, sounds are being built from scratch by generating simple waveforms and modulating them with other simple waveforms. Using this method to try to get the score to sound like it is being played by real instruments is not only difficult, but it is essentially a hit-ormiss operation. Many sound cards now have PCM sampling at various resolutions in stereo or just mono. This means that they come with the ability to record real sounds as numbers that are stored on a harddisk or floppy disk and can then be converted back to real sounds at a later time. This is the same technology that makes music CDs work, only at a much more economical level. Though this technology has been around, at least since the first Sound Blaster, it is not used very much. The reason, as is almost always true in computer games, is space. The OPL-2 and OPL-3 mentioned above create the sounds themselves. Obviously, they only need to be told what notes to hit and when to hit them, using a particular instrumental sound. This data takes very little space on either disks or in memory, since a typical MIDI file is between 5K and 50K. MIDI files or something similar are used to contain the tunes or instructions to tell the OPL-2 or OPL-3 or LAPC1 which notes to play and when. This takes an acceptable amount of disk and memory space for most game developers. PCM, that is Pulse Code Modulation, is very different. PCM files, called VOC files by Creative Labs and WAV files by Microsoft, are actual recordings of sounds and they are very, very big. The data required to play a hit tune on a standard CD player is about 10 MB per minute, 200 times the size of a large MIDI file! In fact, the original Wing Commander, still one of the largest games around in terms of disk space usage, is about the same size as just one minute of CD quality music. Using the upper limits of the Sound Blaster and cutting the 16-bit down to 8-bit, 44 Khz down to 22 Khz, and stereo down to mono, that same one minute of music is still 1.25 MB or a whopping 25 times the size of a large MIDI file. This all means that PCM isn't being used much because it just takes too much space. So much for VOC or WAV file music. The Specs DTR ANTONIO TH Multursedia Sos Sandard LEYEBRO MUITA Muse Educator Enerten FE\" Frode St Bo.ee UCDC924 WA Pul Dawn y WOUNG BLAUTER. Tot Sa Transceny Com WARME M E Lwallet Te WOL SSDAC andan ADPO! T S D-STATS DEOR. SEMEN Eustawia SON X Vestuar CD-ROM Dial A M en INTELLIGENT ORGAN VOIT Lane AC STALKER WED SEATSO CD Muk Player SP 4 Pardon Music? What Music? Although I want to stress that the quality of the music is crucial, the quality of the sound hardware through which the music is played is also very important. Most gamers today listen to their games with the benefit of a sound card based on Yamaha's OPL-2 or OPL-3 FM synthesizer chips. Adliband Sound Blaster music cards use these chips. More recently, the Creative Labs Sound Blaster Pro card switched from using two OPL-2 chips to one OPL-3, as did Media Vision when they brought out the ProAudio Spectrum Plus. The OPL-2 and OPL-3 are, however, very similar and sometimes the software support for an OPL-3 chip ends up using So, What's Next? New sound cards and technologies are arriving in the marketplace all the time. Roland's Sound Canvas card was the first (Continued on Page 78 Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"SIEGE The hordes approach! Are the archers on the battlements? Are there cauldrons full of boiling oil atop the towers? Are the castle gates fiercely guarded? Are your concealed wizards in place? Can your castle withstand the Siege?? Z GAMERPRT SLCT OROK EDITS TO: 1200 ( 7 IDISKISICHE 32 DOGSO GAME RPRT SLCT. ORDR ED17 1 76 COD. XOZIRIR O GANE RPAT SECT VIR EDIT 207 12 Your best friend is your worst enemy, over the MODEM! The new monsters are harsh, the new castles are breathtaking, the new scenarios are wicked, and the new SIEGE EXPANSION is everything you've been waiting for! Add Dogs of War to SIEGE and get: More fantastic monsters, New Castle designs, and More Scenarios to Conquer! Plus, with a modem or serial link, experience Real-time Person to Person Combat!! HEIDI 12213TRAILER ki Mindcraft presents: Siege. Finally, a strategic simulation of pulse pounding, thought provoking medieval style castle assault. Fantastical elements challenge your leadership with a never-ending variety of contests and dilemmas. Should your knights sortie out against the attacking rabble? Is your wizard strong enough to throw another fireball into the enemy ranks? Siege gives you four castles to defend and attack. You can't do it all yourself; you must depend on your vassals and their troops, each with their own abilities and skills. Prove your mastery of the art of Siege! Test your mettle in the existing sieges, or design your own scenarios. What if Highrock Fortress were held by trolls, or Usk'hem Gart by elves? MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual screen photos from the IBM VGA version. "


"Foreign Correspondence rride . 0 COTTON 114 KELN 'Germs Over There Cantau Aquitanus secin or t ado I LA Reni De 2.2. 1 POATE Sends Us His La Send Malli ne lesen un by Robin Matthews Carle Starterie ters. There is an old saying that goes DEMOPLAY B BREAK O @ COMT be called The Koshan Conspiracy in something like, \"The French e COPIA? its U.S. incarnation). B.A.T. II is bahave a word for it.» Lately, the sically a CRPG with strategy and saying could almost read, «The action options. The latter include: French have a game for it.\" Virgin three playable arcade games, four has recruited a French programming flight simulators and 'High Tech team to flesh out the super-duper Paradox.' HTP is a separate 'bioCD version of their popular Dune, game with some 200 odd characas well as to create Dune II: The Battle for Arrakis. The CD-ROM version will include fully digitized B.A.T. Il takes a similar theme to speech and clips from the actual its predecessor, but is set in Roma 2, film. Indeed, since the original film the capital city of Shedishan, a was soundly criticized because of its planet in the BB system (I'm sure editing and not its breathtaking cineJimmy White's Snooker something was set there, or was it in matography, the film clips may be the CC system??? ). The player asbetter received in the computer game than they were in motion sumes the role of Jehan Menasis, veteran agent of the Bureau of Astral Troubleshooters, and picture theaters. Virgin's Caroline Stokes was very enthusiastic about this product, stressing that it will be much more his mission is to defeat the dreaded Koshan who are maniputhan a straight conversion of the disk-based product. Though lating the market of Echiatone 21! Although it may sound like the original had very impressive fairly standard fare, one thing sound and graphics, the company DEMOPLAY @ M gamers can be certain of with regard BREAK 1 0 1 expects the CD version to be abso no S O N IC Ci to Ubisoft is that their products are lutely mouth-watering. If all goes not run of the mill. They normally well, both the new CD version of have some ingenious touches. B.A.T. Dune and Dune II: The Battle for Il should be released for the Atari Arrakis (sneak previewed in CGW ST, Amiga and IBM by the time this #101) with its warring households, column goes to press. the fight for spice, and deeper stratUbisoft has also published another egy game elements, should be revery interesting game — First leased around the turn of the year. Samurai. This is really an arcadeAnother French release coming up type game but seems likely to cause is Ubisoft's follow-up to its sci-fi quite a stir. So, it definitely justifies \"adventure\" game B.A.T. The new a quick mention in this column. Simgame is called, strangely enough, Jimmy White's Snooker ply put, it has excellent graphics, a B.A.T. II (Although it is expected to Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"The most popular computer game series of all time... ...Now, the best chapter yet. HEIR TODAY, GONE TOMORROW Can you guide Alexander through a series of mysterious Islands? Meet characters as curious as the countries they inhabit. ROBERTA WILLIAMS SIERRA Explore the animated garden on the whimsical Isle of Wonder. Encounter enemies and rivals bent on stopping you at any cost. Bold Characters, Bold Design A shipwrecked prince must find his way across a series of islands in search of a princess in peril. You'll need all your wits and imagination to overcome the gauntler of baffling puzzles and fantastic creatures that block you on your quest. In this richly detailed game of discovery and adventure, every choice you make can affect your future options and the attitudes of the many characters you'll encounter. Depending on your skill and the paths you follow, your adventure can end in many of different ways. Nearly half of the possible events are optional! Filled with deeper puzzles, more fantastic creatures, and a moving saga of romance and adventure, King's Quest V1 is a mysterious and magical adventure for the entire family. Circle Reader Service #129 Excellence in Adventure Gaming. SIERRA To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Foreign Correspondence First Samurai superb control system, and amongst the best scrolling seen in any IBM game. It is, in essence, a horizontal and vertical scrolling arcade martial arts game. It's all been done before, but never to this standard. If you want a couple minutes of relaxation from Crusaders or Might and Magic IV, or you can't find the dog to kick, give this a look. We don't want to give CGW readers the feeling that we're slacking on our side of the white cliffs, however. Impressions continues to be a prolific UK publisher. Their latest offeringis Discovery, which is part-celebration of the finding of an obscure continent by some Columbus fella' and part strategy game. The player starts in 1480 and has to raise funds, buy, equip and crew a fleet and then sail off into the blue yonder. It feels very much like a development of their fairly successful Merchant Colony, and uses a similar system. Not bad, but I just can't see this New World thing taking off <grin>. Hope it does better for them than the movie on the same theme did for Paramount. Mirage Software of the UK is well into the development of a Lemmings beater in their forthcoming release The Humans. This is an arcade-style strategy game, where the player guides a tribe of cavemen through an evolutionary cycle to the present day and beyond. Think of a cross between Lemmings and a scrolling platform game and one has both a headache, and The Humans! Finally, snooker is an invention of a British Prime Minister, one Neville Chamberlain (peace in our time\", etc.), and has a large multimillion dollar, world-wide professional circuit. One of the best known players is a Londoner called Jimmy White, nicknamed 'The Whirlwind because of his speed of play. Now, Virgin has released Jimmy White's Snooker on the Amiga (several months ago) and on the MS-DOS machines. It is without doubt the best MS-DOS snooker game released, with superb floating camera views and a very versatile control system. The graphics are crisp, sound support is OK, and there are some hilarious touches not to be spoiled here! For a short diversion, or if your normal break on the green baize is below 10, this could be one to 'cue' up for. CGW First Samurai LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS THINK SPORTS $16.50 Question  9 Higan $14.50 $16.50 AT $16.50 Star Saga THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases at attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone and mail orders. T> or simply send $1.00 for your copy today! BASEBALL BASKETBALL BOWLING EDUCATION CALENDARS $1 FISHING CARD COLLECTING FLIGHT GAMES FOOTBALL HANDICAPPING GOLF TRIVIA HOCKEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS CEREBEL T SAILING 800 747-0908 617 576-6700 SKIING Mkatutaru VASA 675 Moss Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 TENNIS TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME IBM, AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM_ARCADE GAMES: TIBM SPORTS SIMULATIONS: SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 Arkanoid II $14.50TV Sports Football $14.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 Bubble Bobble $14.50 T.V. Sports Basketball $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission, Operation Wall $14.50 Super Sunday $ 9.50 Army Moves, Bad Stree! Brawler. $14.50 NBA Basketball $ 9.50 Rambo III $14.50 Blades of Steel $16.50 Tai-Pan, Fist, Tai-Ceti, Mutants. Renegade $14.50 Double Dribble $16.50 Cyrus Chess, Doc the Destroyer, Sky Shark $14.50 Monday Night Football $29.50 & Uridium. Less than $1.50 each! Harmony $16.50 John Elway's Football $ 9.50 Cycles $16.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19 50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR AMIGA Pick 'n Pile $16.50 Pro Tennis Tour 1 $16.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 The Ball Game S 500 Microleague Football $14.50 Vampire Empire, Sky Blaster, Triple X Savage $14.50 Microleague Baseball $14.50 Crystal Hammer, Final Mesion, Little Cybergenic Ranger $14.50 Tennis Cup $16.50 Final Orbit $14.50 Grave Yardage $14.50 Dragon, Eskimo Games, Powersty Spa Batman Caped Crusader $14.50 Subuteo Table Soccer $ 9.50 World & Clever and Smart Treasure Trap $16.50 Downhill Challenge Skiing $14.50 IBM STRATEGY_GAMES: Superbike Challenge $14.50 IBM ADVENTURE GAMES: Waterloo $19.50 Championship Football $14.50 Buck Rogers 1 $19.50 First Over Germany $19.50 Championship Baseball $14.50 Heroes of Lance $19.50 Sons of Liberty $19.50 Championship Golf $14.50 Dragons of Flame $19.50 Red Lightning $19.50 Pro-Beach Volleyball $16.50 Under Fire $12.50 Superstar Indoor Sports $ 950 War of the Lance $19.50 Gulf Strike $14.50 Superstar Hockey $19.50 Roadwar Europa $16.50 IBM FLIGHT SIMULATORS Phantase 111 Mid-Winter $19.50 F-15 Strike Eagle $16.50 Time & Magk Firezone $14.50 Salo Flight $16.50 S.D.I. $14.50 Gunship $19.50 Berlin 1948 $16.50 Tomahawk $14.50 Dragonlord $ 9.50 Fireteam 2200 $16.50 Super Huey II $ 950 Defender of the Crown $1450 Dambusters $ 9.50 Star Glider II $14.50 Pirates! $ 16.50 Navcom 6 $ 9.50 Xiphos $14.50 Leather Godesses of Phobos $1450 Das Boot U-Boat Simulator $19.50 Carrier Command $1450 Mines of Tian Sands of Fire $16.50 Sky Chase $14.50 IBM_CD-ROM SOFTWARE: IBM TRADITIONAL GAMES: David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 Baney Bear goes to School $19.50 Amarillo Slim's Real Poker $14.50 Blue Angels $14.50 CD Grab Bag $ 15.00 Friday Night Poker $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 CD Game Collection $39.00 Blackjack Academy $ 9.50 Air Strike U.S.A $14.50 Chessmaster 3000 $44,00 Jigsaw $16.50 Blue Max $19.50 LU-ROM. Colection WCIA CD-ROM Collection WCIA $29.00 BattleChess 11 $19.50 IBM EDUCATIONAL_PROGRAMS: Golden Immortal $ 3900 Super Password $ $ $49.00 9.50 President Elect 9.50 Great Cities of the World WILD & COOL GAMES: World Geography $ 9.50 Hound of the Baskervilles 149.00 Continuum $16.50 U.S. Geography $ 9.50 Jones in the Fast Lane $39.00 Drakkhen $19.50 Barney Bear goes to School $14.50 King's Quest 5 $29.00 3DGamemaker $ 500 Discover Numbers $ 49.00 Weird Dreams $14.50 Discover Alphabet $ 500 Mored up Mother Goose $39.00 Sex Olympics $16.50 Discover Math $ 500 Phoenix Shareware 20 $2400 Sex Vixens from Space $14.50 Grade A Math 1-2-3 $16.50 Secret of Monkey Island $49.00 $49.00 1000s more items for all So Much Shareware $39.00 VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE different computers... Apple, Ubima 16 Bundle $ 49.00 1800 676 6616 Atari, Amiga, C64/128, MAC, Wro Commander Bunde AC VGA Spectrum 5.39.00 $49.00 Credit Card Orders Only!!!! ($25 minimum & lots moro IOM MS-DOS !! Wna Commander Uitm 6 Runde 549.00 SUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for U.S.A $8 for Canada, $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales tax P.O. BOX 5160 To receive our complete catalog of over 2,000 items for all computer types, send SAN LUIS OBISPO $2 in cash or stamps to the above address. The catalog is FREE with any order. CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here.call(805) 544-6616. $ 5.00 OOM $16.50 Cansung Detective COMPSULT Circle Reader Service #52 Circle Reader Service #60 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"This season, the most detailed football simulation ever hits the field... ...and sidelines the competition. FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTR ALL 3. Play as a coach, quarterback, or general manager: Imagine playing football and watching the action from all points of view. League Plaj Standings KIR nemix Design your own plays or customize over 200 stock plays. The action varies from city to city, just like in real life. Stats... Action... Everything... Excellence in Sports Simulation. From Dynamix, the company that redefined flight simulation with Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific, comes the most comprehensive and graphically detailed football simulation to ever hit the computer field. Unlike the competition, Front Page Sports: Football isn't a watered down version of reality covered by a fancy license of famous names. It does everything, like you've never seen before. Action, stats, management... every conceivable element of the game is recreated in amazing detail. And most importantly, you decide what to control. Pure action, pure stars or anywhere in between... the choice is yours with a simple click of the button. Front Page Sports: Football Everything a football simulation should be. Circle Reader Service #130 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Review Photo by Susan Zurawik POLIC Virgit dames' tantasy War game bylleff James TITLE: Realms SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM REVIEWED ON: IBM PRICE: $39.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DESIGNER: Graftgold PUBLISHER: Virgin Games Irvine, CA REALMS There can only be one... Just make sure it's yours. n ambitious attempt at combining the isometric control scheme of Populous with a Tolkienesque tableau of warring humanoids, Realms offers a challenging twist on simulated world domination. With Realms, publisher Virgin Games and designer Graftgold are attempting to draw both strategy gamers and role-playing fans into a narrow niche of computer entertainment: fantasy wargaming. While SSI's Sword of Aragon and SSG's Warlords proved that fantasy wargames could be successful, Realms attempts to take this gaming genre to new heights with sharper graphics and an increased emphasis on resource and city management. According to the hackneyed storyline presented in the book and in the game's animated introduction, the player has been given a \"divine mandate\" to rule over the Realms gameworld by a powerful Nordic god. The player will soon discover that divine endorsements serve as poor armor indeed against the sharp weapons of an aggressive, warmongering enemy. In other words, nothing in Realms is a sure thing. Every kingdom in Realms goes to war at the drop of an iron helm so that borders and cities constantly change hands. As if keeping foes at pike's length wasn't enough, however, the player must also assume the role of a medieval city planner, making tough decisions about city and resource management. A challenge in OAMES Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"Your child will have fun and learn with these games.. ..And we guarantee it! Sierra Discovery Series\" MATH & SCIENCE AGCS 17 AND URE 000 Dr.Brain A Sierra Discovery Series PRE-READING SKILLS A jolly jack-in-the-box and a cheerful chimp teach your child how to use the alphabet in Alphabet Blocks. American History needs help from your child in Twisty History, a fun adventure that unfolds in colonial America. AGES 3 AND UP LPHABET EXIT (We Talk GUBU AA SAPO VW Kids encounter math, science, language, and logic puzzles when they land on The Island of Dr. Brain. 22 23 QAND Two helpful and adorable aliens help your child learn all about the physical sciences in Turbo Science. MONTSACK GUARANTEE Excellence in Learning. We Make Education an Adventure Introducing the Sierra Discovery Series, a voyage into fantastic, fun-filled worlds of learning. From the most respected name in computer gaming comes nine exciting titles, each designed (and guaranteed) to provide hours of educational entertainment in the distinctive Sierra style. These games combine the talents of the world's best-known game designers with the insights of education specialists. Each package clearly shows the intended age group, the subject, and the skills your child will learn. Pre-Reading: Mixed-Up Mother Goose, Alphabet Blocks Early Reading: Mixed-Up Fairy Tales Math and Science: Castle of Dr. Brain, Island of Dr. Brain, Quarkce and Quaysoo's Turbo Science Ecology: EcoQuest: The Search for Cetus, EcoQuest: Lost Secret of the Rain Forest American History: Twisty History Sierra Discovery Series Learning Can Be Fun... We Guarantee It! We guarantee these games will entertain your child while he or she learns. To prove the point, we have included a special Knowledge Test to demonstrate some of the things your child has learned while playing the game. If for any reason you are not convinced of any game's learning value, or if your child doesn't have fun playing it we guarantee a full refund of your purchase price. Simply send us your receipt, along with the game and documentation, and a brief note telling us why you're unhappy. Your money will be promptly refunded. To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 Circle Reader Service #131 "


"Review 95 et any genre, the arduous decision of guns or an enemy city. A small helm indicates that When combat is joined, the player may butter is particularly important in Realms. the army in question has camped out in the zoom in with a close-up view of the armies The game begins with the player choos rough, forsaking the comforts of city life. currently engaged. Each army can be indiing one of ten increasingly difficult sce Finally, a small sailing ship indicates an vidually commanded, using a control sysnarios, each with a unique landscape. army that is attempting to cross a body of tem somewhat similar to the ones used in water. Armies can be ordered about by Lords of the Rising Sun (Cinemaware) Some scenarios take place on large landmasses, while others will force the player and Centurion (Electronic Arts). The tosimply clicking on the unit in question to do some island-hopping in order to then clicking upon the desired destination pography of the battle field is taken into or an enemy unit to be engaged. Vallia iD The Enemy Realm of Lorien Double-clicking Their bealth is excellent. Tibe upon a city displayed granaries bold 1 years orain 11 store. on the landscape map brings up the city screen, which displays the current city and offers the player a list of options at the base of the display. If the city is friendly, the player can toggle through such options as buying grain, building city walls, improving the Caeria in Your Realm of Lorien. health of the city's inhabitants, and recruitThe city is under siege. Buy grain ing soldiers. If under account (units on higher ground have reach the enemy and emerge victorious. siege, enemy cities can be influenced to combat advantages) and each army can Residing upon each of these landscapes is pay tributes to avoid being destroyed. assume one of four battle formations a variety of the six humanoid races used in Outfitting soldiers recruited from the (wedge, phalanx, line and square). This the game. These include three traditional city screen involves accessing the army flexible combat system allows players to fantasy races (Dwarves, Orcs, and Elves) screen, where the player can equip new use actual medieval tactics — such as and an equal number of human tribes (Vitroops with varying degrees of armor and outflanking the enemy with a quick cavkings, Amazons, and Barbarians). To beseveral types of missile and melee weap alry maneuver — and see the animated gin, the gamer selects one of the races ons. Each humanoid race excels with par results. included in that scenario to govern, using ticular types of weapons, although the Realms offers crisp, although somewhat it to forge an empire worthy of dimly colored, graphics, but The Keaim of Nakuzz ruling the known world. the animation of marching arDeveloping the overall strategy mies and battling soldiers is a to accomplish this feat is best detreat of animated minutiae. veloped on the screen encountered Music and sound effects are during the initial moments of acceptable through an Ad Lib gameplay: the fortress screen. On or Sound Blaster, although the this screen, a large world map disvictory and defeat sequences plays armies and cities from all of could use a little more aural the kingdoms currently involved enhancement. in the scenario. Here, taxes can be As for gameplay, Realms is a raised, tax routes can be viewed, and the more mundane disk funcdecidedly difficult game. Even during the simplest scenario, tions for loading and saving games can be accessed. A focusing icon the computer-controlled enemy is always on the move, on this screen allows the player to reacting quickly to any actions select any point on the world map the player makes. The interand zoom down for a closer look. face can take some getting After magnification, the view used to, so players should exshifts to a down to earth, isometric view of the landscape. At this level pect to be resoundingly defeated in their first few tries. As of magnification, individual arit stands, Realms should appeal mies can be seen moving about the Realms game manual is rather vague on landscape, each identified by a color to tenacious fantasy wargamers with the the subject. Dwarves get bonuses for using which indicates the kingdom the unit hails perseverance to learn the game system and hammers and axes, Elves are masters of from. The status of each army — which master the included scenarios. The diffithe bow, and Orcs have an affinity for can be up to 1000 soldiers strong — is culty of the game, augmented by the awkblunt bashing weapons. Finally, after a represented by a variety of small icons. A ward interface, makes playing Realms new army has been created, it will appear tiny foot soldier or cavalryman indicates more of a challenge than it should be. As as a barracked unit outside the city which that the army is on the move, a stationary a fantasy wargame, Realms advances the flag indicates that the army is currently created it. genre but doesn't quite usurp SSG's Warbarracked near a city, and a siege tower Possibly, the most enlightened design lords as the quintessential fantasy warmeans that the army is currently attacking feature of Realms is the combat system. game. CGW Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"History records the evolution of man's journey to the skies... ...Now you can relive it. A10 ACE'S  A-C4L:S TE Red Baron Blast your way through dangerous, low-level attacks. (RBMB) Sink enemy ships with torpedoes and dive bombs if you can. (Aces of the Pacific) MISSION BUILDER DYQRS Hang on as enemy fire rips through your cockpit. (WWII: 1946) Take on the great Axis and Allied aces in one-on-one duels. (Red Baron) The Great War Planes Series Excellence in Flight Simulation. From the mud-filled trenches of WWI to the smoking ruin of Pearl Harbor, the evolution of flight is celebrated in Damon Slye's epic Great War PlanesTM series of historical flight simulations. Beginning with the award-winning Red Baron, the series continues with WWII Pacific Theater combat in Aces of the Pacifica and moves into modern-day action over the Persian Gulf with A-10 Tank Killer 1.5\"M. Now the excitement continues with all new expansion disks for Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific. The Red Baron Mission Builder updates the classic WWI simulation with new planes, new aces and a powerful mission builder that allows you to create your own historic missions. For Aces of the Pacific comes WWII 1946, an expansion disk that explores the new planes and missions of an alternate future where the atomic bomb was never dropped and WWII continued past the boundaries of history. Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY continued as hernate future where th Pansion disk that explores Missions, For Ac To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 Circle Reader Service #132 "


"Review The God's Namesake Must Be Crazy HWBIGANTERASSOTSIMATAS Vilane EIMDALL Virgin's Heimdall by Allen Greenberg SYSTEMS: SANOAMES risplaced objects are among the most sacred and revered items known to our TITLE: Heimdall species. Indeed, they have been so SYSTEMS IBM, Amiga (IBM version reviewed) throughout recorded history. Just as modern PRICE: $39.95 COPY PROTECTION: None man or woman may often be found wandering DEVELOPER: Core Design, Ltd. through their living quarters, silently mouthing PUBLISHER: Virgin Games Irvine, CA \"car keys ... car keys ...\" one can also imagine an ancient cave-dweller pacing a cluttered, suburban cave chanting \"hunting spear... hunting spear...\" It is also This Heimdall represents a desperate effort by the gods to hire a common knowledge that each culture creates its mythical figures trustworthy mortal hero to command the search. Using a particuin its own image. Given this information, it is by no means larly potent lightning-bolt, one of the gods has caused a mortal girl unreasonable for us to conclude that Thor, Norse god of thunder, to go directly from virgin to a state of full-term pregnancy, overmay have indeed searched the halls of imperial Asgard as he night. Lest there be any immaculate misconceptions, this is strictly moaned \"enchanted hammer ... enchanted hammer...\" While the a mortal child, despite his electrifying origin. loss of an earthly object may result in the mere absence of an Heimdall qualifies as extremely lightweight role-playing, during animal to cook over the evening's campfire or a missed dental which most experienced gamers will find little to hold their interappointment, the loss of more godly paraphernalia could have est. Newcomers to the genre may, however, be intrigued by this severely affected the outcome of Ragnarok. Ragnarok, the focal opportunity to gather an adventure party, develop their skills and point of all Norse and Germanic mythology, is the battle in which explore a multi-tiered world. The program includes an optional the gods were destined to perish in a battle against the foul progeny trilogy of arcade sequences and the player is required to guide the of the evil god, Loki. Could there be a more inspiring quest than on-screen character through three-dimensional scenery, traps and to aid the gods by tracking down Odin's sword, Frey's spear and mazes. Thor's hammer? Maybe. While the title character plays chieftain to the others, each Heimdall is the warrior chosen by the gods to find their weapons, member of the party has a profession which will determine his as well as the name of the action/role-playing game imported by usefulness throughout the game. Each member is either a fighter Virgin Games depicting his adventures. Mythically knowledgeor a spellcaster and there are occupational subdivisions within able readers will recognize that name as also belonging to the each category. Five crew members are selected by Heimdall from sensitive guardian of the rainbow bridge, Bifrost, which linked a gathering of up to 30 pre-defined characters. The characters Earth to Asgard. This, however, is not that Heimdall. In fact, available to form this party will depend on Heimdall's attributes despite the names and events which are mentioned in the game, at the beginning of the game and there is no opportunity to trade Heimdall is in no way a serious representation of Viking legends. in for new characters later on. As Heimdall sails his ship to search Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"Sure we're the biggest name in computer games... ...But we still make the best little gifts. CROSSWORDS e  A  Bre a k ! rpose 118 A, H AE LEE CAMZAWADIO HOLD O NADONEROS SIERRA 13 12 DDIN **** The King Has Turned into a Raving, Drooling Lunatic! Take-A-Break! Crosswords features over 360 crossword puzzles with scrolling clues and a bint option. CONTE BOHUEDOJUS 2 233 Incredible Machine is a warped and wonderful workshop for your brain. Build bizarre machines on screen. You're Next. GOBLINS NING. and puzzles and e rs COXTEL VISION Screen Antics: The Adventures of Johnny Castaway is a WindowsTM screen saver that tells a story. Gobliiins is brain-bruising game goodness for true warriors of the warped. This is an adventure game starring imps with attitudes. Stuff a Stocking with Sierra Excellence in Time Wasting Stuff. SIERRA Just because we create best-selling adventure games like King's Quest and best-selling flight sims like Aces of the Pacific doesn't mean we can't put together the best little packages of fun for your computer. Check out Take-A-Break: Crosswords, a package that provides fast-loading fun for Windows users. Or build a convoluted contraption on your computer with Incredible Machine, an erector set for your brain. Or control Hooter, Dwayne, and BoBo, a trio of fun-loving imps with a mission in Gobliiins. Or just sit back and watch The Adventures of Johnny Castaway, the first screen saver that actually tells a story. More proof that really cool things still come in small packages (with small price tags to match). Circle Reader Service #133 To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Review ARIATA various islands, he is permitted to select two adventurers from the complexity of inventory management are supply shops scattered five to join him. Of those three, the player then chooses one to be throughout the various worlds. the active hero while the other two simply tag along, apparently Many players may be unhappy with the awkward control they protected by some undisclosed arrangement. are given over the hero while he is exploring. The distant, threeThe optional arcade sedimensional view of the action is often quences are available at the confusing. While attempting to guide a game's beginning, and give character around certain traps or obstathe player an opportunity to cles, a figure's exact position is often determine Heimdall's startdifficult to judge. A mouse, keyboard or ing attributes. A higher rating joystick may be used to input movement at this point not only provides instructions, but this choice does not for a greater hero, but also affect the awkward response of the charallows the player to recruit acter. the more advanced and powCombat provides Heimdall with its erful characters for his party. most entertaining animation sequences. First, Heimdall must prune a during which the normal view is relocal girl's hair using several placed with a close-up view of the hero's throwing-axes. Catching a adversary. Within several seconds, the greased pig is the next task, VCI player must select either a weapon or a while an old-fashioned sword BALANCE SASTAMALL combat spell, followed by an action fight is the final challenge. command. If successful, the player will The catch, however, is that witness the creature's occasionally Heimdall happens to have YES NO! moving and dramatic death. Victory had too much to drink prior to during these encounters will depend on accepting these challenges. Players who reject this arcade action the character's experience and the potency of the weapon in use, will simply be assigned default and mediocre ratings. as well as the speed of the player's attack. Experience and attribute points rapidly increase in the game, but only for the active hero. It is easy for the player to progress through a significant portion of the quest without realizing that most of his party have been left at their starting levels. While attribute points rise, a character's health may suffer from damage and fatigue unless frequently nourished by food, spells and other magical restorative procedures. Heimdall's universe consists of three progressively difficult worlds: Earth (the men's room), Utgard (land of the giants) and Asgard (gods' country). Within each world are a series of islands which are also arranged according to difficulty. The various locations appear to be uniquely decorated, but each contains a similar series of passages containing traps, treasures and grim-faced guardians. Although no auto-mapping feature is available, the layout is simple and the goal is familiar-keep the party fighting in order to proceed to the next room. Spells are printed on pay-per-cast parchment. A scroll containing the desired spell must be found and read by a character with a sufficient rating in \"rune-lore.\" A sufficiently strong character is then required to Heimdall is yet another in a long line of European cast the spell. imports whose instruction manual lavishes more The party must space on a humorous short story rather than the game locate another itself. Defying common sense, a major portion of scroll containthose instructions are used to describe the short-lived ing that spell in arcade sequences. Certain important information reorder for it to be garding crew selection is missing from the documencast again. The tation — both a warrior and a druid are necessary in discovery of order to pass through a certain gate on earth. Also, the other scrolls and \"X\" and \"Y\" keys are indicated as character moveobjects containment controls when it is actually the \"X\" and \"Z\" keys ing special which are used. To Virgin's credit, their instruction runes are also book is far better than certain others which have necessary in orunjustifiably been allowed into the United States. der to progress A player who has never before experienced a combeyond certain puter role-playing game may find some enjoyable key points in the hours with Heimdall. While the program is by no game. Unfortumeans a flawed or unplayable product, its uninspiring nately, the party appearance and simple game-play will fail to earn it may only carry a limited number of items while the number of a place alongside the more sophisticated role-playing games which scrolls. objects and weapons seems without limit. Adding to the are now popular. Experienced players will find a search for their car-keys somewhat more rewarding than this exercise. CGW Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"The most playable computer role-playing game ever created... ...is also the most replayable. Own for Glory Farver L e Ceracier Choose your character and modify his skills and attributes. Puzzles have multiple solutions depending on your character type. SIERRA Every decision molds your Hero... and shapes bis destiny. Overcome obstacles with might, magic, and cunning. The key to this world is your wits. Excellence in Adventure Gaming. If your character survives, he may discover an unspeakable evil that lives at the very heart of fear and violence. To succeed, he must cut to the core of the mystery with his mind, not sort through a series of stats or slash through a thousand computer-generated monsters. This is the newest chapter in the series Compute magazine called «a breakthrough in adventure game design.\" Play as different character types, approaching problems with different skills and solutions. Every decision you make builds your Hero... and shapes his destiny. Play as a Fighter, play as a Magic User, play as a Thief. Each calling will lead your Hero down new roads of wonder, danger and excitement. Circle Reader Service #134 SIERRA To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Game Hints SSI's The Summoning as told by Scorpia DR h, long winter nights. The perfect time to be huddled around space, the save files are another matter. They start off small and a hot computer, indulging in the finer things of life: may grow like a cancer. Beginning at a modest 80K, the files rapidly hem, bloodlust and destruction (I see Fred is nodding his ballooned to where they were more than 750K each by the time I head vigorously, hehe). So just sit right down by the fire and warm reached the end game, and some people had larger files yet. So, in up. What's that? Fred tells me there's a call for you... spite of the small game size, you're still going to need a lot of room The Summoning is deceptive. on the hard disk to play this one. Open the box: two disks. Install the The Summoning is a single-characgame: three megs on the hard drive. ter dungeon crawl, so this Tale will Hah! A weekender, something to be more in the nature of a strategy while away the hours on a rainy guide than the usual game tour, alafternoon as you wait for an epic to though we will, of course, be looking come along. That was my first reacat the entire game. You start off with tion after it was up on my drive. Boy, one of the most elaborate characterwas I in for a surprise! Stalwart creation sequences around. It is In spite of its (relatively) tiny size, mastar woven into the game's introduction this is a big game. Very big. In its These and is actually part of the story backentirety, The Summoning totals 32 ground, making it a lengthy process. levels and they are not empty ones Fortunately, the game designers also by any means. How so much could Jarred Blackheart provided a way to get into the creabe packed into so little space is a Vangujsher tion quickly via the \"Escape\" key, mystery, and certainly an amazing but do sit through the whole thing at accomplishment least once. There is, however, a down side to &XP: 1,814,720 There are three methods for creatthat. While the game takes up little ing a character: random dice rolls, a celo REMI Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"Packwasntnimple Jack wasn't quick SoJack became a candlestick IXI 002 TAR No other fantasy role-playing experience delivers the undiluted horror OR of WAXWORKS for the IBM PC. Descend into live vast worlds of molten terror, battling over 100 evil denizens that occupy the WAXWORKS. Decaying graveyard ghouls, man-cating plants, bloodthirsty Egyptian priests-even Jack the Ripper-are all dying to enter the world of the living with only you in their way. But stand warned: the first-person perspective, VGA color graphics are not for the Irrol Inrsqueamish. WAXWORKS. It all boils r u down to terror. The best in entertainment software.\" Actual game screens from the IBM PC VGA version of the game. Other versions may vary Waxworks is a trademark of Artventure Soft (UKI LId. used with permission by Accolade, Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are properties of their respective owners. Wiixworks C 1984 and 1992 Mike Woodroito. All other materials C 1992 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. TEV IN DORT Circle Reader Service #43 "


"Game Hints random pool of points, and a random set of starting attributes plus a random number of points. You can \"re-roll» in any of these methods as much as you want, and you can even switch from one method to the other. Try all three and see which one works best for you. Typical for a single-character game, your alter ego is both a fighter and a mage. This means that almost all your stats will be important. The one I found least useful was Accuracy, which governs missile weapons. Since the critters in this game move around (some of them rather quickly!), and you have to be in a direct line with them to shoot with a bow (or throw a knife), I found missiles to be limiting weapons. They were only good against the creepers, the slowest-moving monsters in the game. Your other stats, however, are really important, especially Strength. You can never be strong enough in this game. Each point of Strength allows you to carry 5 kilos (all weight is measured in kilos) of stuff. I recommend a starting Strength of at least 18, and higher if you can manage it (20 is the max for any starting attribute). As you begin to accumulate items, especially armor, you will appreciate the need for lots of muscles. Don't skimp on Agility, either. You want to be able to move fast, and that means a high score here, at least 15. Ditto for Endurance. In the latter stages of the game especially, fighting is going to be a fatiguing exercise, so prepare for it now. On the magic front, Talent and Power need good scores, too. Spellcasting is an important part of this game, and you'll want to (a) be able to memorize as many spells as you can, and (b) cast spells that are potent or long-lasting. So, take your time in character creation to get the best numbers you can; it's worthwhile in the long run. Choosing your weapon and magical specialties finishes creation. I favored Hacking/Clubbing weapons because that skill gives you a nice, powerful axe with which to start the game, and Healing, because starting without armor was a little nerve-wracking. That doesn't mean you're stuck with just your specialties. The Summoning operates on the use it or lose it\" principle. As you cast spells, or fight with different weapons, your abilities with that class of weapon or spell increase. So, fight with different weapons, and cast spells from all the disciplines whenever you can. As you go through the game, you'll be finding all sorts of things: weapons, armor, magical runestones (one-shot spells), amulets and necklaces, etc. Lots of Neat Items. The trick is, most of these are going to wear out after a while. Weapons break, armor degrades, magical amulets get used up, and so on. Very little is permanent in The Summoning. So, at the start, your main consideration is going to be accumulating a small armory. Pick up weapons whenever you can, and keep a couple near the top of your inventory at all times for easy access...it's in battle that they break, and you will want to get your hands on a replacement quickly. Remember also that you can fight two-handed, so two one-hand weapons are usually better than one two-hand weapon. Armor is heavy (some of it very heavy indeed). So, until you find at least one Bag of Lightness, you're better off not lugging spare armor around. When you come across new armor, just swap your old set for the new one (the old one is likely to be in bad shape by that time anyway). Your Foozle, Should You Decide To Off Him Okay, so your job is to make it through the labyrinth and do something about the evil Shadow Weaver, who, in the time-honored fashion of all Foozles, is out to conquer the world. How to foil those plans is what you learn as you go through the underground, since you're tossed into the area without much preparation. You'll certainly be doing a lot of trekking (you may end up feeling like the pink funny bunny, just going, and going, and going, and...). After the three beginner levels, there are the five broken seal levels, followed by the three elemental barrier levels, followed by the domains of the five knights, and then the five end levels, until you get to Weaver's citadel (four levels, plus basement). I almost hesitate to mention a few underground levels here and there (heh). Like I said, it's a big game. There's more than just fighting here, too. You'll come across a fair number of NPCs. Many are helpful. They'll give you information or teach you spells, so talk to everyone who isn't immediately hostile. It is not necessary to kill everyone you meet (so curb your bloodthirsty instincts!). There are also, of course, puzzles. Lots of puzzles. The majority of them involve doing tricky things with floor plates and/or teleporters, and sometimes levers. This is where that neat-o automap is very helpful. It's almost as good as the one in Ultima Underworld, lacking only a feature for writing notes on it. On the other hand, it has the virtue (ahem) of being printable, and some important features are put on the map for you: locations of teleporters, pits, rune floors, portals (doors to another section of the game) and stairs. This map is your most important tool in figuring out puzzles, because it always represents the current state of the level. As I said earlier, many puzzles revolve around floor plates. Suppose you stand on one. Did it do anything? Maybe a door out of vision range opened, or a teleporter appeared. How can you tell? Look at the map! (The on-screen map, of course). If you triggered something, it will show up. Keep in mind, though, that multiple plates may have to be weighed down before something is opened or turned on. Naturally, the map only shows those areas you've actually explored, so it's possible something happened in a blank area. If there appears to be no result from stepping on a plate, or pulling a lever, leave it and go wandering around some more. This will be critical when you are in the Blue Knight's domain and fiddling with the levers (many levers) in the Control Room. Your map will be particularly vital here. Also important are the bodies. Critters don't vanish when killed, they leave a corpse behind. These are wonderful for weighing down plates. Finally, a use for a dead monster! Pushing them around can be tricky though, so move carefully. You want to avoid walls, and especially corners; if a body ends up in a corner, it's almost impossible to get it out of there. Teleporters have their own little tricks. The most common is the double: one behind the other. The front teleporter is usually a 004 Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"A Technological Breakthrough In 3-D Action Fantasy! THE SMOOTHEST 3-D SCROLLING GRAPHICS EVER! Ultima Underworld, move over! Legends of Valour\" sets a new standard with the smoothest, most life-like screen scrolling in fantasy adventures. The fast, seamless first-person view never jerks or slows down even when you're turning, And unlike the competition, our 256-color VGA texture and detail is retained even when you move close to an object. LEONOS Valor with hundreds of characters and monsters, each with a unique personality. One-touch iconbased combat sequences are fast and furious. Encounters change depending on day or night conditions. And Automapping tracks every step you take. A LEGENDARY STORY. Choose from an array of professions by joining any of nine guilds. Embark on over 45 exciting quests with multiple endings. Restore a king to power, slay an evil demon and become the stuff of which legends are written! LEGENDS OF VALOUR. 3-D fantasy adventuring never looked better! For play on IBM and Amiga. Cluebook available. SEEING IS BELIEVING! Check out our demo at your nearest software store! SEEL TWO VIRTUAL WORLDS! Explore two huge worlds: 28 miles of overworld town and an underground series of dungeons and labyrinths. Never before has any world been so massive or fully developed. The dynamic, evolving music score further heightens the realism. SRL SIMPLE INTERFACE, SMOOTH MOVES. Use the streamlined point-and-click interface to easily interact 0009 12. MATED 67 IBM 256-color VGA BAKI & VESE &#93E KES Experience the hottest, smoothest 3-D scrolling graphics ever in an underworld, or any world! TO ORDER BY VISA/MC: call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada). ULTIMA and UNDERWORLD are trademarks of Richard Garriott and ORIGIN Systems, Inc., respectively, LEGENDS OF VALOUR is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. $1992 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #140 "


"Game Hints knockback, sending you back a few steps when you enter it. The rear teleporter usually goes to a plate somewhere that needs to be weighed down. That means throwing items over the first one to reach the second Weight considerations are the major factors in determining which items to throw. Different floor plates have different thresholds. For some, almost anything will do. For others, you need really heavy weight. Any item you can hold in your hand can be thrown. When faced with a double, save the game, then start tossing objects, checking your map in-between to see if anything is happening. Remember to try every teleporter twice. Sometimes, on the second entry, they will send you to a different location. Let's Game At The Very Beginning The beginner levels are just that: a sort of training ground devised to give you a bit of challenge and allow you to become familiar with fighting and spellcasting. Puzzles are few and easily solved. Opponents are not too tough, so long as you don't get overconfident. Remember, unless you're boxed in, you can always run. The best technique overall is \"divide and conquer.» When faced with multiple opponents, try to lure them away one at a time. This generally works well, except with spiders. Spiders are very fast and can be deadly (poisonous, you know). Spiders show up in the broken seal levels. Expect to be poisoned regularly here. Until you learn the Cure Poison spell, you'll have to depend on Cure potions, and there aren't many of them. Sometimes, you may have to run around poisoned (it's slow poison, you don't drop dead right away), using healing spells to keep you alive. In Broken Seal 4, you will find some white pearls. PICK UP THESE PEARLS AND HOLD ON TO THEM, THEY ARE EXTREMELY IMPORTANT!! Didn't mean to shout, but this is critical, and you'll understand why when you read about the Citadel further along. Occasionally, especially in the later levels, it may seem you have nowhere to go and a lot of empty space on the map. This is when you try the three teleport runes of Raido, Thurisaz and Gebo. Some floor spots are inscribed with these runes symbols. Invoking the companion rune will send you to the spot immediately (be prepared for a \"welcoming committee\"). If there is no such rune symbol in that section, nothing happens and the rune is not used up. Some of your most difficult opponents will be the knights. You have to kill four of them (Greenie is honorable), and of those, by far the toughest is the Black Knight. In our first encounter, two shots and it was time to restore the game. Ouch! Try to find the Invisibility spell before you take him on. Going toe-to-toe with this guy is simply suicide. He's also fast, so don't stay in one place for very long. Beyond the Knights are the end levels. Of these, End Level 3 (where Raven the Assassin hangs out and End Level 1 (the lava level where the fire giants live) are completely optional. You don't need to do these to finish the game. The fire giants do have some Neat Things in their treasure rooms, though, so you may want to pay them a visit they aren't friendly). End Level 5 is the most important. This area has a small castle in the center, surrounded by skulls that ask for donations. Each donation opens a door in the center of the castle, most leading to small rooms with a little treasure. It is not necessary to feed all these skulls. Only a couple of them are really important. As you make your way through the castle, be on the lookout for skull-requested items; these are the crucial ones. A word about the sewers: stay out of them! We all know what sewage is, and unless you enjoy walking up to your waist, your neck, or over your head in sludge (taking damage, too!), there's no point in going through them. Entering Shadow Weaver's citadel by the front door is really the better way. The Citadel is four levels high and you-know-who lives on the top level. To get there, you must explore the first three, picking up black and white pearls, until you have five black and five white. It is here that the designers really slipped up. Until now, whenever you needed a door key or a special item, it was found either on that level or somewhere nearby. Amazingly, while you need ten pearls, only nine are in the Citadel. The tenth white pearl is... way, way back in Broken Seal 4. How this got by two sets of playtesters is unimaginable, but there it is. Hence my big notice earlier to grab the pearls. Event Horizon (the people who did this game) are working on a fix so that all the pearls will be in the Citadel, but just in case, grab those pearls in Broken Seal 4. On level 4, your best bet is to go up invisible and kill everything in sight before going through the skull teleporters. You must go through all of them to reach Shadow Weaver (a token entry, you might call it, hehe). Shadow Weaver is not immediately hostile, so take time out for a chat... it may clear up a few things. And then it's time forThe Summoning. Did you think that referred to your call to glory? Hah! Nothing so mundane. It's something quite different, and we'll hope the right choice is made at this dramatic moment. It isn't quite over yet, though. There's still a little something you have to do and you may find the actual end of this game...interesting. Short, but in one way, very sweet. Get there and decide for yourself. Whew! Well, that's it for now. In the meantime, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu) On GEnie: visit the Games Round Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! Cow Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"SPELLCRAFT ASPECTS OF VALOR WITHOUT THE WORD, THERE IS No MAGIC. WITHOUT THE MAGIC THERE IS No WORLD. CONRUNE LOBAGONE (atapulted through a portal in time and space, you encounter a Mentor Wizard who will teach you the basics of magic. In return for this coveted knowledge, you must shoulder a grave responsibility... helpful allies, who will provide you with the knowledge and commonplace objects required for the art of SpellCraft. Combine everyday items with the right Magic Words to awaken their magical Aspects. Then, test these spells in combat against Valoria's cunning Lord Wizards. Conjure a multitude of spectacular magic effects, from scorching fireballs and fire. breathing dragons to ominous armies of orcs. Start the game from the Circle of Stones, gateway to Valoria's Magical Realms and re-entry point for the Modern World of Terra. Learn to craft and cast spells to save both the Modern and Magic Worlds from the tyranny and destruction of the power-mad, warring Lord Wizards. SPELLCRAFT Accept the challenge and travel the Modern World of Terra in search of A challenge to be mastered by only the most experienced player, SpellCraft offers:  100+ hours of game play Richly detailed graphics (256-color VGA)  Spell-binding music and sound effects that are compatible with Ad Lib, Roland, and Sound Blaster sound cards Experiment with almost 60 ingredients to create over 100 supernatural spells in your wizardly workshop. Available for MS-DOS and compatible systems. JOHols Pouders Stones ASCIIWARE Circle Reader Service #47 ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. P.O. Box 6639. San Mateo, CA 94403. Telephone: 415/570-7005  1992 ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. Asciiware is a trademark of ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Screens shown are actual IBM/VGA. All brand names and products are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ \"Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" DRAKKAR STAR CRUISER CRUISER I saws, lleu, latar ut don't you open the door and we'll coure the rear ..... .ti NO IV exionen door marih t attartibi shonte lumb up Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer; IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. come visit a land where dragons roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG Net, Inc Multi Player Games Network and MPG Net are service marks of MPG-Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Builder is a trademark of Mayfair Games, Inc Operation Market-Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders "


"in Entertainment -..Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, TX 'What tore you up, Merlin?\" OPERATION EMPIRE BUILDER MARKET-GARDEN 0. SF0.303 KDOM MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think. Fees range from $2.00 to $3.00 per hour. Send the reply card or call 800-245-0317 and we'll send your account number, password, start-up kit and 10 free hours — right away. It's easy to enter this remarkable new dimension, your Multi-Player Games Network VVG Three elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine — the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history 0 CM Combining two great American Cloves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-245-0317 Circle Reader Service #108 "


"BEST That Gooey (GUI) Feeling of the REST by Chuck Miller The world of shareware ast month, I introduced CGW's new column focusing heard. Locate all the bombs in the given time and the \"crowd\" on shareware gaming and looked at several DOS based will respond with a round of applause (unless playing in L games for the PC. This time I want to focus on games practice mode). The playing field is also variable in size from with a graphic interface, specifically for Windows on the PC 23x2 tiles to 50x28 tiles on a standard interlaced screen and Workbench on the Amiga. First, let's check out an offer (103x28 on a SuperHires Interlaced screen). ing for the Amiga. Bomber 1.2 is an excellent public domain release (classified Beware the Mad Bomber as \"Happy Ware — if you use it, remember to smile!\") that There are not all that many Amiga games designed to be requires Workbench 2.04 or greater. It multitasks well and played on the Workbench screen; however, one in particular only consumes about 40K of RAM. There is no direct address that I recently ran across deserves some special recognition. for ordering, though it is available on many bulletin boards Based on a Macintosh game called Bombs, Bomber 1.2 is an and in numerous freely redistributable software libraries. addictive little time-gobbler in the tradition of Minefield, designed by Michael Balzer. The goal, in this game of logic, Yes, I Do Windows is to locate all of the hidden bombs on a field of tiles without setting off any one of them all in a set period of time. It is Two Windows games that I want to look at this month are a very simple concept that, nonetheless, results in quite an Canfield by Daniel Thomas and Castle of the Winds: A addictive playing experience. Question of Vengeance by Epic MegaGames. Both are quality offerings for Microsoft's popular GUI. Practice bull 19 2Go Game players who enjoy a good hand of Solitaire will want to procure a copy of Canfield. It is far superior to the version of Solitaire supplied with Windows, and offers enough extras to make the game truly enjoyable. Excellent graphics and spot animations provide an attractive playing environment. However, one of the most unique aspects of Canfield is the animated card backs. At preset, user-definable intervals, the player is greeted by famous celebrities such as Batman, Bill the Cat, the Simpsons and the Flintstones. Each appear, one at a time, peering through the window on the back of the deck of cards. Canfield offers more, though, than just an entertaining backdrop to a time honored game. Options include the ability Canfield Unregistered Copy Intermediate Level Capri Rt 299 \"hy Unpliit Bomber Game Edit Options Help ** 00 Bomber is very easy to play. Four difficulty levels are available: Easy, Medium, Hard and Alien (read the latter as impossible). Practice mode lets one play without writing scores to the highscore table. When play starts, a field of tiles will be displayed. Then, as the player makes correct selections, spaces with numbers will appear telling how many bombs border that area. The player must then figure out the next tile to uncover without setting off any bombs. When the location of a bomb becomes certain, a flag can be placed on that tile. The number of flags provided indicates the total number of bombs hidden on the screen. .. Ha ESTED * Bomber does include a few bells and whistles (make that digitized sounds). Select the wrong tile and an explosion is Canfield Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"DISCOVERED THE POWER OF SOUND SOUND GALAXY anty Cup Your favourite game has never been more exciting. NOW! With the Sound Galaxy BX II, bring yourself to new heights! Sensational sound effects with 4 watts to power your speakers or headphones! With flood of multimedia education, entertainment and other new age software, you need the full power of sound; you need sound Galaxy BX TDI get one today! CALL US TODAY! TOLL FREE: 1-800-866 8859 Fully Adlib & Sound Blaster Compatible Out of this world! Fully Adlib & Sound Blaster Compatible Latest Dynamic Adaptive Filtering for clearer sounds Lots of Bundled Software Digitized Audio Playback Analog Digital Recording 11 Voice FM Music Synthesizer MIDI Interface FREE Speakers, AYS America Offices AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 Europe Office: AZTECH SYSTEMS GmbH Rm 4.71-4.74 Asia Pacific Center, Birkenstrasse 15 2800 Bremen 1, Federal Republic of Germany. Tel: (0421) 1690843/4 Fax: (04277 1690845 Tlx: 245610 AZTEC-D Asia Pacific Office: AZTECH SYSTEMS TELTDA member of AVS Group 31 Ubi Road 1, AVS Building, Singapore 1440 Tel: (65) 7417211 Faxi 1657418678/9 Tlx: RS 36560 AZTECH MICROSOFT WINDOWS COMPATIBLE Sfxcifications subject to change without pr etium Sound Galaxy is a registrert luntark / AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LT72. All trade names and MTS TIC registered trademarks of the companies. 77x MPC logo is a trademark of the Mein RC Eindle Reader Service #48 "


"Shareware to play at different levels of difficulty from Real Easy to Inspired by Norse mythology, Castle of the Winds is a well Brutal, vary the playfield color, turn on and off card drag, designed FRP with many player amenities. All documentaanimated draw, auto-hints and auto-play. Multiple undo op tion, including background and extensive help files, are availerations are also available, plus all game options can be able on-line. Multiple windows provide the overhead map altered, enabled or disabled. Full documentation with exhaus view, text display and player stats during movement, while an tive on-line help support is provided, and game scores are inventory window pops up upon request and when entering maintained for each level of play. stores. Object management and combat are handled simply and easily with the drag-and-drop, point-and-click ease WinCanfield is shareware and can be registered for a very dows provides. Save games are limited only by available disk nominal fee of $17.00, plus $3.00 shipping and handling (U.S. space, and one can create and import his or her own character and Canada, $6.00 elsewhere). The author can be reached by icon. writing to: Daniel Thomas, Castle of the Windo 2301 N. Huron Circle, PlacenElle Character! Inventoryl Mapl Spells Activate Verbs Options Window Help Overall, game play is quite good, tia, CA 92607 or by phone at with many hours of dungeon delving (714) 524-5625 (Pacific Time). in store (most of the game transpires below ground). While simple, Castle of the Winds: A Quesgraphics and animation are effective tion of Vengeance is part one of and well designed. The lack of any a two part fantasy role-playing sound effects, though, is noticeable. game (FRP) very reminiscent Some simple groans, thuds and of Moria and the early Ultima clanks would have helped enhance games. The interface, of the game's atmosphere. Still, for the course, is designed for Winmodest asking price, Castle of the dows and, as such, it is reWinds is an enjoyable way to open a quired. window to adventure. Gunnhild's General Store Command Pending: Look... You see! A sign that says: Bjorn the Blacksmith 10 (10) Mana 5 (5) Speed 100% 200% Time Od 00:16:12 A Tiny Hamlet As the quest begins, the Castle of the Winds: A Question of player finds that his home has Castle of the Winds Vengeance, a shareware game, is been destroyed and that both of available from Epic Mega Games his godparents have been killed. Thus, he must locate the for $25.00, plus $2.00 shipping and culprit(s) and avenge the brutal murder of his loved ones. In handling. Upon receipt of payment, the player will be sent a the process he must also recover a very important possession registered copy of A Question of Vengeance and a copy of the stolen from his house, an amulet left to him by his father. sequel, Lifthransir's Bane. This second volume is almost Rivaled only This all new LINKS 386 Pro version of our award-winning LINKS golf game offers many dramatic improvements that make playing LINKS 386 Pro more enjoyable and gives you exciting new golfing possibilities! Super VGA Graphics and 386 Power! The new LINKS 386 Pro, featuring Harbour Town Golf Links, is the first golf game specifically designed for the graphic capabilties fairways, rough. and computing power of your personal 386/486 computer system. sand, and other sand, and other SUPER VGA 256-color graphics at 640x400 resolution display or oraphics at 640x400 resolution display surfaces adds an surfaces adds an extra level of breathtaking views of LINKS Championship Courses. Your friends realism. won't believe that your computer looks so good! A lot of listening went into LINKS 386 Pro. Male and female Many of the new features and improvements were added in golfers. response to direct requests from LINKS users like you! An exciting new feature is our Unique Computer Opponent. Play a You can use any round of golf and save your game. The new LINKS 386 Pro of the 7 existing recorded every shot you made. Send your game off to your buddy LINKS courses or HARBOUR TOWN and he can play against you right on the screen, shot for shot, as if upgrade your DERU favorite course to Hole 4 Par: 5 Shots: 1 you were right there next to him! We've also included pre-recorded the Super VGA Ball to Pin: 46 YO. Profile games from worthy opponents, statistics, a variety of game play version. Menu Setup Top Scores Drop modes and much, much more. Over 345 combinations of Viewing Windows. With the new LINKS 386 Pro you're not stuck with just one standard viewing window. With a few clicks of your mouse you can split the screen giving you a real-time reverse view of your shot to the green or add a scaleable top-view that displays the flight of your ball. Scorecard, club distance chari. terrain profile and other panels give you the flexibility E C E SOFTWARE INCORPORATED to display what you want to view while playing and 4910 W. Amelia Earhart Dr.. SLC, UT 84116 (801)801-359-2900. FAX (801)596-9128 you can change your viewing setup at anytime! Address Draw 02 CLUB Rotate SWING 02 SWING U2 Fnde Straight Gimmie Chip Usert ePutt @User2 ON THE TECHWIND ca *Actual Links 386 Pro Super VGA Scree. Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"Shareware Q QUTI twice the size of the first and will import one's previous game. However, it is a shareware product and should be character. In addition, Epic Mega Games will send a hint registered if played for any length of time. Besides a clear sheet to Castle of the Winds and a disk of their other current conscience, registration provides the player with all three releases with the registered version. Orders can be placed by volumes in the series, plus a hint sheet and bonus game, all mail to: Epic MegaGames, 10406 Holbrook Drive, Potomac, for a fee of $32.00 (including postage and handling). Game MD 20854. Orders can also be placed by phone with Visa or requirements are CGA, EGA or VGA graphics, 512K RAM, Mastercard by calling (800) 972-7434. DOS 3.0 or later and a 286 or better CPU. Jill can be ordered from Epic MegaGames at the adWhile not a Windows game, I CONTROLS VASAJILI of the Jungle dress and phone number given MOVE JILL can't pass up the opportunity to above. SUZEZ JUMP talk about another fine shareware ALT HELP release from Epic MegaGames Games reviewed in this column Jill of the Jungle. EN NOISE are available through numerous S SAVE distributors of shareware and pubR RESTORE Jill of the Jungle is not new to lic domain software, as well as on T TURTLE O shareware gaming, but it has been many national and private teleHEALTH especially popular among those communication services. If you who enjoy side-scrolling arcade do not have access to these servadventures. Crisp, attractive 256ices, you can, in most cases, write color VGA graphics and a catchy or call the game developer for an Sound Blaster soundtrack with evaluation copy. Remember, if LLLL digitized sound effects all com INVENTORY you find a shareware game enjoybine to provide an excellent atable, please register the product mosphere. Character animation is Jill of the Jungle with its author. extremely smooth, as is the sidescrolling of levels. Jill's movement as she runs, jumps and Send us your best: If you have authored a shareware or climbs is especially fluid and lifelike. Players familiar with public domain game and would like to have it considered for game releases from Apogee (Commander Keen and Duke review in this column, please send two complete copies to: Nukem, for instance) will be pleasantly surprised by the Best of the Rest quality of Jill of the Jungle. This is a very high caliber product. c/o Computer Gaming World, 130 Chaparral Court. Suite 260, Volume One of Jill is available as a freely redistributable Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Cow LEVEL SCORE by the game itself. mproved swing dicator to allow or more accurate Putting. The Experience Continues... 034 The challenge doesn't end with Harbour Town. You can play each of the original LINKS Championship Courses (sold separately) with LINKS 386 Pro. Seven internationally-acclaimed golf courses on your desktop! Torrey Pines, Firestone South Course, Bay Hill Club, Pinehurst #2, Troon North, Dorado Beach, and Barton Creek with additional courses being released as fast as they are completed. If you're a LINKS owner, you can purchase LINKS 386 Pro at a special introductory price. Call us today for more information. LINKS(386 6 E 1Ent 1-800-800-4880 NEW! WAT Real-time split Call toll-free, 24-hours a day, Mon-Sar in the U.S. Screen views of and Canada or visit your local software devlet your shot. Great for making your What Reviewers Are Saying about LINKS 386 Pro: approach shot to the green. Strategy Plus: \"...with LINKS 386 Pro, Access has not so much pushed back the 'envelope as redefined the term \"simulation. Right from the opening screen it's clear that something special is happening here.\" \"...represents a new generation of computer game. Just play it and love it.\" Vew Features for Links 386 Pro! Seven different viewing windows, with over 345 different combinations. PC Entertainment: mproved club selection feature.. Wide panoramic views giving you a \"...for sheer, unadulterated realism, no golf simulation equals the performance of LINKS 386 Pro.\" etter feel for the course. Statistics recorded for euch player game and course, with optional print out. A \"Saved Shor\" feature. Scaleable \"Top\"...if you're serious about golf simulations, treat yourself to LINKS 386 Pro. And if you don't own liew\". \"Profile View\" which shows changes in elevation between the ball a 386 to run it on, youi've finally got a real good reason to lay out the money for an upgrade. ind the pin.. All new sounds! Supports SoundBlaster: SoundBlaster Pro. Idlib and other compatible sound cards & RealSound.. Improved swing Computer Gaming World: ndicator for more realistic putting. . Male or female golfers, with 10 \"...if you have a fast 386 or 486, think of LINKS 386 Pro as a Ferrari or a Corvette.\" Cifferent shirt colors to choose from. Spectacular texturing of fairways, ough, sand, water not offered in other golf games. \"..the ground texturing is dramatically realistic.\" Circle Reader Service #42 January 1993 Page 71 "


"Review RUNWAY TYCOON OR AIR DISASTER Impressions\" AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS $49.95 BUILD YOUR OWN AIRLINE NAME: Air Bucks SYSTEM: IBM # PLAYERS: 0-4 PRICE: PROTECTION: None SOUND CARD. Adlib GRAPHICS: EGA DESIGNER: Edward Grabowski PUBLISHER: Impressions Farmington, CT Impressions by M. Evan Brooks ir Bucks was the subject of a \"sneak preview\" in CGW #98. Alan Emrich was impressed with what he christened «Railroad Tycoon with Wings.\" Other magazines have rated the simulation highly, so I was looking forward to an entertaining and educational experience. Were expectations fulfilled? Was this a product that makes Railroad Tycoon \"hard drive-deletable?\" The quick answer, at least for this reviewer, is a resounding negative (even if it doesn't correspond with the, pardon the pun, impressions of my editors). The simulation of civilian airline growth from the post-World War II period to the mid-80s is a subject that is inherently fascinating. Impressions has done an excellent job of whetting one's appetite, but a less-than-satisfying job of satisfying such appetite. In-Flight Reading (Documentation) The documentation comes in two manuals: a main instruction manual and a technical support/tutorial book. A new version (1.01) is available to registered users and it includes a strategy guide. However, as of the date of this review (mid-October), neither was available. The manual was written by the British designers, thereby giving proof to the adage that we are \"one people separated by a common language.\" While all major aspects of the game are covered, deciphering what actually happens is an exercise in cryptology and one must often rely on actual playing experience. The actual instructions are only 15 pages, while the remaining Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"Review half of the manual is an interesting, albeit brief, overview of the historical evolution of civilian airlines. Overall, the manual is a decent \"prop job» when a Mach-1 Concorde would have been more appreciated. VIEW ALL ROUTES INTERNATIONAL GT INT2. San Juan OMBS OFTSHMAV1921 Noise Abatement (Graphics and Sound) The sound and graphics are obviously from the minimalist school of game design. A melody provides background Muzak, while the graphics are limited to a colored world map during play. A black line between cities will illustrate routes and way points. A problem exists with Pacific routes in that the routes do not \"wrap-around.\" Thus, a San Francisco-Wake Island-Tokyo route is graphically and incorrectly) illustrated by the eastern route (San Francisco-cross country-cross Europe-Far East). All user input will be made through drop-down menus which consist of tabular entries a la Lotus. Each year begins with a banner newspaper headline (which gives appropriate flavor) and, occasionally, a new airplane will be announced with an attractive screen shot of it coming out of wraps. The remaining graphics consist of a banker (used for securing loans), an airport site (for securing landing rights) and four or five other colorful screens. However, 90% of the game will be played in the world-map views and the only thing appearing on this will be the current route selected plus a bank balance changing at the bottom of the screen. Initially, the game did have a plane traversing its routes. However, both Johnny Wilson and Alan Emrich suggested that it was \"too juvenile\" and it was deleted from the final product. Maybe so, but if there is a resemblance to Railroad Tycoon, it is in the strategic map there is nothing else to entertain the player while the program is running. A game like this shows why Sid Meier is such a creative designer. Gamers, like rats in a maze, like their \"cheese\" screens; here, internal satisfaction is the only \"rat pellet\" offered. Hangar Time (Game Mechanics) Game mechanics are selectable by keystroke or mouse. The mechanics themselves are easily understood; it is only experience that will show how cumbersome the play can become. With four competing airlines, a total of 400 airplanes can be flying. One should ensure that his fleet is at least the size of his closest competitor; remember, once a player's fleet exceeds the magic number, he is literally stealing airlift from his competitors. Of course, even 100 airplanes can become difficult to manage (for those who criticized Railroad Tycoon for its number limitation, this is a good answer). What is most critical is fare management. One must determine which air route and aircraft he needs to adjust (generally from the \"Planes Listing\") and then switch to the financial analysis to determine how profitable a route is. From there, it is back to the \"Planes Listing» to alter the ticket prices. Luckily, game time is frozen whenever any pull-down menu is accessed. One must also be careful in switching a particular plane from one route to another; it is all too easy to switch the entire route. Also, a command for merging duplicate routes would have been appreciated. Plane Speaking (Game Play) Initially, one begins in Miami, Florida. I found an initial short route (e.g. Palm Beach or Orlando) to be necessary to obtain a positive cash flow. Quickly, one should obtain landing rights to New York City and then, the sky's the limit. As play progresses, landing rights take more and more time to obtain. So, it would seem logical to go after the large cities. Despite a 40 year passage of time, the sizes of the cities do not change, so one can quickly determine the long-haul routes. Due to aircraft range, trans-Atlantic and trans-Pacific flights will have to use Wake Island and the Azores, respectively, so their acquisition should be emphasized. No more than two airlines can have landing rights in any city, so optimal planning is mandatory. Fortunately, one can actually acquire virtually every large city by 1950. Then, the remainder of the game consists of maximizing profits and routes. A sub-phase allows sale and acquisition of stock in the various companies, but the computer opponents are notoriously reluctant to issue shares in their companies. Follow their example; as Woodsy Owl the Investor says, \"Give a Hoot, Don't Dilute!\" Each year, an overall performance appraisal is issued in three areas: turnover (number of passengers), fleet size and number of routes. Victory goes to the company with the highest performance rating. Beginning with a DC-3, one can quickly upgrade to the DC-6 (with a corresponding range change from 1,000 to 3,000 miles). While this occurs within two years of the game start, the next major aircraft (Boeing 707) will not appear for a decade. (Actually, the Vickers Viscount appears soon after the DC-6, but its short range and relatively high cost do not make it attractive). By 1950, one should be turning over a tremendous profit. The air fleet should be completely upgraded to DC-6s, and everything appears optimal. Wrong! In 1951 and 1953, aircraft occupancy will drop to virtually nothing unless one increases worker's salaries. Access the \"Research\" option, and ensure that the flight crews are not growing surly. Even dropping the rate from New York to Tokyo to $30.00 will not increase passenger occupancy! Fortunately, increased salaries will soon have one's airliner back in the AB CARGO JOBS AVAILABLE More OK Site Volume Landing Rights Washington Detroit AB Pago Pago Paris AB Madrid Barcelona AB TGI black, although the user might well question the validity of the economic model. The economic model has other vagaries. While one can modify particular aircraft in terms of first class, passenger and cargo EEEEE January 1993 Page 73 "


"Review Hlong sa panis olikas papiai lempien BANK LOAN Add-sub loan inc-Dec Term capabilities, determining an optimal mix is a case of a tempest in HOME! (sounds like a warning from Mr. Wizard, right?) My a tea leaf. With the rapid build-up of a passenger fleet, one should strong save position was rapidly depleted by the computer Al with simply seek to have a relatively profitable route and make up in a rapid sell-off of virtually all overseas routes. size what he loses in incremental adThere are nice touches; one can justments. choose his own logo, but overall, the Actual fares can vary tremendously economic model was sufficiently coneven on the same route, and passenger fusing to cause a rapid loss of interest. occupancy percentages do not seem to Finally, there is a paucity of historibe in cohesion. Yet, setting fares is a cal feel to the program. While the problem in and of itself the input is newspaper headlines each year give via keyboard, and the program accepts some period feeling (e.g. «Ghandi typed numbers like a primitive word Dies,\" \"Marylin Remembered\" [these processor, that is, slooowwwlllyyy! BANK MANAGER minor spelling errors as well as There is a (Replicate command, but in \"Caracus\" will be corrected in Version Version 1.0 it merely copied the chosen 1.011), the airlines themselves are price to all classes (first class, passen Current Loan: 300000 amorphous. Where is the young and Max 1 MUM Loan: 24400000 ger and cargo), thereby obviating its current Interest Rate: 12 vibrant Howard Hughes? What of use. Version 1.01 modifies the (R)epliTerm (in Years): 5 Annual Repayment: 96000 \"Slim\" (Col. Lindbergh), who virtucate command to copy the same price Bank Balance: 20194940 New Loan: 200000 ally single-handedly surveyed and only for the class involved; a welcome laid out the trans-Atlantic and transchange! Pacific commercial air routes in the The game plays in slow, normal, fast and turbo speeds. Since beginning of commercial aviation? normal speed seems to be almost equivalent to real time, I found myself playing at turbo speed and, even here, one feels like a real The Final Approach Howard Hughes simply staring at a relatively static screen and watching his hair, fingerand toenails grow to 18-inch lengths. There are some real pearls in Air Bucks; the problem is that one Ostensibly, Version 1.01 speeds the game up to two-and-a-half must open a number of oysters in order to find them. The strengths times faster and it will be a welcome relief. of the program are its concept and customer support. Impressions The computer opponents are not overly aggressive. In fact, one is active on Prodigy and GEnie and listens to its consumers. Many can save a game and restart it with the computer in all positions so of their suggestions will be incorporated into later revisions. Right the player's airline will be \"optimized.» DO NOT DO THIS AT now, my feeling is that this flight has been delayed. Cow PREMIUM TEMPLATES Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate delenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another. M V1 O Watch yor U Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember. sixir JAAN THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you i to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1. 2. 3 or 4). Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge. Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2). Keel the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7), Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. WoW z A 9.17. B-17 Available! TITIO TIT XT LRYOUTS COMING SOON.. Cool gift Idea! Falcon 3.0 Aces of the Pacific Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Jeftfighter I & II B-17 Flying Fortress CY Air Combat A-10 Tank Killer F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Megafortress ATP Flight Simulator 4.0 HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2. Might and Magic 3 (12.95). * High-quality, 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard .* Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards * Sturdy, laminated stock Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! 1 $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 aler delivery Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 each Name Country S&H add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address city KCC, Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 \"tems (Discounts per order only: Allow 7.4 Weeks) Prodigy: DKRV2GA 1-800-262-6066 IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS MasterCard P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #93 Circle Reader Service #82 Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"Flight From The Ground Up Warrior Enter a time when pilots really flew planes...airspeed was manageable, controls were simple, nothing was computerized. Dogfight success was determined by toughness and talent, not technology. Air Warrior lets you experience the thrill of air combat in ll of the most feared warplanes of the WWII and Korean eras: Mustang P-51, Bf-109, Zero, P-38, Corsair, Spitfire, A-26 Invader, FW-190, MiG-15, Ki-84, F-86. This is the training school for on-line air combat duty against GEnie Air Warrior veterans. The theatre of operations could have over 50 planes airborne at any time; not a welcome mat for a novice pilot. Air Warrior is the first and only Super VGA (640 x 480 x 256 color) flight sim. Take to the skies in 3 modes: Beginner, Intermediate or Expert. Film your toughest missions and re-fly them differently to sharpen flight skills. Test yourself against a buddy in modem-to-modem airspace. But, log as many practice hours as you can; it's a wild blue yonder on-line. For further info on GEnie Air Warrior, call 1-800-638-9636. Available on MS-DOS, November 1992 Don't let him back on top it's a veteran move, Sight and squeeze to keep a Zero from zeroing in on you. KONAMIKI W GEO-1 O Bring up the radar screen to ID the position of friend, foe, and landing fields, in a 900 sq. mile air theatre. TWEE Lange KONAMIKESMAI A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP corporation Bogey #2, 11:0011 Chase him, but savo Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmal Corporaton, 1992 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Konania enough fuel to escape from behind enemy lines. gregistered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. 1992 Konom. All rights reserved. Konami Game Mint & Tip Line: 8(900) 896-HINT (4486). Calls are 5.70 per minute. Touch fone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before calling. Circle Reader Service #90\" "


"Strategy Soaring Profits Strategy for Impression's Air Bucks by Jennifer Schlickbernd t first, Air Bucks can be pretty overwhelming. One follows the tutorial, gets an airline started, and then, what next? It's easy to go bankrupt in this game, but with a little knowledge, it's also really easy to make lots and lots of money. For starters, set the computer players to the Hardest difficulty level. This will stop them from being too aggressive in the site acquisition race. Introduction To Airline Management Be aware of how the computer weighs the various elements of the simulation. The main element is the ticket pricing. Price the fares right and more than half the profit battle is over. Price them wrong and bankruptcy will be stepping on one's coattail. In order for ticket pricing to be effective, the pricing must reflect the demand for the plane's services and routes. So what factors are important? Here's a chart: Most Important Size of Sites Special Circumstances First Class Travel Plane Speed Wages Very Important Customer flow /seasonality Age of planes Competition Advertising Reliability Cargo Comfort Level Length of plane route The simulation interprets these factors to mean that the bigger cities will generate more demand and customers will gravitate toward faster planes, even if they aren't as comfortable (or are old or even have a grouchy staff). Seasonality means that certain places can be more popular at different times of the year. Exclusive or monopoly routes are more profitable. The computer players will generally avoid competitive routes, so competition is usually not a big problem in solitaire games. If an airline's staff feels as if they are not being paid on a scale commensurate with profits, the demand for the airline will go down, since the staff will be crankier and won't service people as well. The older the model of planes flown, the less passengers will want to ride on them, perceiving that they are out of date. Old planes make good cargo planes, but don't be afraid to sell them if costs get too high. First Class travel is special. Don't bother with it on any route other than a large city to large city (large-large) route, but on a large-large route, it is crucial. On a large-large route, one should make 30% of the space available for first class in order to guarantee a profit. (It is always wise to check the Service Income menu item to be sure). Cargo can only be picked up when it shows up in the Jobs Available report. If there isn't much cargo in the cities the plane flies to, don't bother fitting planes with cargo space (though one can still make a little money on cargo even though no cargo shows up in the Cargo Report). Office of Operations (Route Management) The next major part of the battle is site acquisition. Until many hours of play are spent with the game, concentrate on large cities, only picking up small or medium cities where they allow for connection to a large city, such as the Azores or Wake Island. It is more difficult to make money using small/medium city routes. Acquire sites at the beginning of each month. At the beginning of the game, go for New York. Put two or three planes on the New York-Miami run, and there should soon be enough cash for a DC-6 when it is available. After New York, acquire Los Angeles and San Francisco. Make the first transcontinental runs Miami-Los Angeles and Miami-San Francisco runs with DC-6's. Soon after LA and San Francisco are acquired, get either the Azores or Wake Island, otherwise Europe will be unreachable until the big planes become available. When planning routes for planes, try to maximize the plane's range in the route. This means that if the plane can travel 3000 miles before refueling, put it on routes that are as close as possible to 3000 miles to ensure maximum efficiency. If long range planes are put on short routes, extra cost will be incurred. Every stop on a route increases costs. Full planes are needed to make multi-stop routes profitable. Finally, remember that faster planes are more popular planes, since time inevitably means money to some people. Costs for each plane are basically equal to (plane mileage)/10 (Fuel Costs). Any comfort factors increase the cost, along with a poor plane size-to-route-length ratio. Maintenance costs and landing fees are paid at the end of the VIEH ALLE ROUTES year; all other fees and fuel costs are paid at the end of the month. Keep a very close eye on the cost/income ratio of each plane. If it is poor (i.e. the plane is incurring TAB Hashington DC541722 SUUSAS:* more cost than its return on investment), check the percentage of the plane's capacity that is being utilized and adjust ticket prices as necessary. If the percentage of the capacity in use is greater than 50%, try raising ticket prices. If the percentage is lower than 50% (particularly if it's lower than 25%), lower ticket prices and lure in more people with a fare war. Another approach is to re-examine the plane's route. Obviously, it is not economical to fly planes outfitted with plenty of cargo Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"Strategy INCOME Fares First: Economy Cargo Year TO Date 3648942 1 02686151 Last Year 4646316 202467598 115995709 227279644 Plane Sales: Investors Toelstaff-Ads 106477775 77472 3997244 52466 New Pianesi Maintenance! Tax-Investors: 212672232 4327736 4909392 528263 224197330 5390752 HORTH! 40435986 O space on routes where the cargo jobs PROFITANDISLOSS REPORT DULISEDET will be more demand for all of the planes in the are limited. So, planes with excess airline if the airline flies to many places. cargo capacity should either be reasAvoid selling stock for additional money. The signed to other routes or refitted to Total Fares: stock probably will never be available again and get rid of the excess cargo space. profits will be reduced as the hypothetical shareOne must also monitor the service OTOTAL INCOME: 115995709 227279644 holders receive their dividends on future earnings. income. If the first class seating isn't OUTGOINGS Further, putting maintenance fees on Low can be generating much money, it is defi Landing Rights: done in an emergency, but soon, demand and innitely worthwhile to reduce it and Back Interesti come will drop since planes will be \"In Service\" add more economy seating. Under 1659707 TOTAL OUTGOINGS:-110604957 more often (not making money) and customers will other conditions, there may be exBALANCE perceive the airline as being unreliable. Reducing cess cargo along the route and one o KUS wages paid to staff will also reduce demand for the must, consequently, consider reducairline's planes. ing the first class seating and increasing the cargo space. If all of a given airline's planes are doing badly, then (assuming the other advice has been followed) the best strategy is to raise Marketing Department (Conclusions) ticket prices across the board and/or increase comfort levels. Each Last, but not least, keep an eye on Market Research. It will help comfort level increases the demand accorded to comfort level by when deciding what factors need to be changed to increase demand twice as much as the previous comfort level. For example, Quality for the entire airline. Note that in version 1.0, advertising costs are of Staff increases the comfort level by 1%. Meals not reflected properly in the Market increase the comfort level by 2%, Radio increases Research report. This has been the comfort level by 4% and so on up to a Lounge une fixed in version 1.01. Area, which increases the comfort level by 128%. Remember, this is a simulation All comfort level increases also increase the comand, since it's not a real airline, mensurate cost dedicated to comfort levels by the don't be afraid to experiment. In same percentage. version 1.0, there were a few ways to make money by bending the Accounting Office (Money Matters) simulation model severely, but Whenever there's enough money to buy a new NEH PLANE AVAILABLE those have been fixed in 1.01. DCES plane, buy one. If an aggressive route acquisition spred (Darn!). If puzzling things happen, strategy has been pursued, there should be plenty of cooperty R30 06800 an explanation can usually be found potential routes to put new planes on. Also, there by examining the factors discussed in this article. CGW STAT DIPST ARE YOU TIRED OF PLAYING AGAINST YOUR COMPUTER? Broaden your horizons, challenge your mind and interact with other players across the nation. Star Quest is a computer moderated play-by-mail game, allowing you to compete with up to 100 other players. Imagine...an area of 1,000,000 cubic lightyears around our own Sun consisting of 800 stars and close to 10,000 planets, moons, and other objects. Players become explorers, diplomats, merchants, warlords and emperors competing for victory points in five different areas. Game turns are run every three weeks and cost from $4.00 to $12.00 depending on the number of orders. Our \"Game Startup\" package includes rules, map and first five turns for only $18.00. Rules are only $3.00. For more information on this game or to receive information on other games offered contact: DELTAX GAMING VISA 548 Great Hill Drive Ballwin, Missouri 63021 MasterCard January 1993 Circle Reader Service #137 Page 77 "


"Theme Article VOC file to a sound card efficiently enough that it could be played properly. Still, the existence of cheap CD-ROM drives signifies the existence of many CDROM drives which, in turn, means potential for many new CD-ROM products. CD-ROMS can hold quantities of data near 900 MB, but more typically around 500 to 600 MB. This is a staggering figure when one considers how it compares to the capacity of a 3.5 inch high density floppy at just under 1.5 MB. Of course, everything that goes onto a CD-ROM has to be paid for by somebody, so most current CD-ROM games tend to be anything from the same old game but on a CD-ROM, to the same old game again but with the MT-32 music recorded in normal audio format (called Redbook) which just plays the music out of the CDROM drive. This may sound okay, but it's hardly a bargain for those who already have an MT-32 or LAPC-1. E-MU Systems is providing their previously mentioned Proteus Technology to Creative Labs for a daughter card PCM synthesizer similar to the Yamaha TG100, Roland Sound Canvas or Turtle Beach Multisound. The good news here is that this small card plugs into a Sound Blaster Pro 16 card and uses some of its circuitry for amplification and such in order to reduce the cost over adding an entirely separate PCM synthesizer card. This type of approach may be what finally puts good music and sound effects in the hands of the gamer-on-a-budget without having to give up good old Adlib or Sound Blaster compatibility in order to do it. (Continued from Page 46) PC sound card to use General MIDI: a list of instruments and ways of organizing MIDI files that would allow some level or portability of MIDI music files between synthesizers made by different manufacturers. Built-in PCM sampled instruments that sound very much like the real thing (because they are actually the real thing recorded and manipulated) make this class of synthesizer a giant step-up music-wise from anything that existed before. One problem with this kind of sound support, however is the difficulty it has in providing flexibility for sound effects. Turtle Beach has a sound card called the Multisound based on what E-MU Systems, a well established professional synthesizer maker, calls Proteus Technology. With both PCM instruments and the ability to do custom PCM recording and playback, this is a great sounding card like the Sound Canvas, but the $800 street price is still too much for even most serious gamers. Although their price may soon come down, there are now other sharks in the waters. Yamaha now has the TG-100. With sound in the same league with the Sound Canvas and a special connection for direct connection with a PC or MAC as well as the standard MIDI connections. This card has a distinctly DX-7 flavor although the technology is PCM. Meanwhile, Roland is planning a new version of their Sound Canvas card with the instrument list reduced to the General MIDI list, but with the welcome addition of PCM recording ability at a more competitive price. Roland also has their new SC-7 module which will connect to the serial port of a Mac or PC or to the MIDI port of anything MIDI. This module will be essentially a Sound Canvas on General MIDI instruments and Roland says it will sell for about half the price of the Sound Canvas. Media Vision has its Audioport Card which is similar, internally, to a base level Sound Blaster. It fits easily into a shirt pocket and plugs into the parallel port of any PC. It is battery powered with a small built-in speaker and volume dial. This means very portable OPL-2 and PCM for laptops. CD-ROM is essentially just like a music CD that contains different information and requires a special CD-ROM drive to use. CD-ROM drives came into the market at over a thousand dollars but I have seen ads for $199.00 CD-ROM drives. Caveat emptor — price tends to beget quality. Some CD-ROM drives are just enough below standard that they perform simple functions okay, but cannot feed a WAV or Other Neat Stuff Newer technologies are always being developed and, strangely enough, computer gaming is often at the cutting edge. There are a lot of very creative people in this industry and a mistake in a computer game never kills someone, so taking chances is acceptable. FM and PCM synthesis are not the end of the road for synthesizers. Research is going on in many corporations and universities to find new ways of creating sound. New methods for processing and controlling the sound already available are also being developed. QSound Lid. recently announced that Virgin was licensing QSound's full 3-D sound processing technology for use in Sega CD-ROM systems. QSound processes and reproduces sound for the gamer in a full, wrap around world, using only existing stereo equipment. Using just two speakers, QSound tricks the gamer's ears into thinking the sound is all around him/her. Award winning music from Madonna, Paula Abdul, Sting and Luther Vandross, as well as Robin Hood: Prince Of Thieves (the film, not the game) have used the QSound Technology. With realtime software control of this kind of technology, gamers could well hear jets screaming up from behind them or cannons firing from their right without major hardware expenditures. Rock recording engineer Bob Clearmountain uses QSound to mix music. He says QSound \"enhances the music and its emotional power a lot.\" Frankly, the CD-ROM approach has a vast potential for providing fantastic sounding music for computer games, but it is expensive to pay people to do real studio quality music compared to just asking for a composition in the form of a MIDI file for an OPL-2 type sound card. This form of sound is also difficult to coordinate with events in the game. Using the vast space available on the CD-ROM for WAV or VOC PCM recordings which then must be sent to a sound card for playback is seen by some as a more workable solution but requires one to own both a CD-ROM drive and a sound card. Creative Labs and Media Vision both sell kits for just this purpose with new 16-bit sound cards which use OPL-3 synth chips and SCSI interfaces for a CD-ROM drive which they include in the kit. Needless to say these kits are not cheap. The Meaning of Life (Or, at least, a Conclusion) Gamers don't touch that volume dial! Listen to the music in computer games, then talk about it, complain about it or praise it. It can and will get better when developers know that we care. Developers — make the music a part of each game, not a last second add-on. Remember that the competition is Hollywood. I don't remember who it was, but a very wise composer once told me that all the equipment in the world didn't matter if I couldn't write good music for it. Now, that's where the state of the art is. CGW Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"Blow It Out Your Ear. Pump up the volume with Sound Blaster! The sound card from Creative Labs. Experience the full power of 11-voice synthesized music and 8-bit sampled sound effects. Don't just hear it... let it blow you away! The scream of your F-15's engine as you elude enemy fire... the crisp crack of your bat when you hit a homerun off the screen... the echoing ring of sword against sword during your next fantasy adventure. No wonder Sound Blaster is the world's #1 seller. And why it's the sound card that more gaming software developers write for under DOS or Windows 3.1. To find out more about Sound Blaster, the only sound card that's 100% Sound Blaster compatible, visit your local computer retailer or call Creative Labs at 1-800-998-LABS. Get the full blown sound capability you've always wanted for your PC—for only $149. With Sound Blaster from Creative Labs. Because... SOUND if you don't have BLASTER Sound Blaster, you're really blowing it! SOUND BLASTER 11 SB CREATIVE MIKROSOFT WNIXMS Sound Blaster is a trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. O 1992 Creative Labs, Inc. All rights reserved. International inquiries: Creative Technology, Lid, Singapore Tel 65 773 0233 Fax 65-773-0353 Circle Reader Service #63 CREATIVE LABS, INC. "


"CGW A monthly look at the Computer Entertainment Stock Market esta Sierra On-Line, Inc. NASDAQ Symbol SIER One week per bar. 5 se Stock Price per Share as real estat selepas fulgenting on this w dan 1989 1990 1991 1992 Sales Millions)  se Net Income (Millions) S 1989 1990 1991 1992 Company fiscal year ends in March as indicated by this lower graph. Next fiscal year will close March 1993. Sierra Stock Rebounds From Slough of Skepticism Sierra On-Line's common stock (NASDAQ: SIER) recently recovered from a disappointing low in August. That low was believed to be the result of investor disappointment with The Sierra Network on-line service and an announcement that the latest addition to the company's flagship series, King's Quest VI, would not ship during the fiscal quarter ending in August. Since the company could estimate sales of over 250,000 on the King's Quest title (based on the performance of past titles) and had anticipated a much more positive response on TSN by the present time, investors feared that TSN had become a \"black hole\" and KOVI would not perform as well as its predecessors. A few short weeks later, the stock experienced a significant recovery. Sierra CEO Ken Williams believes that the rebound was directly related to both the successful launch of and response to King's Quest VI, combined with a very optimistic earnings picture for the last six months of the fiscal year. Williams observed that the company shipped 15 products during the previous fiscal year with eight of those products shipping during the first half of the fiscal year. He estimated that the company would ship 27 products by the end of the current fiscal year and, even though only seven of those products shipped during the first half of the fiscal year, revenue was up 17% over the same period. Though revenue was up, Sierra reported a loss per share in earnings for the second quarter (ending in September, 1992). The loss per share was the first in, at least, 13 quarters (dating back to June of 1989 in the Standard & Poor's summary). The loss can be laid directly at the feet of The Sierra Network, but the company has high expectations about the network's future. Since the nadir in stock price, TSN 2.0 has began to penetrate the market and the subscriber base is growing at a rate of 300-500 per day (seven days per week). So, though it has been slower than expected in reaching its desired user base, many investors are seeing renewed hope in the project. Sierra is circa 71% institutionally owned and 13% insiderowned. There were approximately 2,500 shareholders of record at the end of June, 1992. CGW Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"A young actress has been brutally murdered behind Interact with dozens of unique characters, each with their own personalities and alibis the Regency Theatre. Stromyal THLOOK Th01 Talk DICK COLORS | PONENTE R ose GOUE SE Use the detailed overhead map of 1888 London to identify your next sleuthing location Jack the Ripper appears Refer to Dr. Watson's journal for a detailed record of your investigation to have struck again. DICK S tory LOOR NUVE. catk) FILES LIST [ 01 Use your laboratory at 221B Baker Street to analyze clues Classically-scored soundtrack with over 30 original themes Scotland Yard turns Digitized voice and sound effects (soundboard required) took INOVU Walk Stick i OPEN CLOS entor no Files I VE SE to you my friend. The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes for the IBM PC and compatibles. @@ HOLMES Visit your local retailer, or call 1-800-215-4525. By Mythos Software and Electronic Arts, 1992 Mythos Software. All Rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. UNEA ELECTRONIC ARTS The largest the PC ever done for Graphic Adventure Circle Reader Service #74 "


"POPULOLIS TRIALS OF THE OLYMPIAN GODS PRODUCTIONS LTD ELECTRONIC ARTS "


"BACK WITH AVENGEANCE! | A MUST-HAVE EXPERIENCE. IF YOU'RE ALREADY A POPULOUS FAN, YOU'RE IN FOR A TREAT. IF YOU'RE A NEWCOMER, YOU'RE IN FOR AN ADDICTING, ENTERTAINING GAMING PHENOMENON.\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW THIS TIME, ANCIENT GREECE IS THE BATTLEFIELD, AND NOW YOU'RE LOCKED IN CATACLYSMIC COMBAT WITH THE TITANIC FORCES OF THE OLYMPIN PANTHEON. AT STAKES THE WORLD-WINNER TAKES ALL! COMMAND 35 NEW POW&RS: RAZE CIVILIZATIONS WITH CATASTROPHIC QUAKES; SET THE OCEANS TO A BOIL; RIP THE WITH LIGHTNING, NURL DOWNPOURS OP FIRE PLUS THE DEPTHS OF POSEIDON'S LAIR; WIEJ (ENT VULCANOES; SPIN-OFF TITANIC WHIRLP 2LOW HAP ESS VESSELS: (UNLEASH AST DEADLY TORNADOES TO RAVAGE THE LA GNCOCT A SERIES OF DIABOLICA PLAGUES TO PARALYZE THE PORUL AND YOU'RE JUST GETTING WARMED UP. CRUSH THE MOST POWERFUL THE GREEK GODS AND CLAIM YOUR RIGHTFUL SEAT ATOP MT OLYMPUS! TORCH YOUR OPPONENT'S LANDS WITH A CATACLYSMIC FIRE STORM WHILE YOU RIP THROUGH THEIR CITIES WITH A MIGHTY TORNADO! CREATE A THRIVING EMPIREBUILD WALLS, ROADS OR PLANT TREES TO INCREASE YOUR POPULARITY AND POWER! YOUR ULTIMATE FATE RESTS IN THE HANDS OF ZEUS. SUCCESS ON THE BATTLEFIELD MAY EARN YOU A SEAT NEXT TO HIM ON MT. OLYMPUS. POPULOUS IT IS AVAILABLE FOR THE IBM AND COMPATIBLES FOR $59.95. TO ORDER: VISIT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALL 1(800) 245-4525 ANYTIME. POPULOUS IS A TRADEMARK OF ELECTRONIC ARTS. IBM SCREEN SHOTS. Circle Reader Service #73 "


"LLLLLLLLLLL COMPANY REPORT QOP Little Things Mean A Lot At QQP more than 13,000 feet of track, contains 400 bridges (some with more than 12,000 pieces of wood) and has 13-14 ft. high mountains that consist of more than 75,000 pounds of plaster. Bruce says that there is enough lumber in the set-up to build six ranch houses, and the entire set-up contains literally thousands of scale buildings and over 1,000 switches. In 1977, Bruce was able to combine his obvious interest in model railroading and his longtime wargaming hobby (Bruce states that he began playing Avalon Hill wargames in 1966) by opening a hobby shop. At this point in time, he was managing the hobby shop by day and performing music by night, a pace that he kept up through 1982. Dovetailing with his hobby interests, he formed the Flemington Wargame Society and The Perfect General was born. At least, the game which was played over a permanent hexgrid protected by polyurethane and had terrain and point values painted on top of the coating was born in 1978. According to Bruce, most of the club's members became so engrossed in their custom miniatures game that How Bruce Williams Zaccagnino Went From many of them stopped playing \"boxed\" wargames. When we visited Bruce, we met some of the old wargaming Hobby Store To Publisher crew and they all still played The Perfect General, though they now play the computer game version, while the old table-top sits idle. Yet, as if all of this activity was not enough, Bruce From 1972 until 1982, lots of people would have elected to pursue yet another hobby. In 1983, he purthought of Bruce Williams Zaccagnino as a musician. He chased a theatre pipe organ from a small mansion in played in supper clubs in the New Jersey area and later Connecticut. Naturally, with his penchant for building, performed concerts in both New Jersey and Pennsylvahe had to customize the historic instrument with parts nia. Music has always been one of Bruce's passions, but from other classic organs. So, in its current configuration, it is only one. This story is about a man who specializes Bruce's concert organ is about half-Wurlitzer and halfin the improbable, whether it is in building the world's hybrid from other organs. It has nine ranks of pipes and largest model railroad or founding a computer game has had three different custom consoles over the span company from scratch without even knowing how to Bruce has owned it. program a computer. This is the story of how The Perfect The organ resides in a special recital hall adjoining the General was transformed from a miniatures game to a Zaccagnino house. It has an exterior entrance for concert computer game company's flagship product. attendees, a balcony for special guests and a customIn 1972, long before most of us ever dreamed of the made chandelier. Though the recital hall has an exterior personal computer, Bruce was following the bliss of one entrance, it can also be reached via a secret passage from of his non-musical passions — the Zaccagnino residence. (Now model railroading. He built his we know of two award-winning house that year and designed the game designers with secret pasbasement to contain a large model sages in their house.) railroad set-up. Today, that baseBy 1986, Bruce sold the hobby ment is equal to one wing of his shop and was prepared to devote model railroad. In 1974, Bruce and himself full-time to the study of his wife, Jean, had experienced so music. The organ was finished and much weekend foot traffic from the recital hall was in ship-shape. the local aficionados that they deHis intent was to become an even cided to excavate a new entrance better concert organist and to comto the basement. Of course, Bruce pose. But in 1987, Bruce discovbuilds structures and models exered computer games. He played tremely fast, so they decided to dig several, including the original The out an additional 40 feet to serve Bard's Tale, but kept coming back as what would become the second Zaccagnino's organ is one of a kind. to the same game time after time. wing of the railroad. It was Empire that intrigued Bruce Now, Bruce admits that he was having grandiose ideas and, over the years, it was Empire that inspired him. What during the construction of the second wing and decided if he could get Mark Baldwin, the designer of the personal to build the third and largest wing. But that wasn't the computer version of Empire, to program The Perfect end of it. Three years later, he added the fourth wing, after General? which he finally had what the Smithsonian Magazine Bruce put together the plan and followed through. billed as \"The World's Largest Model Railroad.\" In full Advised that it was hard to get distribution for a one operation, it takes 81 people to operate the railroad. At a product company, he went into simultaneous production scale speed of 60 MPH, it takes a train about three and a with Thurston Searfoss on The Lost Admiral. Both games half hours to travel from start to finish. The layout uses were received with considerable acclaim when they burst Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"Company Report onto the scene in late 1991. The Perfect General had a more up-to-date interface and flashier graphics, but gamers tend to think of The Lost Admiral as having a more sophisticated artificial opponent. The tactical scale of The Perfect General seemed extremely attractive to many wargamers and it became a phenomenal first product, especially for a wargame. Wargames were supposed to be the marketing kiss of death when TPG and TLA hit the shelves. Now, they are experiencing a rebound due to the success of several titles. Several things happened with the success of TPG and TLA; one was that they hired Steve Cohen to serve as vice-president of operations. The second was that they accepted an unsolicited submission from Andrew Visscher; a card game which had more solitaire variants than any game they had ever seen. The third was that they learned from their simultaneous release of two quality products that it pays to offer a nice graphic look in addition to gameplay. That's why they hired graphic artist Tim Cuccolo to spruce up the look of their upcoming Conquered Kingdoms (see the related story in this issue) and Gary Stephens to provide a more polished touch to the box and manual art for all QQP products. The addition of Steve provided a competent and personable \"jack of all trades\" for both the marketing and development of all the QQP products. There is an exuberant, all-out \"go for it\" quality in Steve that lets one know that things are going to be done and they are going to be done quickly. Bruce tends to work quickly and quietly. Steve tends to be the pacing coach on the sidelines. The duo make for a solid management team. The solitaire product, Solitaire's Journey, was solid, but Bruce wanted it to have a little something extra. He conceived of the quest ideas and Andrew put them together, even though he concedes that he wasn't entirely convinced in the usefulness of that approach. Again, Bruce's instinct proved to be right and Solitaire's Journey proved to be a bigger hit than TLA and, at last report, was moving up on TPG in sales. Now, both Andrew and Bruce are happy. Indeed, so happy that Andrew is hard at work on a complete remake of TPG. The acceptance of Cuccolo's and Stephens's work remains to be seen, but we definitely think they will help make Conquered Kingdoms yet another QQP hit. Indeed, the boxes are looking better all the time and Cuccolo is learning new tricks on the computer every day. This bodes well for the company's future. The Perfect Game Design Speaking of the company's future, it is not about to put four fascinating titles on the shelves and disappear. The company is making big plans for the future. For one thing, they still accept unsolicited submissions like that of Andrew Visscher's solitaire program. An Atlanta-based developer has recently sold Battles of Destiny to QQP and it looks like it is getting the same type of playtesting and design effort as any of their other products. Visscher, as noted earlier, is hard at work on a remake of TPG, and Conquered Kingdoms is nearing completion. In addition, CEO Zaccagnino states that he has design notes for 30 unique new games and expects to produce them over the next decade. He wisely admits that the company may have to stay small in relation to other computer game companies in order to continue molding games into his overall philosophy, but he is willing to do Scenes from \"The World's Largest Model Railroad.\" so in order to reach his life's goal. «I'm on a quest to make one of the best games ever built-a Monopoly or Bridge or Chess that will last a person a whole lifetime. Asked the secret of QQP's successful game designs, Bruce summed matters fairly succinctly. Likening the process of creating a game to that of writing a novel, he stated that he felt more people knew about the Napoleonic era due to TolThe stoy's War and Peace than from the history Losit books. \"You have to write the historical roAdmiral mance as opposed to just the history.\" His Theyer Lana Destur goal, then, is to be the historical romance writer of computer games, one who offers just enough flavor ofan era, a style of warfare or strategy, to capture the imagination and pull the gamer into the alternate universe. To Bruce, the game itself is more important than the details, but the details have to fit together smoothly to build the game right. Part of his five year plan blends many of his QQP. accomplishments together. The success of QQP has allowed Bruce to acquire property on a highway, rather than off the rural road where the company is currently quartered. QQP plans to build a large threestory facility that will serve as a permanent (and more accessible) home for \"The World's Largest Railroad\", a doll museum, a new and larger recital hall for a larger version of the restored theatre organ, a residence for the Zaccagninos and, of course, a new headquarters for QQP. The variety of talents pull together to create enough income to be able to both build the new facility and give the railroad and the organ to the world. Bruce will have to charge Perfect some admission to be able to maintain the railroad, but he thinks considerably more peoGeneral ple will be able to experience it than the four or five thousand people who used to attend his rare, open house weekends. For computer gamers, the good news is clear. QQP will be adding three or more programs per year to its product line, and each will have that magic touch that Bruce Williams Zaccagnino puts on every product. Then again, what less could we expect from a fellow gamer?cow The TUNDY KOOPJanuary 1993 Page 85 "


"Review CV SSKS Prophecy of the Shadow by Jeff James VETER ROW.PLAING APATA. TITLE: Prophecy of the Shadow SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Document look-up DESIGNER: Jaimi R. R. McEntire PUBLISHER: Sunnyvale, CA PROPHECY SHADOW SSI Cince 1988, Strategic Simulations, Inc. (SSI) and TSR, Inc. publisher of the famous Advanced Dungeons & Dragons people and paper role-playing game — have enjoyed a mutually propitious partnership. The products of that creative union have been slaking the adventuring thirst of thousands, if not millions of adventure gamers since then. While this partnership can undoubtedly be considered a success, SSI's latest role-playing offering, Prophecy of the Shadow, is a solo effort. Far from signaling a breakup in the TSR, Inc./SSI partnership, Prophecy can be viewed as SSI's attempt to have \"it's own space.\" Prophecy represents a number of firsts for SSI. Other than being the first adventure game published solely under the SSI label since the Phantasie trilogy, Prophecy is also SSI's first single-character adventure. Most notably, Prophecy also breaks new ground by being the first fantasy role-playing game to use digitized animation of costumed human actors. All of these aspects combine to make Prophecy a refreshingly enjoyable adventure, targeted primarily at role-playing neophytes. Prophecy's storyline is nothing new. The player-character's master has been slain, a princess must be rescued, an evil ruler must be deposed, and an even darker evil lurks in the shadows. While seasoned RPG'ers may almost disregard the masterfully redundant storyline, tenderfoot adventure gamers should find it a welcome background for adventuring. SSI is aiming STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. this product squarely at rookie role-players and most of Prophecy's characteristics reflect this. Character generation is a prime example of the Prophecy design philosophy. After choosing a name, a gender, and answering three short questions about the character's childhood, the player is ready to play. Instead of the lengthy list of character ability scores found in other adventures, Prophecy relies on only three attributes: health, agility and magic. No equipment to buy, no spells to memorize, and only one character to keep track of. Gamers fond of platoon-sized adventuring squads which must be equipped, fed, washed and scrubbed before hitting the trail would be well-advised to look elsewhere. Most of the game is controlled by accessing a strip of icons which vertically divide the Prophecy screen in half. These ten embossed icons control all of the actions in Prophecy, ranging from saving games to casting spells. While this interface works best with a mouse, SSI has thoughtfully included a full set of keyboard equivalents for stubborn keyboard users. The left side of the screen is devoted to listing character statistics and character inventory, while the right displays an isometric, overhead view of the action, much like the vantage point offered in Microillusion's Faery Tale Adventure or Origin's Ultima VI. Underneath this display is a text window which reports the results of searches and lists damage to both your character and any engaged enemies. The remaining space at the bottom of the screen is used as a text display. This sense of frugal simplicity exhibited in Prophecy's interface reveals itself in other aspects of the game as well. Conversing with NPCs requires that the player move next to the NPC, click on the talk Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"THE BEST IN GAMES ALL REGIOIEEEM VGA ASTAL GHUES 91126542 FEATURBO \"MYLO STEAMWIT U ERI 10 3THIS GAME IS SHAREHE D WERE BBBS STANS Scons ISDIC 28600 ARCSELELERLE 10 10] CRYSTAL CAVES (F262) $4.00 WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (F323AB) $8.00 COSMO'S ADVENTURE (F315AB) $8.00 00009400 390072 BAUE 100 M:8868 HEALTH Mwa PRESSTALTELE COMMANDER KEEN IV (F290AB) $8.00 = : CWD Free DUKE NUKUM (F252) $4.00 GALACTIX (F321) $4.00 CWI Information Services Po Box 4851 Anaheim, CA 92803 Order TOLL FREE 1-800-777-5636 PLEASE SPECIFY 5/4\" OR 312\" DISKS FOR FAST DELIVERY CALL 1-800-777-5686. VISA/MASTERCARD OR MAL CHECK OR MONEY ORDER SORRY, NO COD ADD $4.00 SHIPPING & HANDLING FOR ENTRE ORDER CALFORNIA RESDENTS ADD 775% SALES TAX ALL TITLES ARE SHAREWARE CONTINUED USE OF SHAREWARE REQURES SEPARATE PAYMENT TO AUTHOR (HONOR SYSTEM) The Best Place To Find It! shareware Catalog QUALITY low-cost software Over 1000 titles listed Circle Reader Service #64 "


"Review icon, then choose from a list of topics on the conversation screen. Clicking on one of these topics elicits a response from the NPC; occasionally, a response will add a new topic to the conversation window. After the NPC has responded to the topics, no further questioning is possible. or otherwise making movement for the camera. Backgrounds behind the character are hand-drawn, reflecting the location in which the conversation is taking place. For the most part, the quality of the digitized animation is surprisingly good. A few sequences verge on tackiness, with a few actors appearing as if they're attending a Halloween bash for ex-Shakespearean thespians, replete with plastic halberds and polyester robes. Overall, though, the quality is impressive and adds a realistic dimension to gameplay. a painful cry for digitization! SSI has plans to release more single-character role-playing adventures along Prophecy's lines, trying to carve out a market primarily composed of adventuring novices. Prophecy does prove that SSI is more than able to create an adventure game on its own, without the help of long-time business partner TSR. Bruce Dandylegs DALOG Health arrows 8 THE Areo Slow.on Larkin Lorsp ou o Torchet. O DYN Item Use cal Loding Drink Work Bumors \"Bannerwickl Land of opportunity! Welcorse to the big city. kid!\" but rina noclsing of interest but find nothing of interest. Qi Gorss Saved ** JESRO Lamol The magic system is similarly straightforward. Casting a spell involves finding a \"catalyst,\" which is then used to cast one of up to a dozen different spells. No need to fumble with bizarre ingredients or bother with spell memorization here; in Prophecy, magic-use is a \"point and shoot\" operation. Undoubtedly, the most noticeable feature of the game is the use of real actors, dressed in medieval garb and filmed for use in the game. Seen while conversing with the character in question, a short animation of perhaps 4-12 frames is seen of the character posturing, turning, walking The music is appropriate, with a sprightly marching tune for overland travel, and a collection of creepy dungeon ditties for subterranean travel. Some of the tunes can become overly repetitious, although the music can be toggled off if the player desires. Sound effects are also welldone, with the blood-curdling scream of a fallen foe sounding almost too real; I pity the poor SSI staffer induced to emit such Prophecy is a solid, albeit limited, offering from SSI and designer Jaimi McEntire. Seasoned adventurer gamers who demand huge game worlds, multi-character parties and difficult puzzles might frown at the design philosophy behind Prophecy. Prophecy is not, nor does it intend to be, a replacement for SSI'S AD&D series of role-playing games. However, gamers looking for something new and refreshing — where byzantine game mechanics take a back seat to ease-of-use and an engaging storyline — should find playing Prophecy to be well worth the quest. CGW THE NEXT EMPIRE O PLAY BY MAIL APRINTOUTS LIKE THIS EVERY TURN! ...the only game that sends you fabulously detailed maps like this one, showing your fleet's sensor views every turn ...along with clear, complete stats on each starship you design, build, and maneuver Individually using up to 21 different onboard systems...plus status reports on starbases, probes and asteroids you controll The Next Empire Is a completely computer-moderated game, over 6 years In the making. Each universe is a unique, complex gaming environment populated with 21 allen players Itching to blow the hulls off anyone who gets in their way! FREE SET-UP AND RULES!  $7.50 per turn; no hidden fees or double turns RSI Recently voted $1 PBM gamo in a nationwide player magazine survey!  fast game (two weeks per turn) or slow game (three weeks per turn)  clear, concise rules; our complexity comes from your gaming freedom Reality Simulations, Inc. P.O. Box 22400 Tempe, AZ 85285-2400 (602) 967-7979  FREE SET-UP AND RULES! Page 88 Circle Reader Service #125 Computer Gaming World "


"\"...cutting-edge.\" \"The entire CGW crew was deeply impressed...\" Computer Gaming World Shadow President. TM The Simulation of Presidential World Power PC GAMES EDITORS [ \"We're talking global power stuff.\" PC GAMES YOU are the President \"...a chance to get on-the-job training as leader of the free world...\" NBC News/Chicago \"...can give you a creepy sensation of having actually hacked your way into a secure government network, so plausible & fine-grained is the flow of information. Game Player's PC Entertainment At the controls of the most powerful nation on Earth, you are armed with money, weapons, and influence. Promote human rights or drop the bomb? Will you be reelected or assassinated? You will change the course of world history and uncover your vision of the planet and its people. TM Based on CIA World Factbook data and 7 years of Tufts University doctoral research, informally presented to the U.S. State department to aid in NATO strategy development. Shadow President is brought to you by the D.C. True, Ltd. award-winning team of John Madden FootballTM. creators of software for the mind and heart IBM $69.95 To Order: Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-929-1243 30 DUDUJE 1992 D.C. True, Ltd. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #65 "


"Review by Alan \"Slap Shot\" Emrich and Chris \"The Goon\" Lombardi INSTROD Though CGW's primary emphasis is on games for personal computers, we occasionally run across a quality game on a cartridge game system which we think would be of interest to our readers. Shot On Goa EA's NHLPA Hockey Scores With Two CGW Editors EN NHLPA NHLPA 11 INSURANS TY 113 USTURS The blades, the ice, the crack of the slapshot off the glass. The speed, the grace, l and the wicked crunch of a brutal check in the corner. The throngs in their sweaters and caps exploding with release as the overtime shot careens off the goalie's shoulder and into the net. There's nothing to match the passion, pulse and power of hockey. As certified and institutionally committed hockey nuts, we have been looking for a game that captures these sights, sounds and emotions of the sport. As equally rabid strategists, we needed a game that would capture the sport's tactical elements without sacrificing the visceral 'oomph' of the play. When Electronic Arts released their NHL Hockey for the SEGA Genesis, we were so impressed that a couple of CGW editors broke down and bought a system... in the name of their kids, of course, When we heard that EA was upgrading NHL Hockey, getting a National Hockey League Players Association endorsement contract, and renaming the game NHLPA Hockey, we heard little sirens in our heads, raised our editor's pens high in the air and formed a circle of cheering, macho celebration. NHLPA Hockey improves on its predecessor in many ways, but the most exciting is the inclusion of real hockey teams and player names. All 24 NHL teams are represented including the Tampa Bay and Ottawa expansion teams — and each team fields a near complete roster of players as they stood near the end of the '91-'92 season. Unfortunately, since the sport's general managers love to play 52-pickup with the league during the off-season, many of the rosters are inaccurate (i.e. there is no Lindros and Philadelphia still has the half-dozen players that are now Nordiques). Still, it's fun to look on the scorecard and see listings like, Lemieux from Jagr and Stevens: or Oates from Neely and Bourque. Like Wayne, I Want To Be Like Wayne More interesting than the names is the fact that the players will play somewhat like their ELECTRONIC ARTS SEGA Licensed the sees Enter Lad fplace the SECA GENESIS SYSTEM TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: DESIGNERS: NHLPA Hockey '93 SEGA Genesis $59.95 Michael Brook. Scott Orr, Rich Hilleman, Jim Simmons Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA PUBLISHER: Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"CONSTRUCT & DEFEND CITIES TO ADVANCE THE ROMAN EMPIRE count LITHIN TUTTUA Il man ... un 01-TIME A s governor of a province of the Roman Empire you must TUBETES A build cities for the good of your people. Fortify your cities with walls & towers but should your defences fail, BBS you must command legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes! Success will lead to promotion -and ultimately, the very best may rise to become... Caesar! Battles may also be fought out in detailed, animated combat using a much enhanced version of Impressions' Cohort (Cohort II will be DE EOBR B F1786 available separately). FUREKOM Grow your city with ampitheatres, forums, Keep our hostile tribes with Cross-country temples, aquaducts, roads, baths & workshops walls to match The Great Wall of China and much, much more! Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #88 "


"Review mostly because there are far too many break-aways on the tiny rink, and in part because excited players tend to put an enormous number of shots on goal. Though not terribly realistic, these factors make the game that much more dynamic. BITIOS flesh counterparts. Each player is rated in a dozen significant categories: from energy level, to skating skill, to shot and passing accuracy, to fighting propensity and skill. One knows by the player's strength and shooting skill that they are controlling Mario Lemieux, the passes are almost always on target when controlling the Great One, and one certainly isn't surprised to see Marty McSorley skating to the box for a roughing penalty. The game play in general is quite realistic as well. With the \"Penalties\" option on, the refs will call the full gamut of infractions, and in a fairly realistic way. \"Offsides\" and \"icing\" create their usual headaches for the team on the offensive; players com22 230 mitting major penalties will be slapped with fives minutes in the box; \"interference\" will be called on a player who invades the goalie's crease; and the ref will even signal delayed penalties (and the goalie will even come off the ice!) until the offending team takes control of the puck. The only rule omission takes control of the puck The only rule omission we were able to find, besides some of the new rules for the '92-'93 season, was the \"two line pass\" — which would have been a problem given the somewhat skewed scale of the rink-to-player size in the game. The Goon Squad Defensively, NHLPA Hockey is a whole new puck game compared to its predecessor. Goalies have become much more intelligent and more difficult to score against. The animations have them diving, lunging and kicking away slapshots like their real-life counterparts. Players also have a wider variety of defensive commands to choose from. Hooking other players or hip checking them off-balance is easily done (perhaps too easily), but the refs will only let so much go by before blowing the whistle. Vicious body checks can be thrown with a combination of a speed burst (button C) and a \"check\" command (button B). If the check is vicious enough, the victim may be knocked for a loop and forced to leave the game for a period or two. This capability lends naturally to goon or \"enforcer\" tactics wherein a coach assigns a burly Neanderthal to rough-up the opposing team's finesse men. With the line changing feature, players can set up such a \"checking line\" in addition to 6 other lines) and put that line into the game with the flick of an \"A\" button. Each team's lines can be edited by the player and saved to the battery powered cartridge for future play. These features make NHLPA Hockey a more strategic and defensive game, though the scores between practiced players will tend to be a bit inflated Frills and Chills Beyond the hot game play, NHLPA Hockey has a rink full of features and cute fluff that really fleshes out the excellent core game. Cheers and boos from the crowd correspond with the hometeam's play, and there is a Crowd-Meter that records the decibel level of the crowd to give players a gauge as to how much the crowd is into the game. A high crowd rating will even give the home team a psychological shot in the arm advantage. An arena organist will play the cliched sound-bites during appropriate game situations. During line changes and at the end of penalties, the players will PIT 1 hop over the bench wall or come out of the penalty ISHSH 2 box. During period breaks one can view other scores from around the league and can even view highlight films of the game's exciting goals! The net can be dislodged from the posts and the rare slapshot will break a pane of the plexiglass. The game offers a replay feature that will not only allow one to rewind and review 10 seconds of game-play, but one can even focus on a player or section of the rink so as to better visualize how a goalscoring play developed. The replay feature is a great \"in your face» feature as one can illustrate to their grumbling opponent how to properly run a power-play or set up a \"trailer man\" for a rebound goal. NHLPA Hockey is as littered with cute features as a rink after a hat-trick. Single games can be played between two players or the computer, or players can enter a play-off tree that is structure like the NHL play-off system. As players progress through the four \"best of seven\" steps in the tree their statistics are compiled and saved to the battery-powered cartridge. If players power-down, they can come back to the saved position on the play-off tree at any time. We should also point out that, though we didn't use it much, there is an option that allows two players to play on the same team against the computer. The Parting Shot As we wind up for a last blue-line slap at NHLPA Hockey, we must first tip our helmets to EA for an excellent upgrade to a decent game. The addition of real players, the refinement of the play action and the inclusion of detail that only true hockey fans could program and appreciate, all combine to create one of the best action-oriented sports games we've seen. While it's no Wayne Gretzky Hockey in terms of statistics and league play capabilities, it is a great time and just about as realistic and detailed as one could hope a cartridge game to be. With hoarse voices from a night of too much noisy fun, we give NHLPA Hockey two red and blistered thumbs up. Cow Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Discovery IN THE STEPS OF COLUMBUS FEATURES: 6 New Worlds to Discover Tn Discovery, you are the master explorer and adventurer: Set Sail into the distance, in search of new lands; Explore new worlds ; Pirates are everywhere.be prepared for sea battles; Create Cities -fell trees, build farms, forts, warehouses, schools; Trade the produce from your new world to buy new ships; Fight the other nations trying to establish their empire. Piracy mutiny & battles Land & Sea combat Simple point and click interface 8 ship types; 4 maps In 1492 Columbus discovered America for God, Gold and Glory! 5 competing nations 500 years later this is your chance to discover a new world! YOUR CHANCE TO DISCOVER AMERIC SPANK S eat GOLDONYO DISCOURING HOROCO GUNS MOYOTT HON CLARO ROUTC Forte tenis f OTTACX CARGO GRAH PRCYCH POR DOCSC SAYU i DISCOUCR ED ET Animated people develop buildings all by themselves. WOLD toon Yoruiche HORRE GOS 20 CORGO O You will need to fight off pirates and more! Watch your empire grow. Impressions IMPRESSIONS SOFTWARE INC: 7 MELROSE-DRIVE FARMINGTON CONNECTICUT 06032, Circle Reader service #89 "


"Review The Icing On The Puck Bethesda's Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 by Gordon Goble ETZKY IKEY TITLE: Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 SYSTEM IBM (3/4 rink view requires 585K Base Memory and an additional 512K Expanded Memory) PLAYERS: PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DESIGNERS: C. Walton, D. Gregory PUBLISHER: Bethesda Softworks Rockville, MD I grew up watching hockey, playing street hockey and really enjoying a good game of table hockey. I guess you could say I like hockey. The first electronic hockey I ever played was a marginally more complex adaptation of \"Pong,\" nearly twenty years ago. Engaging in interactive entertainment on my family's television set was, at that time, an unbelievable sensation. Bethesda's Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 (WGH3) represents just my second experience with computerized hockey, and I was drooling (like Homer Simpson over a good steak) in anticipation. The box was torn open in a frenzy of cardboard and shrink wrap, and my assessment had begun. WGH3 is a slightly flawed attempt at the perfect sports simulation. It looks like the real thing and, at first, seems to play like the real thing. But after a little experimentation, it becomes apparent that as far as definitive computer hockey goes, the Great One should have waited a little longer before lending his name. The sheer magnitude of WGH3 is the first surprise. At 9 megs of installed size (13 megs of free disk space are required for a fast load), it is indeed a fat little fellow. Yet once installed, running WGH3 to its full potential involves two somewhat annoying procedures; adding the name of your sound card to the command line each and every time you play (batch this to save time), and the initiation of your computer's expanded memory facilities. There are two main interfaces to WGH3; a press box view of the rink, wherein specific team, roster, coaching and mode-of-play choices are presented; and the game view itself. It is abundantly clear that game designers have poured a tremendous amount of effort into the former. Decisions, decisions...pre-game options are indeed plentiful. Game action can be viewed from two angles; the nosebleed overhead roof cam, or the new (and infinitely superior) \"3/4\" view. Length of game, duration of game (for those fitting a little pro hockey between appointments), choice of referee, fights on/off, penalties on/off... these are but a sampling of available variations. Last, but definitely not least, the teams involved in the upcoming tilt must be decided. Choices of those teams include all NHL rosters from the 1992 season, Bethesda's own makeshift squad made up of WGH3 programmers and designers, or any new powerhouse group that comes to mind. Once participating teams (and, if desired, the color of their uniforms) have been decided, any player can be modified by enhancing or detracting from up to ten of his on-ice strengths and weaknesses. Even his name can be changed (somehow Wayne Gretzky became Gord Goble, for instance). Having gotten this far, an important decision must be made -to coach or not to coach, that is the question. If coaching is defaulted to the computer, it will make the decisions as to which players are thrown into the fray at what times and which of a variety of pre-set plays will be put into action in given circumstances. However, if the armchair Gretzky elects to coach himself, these time-consuming, yet possibly very effective options can be tailored in any fashion he wishes. One more important stop before the action commences the Coach's Clipboard. Here, deep in the bowels of the locker room, in the coach's own sloppy handwriting, certain critical options are decided. Will the overall team plan include frequent \"dumping-in\" of the puck or is this going to be a tic-tac-toe passing unit? Which player will be under human control? This is one area not to be skipped, for it involves a most important choice, requiring a little preliminary explanation. Once on the ice, Mr. Armchair Gretzky will be in total control of just one of his team's players at a time. This will never change. While a set of standard plays can be preconceived generalizing his chosen team's style, there will always be one player only responding to his human coach's signals (via keyboard, joystick or mouse). The player under human control operates in one of two ways, and that decision must be made now. Choosing the \"Puck Hog\" (Continued on Page 98) Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"Don Bluth Multimedia Presents DRAGONS LAIR DIT: THE CURSE MORDRPAD After destroying the evil wizard Mordroc in his bid for marriage to your beloved Daphne in Dragon's Lair II: Time Warp, his sister, the evil witch Mordread, is demanding revenge. You, as Dirk the Daring, must test your skills as you are thrust into a frantic quest through time to save Daphne and the children before they are trapped forever in the Vortex of Eternity. Dragon's Lair III: The Curse of Mordread brings the classical animation style of Don Bluth to your computer featuring full-screen animation, digitized sound and new animations not included in the original laser disc arcade game. Ready Soft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 READYSOFT Richmond Hill, Ontarlo, Canada L48 189 Tel: (416) 731-4175 Fax: (416) 764-8867 \"Dragon's Lair\" is a registered trademark of Bluth Group, Ltd. . \"Dragon's Lair III: The Curse of Mordread\".  Don Bluth Multimedia, Inc.: Character Designs  Don Bluth:  all audio, visuals and concept Don Bluth Multimedia, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED; Programming  ReadySoft incorporated. Circle Reader Service #124 "


"VKNG ) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing Past IBM Ami IBM Ami Rampart IBM Ami 28 28 20 Fall 37 37 37 IBM Ami Winter . 15 15 39 39 27 . 39 39 37 38 Pirates Gold Pool of Radiance Pool of Darkness Prince of Persia Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory (VGA) Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Ultrabots Wing Commander II Special Operations : Special Operations 2 Speech Pack 19 19 35 Realms Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: Battletech Rex Nebular Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Rules of Engagement Space Quest III Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spelljammer Star Control 2 StarFlight 1 StarFlight 2 Star Trek 25th Anniversary Twilight: 2000 Twilight 2001 1734 bmwH 1934 15 . 36 32 Jan 93 IBM Ami AD&D Starter Kit AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's 2 43 . Betrayal at Krondor 42 Black Crypt Castles Castles-Northern Camp, 19 Castles II Challenge of Five Realms 42 . Champions of Krynn 19 . Conquests of the Longbow 4237 Curse of the Azure Bonds 34 34 Darklands 39 . Art Disk w/HB Dark Queen of Krynn Darkside of Xeen Dark Sun Death Knights of Krynn 19 Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 43 Eye of the Beholder 34 34 Eye of the Beholder 2 38 38 Four Crystals of Trazere 34 34 Gateway Savage Frontier 34 34 Hero's Quest ll 39 . Heimdall 32 32 King's Quest Enhanced Dec King's Quest 1 King's Quest III King's Quest IV 39 . King's Quest V (VGA) 39 King's Quest VI Legacy of Necromancer 27 . Legend of Kyrandia 37 . Lord of the Rings 36 36 Lord of the Rings 2 \"M\" Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 37 . Might & Magic II 39 39 Might & Magic IV 39 . M&M Clouds of Xeen Merchant Colony . Fall . 2001 Empire Deluxe The long-awaited update to the original Empire is finally here. All the features of the old with all the technology of the new combine to make another classic! IBM $37 Hint Books ADED Clue Books 10-12 Chuck Yeager Handbook 16 . Civilization Darklands HB w/Art Disk 15 Eye of the Beholder 2 Falcon Air Combat Lord of the Rings Lucasfilm Air Combat Harpoon Battlebook Magic Candle 2 Might & Magic III Planet's Edge Railroad Tycoon Rex Nebular Run 5 Magazine 1.17 Sierra Hint Books Sur Trek 25th Anniversary 10 Ultima VII Ultima Underworld Wing Commander Wizardry 6 (Bane) Present  Hw IBM Ami Sept Sept 28 . 38 Conquered Kingdoms Become the world's greatest conqueror! Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia. Nine scenarios, random map generator. Basic or fantasy units or both. Rich in strategy and tactics. Full ranking system. Win awards and promotions. Modem play. I or 2 players. 21 difficulty levels. Must own! IBM $38 Amazon Classic Adventures Digeneration Dagger of Amon Ra Castle of Dr. Brain Elvira Elina 2 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones/Fate of Atlantis Jaws of Cerberus Hardware 42 . 33 . 4343 43 43 Mar 93. 37 37 39 . 53 42 42 42 38 . 38 . 42 KGB Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry II Leisure Suit Larry III Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes Lost Treasures of Infocom Les Manley/Lost in LA Mercenaries Oh No! More Lemmings! Out of this World Police Quest Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Strike Commander Waxworks Willy Beamish The 7th Guest Explore this horror adventure program through CD-ROM. Revolutionary graphics and outstanding music and sound effects. Takes up two CDs! Raytraced 256-color graphics are unlike any other. IBM $57 STAR CONTROL Adlib CH-Flightstick Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Ultrasound 130 Pro Audio Spectrum.16 239 Sound Blaster Pro SoundBlaster Pro Basic SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard Thrustmaster flight stick 79 Thrust Master throttle 79 180 42 Ami Viking Ratings Future Sept Sept aia i . ri December Specials IBM Buck Rogers 2 19 Champions of Krynn Conflict: Korea Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder Gateway to Savage Frontier Kampfgruppe Keyboard Templates MI Tank Platoon Pools of Darkness Tony LaRussa Ult. Baseball 19 Yeager Air Combat AGE Battletech 2 Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Dune Dune II . . Epic Star Control Il This sequel to Star Control is much improved over its predecessor. Explore and lib. erate over 3000 planets in 500 star systems. Make contact with over 18 alien races. Sharp 256-color VGA with digital sound and music. Mysteries to unravel and plots within plots. IBM $37 Elite Plus Free D.C. : V For Victory Darklands Harpoon Designer Series M&M Clouds of Xeen Sherlock Holmes Wizardry 7 Carriers at War Great Naval Battles Summer Challenge The Summoning B-17 Flying Fortress High Command Rex Nebular SpellCraft Air Bucks Cyber Empires Mantis Madden Football II Gateway . Hard Nova Jonny Crash Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 46 Legions of Kreila/Star Legions 37 Mantis Martian Memorandum 30 Megatraveller Megatraveller 2 Megatraveller . BBB"


"SAME DAY SHIPPING depending on availability. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm Eastern (am7pm Pacific). UPS $4.00 (AK & HI= $11) COD $8.00. Second day air: $2.50 extra. SHIPPING OUTSIDE OF U.S. is $12 & UPS Foreign available. UPS OVERSEAS:3-day shipping time! Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 For information and release dates 1-(404) 840-7906 To place orders in U.S. and Canada 1-(800) 852-6187 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Strategy Pre-WWII CASTINTI SECE&CONCHAST. IBM Ami Winter . IBM Ami High Command SimLife Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Theatre of War Tracon 2 Tristan IBM Ami Front Pg Sports: Football 37 Front Pg Sports: Baseball Mar Front Pg Sports: Bsktball 1993 Games: Summer Challenge 35 Games: Winter Challenge 36 Greens . Sports Ancient Art of War in Skies 37 . Bandit Kings of Anc China 39 39 Battles of Napoleon 36 : Civil War Vol. 1, 2 or 3 27 Conquered Kingdoms Oct Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus 37 Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas Grand Fleet Kingdoms of England L'Empereur Merchant Colony No Greater Glory 43 43 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin ! Prelude to Jutland 29 . Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder 20 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 43 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 42 Siege 30 . Expansion Disk Warlords/Enhanced 3232 All-Amer. College Ftbill 92 37 Earl Weaver Baseball 11 34 MLBPA Stats 90 15 . . . 36 . IBM Ami Conflice: Korca 16 37 Conflict: Middle East 39 39 Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F.ISHI F-15 III Master Edition Falcon 30 Operation: Fighting Tiger Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk 1 Harper v1.3 Battleset 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Series 32 Harpoon Scenario Editor Harpoon Challenger Pak 43 52 Harpoon Challenger Pak S.E. 50 Harpoon II Jump Jet MI Tank Platoon Maximum Overkill MBT Central Germany MBT Middle East MBT North Germany Megafortress 28 39 Mission Disk 1 or 2 Megafortress Megapack NAM Patrio Special Forces Utopia . Castles II King Charles of Bretagne is dead, without a clear successor to the throne. You must fight if you intend on wearing the crown. Much improved over the original Castles. Scout unknown territories and forge political and military alliances with opponents. VGA graphics and complete sound board support. IBM $37 377RE ENGLE Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk 15 . Stadium Disk 15 . Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 42 . John Madden Football II 33 Links Links 386 Pro 42 Course Disks 1-7 16 ca MicroLeague Baseball 4 NCAA College Football \"9237 NFL Challenge NFL Pro League '92 Pro League Baseball 37 Tony LaRussa Uit. Baseball 34 1901-1968 Disk 15 Fantasy Manager Disk 15 AL & NL Stadiums 15e 1990 player stats 15 . 1991 player stats 15 . Wayne Gretzky Hockey2 36 36 Hockey League Sim. 28 28 World Circuit XMas 34 High Command This is the best WWII grand scale game of Europe yet! It covers 1939-1945 and models three aspects of war: military, political and economic. You can control any of these and have the computer control those that lack interest for you. EGA graphics and 200page manual. IBM $44 MICROPROSE General IBM Ami Silent Service 2 34 34 Task Force 1942 XMas . Their Finest Hour/Battlehawks 44 19 Third Reich 28 28 Typhoon of Steel 1939 V for Victory: Utah Beach 43 . V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Mar . Victory at Sea Western Front F-15 III Using a revolutionary new visual system, F-15 III will create the most realistic dogfighting so far. 2-player ability via modem or direct link will allow formation flying, head to head combat or pilot/RIO teams. IBM $47/42 A-Train Construction Set ATP Air Bucks BattleChess 4000 (VGA) BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) Buzz Aldrin's Space Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Killer AT.P. Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 Flight Simulator 4.0 Jetfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10 999999999999 Sci-Fi Daladl World War II Aces of the Pacific 42 . Campaign Disk 1 20. Campaign Disk 2 20 . Aces Over Europe Dec . Campaign Disk Feb . Action North Atlantic 29 . Action Stations v3.2 32 32 Actions Stations Data Disk 17 17 Air Raid Pearl Harbor 29 B-17 Flying Fortress Banzai Battletank Barbarossa Bismarck Campaign 32 32 Carriers at War Carrier Strike 42 . Fire Brigade Fleet Commander Winter . Fleet Med 3939 Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Expansion Disk 19 . In Harm's Way 39 Malta Storm 39 39 Marianas Turkey Shot 29 . Midway 29 Moscow Campaign 39 . MBT Central Germany 39 MBT Kursk 39 New World Order Feb 93 . Pacific War Panzer Battles 26 34 Patton Strikes Back 17 . Prelude to Jutland Rommel N Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 44 DO-335 plane disk 20 HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet IBM Ami Civilization 38 38 Civilization Master Edition 45 . Command HQ 34 . Empire Deluxe 37 Flight Simulator 4.0 40 . Flight Planner Sound, Graphics Upgrade 27 Scenery: Hawaii 21 Scenery: Great Britain 38 Inst. Pilot Scen. West 59 . Inst. Pilot Scen, East 59 Fly the Grand Canyon Global Conquest 39 Hong Kong Mahjong Lexi Cross 27 . Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced Winter . Monopoly Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 Perfect General 38 38 WWII Scenario Disk 22 22 Scenario Disk 2 Populous 2 World Editor Powermonger WWI Scenano Disk Power Politics Railroad Tycoon 28 . Oct Armada 2525 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Fireteam 2200 Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Mercenaries Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) 38 Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Apr 93 Second Conflict (Windows) 34 Spaceward HO! (Windows) 37 Spaceward HO! (DOS) Jan 93 Speedball 2 Star Legions . CD-ROM The 7th Guest Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space Challenge of the Five Realms Feb 93 Chessmaster 3000 Dune The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Murder Makes Strange Bedfellows North American Indians The Secret of Monkey Island Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Shuttle Total Baseball Wing Commander + Sec Missions 1&2 Wing Commander/Ultima VI . . Paladin II You're a young paladin in search of knighthood. Up to nine others will accompany you in this sequel to Paladin. 256color VGA and digitized sound. 20 different scenarios with a superb scenario editor IBM $37 Risk Risk (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt 485 SimCity Modern 34 15 34 . & 7th Fleet A Line in the Sand ATAC Air Force Commander Birds of Prey 39 39 27 . Summer 37 Sim City Terrain Editor Sim City Set #1 Sim City Ser #2 Sim City (Windows) SimEarth Sim Earth (Windows) 23 38 44 45 . . 44 . 33 "


"Review Keyboard MC Liut Teen Copitol (Continued from Page 94) of these shots is almost imperceptible). As well, there is no gauge option at the bottom of the clipboard before the game allows Mr. to measure the accuracy of shots on net. It sure would be a welcome Armchair to control whatever player on his team is in possession addition to aim a shot on goal or a feathered pass with some of the puck throughout that SETTES precision. [Ed: Actually, one can hold the mouse game. Choosing the \"Part of button down a little longer to wind up on a slap shot Team\" option means he will alas opposed to \"one-timing\" it.] ways be in control of the same Goalies are utterly computer controlled. Again, this player, regardless of whether he is OK for those who would rather coach than perform has the puck or not. (Well, al\"hands-on\" netminding, but merely giving a goalie top BECHESIE most always — depressing the talents at the beginning of the game is not much fun \"D\" keyboard key during play SDF[ll]<S come game time. Also, if the player does not put the will allow control to be changed best goalie out there, the game offers no chance to to the player that is closest to the change goalies in mid-game to change the momenpuck at the moment.) These are tum. Ed: The module for changing goalies in midimportant options to remember, game was actually programmed, but accidentally lefi as an adept human can do much out. The playtesters did not try to avail themselves of more with his controlled player than the computer can. All this the option, so the omission was not discovered until the published sounds quite complicated, but is picked up pretty quickly. version hit the market.] Then, just as it seemed pre-game preparations would never end, Another frustration is the fact that pucks disappear off the screen it was game time. With the exception of a couple of rows of prime for moments at a time. This seems incredibly strange. My most seating and a small game clock/scoreboard that sits telling criticism is the fact that unobtrusively to one corner, the screen is filled comsolo rushes from one end of the pletely with ice surface. This is good. The puck is ice to the other, even with opposdropped, and inevitably, the human will lose this and ing players draped all over the nearly all face-offs to the computer. This is not good. top, are often much more effecWGH3 feels and sounds like a real hockey game. tive than stunning passing plays Players cut swaths through the ice realistically, carve (where the computer team simthrough corners realistically, get tripped and fall head ply reads the play just too intellifirst to the ice realistically and raise their arms in gently to be believable). triumph or pump their fists after bulging the ol' twine A final word about penalties stotine Cialis realistically. Fast guys are fast, slow guys slow, tough Den feupra. pas Ruto-Pay SLIKE must be injected, here. There are guys tough, and skilled guys hard to get off the puck. Coach Auto-Cash HOUSE Professional too many! Rare is the time when ifa player mistakenly collides with a net at break-neck one player or another is not doing speed, said net actually comes offits moorings, creating a stoppage hard time in the sin bin. [Ed: When WGH3 was originally being of play! A Zamboni (ice cleaning machine) even hits the ice tested, it did not call as many penalties. More than one NHL coach surface between periods. Flashbulbs go off in the crowd during and player who consulted on the game complained that the game exciting flurries of activity, and hey, didn't I just see that guy reach did not call enough penalties, so they modified the game to its into his bag of popcorn? present configuration. It seems to be a \"no win\" Goalies freeze the puck when algorithm. However, the frequent nature of penalties they should, players under comin WGH3 brings me to my Tip of the Day, and that is: puter control fire the puck down It's re-e-e-al easy to draw penalties. With possession the ice when playing shortof the puck, the player can simply skate to the nearest handed. All these things are boards and he'll draw opposition players like flies. By good. holding the puck and standing still, most often, the player'll be hacked brutally to the ice, and voila — The audio make-up of WGH3 penalty! Repeat procedure, and voila again, the bad squares admirably with the guys are two men short, making it much easier to slam sounds of a real hockey rink, too. Current Play: H e Center home a scintillating slap shot. This sneaky little proTwo players collide full speed in Defense Orense Lost Hinga cedure is much easier than setting up a terrific passing the corner and it hurts just to Play nos play, and although far removed from real hockey, hear it. The puck ricochets off when in Rome... the back boards with a reverberating clunk and is gathered up in a swish of flying ice. The rink announcer sounds just like a typical The Great One himself penned a few lines of introduction in the rink announcer should do. A standing \"O\" for the design work that WGH3 manual, and I think he summed things up quite succinctly went into these facets, please. by saying \"...playing this simulation will teach you something about hockey. You may not learn about controlling the puck with So..nothing's wrong, right? Wrong. the side of your skate or how to As indicated by what I've said so far, a tremendous make a feather pass, but I guaramount of Bethesda's research and effort has gone into antee you'll learn about the imstatistics, rosters, coaching decisions and a good overportance of strategy and all \"feel.\" This same quality is somehow lacking from teamwork...» Unfortunately, the actual play. with nine megabytes taken up Numbers are missing from the backs of player's on my hard drive and a stronger jerseys. It's hard to tell the Gretzkys from the lumbercomputer than even NASA had ing oals except by the way they move and even then, twenty years ago, I had hoped it is not an easy task. There is no control over the speed for a little more. CGW of passes and shots (and although a wrist or slap shot can be chosen, the difference in the speed and quality DITIT 402 Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"FREE** GAME WITH EACH ORDER OVER $100 CALL 800 753 GAME $32 $34 $32 battle hardenedl Warlords Krellan warriors in Warlords 2 33 $32 $15 $39 $31 $19 AMARE 834 $22 $42 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS A Train $42 Mercenanes $38 SimCity Graphic 2 S23 Main Bitle Tank N Grm $36 Crime Does Not Pay $29 Manhunter SF $15 Days of Thunder S24 Madden Football 2 $32 Air Bucks $34 Merchant Colony $34 SimCity Terrain Editor $15 Main Bitle Tank ME $36 Crime Wave $37 Maniac Mansion $18 Dirk's Baseball Encycpd S19 Magic Jhnson Est Bik \"$12 Ancient Art of War S29 Microcosm S32 SimEarth DOS/WIN $41 Malta Storm $36 Cruise for a Corpse $34 Martian Memorandum 537 Espana Games $24 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Ancient Art War at Sea $29 Millenium $24 Star Control $29 Man of War $36 Cybercon 3 $29 Mean Streets $37 East Break \"$12 Michael Jordan Fit Sim $44 Ancient Art War in Sky $34 Monarch $38 Star Control 2 $37 Mare Nostrum $26 Dark Half $34 Nobulas S27 Front Page Football $39 ML Basbil 4 USA Today $31 Are we there yet? S17 New World Order $38 Starfleet 1 $17 Marianas Turkey Shoot $28 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Oregon Trail S28 Games Winter Chling $34 ML Basbil 4 Fantasy Mg $25 Armada 2525 $29 Nobunaga 1 or 2 $37 Starfleet 2 $38 Midway $26 Demon's Gate S36 Out of this World $36 Grand Prix Circuit $17ML Basbil 4 General Mg $19 Bandit Kings of China $37 Nuclear War $12 Star Leg ons 4-838 Moscow Campaign S36 Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV \"S12 Plan 9 from Outer Space$31 Greens $34 ML Basbil Mngr's Ching $19 Battle Isle $32 Objection $34 Strategic Forces S19 Northern Fleet S36 Die Hard $28 Police Quest 1 $24 Gretsky Hockey 2 $34 ML World Series Disks S17 Battle Isle Scenario $22 Objection Enh S89 Sword of Aragon $28 Operation Overlord $36 Dont Go Alone $12 Police Quest 2 of 3 $34 Gretsky League $26 ML TD 1982 1990 Ea. S17 \"STAR LEGIONS Task Force 1942 $39 AMAZON' recap Power Hits: Movies PIRATES GOLD is another in the Theatre of War Prince of Persia -532 tures the fun of the lets you become a $21 theatre Sets Rex Nebular Cos Gen B$39 Star Fleet series of 1950 sdrive-inmov. swashbuckling pic Traders $19 space strategy les Travel to un Riftwar Legacy $39 rate in the 17th Utopia simulations. You $31 exploredreg onsal Rise of the Dragon EGA S29 century Caribbean Viking Fields of Congst $37 Rise of the Dragon command more the Amazon, fight Expands on the Visions of Aftermath $12 Risky Woods $24 than 100 legions of 10 foot ants, and original with more Robocop 3 find emeralds sto opportunities to HOCleet lentyCortez. Amaz gain treasure. Battlecruisers Worlds at War Search for the King ing cinematic et power, and pres. $23 Secrt Monky Isind 1 tects such as mul. Deastroyers and tige. Features IBM WARGAMES Secrt Monky Isind 2 $38 troop transports. tiple S26 swordfighting & cameral Sex Olympics Features real timel Action North Atlantic $19 angles.flashbacks. combat capabili $26 Sex Vixens from Space $12 combat, state-of-Action of River Plate zooms, pans, & ties, realistic dig. Action Stations the-art graphics $29 Sierra Adventure Bundle $39 fades Features full tized speech &sup animation and Action Stations Scenario $14 $12 digitized voices & Shogun port for all major sound. Air Raid Pearl Harbor SINUT $38 $26 sound effects $39| Space Quest 1 soundboards, $34 Amer Civil War 1 $22 Space Quest 2 $15 Battles of Destiny $38 Omega $30 Amer Civil War 2 $22 Pacific Storm Midway $36 Earthrise S9 Space Quest 3 $34 Hardball 2 $28 ML All Stars $17 Big Business $19 Operation Combat $12 Amor Civil War 3 $22 Pacific Storm Solomons S36 East West Berlin 48 S 9 Space Quest 4 $39 Hardball 3 $34 ML Franchise Disks Ea $20 Black Crypt $32 Overlord $24 Banzai 519 Panzer Battles S22 Eco Quest 1 $34 Space Quest 5 $39 Hardball 3 Player Disk $19 ML Basketball $28 Breach 2 Enhanced $19 Pacific Theater of Oper $42 Battle of the Atlanlic $36 Patriot $44 Elf $24 Space Quest Bundle $39 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $19 ML Personal Pro Goll 528 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Paladin 2 $34 Battle of Austerlitz $12 Patriot Battle Sets Ea. $24 Ep.c $32 Spaceward Ho! $38 Hole in One Mini Golf $12 ML Football Deluxe Buzz Aldrin Race to Spc$42 Perfect General S38 Battle Stations $26 Patriot Editor $27 Felony $38 Hole in One Course Dsks 7 ML Football 2 Carrier Command 99 Perfect General Disk 1 S23 Battles of Napoleon $24 Patton Strikes Back $27 Free DC $24 Spellcasting 101 $19 Indianapolis 500 $17 Microsoft Golf WIN $39 Castles S 36 Perfect General Disk 2 523 Battleship Bismark $26 Prelude to Jutland $26 Future Wars $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 International Sports Ch $29 Mike Ditka Football $32 Castles Disk 1 S19 Perfect General 2 944 Battle Tank Barbarosa $36 Red Lightning $12 Galleons of Glory $24 Spellcasting 301 $34 J Conners Pro Tennis $32 Mini Putt $9 Castles 2 $36 Populous $17 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Return to the Falklands $28 Gamma Force $6 Star Trek 5 S12 Joe Montana Football 531 MUDS $19 Centurion $19 Populous Promise Land $14 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $24 Rising Sun $26 Gateway S36 Star Trek 25th Aniversry 836 John Elway's QB S 6 NASCAR Challenge Civilization $39 Populous 2 $38 Borodino $30 Rommel at El Alamein S36 Godfather S32 Star Trek Nxt Generath $46 ar Trek Nxt Generato $46 Lakers v Celtics Lakers v Celtics $17 NFL Challenge $60 Civilization Master Ed. $45 d'GAME MAKER' Rommel at Gazala $36 Gold Rush $15 $15 SPEAR OF DES. NFL 1984. 1987 Ea. Command HO TRARE DE ANTO allows you to cre. Rommel North Africa S24 Grail Quest $2 TINY' is a Castle NFL 1988. 1991 Ea Conquered Kingdoms $38 Rorke's Dnitt ate 256 color VGA 34 Hare Raising Havoc $32 $22 Wolfenstein 301 NFL Preseason Disk Conquest of Japan Second Front adventure and are $36 NFL All Star Teams Harley Davidson $22 graphic adventure. Control of the Seas Seventh Fleet cade games with. $36 Heart of China NFL College Alumni Encounter well Crisis in the Kremlin out programming Spoils of War $39 Heaven & Earth trained enemy sol NFL College Teams $19 Dark Seed Stalingrad Campaign Features sound $36 Heimdall $20 diers, secret door NFL Dream Teams Dark Star $36 support, multiple Storm Across Europe NFL Greatest Teams $22 $12 Hired Guns ways, gruesomel Dino Wars $28 $27 Third Reich Hook NFL Roster Editor levels per game. a mutants and pow. S20 Oplomacy $25 rom 535 Hostage To The Rhine NFL Situation Editor importimages from S20 erful bosses in first Discvry Steps Columbus $34 .GIF files, charac. Typhoon of Steel $12 HUMANS person perspective NFL Challnge Prem Ed $59 DRAGON Force $19 $19 ter & monster ani NFL Football Indy Jones L Cosd vga S27 Features 20 com. Dragon Lord \"S19 mation, scrolling in UMS 2 Civil War $24 Indly Jones Fate Atlantis 838 z a plete floors, 4 lev. NFL Proleague FootballS19 Dune $29 all directions, addl UMS 2 Desert Storm S24 Isle of Dr Brain 529 els of difficulty.digil Nicklaus Signature Edit $39 Dune 2 or subtract hitl UMS 2 Planet Editor S28 Jack the Ripper $38 Nicklaus SE Clip Art $24 tized stereo sound Empire Deluxe $39 points, lives, scorel V for Victory $44 James Bond Stealth Aff $34 effects, & multiple Nicklaus SE Course 1 $19 Fighting for Rome and money $27 $37 KGB $68) Velikiye Luki saved games S371 Nicklaus Greatest 18 Final Conflict Victory at Sea $37 King's Quest Enhned $19 Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $27 Fire Team 2200 529 Power Monger $34 Bravo Romeo Delta $34 War in the Faklands $26 King's Quest 2 or 3 $15 Summoning --638 LH 3 in 1 Football $36 NG Clip Art $17 Fire Team Const Kit $25 PowerMonger WWI $21 Campaign $29 Warship Changed Hist$26 King's Quest 4 $34 TMNT Arcade $25 CH Boxing $36 NG Course Disk 1-5 Ea. $15 Fort Apache $34 Pushover $32 Carriers at War $39 Waterloo $12 King's Quest 5 vga $39 Time Quest $12 LH Boxing Contenders $16 Over the Net Volleyball 8 9 Gemfire $37 QOP Bundle $59 Carrier Strike $42 Western Front $36 King's Quest 6 vga $45 Train 86 LH College Basketball 536 Pete Rose Baseball S9 Genghis Khan $37 Railroad Tycoon $34 Carrier Strike Expan Pk $19 White Death $24 LA Law $34 Uninvited 59 LH Full Count Baseball S36 PGA Tour Golf Global Conquest $39 Rampart $27 Charge Light Brigade $34 Lane Mastodon S9 Universe 1-3 Each S 34 LH Hockey $36 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Global Effect $32 Reach for the Stars 3 $19 Civil War SSI $42 IBM ADVENTURE Laura Bow 2 $39 Walker $32 LH Pro Basketball $35 PGA Tour Goll Disk 1 517 Gold of the Americas $19 Realms $29 Conflict: Korea $38 Advnts Willie Beamish $34 Leather Goddesses $12 War in Middle Earth S15 LH Team Disks $16 PGA Tour Golf Led Edt $45 Imperium $26 Red Zone $32 Conflict: Middle East $36 Advnts Willie Beamish 2 $39 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Where Amrcas Pst CSD $37 LH League Leaders $16 Playmaker Football $26 Inindo $37 Renegade Legion Intrcpt$12 Conflict in Vietnam $12 Altered Destiny $34 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Where Europe CSD $30 LH Utility Disks $16 Power Hits: Sports $32 Koshan Conspiracy S32 Rider of Rohan $19 Decision at Gettysburg $29 Amazon $39 Leisure Suit Lrry 1 vga $15 Where USA CSD $30 Links Golf $29 Pro Football Analyst $24 Lemmings $32 RoboSport WIN $37 Dreadnoughts $42 Altack Pack $42 Leisure Suit Lrry 2 $15 Where World CSD $27 Links Disk 1 Bountiful $17 Pro League Baseball $36 'SPACEWARDI Dreadnoughts: Bismark $29 PRO AUDIO PRO AUDIO Where Time CSD $30 CARRIERS AT HO!' takes you to Dreadnoughts: Ironclads $29 Weird Dreams SPECTRUM WAR' brings to life Fall Gelb the stars as you PLUS' features Sh $19 Wonderland six crucial cartier explore and conFifth Eskadra $18 fidelity recording & Zak McKracken WHB battles of WWII: quer the galaxy Fire Brigade playback in 44kHzl Zeliards Pearl Harbor, Coral You allocate funds Fleet Commander $39 stereo, advanced Zombie Sea. Midway, East& resources to German Raider Atlantis $26 20 voicestereo syn ern Shores. Santa build armadas, in Gettysburg Turning Pnt $36 thesizer, high per IBM SPORTS Cruz, and Great habit & terraform formance 16 bit in in 4D Boxing $17 Marianas Turkey planets, research Grand Fleet S36 $ 6 4th & Inches terface, 4 watt per Shoot. Seek out new technologies Great Naval Battles $45 channel amp, built ABC Boxing and destroy enemy Features an adGit Naval Battles Exp $19 in SCSI interface ABC Mon Night carriers, fleets, and justable galaxy Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 MIDI sequencer All American College Fb $36 air forces. Features size, number of Halls of Montezuma $24 waveform editor All Star Sports Pak $34 hundreds of indiHarpoon $25 players up to 19. four track music American Gladiators S24 vidually modeled network and moHarpoon Set 2 or 3 S19 $28 studio, & windows APBA Baseball S h ips & aircraft from dem play. $38Harpoon Set 4 3.1 drivers. $1391 APBA General Manager $29 that period. $39 Harpoon Design Series $32 APBA Micro Manager $32 Lemmings Data Disk $19 Romanc 3 Kngam 1 or 2 542 Harpoon Editor S27 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $37 Leisure Suit Lrry 3 $24 APBA Stat Master $29 Links Disk 2 Firestone $17 Road to the Final Four $37 Lemmings 2 $32 Rules of Engagement $37 Harpoon Challenger Pak$42 Chambr Sci Mutant Prst $25 Leisure Suit Lrry 5 $34 APBA 1908.91 Ea. $21 Links Disk 3 Bay Hill $17 Reel Fish'n $12 L'Empereur $37 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Harpoon Chalingr Pk SE$49 Coaster $32 Leisure Suit Lrry Bundle $39APBA Basketball $34 Links Disk 4 Pinehurst $17 Serve & Volley S12 Liberty or Death $37 Second Conflict WIN $34 High Command $44 Code Name: Iceman $15 Loom $19 APBA Bowling $14 Links Disk 5 Dorado S17 Skate or Die $15 Lost Admiral $24 Seven Cities of Gold 2 $38 in Harms Way $36 CodeName : Iceman 2 $39 Lord of the Rising Sun $34 APBA Football 834 Links Disk 6 Bitn Creek S17 Sport of Kings Lost Admiral Scenario $23 Siege $38 Kampfgruppe $37 Colonel Bequest S15 Lost in LA S37 Basketball Challenge S28 Links Disk 7 Troon Nrth $17 Summer Challenge Lost Admiral Enhanced S44 Siege Expansion Disk $19 Kriegsmarine $36 Conquests of Camelot S15 Lost File Sherick Hms +-$44 Bball Ch. 1987-88 Ea $13 Links 386 Pro S42 Super Car Pack Lost Patrol Sim Ant $37 Kursk Campaign $36 Conquests of Longbow $39 Lost Treasures Infocom $42 Bball Ch. 1989.90 Ea $17 Links 386 CD 1-6 Each $20 Team Suzuki Medieval Lords $14 SimCity $29 Line in the Sand $27 Conspiracy Deadlock $34 Lost Treasures Infocom2532 Bo Jackson Baseball $32 Low Blow $12 Tennis Cup Medieval Warriors $9 SimCity for Windows $37 MacArthur's War $29 Countdown $37 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $24 Cycles Grand Prix $28 Madden Football $17 Tie Break Tennis $14 Mega Lo Mania $31 SimCity Graphic 1 $15 Main Bttle Tank C Grm $36 Covert Action $29 Manhunter NY $28 Daily Double Horse $19 Madden TD 89 & 90 $18 TKO Boxing 88388 $12 $19 $12 $15 $34 $32 "


"Review \"Wolfing Down\" Takes On New Meaning In id Software's Latest Call of the TITLE: Spear of Destiny, a Wolfenstein 3-D Adventure (Original Wolienstein 3-D not required to play) SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DESIGNER: id Software DISTRIBUTOR: Formen Corp. North Andover, MA by Bryan A. Walker Wolfenstein 3-D episodes will be right at home. The regular troops — SS, killer dogs and mutants — still prowl around in droves. However, there's now a variety of new scenery, devastating new bosses, and smart, fast SS Officers. Sound effects are generally the same, with some great new \"death rattles» added. Very good new murith Wolfenstein 3-D, (reviewed in CGW #98) id Software sounded a clarion call to gamers who thought that entertainment software of exceptional quality came only from the established publishing leaders. Whisper-smooth first-person graphics, great sound, nail-biting game play and violence o' plenty set the first episodes apart from the gaming crowd. Now, fearless hero B.J. Blazkowicz returns in this, the stand alone finale of the Wolfenstein 3-D saga, Spear of Destiny. The prelude to the mission reads as so; Hitler, notorious occultic artifact collector, has acquired the weapon that was used to stab Jesus Christ as he was crucified. The possessor of this legendary Spear of Destiny is said to be invincible, prompting the Allies to send B.J. on a suicide mission. The objective: steal the Spear away from the Third Reich. Rules of engagement: kill 'em all, let God sort 'em out. And everyone knows that FLOOR when B.J. takes on a \"suicide mission,\" it's murder on the Nazis! Those familiar with the earlier sic adds atmosphere to the proceedings, particularly on the final levels. What Spear of Destiny really offers the player is additional challenge and even more of the trademark violence and gore of the earlier episodes. New players might be advised to start on a lower difficulty setting. Having played through on the \"Death Incarnate\" level, I encountered many areas absolutely jampacked with enemies. The resulting exchanges of gunfire were so intense and visceral, I could almost smell the cordite! If Mack Bolan fans find out about this game, id Software will have the biggest cross-over hit in software history! As with the earlier Wolfenstein 3-D episodes, gamers who expect the slain enemies to \"de-res\" while dying neatly and quietly will be woofing their milk and cookies. Be that as it may, there's an appeal to mowing down a line of Nazis with a sweep of a red-hot minigun that just can't be found in other games. HEALTH ANIMO 9 SCORE LIVES 2800 3 OLOS Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"& BUY 2 EAD GAMES GET 1 EAD GAME FREE CALL 800 753 GAME $24 $34 offers Super VGA/ Starflight 1 graphics and ad. Starflight 2 $12 $79 LINKS (386 om wonhy oppo: Ultima Trilog DROPROSE& convoys, and $24 $24 $31 $9 $25 $21 IBM SPORTS B M TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL HINT BOOKS IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ACTIONARCADE IBM ACTION ARCADE Tom Landry Football $29 Hong Kong Mah Jong 532 Trump Castle Data Disk $12 Quest for Glory 1-3 Ea. $10 Buck Rogers 1 $12 Shadow lands 530 Gremlins 2 $ 9 Take a Break Pinball $29 Tony LaRussa Basebil 519 House of Cards $12 Turn-n-Burn $10 Railroad Tycoon $10 Captain Blood $ 9 Sleeping Gods Lie $29 Guy Spy $29 Take a Break Pool 529 TLaR Fantasy Manage $15 Hoyle's Games 1 $21 Vegas Entrtmnt Pk WIN $20 Rise of the Dragon $10 Captive $30 Space 1889 $16 Hard Driving 2 $38 Taking of Beverly Hills $24 TLaRussa AL Stadiums $15 Hoyle's Games 2 $21 Video Pokrby Masque\" $19 Run 5 Issue 1 20 Ea. $ 6 Celtic Legends $32 Space Hulk $38 Hare Raising Havoc $32 Teenage Mint Nnja Trtl $25 TLaRussa NL Stadiums $15 Hoyle's Games 3 or 4 $29 Video Pokr A la Carte \"$24 Savage Empire $10 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Space Inc. $34 Home Alone $27 TMNT Manhattan Miss $31 TLR Teams1901-68 S15 Ishido $17 Video Poker WIN $34 Search for the King $10 Champions $37 Space Rogue $30 Killing Cloud $19 TMNT Arcade Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Jeopardy 1 of 2 510 Waynes World $26 Secret Mnky Isind for 2 510 Cobra Mission $44 Space Wrecked $19 Knight Force $29 Terminator Weaver Commisnr 2.0 $16 Jigsaw Pinups $24 Welitris $21 Secret of Silver Blades $10 Conan $19 Spelbound $39 Lemmings $32 Tetris Classic WIN $27 World Circuit $34 Living Jigsaws $12 Wheel of Fortune 1-3 Ea.S10 Sentinel Worlds $10 Corporation $19 Spellcraft Aspet of Valor $38 Lemmings Data Disk S19 Tristan Pinball $39 World Class Soccer $28 Lotto Gold $29 Wheel of Fortune Gold S15 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Cybergenic Ranger $32 Spell Jammr Pirts AS $39 Light Corridor S29 Troika $27 $19 TRISTAN PIN. Wordtris \"LINKS 386 PROl Spirit of Excaliber TASK FORCE BALL' brings you Wrld Chmp Backgamn $24 $17 1942 gives you a S24 $17 WARN, all the excitment of Wrld Chmp Cabbage chance to command TRISTAN playing realpinball. $19 Star Saga 2 IRISTAN vanced features a fieet of destroy Flipandnudge your HINT BOOKS Sword of the Samurai S 9 designed for your ers, cruisers, and $10 way to the highest 680 Attack Sub 386 or 486 New Swrd Samrai & Pirates $16 battleships against score possible us Advnturs Willy Beamish $10 features include Tangled Tales S21 aggressive enemy ing great leatures Altered Destiny $10 Terran Envoy computer oppo lorces in the South from traditionalpin. $16 A Train $12 nent, save gamel Third Courier Pacific. Features ball games. Fea. Bard's Talo 1.3 Ea. $10 Times of Lore option that allows TASK FORCE M night combat, reals. tures authentic ball Buck Rogers 1 or 2 910 Tunnels & Trolls your friends to play ic weather condiaction, wild pinball Castle of Dr Brain $10 Twilight 2000 against you in an E ALTUL ACTION DE SONIPACIE tions, blinding ex devices, rocketflipChampions of Krynn $10 Twilight 2001 existing game, preplosions, flares, tor. pers, thumper Civilization $16 Ultima Martian Dreams $37 recorded games pedoes, ability to bumpers, multiCode Name Iceman $10 from worthy oppoUltima Savage Empire $34 sendorders to ships ball, extra ball, and Colonel Bequest 1 or 2 $10 Ultima Trilogy nents, and many AMTEX stereo sound. $39) Conquests of Camelot $10 game modes $421 Ultima Trilogy 2 $45 VGA graphics. $39 Conquests of Longbow $10 Ultima 4 $35 IBM TRADITIONAL Lexicross $24 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Simcity/Simcarth $20 Cyber Empire $32 Ultima 5 $35 Loopz $24 Vaxine 3D Pool $12 Monopoly $24 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Space Quest 1-4 Ea. S10 Cyber Space $29 Ultima 6 False Prophet $39 Monty Python $15 Viking Child 3 in 1 Players Pack $24 Omar Sharif on Bridge $37 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Spellcasting 101 or 201 S10 Darklands $39 Ultima 7 Black Gate $46 Ms Pac Man $6 Volfied Acquire $15 On Target S10 Dragon Wars $10 Starflight 1 or 2 S10 Drakkhen $37 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $19 M.U.D.S. $19 Wild Streets Advance to Boardwalk $15 Peanuts $31 Drakkhen $10 $10 Star Trek 25th Anniv Star Trek za $10 Dragon Wars $12 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $46 Mystical $27 Wild Wheels Armada S10 Penthouse Jigsaw S24 Dungeon Master $10 Strategy Plus 3 -11 Ea. $ 8 Dungeon Master $34 Ultima Stygian Abyss $48 Nevermind $25 Wrath of the Demon Amarillo Sim 7 Card Std $10 Pictionary $19 Dynamix Great War Pin $16 Strategy Plus 12-22 Ea. $ 5 Dusk of the Gods $29 Uncharted Waters $42 Night Breed $15 X Men Amanilo Slim Poker S12 Pinball WIN $29 EcoQuest $10 Strike Commander $16 Elvira 1 or 2 529 Vengeance of Excalibur $19 Night Shift $17 X Men 2 Backgammon WIN *$24 Planet of Lust $19 Elvira 1 or 2 $10 Stunt Island 516 Escape from Hell $17 Waxworks $34 Ninja Rabbits $10 Xenocide $12 Battle Chess 1 of 2 $29 Price is Right $15 Eye of Beholder 1 $10 Time Quest $10 Fire King S19 Windwalker $28 Nova 9 $21 Battle Chess WIN $29 Prime Time Hits 1 or 2 $25 Eye of Beholder 2 $12 Treasures Savage Frntr $10 Flames of Freedom $28 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Obliterator $6 IBM HARDWARE Battle Chess 4000 $36 Rack'em $12 Fountain of Dreams $10 Tunnels & Trolls S16 Fountain of Dreams S15 Wizardry 4 $19 Oil's Well $15 Ad Lib Sound Card $49 Blackjack DOS/WIN $16 $10 VIRTUAL PILOT | Ultima 4.7 Ea Four Crystals of Trazere $39 VIRTUL DIN 'F15 $179 STRIKE Ad Lib Gold 1000 Bridge 7 is a flight yoke that! Ultima Avatar Advntures $16 Gods S26 EAGLE 3' will Adlib Progrmrs Manual $27 Bridgemaster mounts on your Ultima Underworld S10 Hard Nova S17 challenge even Adlib Surround Sound $64 Casino Craps $10 desk and plugs into nol Ultima 7 & Underworld S16 Heaven & Earth $32 seasoned pilots ats Adlib Telephone Module $64 Casinos of the World S32 at your IBM compat V for Victory $16 STRIKE EMC Hero's Quest 1 EGA $21 Includes a new Ad Lib Visual Compose $75 Centerfold Squares S21 ible. Features lett. Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg S12 Hero's Quest 1 visualsystem that Ad Lib Speakers $15 Check Mate DOS/WIN 536 right, front & back Wizardry 7 Crusade $12 Hero's Quest 2 blends 3D poly. Flight Stick Chessmaster 3000 S32 views accesible all Yeager's Alt Combat $16 Hero's Quest 3 $39 gon 942 and bit. Flight Stick w Falcon Chessmaster 3000 WIN 838 Immortal $17 the touch of a but mapped graphics. 5. Game Card 3 Chess Net WIN ton, flap & gearl IBM AD & D Keys to Maramon $12 Features cam. Gravis Ultrasound Brd $129 Chess X Collossus $17 controls, tactilefire AD&D Collectors Ed 2 $45 King's Bounty $24 paign mode. 21 Champ Joystick Classic 5 DOSWIN buttons under your AD&D Starter Kit 545 Knights of Legend player head-toMaxx Control Yoke $59 Clue Master Detective $15 thumbs, precisel Champions of Krynn $19 Legacy of the Necrmncr $19 head by modem Maxx Rudder Pedals $39 Combination Lock $10 trim control, and Curse of Azure Bonds S15 Legend $31 Mouse 3 Button IN and 2 player coop $29 A Crossword Magic $29 thumb-screw ter Dark Queen of Krynn 532 Lord of the Rings 1 $32 erative in separate Pro Audio Spectrum 16$199 Dealers Choice Poker $29 S37 Dark Sun Lord of the Rings 2 minals for easy in. S37 Pro Audio Spctrm Plus $139 Demon Blue stallation, MICROPROSE planes or in the S541 Death Knights of Krynn $20 Loremaster $39 same F15. $44 Sound Blaster $99 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dragon Strike $15 Lure of the Temptress $37 Sound Blaster Pro $189 Dr Thorp's Mini Bickick $10 Risk 524 Free DC $10 Dragons of Flame $12 M $45 Wizardry 5 $32 Pac Man $9 Sound Bistr Pro Basic $159 Ewd O'Thorpe Blckick \"524 Risk WIN S29 Gateway Savage Frnt $10 Eye of the Beholder $19 Magic Candle 1 $12 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg $37 Pick N Pile $27 Snd Blaster Speakers $15 Electric Jigsaw S12 Rodeo Games $10 Global Conquest w Disk $21 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Magic Candle 3 -38 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Pipe Dream $19 Snd Blaster Voice Edtr $54 Faces: Tetris 3 $15 Sargon 4 or 5 $34 Goblins $10 Gateway Savge Front 532 Matrix Cubed $32 Pitfighter S22 Sound Star Snd Board \"S24 Femmes Fatale $26 Scrabble $24 Gunship 2000 $16 Heroes of the Lance $12 Mechwarrior $19 IBM ACTION/ARCADE Powerdrome $12 Thrustmaster Joystick S69 Femme Fatale DD 1 S18 Scrabble Deluxe $24 Hard Nova $10 Pool of Darkness $38 Megatraveller 1 \"524 Airborne Ranger $12 Power Hits: Battletech 532 Thrstmstr Pro Joystick $109 Femme Fatale DD 2 $18 Shanghai 2 $24 Harpoon Battlebook $16 Pool of Radiance $15 Megatraveller 2 $19 Aliens ate my Babysitter $32 Power Hits: Sci Fi 532 Thrstmstr Ruddr Pedal $109 Femme Fatale DD3 S18 Shogi Master $34 Heart of China $10 Secret of Silver Blades 515 Megatraveller 3 $39 Amazing Spiderman 59 Punisher **$24 Thrustmstr Weapn Cntrl 579 Game Maker $68 Solitaire WIN $32 Hero's Quest 1.3 Ea. $10 Shadow Sorcerer $15 Midwinter 1 S12 Arachnaphobia 528 Roller Babes $25 Thunder Board SndBrd $84 Games People Play S27 Solitaire Royale $19 Hero's Ost 3 Strat GuideS19 Tales Magic: Prophcy S 38 Might & Magic 1 or 2 $12 Artura \"S12 Rotox $20 Thunder Board for WINS109 GO Master 5 Dix S109 Solitaires Journey $38 Immortal $10 Treasurs Savage Frontr $32 Might & Magic 3 $38 Back to the Future 2 $15 Savage $19 Thunder Board Spkrs $15 GO Master 5 DIX WIN S109 Sorry S15 Indy Jones Lst Crsade 510 War of the Lance $9 Might & Magic 4 or 5 $46 Back to the Future 3 $15 Sierra Arcade Bundle $24 Video Blaster $349 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis S10 DREADNOUGHTS Bargon Attack $24 Island of Dr Brain \"SECOND CON Second $10 is a WWI surface Bart Simpsn House Wrd $31 Jetfighter 2.0 FLICT is a win $16 fleet battle simula Battle Master onflict $37 dows game of inKing's Quest 1-5 Ea. $10 Battlestorm tor. It recreates the The Calart Conte Continue 532 terstellar strategy Leisr Suit Larry 1.5 Ea $10 look. specificatons. Bill & Ted's Exclint Adv $19 and conquest. Test Lemmings w Disk $21 and tactics of fleet Blockbuster \"$12 your skill against Loom $10 combat. Features Brain Blaster $28 friends or the com Lord of the Rings 1 or 2 $10 3D views, compreBudokan puter in one of 6 Lost in LA hensive manuals Colorado exciting scenarios LucasArts Adventure $16 and sea charts, al Continuum or create your own LucasArts Air Combat $16 potent Englishcom Cool Croc Twins with the built in ediMagic Candle 1 or 2 $10 mand parser.one orl Crackdown tor. Choose beManhunter NY or SF $10 two player model Dark Century tween warships Maniac Mansion $10 FLIGHTSTICK' is one of the most popular joysticks available and computer con Day of the Viper stealthships, mis Martian Dreams today. Features total 360 degree cursor control, greater Matrix Cubed trolled ships, gun Generation siles, & transports $10 durability, a contoured pistol grip handle with audio and facile n e Mean Street ery and damagel Dig Dug $10 in your quest to rule teedback firebuttons, and separate throttle control control s421 Dr Doom's Revenge $37Might & Magic 1 or 2 the galaxy $34 $10 Dragon's Breath $27 GO Joseki Genius 9 39 Space Vegetables $10 Might & Magic 3 or 4 $16 IBM ROLE PLAYING Mines of Titan $12 Dragon's Lair 1 $24 Silpheed $21 IBM SIMULATION GO Junior $19 Spot $15 Official Sierra Hint Bks $12 2400 AD $28 Mission Impossible $19 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Simpsons Arcade Game $31 688 Attack Sub $19 GO Master 5 DOS/WIN 539 Stratego $31 Planet's Edge $16 Autoduel $26 Murder $29 Drgn's Lair Singe Cst $34 Sliders $27 A10 Avenger $46 GO Scribbler $34 Strip Poker 3 $31 Police Quest 1-3 Ea. $10 Bad Blood 531 Obitus S27 Freakn Funky Fuzzballs $19 Space Ace 1 of 2 $34 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 534 GO Tactical Wizard $39 Strip Pokr 3 DD 1-6 Ea. S19 Pool of Darkness S12 Bard's Tale 2 S19 Pirates Gold $34 Galactic Conqueror $31 Space Wars $37 Aces of the Pacific $42 GO Master Toolkit $39 Super Jeopardy S27 Pool of Radiance $10 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Planet's Edge $38 Galactic Empire $27 Speedball 2 $25 Aces Pacific Mission 1 $27 Grand Slam Bridge $17 Super Tetris S29 Populous 182 Officl Str $16 Bard's Tale Cnstrctn St $19 Prophecy 1 $12 Galaxian $ 6 Stellar 7 $21 Aces Pacific Mission 2 $27 Grand Slam Bridge 2 832 Terminator Chess $34 Power Monger $10 Battletech 1 $12 Questron 2 $12 Gauntlet 1 of 2 $ 9 Super Off Road $15 Aces over Europe $46 Grandmaster Chess $37 Tetris Classic $27 Power Mngr Strategy Bk$16 Battletech 2 $31 Rings of Medusa *$24 Goblins $24 Super Pac Man $ 9 Aces Europe Mission 1 $27 Home Alone 2 $26 Trump Castle 2 $24 Prophecy of the Shadow $12 Black Crypt $32 Sea Rogue $39 Gold of the Aztecs $29 Super Space Invaders $25 Aces Europe Mission 2 $27 Home Casino Spectaclr $15 Trump Castle 3 $34 Quest for Clues 2.30r4 $21 Bloodwych S15 Sentinel Worlds \"512 Grave Yardage S12 Take a Break Crosswrd S29 AH 64 Helicopter 346 $15 $30 reality $10 DY Flight Stick 0855 $13 "


"Review took the Destiny Spear. A system lock-up was the result, but turning off the Soundblaster digitized sound option provided the fix. There are those sensitive people who are going to be scrambling for the smelling salts after seeing Spear of Destiny. It's brutal and bloody, no doubt. It's also a well-executed and enjoyable game. The real gaming warriors who like a lot of \"oomph» in their entertainment will find Spear of Destiny can rock 'n roll with the best of 'em. Girly-gamers need not apply! DIMMA HTA: 2901932032 2001 esc ONE 000S 01 CGW The four new Bad Guys, along with a surprise Ultimate Bad Guy, are tougher than those of previous episodes. Even worse, they're often surrounded by their own escort of regular enemies. Standing toe-to-toe against these ugly chumps, or trying to fight them and ignore the escorts will rapidly result in a severely ventilated those who think that obtaining the Spear of Destiny is the final step are going to be thrown a curve. I won't spoil the surprise, but be prepared for an environment and enemies that would scare the bean dip out of Clive Barker. This surprise final-level endgame is an excellent touch! The only real weakness of the game is that there are no technical improvements over the earlier episodes.Spear of Destiny has many situations that cry out for new weapons and equipment. Proportional joystick response alone would have been a huge improvement in gameplay. Joe Garagiola might say \"Spear of Destiny is more of the same, only a lot more so.\" While suggesting these features for future Wolfenstein 3-D episodes to Jay Wilbur of id Software, I was informed that Spear of Destiny is the final installment of B.J.'s adventures against the Third Reich. Fortunately, fans of the Wolfenstein 3-D titles can take heart. id is working on a new title called Doom, which Mr. Wilbur enthusiastically described as \"Wolfenstein times a million!\" Now becoming almost obligatory in the MS-DOS gaming world is the laundry list of bugs encountered. Mercifully, I found only one glitch during play, arising, wouldn't you know it, at the moment ! 2:12: B.J. After gunning down hundreds of enemies for a score of levels, the Spear of Destiny is within reach. The Penultimate Bad Guy, surrounded by SS Officers and mutants, provides more than enough reasons for B.J. to load up on ammo and medical supplies repeatedly. However, LIFLOOR HEALTH AMNO SCORELIUES 42001 Discover the pbm game sweeping the nation! LORDS OF DESTINY Embark on an introductory journey to the fantastic world of play-by-mail gaming, with a game specially designed for newcomers to the hobby Il of play-by-mail gaming. the game of galactic empire building, legendary beings, and cataclysmic battles! Lords of Destiny is a 100 % computermoderated play-by-mail game where many players compete in a galaxy packed with features like: INTO THE MAELSTROM FREE RULES! FREE SETUP! |many different ship types; economic and military tech levels planetary defense shields composed of individual ground units ancient artifacts with special powers known only to the owner hundreds of named characters with abilitics such as exploring, spying, researching, governing, diplomacy, psionics, combat, ... special locations to utilize such as black holes, secret societies, Players begin each game having one leader with four followers. Your quest is to amass enough power to proclaim training academics, worm holes, and the 7 wonders of the galaxy! neutral empires ranging from primitive cave men to advanced yourself king. Along the way you must persuade powerful beings and monsters to join your cause and fight many battles. You must elder races; possessing their own forces, characters, and artifacts decide which regions to concentrate your recruiting efforts; each region having different natives who may join your cause. Do you Turns are only $3.75, no \"double\" turns or hidden fees ever dare enter the mystical whirlpools and journey to the unknown? Games last about 27 turns; with 7, 14, or 21 day turns Why try play-by-mail games? Basic version available which provides an easy-to-learn game AND MORE! II 1. There is never a problem finding people to play against. Players across the country can compete in the same game. A detailed combat system with free battle reports; updated galactic maps 2. Sophisticated games are a breeze to play since the included with every turn; and customized fill-in-the-blank order sheets population, factories, industrial complexes, crew types, plundering, computer takes care of all the nitty gritty details. alliances, power plays, long-range scanners, multi-class characters... 3. They realistically create the \"fog of war\" since a player NO OBLIGATION! sees only that information available to his own forces. 4. You can plan strategy anytime; whenever its convenient! Mention this ad SPECIAL STARTUP PACKAGE and receive free RULES, SETUP, 2 TURNS: ALL FREE! rules and setup! There is no obligation, simply mention this ad. Turns are only $3.25 with never any extra, hidden costs. Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 Circke Reader Service #97 Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"FREE\" GAME WITH EACH ORDER OVER $100 CALL 800 753 GAME O THEATRE WAR WAR'is a real-time ultrabots $32 542 1 b oxodo ratings, match ups 0104 $25 $32 $36 $34 $24 2822832323% $19 IBM SIMULATION I BM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION IBM CHARACTER MAC STRATEGY MAC TRADITIONAL AMIGA WARGAMES AMIGA WARGAMES Air Force Commander $34 Megafitrss Mission 1 $26 Test Drive 2: Euro Chilg $15 EDITORS Harpoon Battle Set 4 $27 Solitaire Royale $15 Blitzkrieg $29 UMS 2 $34 Allied Forces Bundle S29 Megafrtrss Mission 2 $26 Test Drive 2: Muscle Cr $10 Treasures Savage Frnir $16 Harpoon Challenge Pck $59 Strafogo $31 Blitzkrieg May 1940 $34 Wargame Constrctn Set $12 Armor Geddon S29 Megafortross 3D Editor $27 Test Drive 2: Supercars $15 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Harpoon Chlingr Pck SES59 Super Tetris $32 Campaign $29 Warhead S34 ATAC $29 Megafortress Mega Pk-$38 Test Drive 3 $29 Ultima 4-7 Ea. $16 Lemmings S29 Swap $29 Charge of Light Brigade $34 Waterloo $12 ATP $37 Miami Enforcer $39 TO3 Road & Car Disk $19 Ultima Martian Dreams $16 Mission Starlight S29 Tetris 524 Civil War No Grte Glory $42 Western Front 817 Flying Fortress $39 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 TFH & BH1942 $44 Ultima Savage Empire 516 Moorbase $29 Wordtris $29 Conflict Korea $36 White Death S29 Battle Command $19 Orbits $37 Thunderhawk $24 Ultima Underworld S16 Operation Combat $15 Conflict Middle East $36 Battlefield 2000 537 Power Boat Simulator $39 Thunderstrike S27 Wizardry 4 or 5 $16 Railroad Tycoon $45 MAC ROLE PLAYING Dreadnoughts AMIGA STRATEGY Birds of Prey -$32 Rapcon S29 Top Gun Danger Zone $31 Wizardry 1-3 $16 Reach for the Stars $29 Curse of Azure Bonds S38 Dreadnoughts Ironclads 529 Archipelagos $26 Blue MaxAces WWI $12 Reach for the Skies S31 Tracon 1 or 2 WIN $34 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $16 Robo Sport $35 Dark Queen of Krynn S38 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Armada 2525 $39 THEATRE OF Tracon 2 JOHN MADDEN King's Bounty S15 PATRIOT is the WAR'is a real-time Ultrabots $37 FOOTBALL 2' im Might & Magic 3 definitive landwar. game of strategy Unnatural Selection $32 proves on one of the 34 Pirates fare simulation for and conquest on a Vette $29 most popular foot Pools of Darkness $38 the PC In this ini choss-like board Virtual Reality Studio $49 ball games avail Pools of Radiance tial battleset,coaliWRO Features Super Wing Commander 1 $39 able with, play-by. Secret of Silver Blades $38 tion forces meel PETER VGA graphics in WC1 Secret Mssn 1 or 2$19 play analysis, and Spirit of Excalibur $29 with the deliant 640x480. ray-traced WC 1 Bundle 1 $45 icon menu, instant Startlight 1 of 2 $38 troops of Saddam 3D game pieces Wing Commander 2 $45 replay, and even Vengeance of Excalibur $29 Hussein.Com modem play. 102 WC2 Opertn Mod 1 or 2 $27 help from Madden Windwalker mand over 2000 player game. mu. WC2 Speech Pack $15 himself. Other fea. Wizardry 1 units from either sic that varies with Wolfpack S15 tures include player Wizardry 2 side. Features 256 the mood of the X Wing ratings, match-ups Wizardry Cosmic Forge $37 color VGA graph gre configurable Yeager's Air Combat $38 injuries, field con ics, state-of-the-art game board up to ditions, & ability to MAC ARCADE database, interface 50x50tiles.-532 IBM CD ROM designplays.-532 221 40 Boxing $32 & mapping, -544 BUY 2 GET 17th Guest $56 BUY 2 GET 11 Armor Alley $32 BUY 2 GET 1 Aesop's Fables $32 Crazy Cars Campaign Strat Flight S$37 Red Baron $39 Battle Chess DOS/WIN $46 BM EDUCATIONAL Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 Dragon's Lair $34 Fire Brigade $35 Bandit King Anct China $37 Car and Driver $38 Red Baron Missn 1 or 2 524 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Castle of Dr Brain S29 Simcity $29 Dragon's Lair Color $36 Battle Isle $32 Cardinal of the Kremlin $27 Red Storm Rising S14 Capstone Game Collect $45 EcoQuest 1 or 2 S34 Simcity Graphic 1 or 2 $23 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Gettysburg Turning Pnt $36 Beast Busters Carrier Command S12 Road&Track Grand Prix S37 Conan $24 Island of Dr Brain $29 Simcity Terrain Editor $15 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe $34 Great Naval Battles $42 Big Business Conqueror Multi Tank S16 Sailing Instructor CGA $199 Crest Robin Hood WIN $42 Jones in the Fast Lane $24 Sim Earth $41 Faces/Tetris 3 $25 Halls of Montezuma $28 Black Gold Crash Course S6 Sailing Simulator CGA $39 Don Quixote $32 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Spaceward Ho! $37 Guy Spy Color 829  $38 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $16 Design yr own Railroad S29 East Coast Voyages $34 Dune $35 Mixed Up Faery Tale $29 Strategic Conquest $37 Nova 9 Color $21 Harpoon Battle Set 2 519 Breach 2 Dynamics Bundle $39 West Coast Voyages $34 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 Mixed Up Mother Goose 534 Uncharted Waters $42 Oids 525 Harpoon Battle Set 3 919 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 El Fish $41 Sailing Instructor VGA $239 Fascination WIN $39 Quarky Quayso Science $29 Warlords $29 Pick n Pile S28 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $26 Buzz Aldrin Race Space 536 Elite Plus $19 Sailing Simulator VGA $42 Jones in the Fast Lane 542 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Pipe Dream S19 Harpoon Chling Pck SE $49 Castles $36 Eye of the Storm $29 East Coast Voyages $39 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 Twisty History S29 MAC ADVENTURE Shufflepuck Cafe $27 Harpoon Scenario Editr $27 Castles 2 F117A Nighthawk $42 West Coast Voyages $39 Legend of Kyrandia S49 Adventrs Willie Beamish $39 Space Ace $34 in Harms Way $36 Centurion Defndr Rome $32 F14 Tomcat $19 SEX OLYMPICS M AC SPORTS Conquest of Longbow $39 Civilization F15 Strike Eagle 2 S19 combines sexual 4th & Inches S12 Heart of China Covert Action F15 SE2 Scenario Disk S17 tongue-in-cheek Fast Break $30 Indy Jones Grphc Advtr $32 Deuteros F15 Strike Eagle 3 344 humor adult Hardball 2 $31 King's Quest 5 Dino Wars F19 Stealth Fighter graphics, unusuall Jack Nicklaus Great 18 $27 Leisure Suit Leryn Color $34 Dragon Force F22 ATF sound effects and l J Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea $15 Leisure Suit Larry5 $39 Feudal Lords F29 Retaliator an icon driven Mean 18 Golf $30 Loom $29 Final Conflict Falcon AT NASCAR Challenge $31 Lost Treasures Infocom $46 Fireteam 2200 Falcon 3.0 $45 terface to create a PGA Tour Golf $38 Mutant Beach $43 Full Metal Planet Falcon 3 Scenario 1 game that is a little PGA Tour Course Disk 1 $17 Out of this World $36 MANREMONT WANG OUT Genghis Khan Fire & Forget 2 different than your Playmaker Football $32 Police Quest 3 Color S34 Global Effect Flight of the Intruder usual fare. Fea Tom Landry Football S29 Rise of the Dragon $34 Gold of the Americas $28 Flight Simulator 4.0 542 tures 3 levels of Wayne Gretzky Hockey S36 Secret of Monkey Island S38 Imperium Aircraft Scenry Design $35 game play, and Weaver Baseball $32 Sky Shadow $28 Koshan Conspiracy Flight Planner S24 MERCENARIES' lets you command a group of soldiers on objects thatchange Space Quest 3 or 4 Lemmings New Facilities Locator S27 MAC WARGAMES location each time Where Europe CSD interplanetary combat missions. Each mercenary, civilian. $30 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Cound. Graphics Upgrde $27 you play. S24 Americn Civil War Vol 1 $29 Where Time CSD $30 and alien has their own personality. Produce your own L'Empereur Fly Grand Canyon 3D ARRAD STALLION ADVOITURE $45 Civil War No Git Glry $42 Where USA CSD $30 missions with the built in scenario editor. BUY 2 GET1-538 Lost Admiral Gunboat S33 Scenery Collect A or B S37 Lost Treasurs Infocom $46 Halls of Montezuma 529 Where World CSD $27 Space Ace 2 $34 Kampfgruppe $37 Medieval Warriors $15 Gunship $12 Secret Weapons Litwtf $44 Mantis Expermi Fighter $45 Harpoon Scenario Edit $27 Space Ace 2 Color $34 Kreigsmarine $36 Mega Lo Mania Gunship 2000 $39 529 S Weapons Fynt pas S Weapons Exp1 P38 $21 Omar Sharif on Bridge $46 Panzer Battles $29 MAC TRADITIONAL Starglider 2 529 Kursk Campaign $36 Merchant Colony 534 Gunship 2000 Scenario $24 S Weapons Exp2 P80 $21 Secret of Monkey Island $49 Patton Strikes Back $32 Long Lance $36 Millenium S24 Harrier Combat Sim $ 6 S Weapons Exp3 He 162$21 Secret Weapon's Luftwit559 Rommel North Africa $29 Bridge 6.0 S29 Thexder 1 515 Lord of the Rising Sun S30 Moonbase $29 Heatwave $25 S Weapons Exp4 Do335$21 Sherlock Holmes $44 UMS 2 $34 Bridge 7 $31 Tristan S48 Lost Patrol $34 Navy Moves Heroes of the 357th $32 Shadow President $34 Shuttle $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $29 Checkmate $36 Wolltris $24 Main Battle Tnk Grmy S36 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Hoverforce $31 Shuttle $29 Space Quest 4 $42 V for Victory $38 Chessmaster 2100 $32 Xerion S25 Main Battle Tnk N Grmy $36 Nuclear War $15 Hunt for Red October $22 Sim Earth 2000 542 Spirit Excalibur S24 Classic 5 S32 Malta Storm $36 Ogre $19 Hyperspeed $34 Sim Farm S41 Star Child $32 MAC STRATEGY Cabbage King Gin King $27 MAC SIMULATION Moscow Campaign $36 Omega $34 Jet Fighter 2 S39 Sim Life $41 Star Trek 25th Annivrsy $46 Ancient Art of War $29 Crossword Magic $32 Carrier Command $31 North & South $27 Operation Combat $15 Jet Fighter 2 Missn Disk $19 Silent Service 2 $34 Stellar 7 $42 Ancient A War at Sea $29 Go Master 5 $39 Design your own Train $32 Operation Overlord $36 Overlord 'PC SYMPHONY ONY\" Ultima Bundle \"MEDIA CON F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 RAGNAROK is an 8 bit Adib Where in World CSD $64 CEPT is an 8 bit Falcon $34 lets you experi$22 compatible sound White Horse Child soundblaster.com Falcon AT ence the vast, un card for your PC. Wing Commandr Bundle $45 patblesoundcard. Falcon Color bounded world of Features 11-voice Features 11-voice Grand Prix Circuit IBM CHARACTER Norse Mythology FM music, built in FM music, digized Hunt for Red October Acquire the arcane 4 watt power am EDITORS GEDY Voice input, digiLife and Death MEDIA CONCEPT skills of polymorph plifier, simulta. Bard's Tale 1-3 Ea. S16 tized voice output Megafortress neous 9 voice, 61 Champions of Krynn and transforma $16 full duplex MIDI Red Baron Color tion in order to de melody.& 5thythm Curse of Azure Bonds $16 interface, 4 watts Sands of Fire feat Surtr and his sound generation, Dark Heart of Uukrul $16 perchanneloutput Sim Ant hordes of Demons hardware volume Dark Queen of Krynn $16 volume control Sim City Supreme Includes 100 action control to 4 ohm & Death Knights of Krynn $16 microphone and Specter packed realms 8 ohm speaker Drakkhen $16 Tank line in jacks, a carphone output, & $16 over 200 magical Escape from Hell joystockport, and Test Drive 2 artifacts, 200 disEye of Beholder 1 or 2 $16 internal speaker Hardware decomTest Drive 2 CA Chaling $15 output Fountain of Dreams tinct races, & VGA $37 $16 pression $84 Test Drive 2 Euro Chlig $15 graphics. Hard Nova $16 $38 Test Drive 2 Muscle Car $15 Jump Jet $39 Stormovik $15 Keys to Maramon $16 Balance of the Planet $19 Hoyle's Book Games 1 $21 Test Drive 2 Supercars $15 Operation Spruance $34 Paladin $28 Knights of the Sky $29 Strike Aces $19 Knights of Legend $16 Castles $36 Hoyle's Book Games 2 $21 Tracon $34 Overrun $15 Perfect General $34 Land, Sea & Air 1 or 2 $39 Strike Commander $45 Lord of the Rings 1 or 2 $16 Citadel $26 Hoyle's Book Games 3 $29 Tracon 2 $29 Panzer Battles $29 Perfect General Scen $23 LHX Attack Chopper $17 Stunt Driver $15 Magic Candle 1-3 Each $16 Command HO $39 Ishido $34 Vette S33 Patriot S38 Populous Life & Death 1 or 2 S23 Stunt Island $34 Megatraveller 1 or 2 S16 Cyber Empire $32 Lexicross S32 Yeager's AFT $32 Rommel El Alamein S36 Populous 2 Lightspeed Tank 837 Might & Magic 1-3 Each $16 Darwin's Dilemma 3 2 Monopoly $29 Rommel at Gazala $36 Populous World Editor $16 M1 Tank Platoon \"S24 Team Yankee 834 Planets Edge $16 Genghis Khan $37 Omar Sharif on Bridge $36 AMIGA WARGAMES Rorke's Dritt $34 Ports of Call Mantis Exprmnti Fghts $39 Team Yankee 2 S28 Pool of Radiance $16 Gold of the Americas $29 Action Stations $29 Second Front $36 Powermonger Mantis Speech Pack $19 Test Drive 2 $30 Prophecy of the Shadow $16 Go Master 5 $109 Sargon 5 $32 Action Stations Scenario $14 Storm Across Europe Maximum Overkill $44 Test Drive 2. Collection $29 Secret of Silver Blades $16 Harpoon $39 Scrabble Deluxe $29 Alrika Corps $34 To the Rhine $36 Railroad Tycoon Megafortress $26 Test Drive 2: CA Challg $15 Sentinel Worlds $16 Harpoon Set 2 or 3 S22 Shanghai 2 $32 Battle Tank Barbarossa 36 Typhoon of Steel $15 Reach for the Stars $24 519 $22 $24 $59 ENDY Z PC'SYMPHONY  $37 $27 "


"Strategy Bringing Enlightenment To The Darklands A Player's Guide to Darklands -Part II mo by Samuel B. Baker II eep in the dark forests of medieval Germany, a wise alchemist unveiled arcane secrets regarding the world of \"Darklands.\" Unfortunately, too few people could read those secrets, so we published them in Computer Gaming World. Since the wise scholar has continued to disseminate the ingredients of successful role-playing, we have acted as the custodians of said knowledge and elected to publish another installment in our continuing effort to bring enlightenment to the \"Darklands.\" After further experimentation on unwilling dwarves and other nasties, we discovered that a longsword seems to be the best allaround weapon choice. It is fast and can deliver 20-30 points of damage when strong edge and deadly blade are applied. Medieval vivisection also indicates that long bows with Trueflight spell enhancements are also quite effective. In addition, adventurers who plan ahead might consider buying darts to improve the throwing skills of the party. In this way, when the crunch comes, potions may be delivered with lethal accuracy. As parties can afford it, it is wise to train, train, train. One should pay particular attention to increasing religion and alchemy skills, since ineptitude can have incendiary consequences and townspeople tend to have little patience with parties that dissolve the inn and the like. The party's religious specialist may prove to be a good secondary alchemist for making the easy 3 potions, such as Sunburst, Stone Tar and Essence of Grace, since that character will most likely have some brains. Some consideration should be given to marching off to Nurnberg. Nurnberg is a wonderful city. Its shoppes have very nice hand weapons and armor (37 quality) and it also has a university. Universities are expensive places to train, but they teach Healing. Physicians teach Healing as well, but most of the time they are much less willing to give instruction. Since the higher the party's local rep goes the less things cost, a move to Nurnberg will bear good fruit as the party increases their local rep. Remember, when moving about in a city, never sneak out or stay in the ghetto areas, as it messes up the local rep. Always try to charm the guards or sneak into a city. Both of these will increase skills, and if one has success talking with the guards, the party's local rep will go up. Virtue seems to be one of the things that new players have problems with. Once the party has some cash (say 10 to 15 florins), start donating at village churches (that aren't devil worshipers!) and wellknown churches in town. This will work better as the character's religious skill goes up. Escorting caravans and pilgrims also may give an increase. When the party has chain or better armor and has primary weapon skills in the 40s, start looking for evil lords. They live in the same sort of keeps that the Raubritters do. They can be found out by talking to the peasants. If the peasants are reticent, keep trying; eventually they will talk. It will be obvious from what they say whether all is well or not. When confronting the problem of getting inside an evil noble's castle, the best way is to sneak inside. However, most of the time, the party member selected for this task will blow it and fall, thus alerting those inside. If the party has the money, bribe the guard. This way the party starts out on the ground level and should be able to fully loot the castle before encountering the lord of the manor. Most of the time, if one of the party asks politely, a Raubritter will let the party in and feed them dinner, planning to kill them later. If the party retires to their rooms, they can sneak out and pillage at their leisure, facing only one or two of the Raubritter's men at a time instead of eight men at once and the Raubritter himself in plate. In either of these cases, if the party accidentally runs into the head honcho early, they will get booted out of the castle after Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"& BUY 2 EAD GAMES GET 1 EAD GAME FREE CALL 800 753 GAME $21 $34 $39 'CAR & DRIVER') Total Eclipse THE CARACDRIVER ook me best per una $28 UMMONING Character role play   5   GREAT you to command INAVALGerman navy in  ANDERAS      $26 S19 Leica $31 PIRATES OF Punisher CHERLOCK SHERLOCS ne JVHOLMES papo 3 3 3 AMIGA STRATEGY AMIGA ADVENTURE AMIGA ADVENTURE AMIGA SPORTS AMIGA ROLE PLAYING AMIGA ARCADE AMIGA SIMULATION AMIGA SIMULATION Realms $19 ivanhoe $34 Shogun $41 PGA Tour Goll $32 Legend of the Lost $34 Cyber Space $29 Blue Angels $15 Test Drive 2 Euro Chlig $15 Renegade Legion Intept $12 James Bond Stealth Afr$34 Space Hulk $38 PGA Tour Golf Course 1917 Lord of the Rings V1 $34 $31 Blue Max Aces Gt War $34 Test Drive 2 Muscle Car S15 Dark Castle Riders of Rohan $31 Joan of Arc $31 Space Ouest 1 $34 RBI 2 $32 Lure of the Temptress $37 Dark Century $29 Cardinal of the Kremlin 532 Test Drive 2 Supercars S15 $19 Space Quest 2 Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 KGB $15 Reel Fishin $31 Matrix Cubed $33 Conqueror $32 Day of the Viper S34 Their Finest Hour Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $42 Khalaan $34 Space Quest 3 $34 RVF Honda $30 Midwinter $28 Dragon's Lair $34 Das Boot Submarine $34 Thunderhawk $29 Rules of Engagement $38 King's Bounty $15 Space Quest 4 $34 Shark Attack Unlim Golf $28 Might & Magic 2 $38 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Eye of Storm Flight Sim $29 Thunderstrike Simcity $33 King's Quest 1 S19 Steigar S27 Ski or Die $32 Might & Magic 3 $38 Dragon Lair Esc SingeC $34 F15 Strike Eagle 2 S29 Tracon 2 Simcity Terrain Editor $15 King's Quest 2 $15 Street Rod 2 S27 Sport of Kings $15 Murder $29 Fire Power $17 F16 Combat Pilot $34 Virtual Reality Studio $49 Star Control $34 King's Quest 3 $15 Theme Park Mystery $15 Summer Challenge $34 Pirates $19 Flood 329 F19 Stealth Fighter $34 Western Europe Disk $22 Starfleet 1 $38 King's Quest 4 $34 Time Machine $34 Superstar Basketball $24 Plan 9 from Outr Space $31 Globulus $22 F29 Retaliator $34 Yeager's AFT $28 Golden Axe 'THE SUMMONTHE ULTIMATE FANTASY DRIVING GAME IN GREAT NAADVANCED ZUMULATOR BED Treasure Savage Frontr $32 Gravity lets you test drive VAL BATTLES ING' is a single Turrican 10 of the best percharacter roleplay Guy Spy you to command Universe 3 $34 formance cars like Heavy Metal ing game. Play in the British or War in Middle Earth $15 the Porshe 959, side this game filed Home Alone Test Drive German navy in Warriors of Legend Shelby Cobra, and $19 with mazes, casties Hoverforce the North Atlan. Ten of the Best Where in Europe CSD $34 Ferrari Testarossa secret passage Hyperforce BATTLES ic during WWII. tic during WWII. Where in USA CSD Features 10 differ$34 ways & dungeons. Killing Cloud Captain's view Where in World CSD ent tracks, bit $27 Killing Game Show You gather clues. puts you on the William Tell S28 solve puzzles, con mapped landKnights of Crystallion bridge with stateWonderland $19 scapes, drive in verse with NPC's, Last Ninja 3 of-the-art graphics and battle hordes any direction or ott Leander Fleet view gves you AMIGA TRADITIONAL road, head to head Light Ouest of monsters. Feaaneagle's eye view American Tail Color Bk $19 viamodem instant Matrix Marauders tures 40 levels of a task force. AdBattle Chess $29 Menace replay, and 256 automapping and miral view allows color VGA. $38 Battle Chess 2 Chinese $29 Mystical portablemaps. -S38 strategicplay.-S45 Checkmate SRL $36 BUY 2 GET 1 SEL BUY 2 GET 1 Navy Seals BUY 2 GET 1 Chessmaster 2100 $34 Never Mind Stock Market $15 King's Quest 5 $34 Clue Master Detective $28 Team Suzuki $15 Pool of Radiance S15 Night Breed $14 FA18 Interceptor $18 SPEND $100 GET 1 FREE Sword of Aragon $12 Leather Goddesses $15 Cribbage King Gin King $28 Tom Landry Football S29 Prophecy of Shadow $38 Night Shift $19 Falcon $34 3 in 1 Players Pack $24 Theater of War $32 Legend of Faerghail $28 Harpoon Design Series S32 Wayne Gretzky Hockey $36 Rings of Medusa $34 Nitro $32 Falcon Mssn Disk 1 or 2 $19 Backgammon \"$24 Third Reich $27 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Home Alone 2 9 29 Wayne Gretzky Hcky 2 $34 Secret of Silver Blades $15 Nova 9 $21 Flames of Freedom $29 Chess Net *S24 Traders Leisure Suit Larry 1 Enh S34 Hoyle's Book Games 1 $21 Wayne Gretzky League $28 Shadow Sorcerer $32 Ork $29 Flight Simulator 2 $34 Deja Vu 2 Las Vegas \"$12 Uncharted Waters S42 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $24 Hoyle's Book Games 2 $21 World Circuit $34 Sleeping Gods Lie $29 Out Run $28 Galactic Conqueror $31 Don't Go Alone \"$12 Utopia S31 Leisure Suit Larry 2 S15 Hoyle's Book Games 3 $29 World Class Leaderbrd $26 Space Ace $34 Paperboy 2 $27 Gun Boat $33 Dragon Lord \"$19 Warlords $32 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $24 Ishido $36 World Class LB CD1 $15 Space Inc. $34 Pick'n Pile $27 Hawaiian Odyssey $22 Edward O'Thorpe BU \"$24 Worlds at War S29 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $39 Jones in the Fast Lane $24 World Class LB CD 2 $15 Space Rogue $34 Pitfighter $22 Heatwave S28 Fast Break Basketball \"$12 License to Kill $28 Monopoly $24 World Class LB CD 3 $15 Spirit of Excalibur $19 Plague $28 Hunt for Red October 522 M1 Tank Platoon \"$24 AMIGA ADVENTURE Lord of the Rings Vol 2 $36 Omar Sharif on Bridge $32 World Champ Soccer $12 Starflight 1 $32 Power Drift $28 Japan Scenery Disk S22 Magic Johnson FB \"$12 Adventr Willie Beamish $34 Lost Treasures infocom $39 Peanuts Starflight 2 $32 Power Drome $18 Jet $33 Megatraveller Zodani **$24 Altered Destiny $37 In THELOSTFILES LES AMIGA ROLE PLAYING Sword of Twilight $34  . SPELLJAMMER Operation Combat *$12 An American Tail $29 $34 OF SHERLOCK Alien Drug Lord Terran Envoy *$24 Arthur Quest Excalibur $34 HOLMES'Jack the Autoduel $26 Third Courier REALMSPACE Rings of Medusa \"$24 B.A.T. $19 Bard's Tale 2 Times of Lore Ripper appears to combinesa 30 space \"$12 Sentinel Worlds Betrayal $32 Bard's Tale 3 have struck again Twilight 2000 $39 simulator with AD&D Sound Star Sound Card $29 Black Cauldron $38 Battle Master Ultima 4 and you must stop PIRATES OF tactical combat. Sal Third Courier $12 Cadaver Black Crypt $32 Ultima 5 REALMSPACE him. Explore doz Video Poker A'la Carte \"$24 through space and Chambr Sci Mutant Prst $31 Bloodwych ens of authentic $34 Vengeance of Excalibur $19 engage enemyships Video Poker Masque \"$19 Chuck Rock London locations. Bloodwych Data Disk $21 Windwalker in real time battles, Codenamelceman S15 Captive use your laboratory CHIPS & BITS $30 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $39 then board the enColonel's Bequest $15 Carthage to analyze clues $29 Wizardry 7 $45 emy vessel for PO Box 234 Conquest of Camelot $15 and interact with Celtic Legends $32 Wrath of the Demon $29 close range tactil Rochester VT 05767 Conquest of Longbow many unique char Champions of Krynn $32 Xenomorph cal combat with Fax 802-767-3382 Courtroom Chaos in Andromeda $27 acters. Features weapons & spells. 802-767-3033 Crime Does Not Pay $32 VGA & a classical Chronoquest 2 $34 AMIGA ARCADE Features point and Cruise for a Corpse $19 soundtrack Conan $441 Agony $29 click control, $381 \"Spend $100 on any in vyber Empire + BUY 2 GET 1 Corporation $19 Amazing Spiderman S25 BUY 2 GET 11 stock software and get 1 Damocles Curse Azure Bonds $15 Amnios $29 starred game free Dark Hall $34 Magic Fly $28 Penthouse Jigsaw $24 Dark Queen of Krynn 532 Anarchy S24 Predator 2 $15 Kennedy Approach $34 Darkman $29 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $24 Pinball Dreams $32 Death Knights of Krynn S32 Aquaventura 529 Prehistorik $29 Knights of the Sky $34 Buy 2 marked games Dark Side $28 Manhunter NY 529 Pool Shark $15 Dragons of Flame $12 Arachnaphobia $27 Quix $25 M1 Tank Platoon $34 and get a coupon good for Death Bringer $28 Manhunter SF $29 Risk $24 Dragon Strike $15 Artura $34 Rick Dangerous $25 Mantis Experimntl Fghtr $34 1 game marked by Dick Tracy $22 Mean Streets $31 Scrabble $24 Drakkhen $39 Atomino $29 Robocop 2 $34 Megafortress $38 Duck Tales $31 Moebius $41 Shanghai 2 $32 Dungeon Master $28 Awesome $29 Robocop 3D $32 Megafortrss Mssn Dsk 1 S27 We accept Visa, MC &Money Dune $35 Munsters $27 Solitaire's Journey $36 Dungeon Master 2 $28 Back to the Future 2 $15 Rollerbabes $25 Megafortrss Mssn Dsk 2 $27 Orders. COD add $5. Checks East vs West Berlin $27 Oil's Well $21 Solitaire Royale $24 Elvira Mistress Dark $34 Back to the Future 3 $15 Shadow Beast 2 $27 Reach for the Skies $31 Held 4 Weeks. Most items $32 Omnicron Conspiracy $29 Spot $15 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $39 Barbarian $28 Shadow Beast 3 $27 Red Baron $34 shipped same day. All shipping Free DC $34 Out of this World $36 Stratego $32 Eye of the Beholder $39 Barbarian 2 $29 Shockwave $29 Red Storm Rising $29 rates are per order not per item, Future Wars $34 Planet of Lust $28 Strip Poker 3 $29 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Bar Games $34 Sliders $27 Sherman M4 S34 UPS $4: 2 Day Air $6: Mail S5: Godfather $12 Police Quest 1 $24 Swap $29 Faery Tale Adventure $31 Batman Capod Crusade $28 Spacewrecked S31 Shuttle $29 Airmail Canada $6:HI, AK.PR. \"GRAND SLAM Tetris $24 \"MEGAFORTRESS Space Ace 2 \"V FOR VICTORY BRIDGE 2' imTrump Castle 2 $32 MEGA PACK Space Wars thrusts you into into provesontheongww combines the origi Speedball 2 the role of military AMIGA SPORTS nal to provide the FBA VICTORY nal Megafortress Stellar 7 strategist during the most complete 3D Pool game, version 1.1 Stryx Normandy invasion bridge program 4D Boxing upgrade, OperaSuperman of WWII. Features ever. Includes tuul 4th & Inches tion SledgehamSuper Off Road full color scrolling torial hands, flex. ABC Monday Night FB $34 mer, the Mission Super Space Invaders map, nearly 500 ible practice mode, Challenge Golf Editor & the novel Targhan military units, 8 Cycles Grand Prix hints for new play. TMNT \"Flight of the Old types of combat. Days of Thunder ors, more bidding $34 Dog in one pack TMNT Arcade reastcweather play conventions, & an Fast Break age. Features VGA Treasure Trap either americano adjustable partner. Grand Prix Circuit a 3D world with uniUntouchables german command, Supports mouse Greens versal camera Warlock 6 different sce. VGA & all major Hardball $33 angles, 31 dillerent Wild Streets narios,& 11 historisoundcards $21 Hardball 2 $28 missions. S38 Wild Wheels cal variants. -S44 BUY 2 GET 11 Indianapolis 500 +BUY 2 GET 1 Xenophobe + BUY 2 GET 1 Internationl Sports Chilg $29 20 Zany Goll $18 Gold Rush $24 Police Quest 2 $15 Jack Nicklaus Great 18 $27 Federation $34 Batman the Movie $31 Zone Warrior S26 Silent Service 1 $15 2 Day Air $12. Airmail Europe Heart of China $34 Police Quest 3 $34 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited $39 Four Crystals of Trazere $32 Battle Bound Silent Service 2 $34 $12 first item plus $6 per addiHeimdall S19 Pools of Darkness $38 J Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea. $15 Galewy Savage Frontier $32 Bill & Ted's Excelint Ad $27 AMIGA SIMULATION Skyfox 2 $18 tional item Horror Zombies Crypt $34 Prince of Persia $28 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $17 Hard Nova $32 Blockout $28 688 Attack Sub $32 Star Trek 25th Annivrsy $36 Hostage $31 Rise of the Dragon $34 J Connrs Pro Tennis Tr $32 Heart of the Dragon $34 Brain Blaster $28 A10 Tank Killer $34 Strike Aces $34 All Sales Final. Check Hound of Shadow $19 Search for the king $37 Links $37 Hero's Quest 2 $34 Bride of the Robot S28 A10 Tank Killer Enhned S34 Strike Fleet S26 compatibility before you buy. Hunter $24 Secret of Monkey Island $38 Madden Football $32 Hillslar $12 Budokan S26 Aces of the Pacific S42 Team Yankee 534 Shipping times not Immortal $32 Secret Monkey Island2 $38 Mean 18 Golf $30 Journey S34 Chase HQ 528 Armour Geddon S29 Team Yankee 2 $29 guaranteed. Defectives Indy Jones Fate Atlantis S38 Sex Olympics $24 Mean 18 Course Disk 1 S15 Keet the Thiel $15 Continuum $32 ATAC $29 Test Drive $27 replaced with same item. Indy Jones Grphic Advtr S24 Sex Vixens from Space $28 NASCAR Challenge $31 Keys to Maramon $32 Crackdown $20 Battle Command $26 Test Drive 2 $30 Offer, price, & availability Iron Lord $28 Shadow of the Beast $29 Over the Net $24 Legend $31 Cybercon 3 $29 Birds of Prey $32 Test Drive 2 CA Ching $15 subject to change. $28 w $34 $32 $32 Elt $34 GAFORTRESS tem si es recret $15 $24 $27 $34 883883388 "


"Strategy killing him, and a message will say that the party has looted the castle. Lies, lies, lies! An industrious party can easily make 20 florins cash and items if allowed to work their way completely through a castle. If the party gets booted out early, simply make note of where that bad old boy is and load the game from the saved position players created prior to entering the castle. (Guild regulations require CGW readers to save prior to entering castles, dungeons, mines, caves and software stores with no exchange privileges.) The Raubritter will be in the same place, so that location may be left for last on the itinerary. Also, if the party runs DET 4 28 30 99% Ganther 1 35 40 99 creases. My party's virtue went up by six points at the conclusion alone. Victory over the witches will require about a dozen New Wind potions and several Sunbursts or Eyeburns. Of course, the other means of improving the party's reputation is to slay a dragon. Basically, going after a dragon is an exercise in pain management. Many pitfalls await the player in the forms of mists and rains that tend to degrade the quality of all weapons and armor that the party is carrying and zap the party's store of alchemical components. Dragons are most easily found in forests during the winter. Those with a sound board who have left the music on will hear a prolonged gong note repeating when the party is near. One should expect to spend at least two months searching for one of these beasts. Fighting a dragon is easy. Use Firewall on every party member or pray to a flame-retardant saint when the party is on the battlefield. Throw something to discommode the beastie, walk forward and wail away. The party will be rewarded with 50 florins and a 100-point increase in fame. Before the party enters the Templar's abode, be sure that it has a couple of dozen or more Stone Tar potions and an equal number of Sunbursts. Throwing a Sunburst or two at the same time a Stone Tar is tossed in the doorway slows down their reactions long enough for the Stone Tar to deploy. One can then set up the two best fighters in the doorway or hallway while the other characters find a good line of sight into the room and ply their bows. With the Lise of potions it is possible to kill a Templar with three bowshots. With Stone Tar blocking their path, the fighters in front can use their bows for one or two shots before having to engage in hand to hand. Any Templars that make it into melee should go down quickly since they have all probably gotten hit by at least one arrow. In the large courtyard, one can station the three best shots of the party in one corner of the courtyard and have the other fellow run up to rooms on the opposite side and open doors. This usually attracts the attention of those within, but some bashful beasties 1 19 25 34 into him in a large room with several doors, some of the party can run to the doors and open them, giving the party more bodies to loot. BEDE h t. Finnian Known for his Feud with St. Columba, and for extravagant miracles including moving a viver). fic provides a small increase to Streetwise, anda modest increase to Charisma, Agility, Speak Common and Read/Write. Ubile heis invoked, the party may travel on water as though it wereland for a period of one day Mines are a decent source of loot and may provide a few items of quality. The party should have a good supply of potions of various sorts to ease the burden of fighting. If the party should stumble upon a chest that is trapped, consider long and hard whether the party's EOD fellow can dispose of the device. Eaterwater will not work on a trapped chest. It will be the skill of the individual that will determine the outcome. The penalty for failure is an explosion that is triggered each time the disarm attempt fails on that device. This can quickly lead to tattered armor and tattered bodies as the dangerspace is quite large. After such an experience, one may be forced to withdraw. This may be done in some safety, as the mines do not reset for several weeks. What is killed will stay dead if one returns in a matter of days. I would not recommend an extended interruption, because part of the mines may change and some creatures may return to life. When the party has defeated several Raubritters and evil lords and has been through one or more mines, it may be time to consider finding and wrecking a witches' sabbat. If the party cannot find a village that has turned to witchcraft, it is possible to find out the date of the next sabbat by praying to a saint at a sabbat location. These look like lopsided monasteries in grey stone. Once the date and place is known, the party will most likely have to hustle to get there in time. Having superb quality horses and sticking to the roads will save lots of time. To use horses, give one to each party member. They cannot be equipped. And remember to give one to Hanse when he offers to help. I forgot to give one to Hanse myself. One of my friends pointed this out to me and suggested that I tie a rope to Hanse and drag him along behind. When encountering pilgrims on the way to a sabbat, giving them money may return a virtue increase and save the party valuable time. The party might also consider boats. There are few encounters on them and they make good time. Defeating a sabbat will produce a raft of skill and virtue inSuccess: 49 DF Remaining:59 ore divine Favoris spent ess divine Favoris spent Saint Day ray now For.. is on't pray right now 1 September 11 may have to be enticed to come out and play by darting into the room and shooting them to attract their notice. When they give chase, the track star of the party can run around, staying out of harm's way while the three stalwarts make colanders out of their armor. While wandering the halls of the Templars and delving in the mines, the lead character should not wear his or her Sunday best as it may soon be ruined by the odd booby trap. One may always change into the good armor when lighting draws nigh. We can only hope that dispensing such wisdom will enable characters to survive and succeed. Here's hoping our readers find the light of victory rather than a dark demise in Darklands. CGW Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"THE LTERMINATOR PREPARE FOR THE FUTURE... 1370 PICCARD DRIVE ROCKVILLE, MD 20850 Circle Reader Service #49 THE TERMINATORD 1984 Cinema '84. A Greenberg Brothers Partnership. All Rights Reserved. Licensed by Hemdale Film Corporation. THE TERMINATOR TM designates a trademark of Cinema '84. A Groenberg Brothers Partnership Rathada Sol i dadamade of Man Ischnoloimitad Program Convright 1992 Bethesda Softworks. All Rights Reserved "


"CRUCISIONS Carmen Sandiego Mercy Laroc Dazzle Annie Lady Agatha Len Bulk Scar Graynoit Nick Brunch Fast Eddie 8 Thor Thorovich Katherine Drib Amiga: Harpoon Challenger Pak (Three-Sixty) Megafortress: Operation Sledgehammer (Three-Sixty) not pictured MS-DOS VGA: Police Quest 1: In Pursuit of the Death Angel (Sierra) MS-Windows: Tetris Classic (Spectrum HoloByte) Macintosh: Ferrari Grand Prix (Bullseye Software) Harpoon Challenger Pak (Three-Sixty) The Dark Queen of Krynn (SSI) not pictured SEGA Genesis: LHX Attack Chopper (Electronic Arts) Where In The World Is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) DETTO Excl. manu Monday, 6 PM BA3 Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego? Harpoon Challenger Pak Super Nintendo (SNES): Rampart (Electronic Arts) Desert Strike (Electronic Arts) VEZAZIONE 129 It DED THIS LHX Attack Chopper Police Quest Tetris Classic for Windows KODUNBE 117811 HYDRAS 30 SATNI8BILESU 8 GUEKO LOAD NA IVES 1. RADAR SITI SCORE Y-NIP 8.1115SINN SINTIS Desert Strike Ferrari Grand Prix Rampart Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"JUMP START YOUR MIND. Heaven & Earth A Dazzling Journey for the Mind LAVORABALLOSSARDI LORE OR Surge through the elements of Heaven & Earth as three vibrant games flash before your eyes. Master the brilliant illusions, where more than 575 puzzles test you, and the path you choose rates as highly as the solution. Sweep into the hypnotic and fiery grip of The Pendulum, as slight, controlled movements-not quick reflexes, delicately influence its motion through four geographic arenas. And blend the awesome beauty of the elements and seasons together, as you match suits in the Cards, inspired by ancient Japanese Hanafuda cards. Once you've ventured past these levels, a fourth awaits. Beckoning you to combine the skills of reason, spatial relation and balance you've acquired into 108 new and electrifying challenges called The Pilgrimage. Heaven & Earth. When you're done playing games, play with your mind. N ie Options Aloul TO ORDER HEAVEN & EARTH: Visit your software retailer or call 1-800-688-1520. For IBM, 100% compatibles and Macintosh. Published by Buena Vista Software Burbank, CA 91521-6385 Actual VGA screen shots SOFTWARE score 0 Goal 0,000-Return to Silence Publishing International and Buena Vista Software A Software Resources International Production Circle Reader Service #70 "


"Review SALO a s . S Legend's Spellcasting 301: Spring Break . by Charles Ardai 3/H DIARY SIPERCADERIG 201 IBM VO 256-COLIH LEGEND OTTANUT writes interactive fiction should take a good, hard look at what Meretzky is doing, because he is doing it right. Those Are The Breaks, Kid In the spring a young man's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love. --Tennyson Ah, the spring. Season of renewal, of the Earth's rebirth, of effervescence TITLE: Spellcasting 301: Spring Break SYSTEM: and delight; of balmy PRICE: $59.95 breezes, hot beaches, cool PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: Steve Meretzky beer, loud music; string PUBLISHER: Legend Entertainment bikinis, tanned bodies and Chantilly, VA well-oiled muscles; of adolescence in full, ribald flower. It is about this season that Alan Jay Lerner once wrote, \"It's wild! It's gay!/A blot in ev'ry way./The birds and bees with all of their vast/Amorous past/Gaze at the human race aghast\" and boy, was he right. Can anyone who has ever tuned in to the Spring Break reports on MTV or \"A Current Affair\" doubt that Mssrs. Lerner and Tennyson knew whereof they spoke? In recent years, Spring Break has even eclipsed Mardi Gras to become the defining annual event of American hedonism. Of course, it should be noted that Mr. Lerner put his words into the mouths of the Knights and Ladies of the Round Table in \"Camelot\" and that Mr. Tennyson wrote his paean to youthful excess way back in 1842. So, while the phenomemon of Spring Break is a decidedly modern one, it clearly has its bacchic antecedents throughout history. It is true that one can hardly imagine a proper Victorian lad cannonballing into a pool or Merlin the wizard hanging ten in the Fort Lauderdale surfbut then, not all Victorian lads were proper and not all wizards were Merlin. That springtime frolics know no cultural or temporal bounds and that all wizards are not Merlin, by a long shot is demonstrated most effectively in Spellcasting 301: Spring Break. In this latest installment of Legend's Spellcasting series, the incomparable Steve Meretzky imagines what his nerdy, fledgling wizard, Ernie Eaglebeak, would do over one particular spring break from arcane, old Sorcerer U. What Ernie would do, according to Meretzky, is scope girls, drink beer, attend oil wrestling matches and wet t-shirt contests, body surf, run weird errands for a local Sorcerers' Guild, and lose money in a crooked casino (not to mention have dalliances with any number of willing young women). With activities like these to adapt, it was probably inevitable that someone would eventually turn Spring Break into a computer game. We should be grateful that this adaptation has one of the best crews in the business at the helm. Spellcasting 301 is vintage Meretzky, up there with his earlier classics such as Planetfall, Sorcerer, and Leather Goddesses of Phobos. Everyone else who After what Ernie went through in the first two games, the poor boy certainly deserves a break. (In case anyone has forgotten exactly what he did, the new game offers an irresistable recap to start things off. Irresistable mainly because it is delivered by a bodacious babe wearing a mortarboard, an open graduation gown, and very little else.) A break is not what Ernie gets, however, mostly because he has to spend Spring Break defending his manhood and the manhood of his equally geeky frat brothers against the assaults of the manly men of rival frat Getta Loda Yu. As in the movie \"Revenge of the Nerds, Part Two: Nerds In Paradise,\" which this game occasionally resembles, the plot revolves around the battle between the amiable schlubs of the good-guy frat and the brain-dead, musclebound he-men of the bad guy frat. The player's job is to use Ernie's ingenuity and magic to balance out the natural advantages the GLY brothers possess, such as good looks and muscles. The story is divided into a number of separate challenges, with Ernie having to tackle a few every day. This plot device helps keep the story fresh and the action moving as long as the player keeps doing something (time doesn't advance between moves), the story keeps progressing. This means that it is possible to do almost everything wrong and still get fairly far into the game. It is also possible to win the game without beating every individual challenge. Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"You Call The Shots. Dive down an island canyon as blasts buffet your biplane and you head toward your landing strip-a speeding train! Trade your stunt pilot's stick for a megaphone and direct the action from the ground, a moving vehicle, even the air. Edit the explosive footage you've filmed with the thunder of sound effects, music and voice-over' in the post-production studio. Do it all. Fly. Film. Edit. Or just watch it all unfold. It's up to you. Stunt Island is a flying and filmmaking paradise. With more than 45 dynamically-correct aircraft, 30 diverse shot locations, 1,000 pre built props and eight cameras at your disposal. All made graphically real through advanced Gouraud shading in 256-color VGA. All at your command Disney SOFTWARE STUNT ISLAND The stunt flying and filming simulation STUNT NISLA TO ORDER: Visit your software retailer or call 1-800-688-1520. Published by Walt Disney Computer Software. Inc 500 S Buena Vista St. Burbank, CA 91521-6385 For IBM and 1002 compatibles Actual VGA screen shots Sound Blaster card and microphone required. DISNEY Circle Reader Service #69 "


"Review Picture, for instance, what Meretzky would want done with the studfinder Ernie finds in a hardware store. Picture what solution he'd devise for winning in a casino where the house is crooked. Go ahead. Picture. Too Darn Hot Speaking of pictures, Spellcasting 301 has an advatage over older Meretzky hits in that it is not a pure text game. Though the text is delicious, the graphics here are half the fun. All the Spellcasting games have featured sexy scenes, but this installment really goes over the top (becoming \"topless?\"), with few locations lacking in specimens of feminine pulchritude. There are even a handful of full-screen digitized images of beach bunnies in pin-up poses and bikinis which would do credit to any edition of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue. While there is nothing more raunchy than might be seen on, say, \"The Benny Hill Show,\" that still leaves plenty of ground to be covered (or uncovered, as the case may be). Because of this \"open\" design, and the fact that Meretzky does not throw in some grave threat to humanity that Ernie has to thwart while on his break, the atmosphere of the game is relaxed. Appropriately enough, it has something of a vacation feel to it: the player samples the sights, chats with the natives, has a great time, and leaves feeling refreshed. This is not to say that the game is easy. It's just not difficult in any of the irritating ways that adventure games often are. The parser is friendly (even when it doesn't understand a command one enters, it says so in a witty way); the game draws its own map; there are a number of well-thought-out dedicated interfaces for special activities (flying a magic carpet, getting around one's hotel, playing the casino games); and the puzzles demand reasoning on the part of the player, not just an easy association of ideas. This last point is worth emphasizing, especially in light of the growing trend toward point-and-click adventures in which a player's possible actions are limited to a small number of verbs set out as buttons on the screen. Of necessity, these games typically require the player to do little more than pick up an object on one screen and deposit it in the appropriate location on another. (Some games even have a catch-all *Use\" command, but it is the computer that figures out what \"Use\" means in any given situation, not the player.) In Spellcasting 301, one enters commands in plain English and must come up with detailed, step-by-step solutions to the game's intricate puzzles. Except in one instance (which is clearly a parody of similar scenes in other games), there are no quests doled out along the lines of, \"Young man, I will give you the sword you seek, but only once you have brought me the Lost Lariat of Laredo.\" Here, instead, each situation embodies a unique set of obstacles, subtly presented, which can only be overcome through the use of one or more of the objects and spells Ernie has collected along the way. The spells, in particular, are interesting because each is, in effect, an additional verb: one casts a spell by typing in its name followed by the name of the object on which the spell is meant to act, exactly the same way one \"invokes\" a verb. This means that the player not only has a wide range of English verbs to choose from outside Restore of the usual, boring \"Push,\" \"Open,\" \"Take,\" and so forth, but a wide range of exotic verbs as well. There's a \"Spunj,\" for instance, which means \"Enlarge tree roots» and «Voy,» which means \"Create dungarees.» Adding to the fun is a spell which mutates other spells (effectively doubling the number of spells in the game) and the fact that spells can be cast on themselves. The result is that Spellcasting 301 is command-rich. There are a lot of different things one can do, and one can do them in such a large set of locations that the game really succeeds in doing what only the best interactive fiction does creating the sense that one is exploring a roomy, well-simulated alternate reality. Capping things off is a large dose of Meretzky's devious and inimitable wordplay. (Who will ever forget the \"Textractor\" in Leather Goddesses that turned a rabbit into a rabbi?) Puns and gags enliven all the puzzles and are central to one or two of the best. Help Picture HAR Inventory Ei Exane bathing at DIP soll Drop I LA You climb the winding store and enter the roon at the top Open coral eyeglas TOY spell PAIH  harbor Two display modes are available. In \"Nice\" mode, black censorship bars cover particularly risque portions of the graphic window. In \"Naughty\" mode, anything goes. The graphics are sometimes stunning and sometimes just okay, sometimes erotic and sometimes not, and there is very little outright nudity. Players apt to be offended by the next closest thing, or by the relentless (though all-in-fun) portrayal of women as sex objects, should think carefully before booting this one up. Be prepared that the Naughty mode also features some fairly salty dialogue, including one memorable catfight after an oil wrestling match, and a good deal of matter that the more prudish among us might find objectionable. At one party, for example, Ernie's frat brothers pass around a plate of magic mushrooms (though in this game, who knows, maybe they really are magic mushrooms). In another scene, a hundred men line up for a go at insatiable nymphomaniac Hillary Tickingclock (you might say Hillary swings like a pendulum). When Ernie's turn comes, he can take the encounter as far as he wants, to the accompaniment of digitized heavy breathing on the soundtrack. The parser understands every obscenity I could think of (and I'm from New York), responding appropriately to one's explicit instructions and requests. My position on the issue of adult content such as the above is one of indulgence, both in the sense that I enjoyed indulging in the shameless, bawdy material myself and in the sense that I think those who don't enjoy it should at least indulge those who do. It is a harmless enough pleasure; and no one who sees this game in a store, with its cover painting of a nearly naked spring breaker, could possibly mistake it for the latest addition to the Carmen Sandiego line. Also, while Meretzky is well on his way to being a dirty old man, he is no pornographer. More explicit material abounds at any newsstand. Still, the emptor should get his caveat and I feel obliged to make this point clearly: gamers should not buy this game if they would not want sexual matter on their hard drives. (Anyone who snickered after reading the preceding sentence should have no problem with the game.) athus Lighthouse Base Look eventory Du 14 Hall Sorcerer's Dildo have a habit of locating their headquartere Inquiry. Out of the way place, and the Fort Maughtytail Sorcerer'. Deild sons to be exception. The Cut Hall, Gurrounded by the glass w ens of the Llothon, la flooded with sunshine. The perception that Sorcerer' Cuild Halls are always din, terranean duong of no-covered tones le just one of nany Inaccurate inpressione about the profession. There is spectacular view of the ocean and harbor in wery direction. Retair winds back down to the base of the tohthouse. Sorcerers abouw, doing all those Sarcerish things that Sorcerere de in their Qulid Halls. You are approached an old, stooped me. It must be ocean RAIFONT spell il erall book Wate Apply wuction gloves trophy Sorcerer! Perhaps you'd like an opportunity to prove Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"III INCORPORATED The Ultimate PANDEMONIUM I Gaming Rigll $18,00000 IN PRIZES! IN PRIZES! c. 11 SCORE 00019601 X HELEHELELEHEH IN LILL WILL GLU You have the POWER. In this contest you don't rely on the luck-ofthe draw. You determine if you win or not. You win by outscoring others in a game of skill. Can you solve the puzzle below? Then you have what it takes. It looks simple, but it's only the start. Each of five more puzzles gets a little harder. But this time it's all up to you. Stay in to the end with the highest score and the gear is yours. With whatever options you want. Do you have what it takes? Then play to win! Video Gaming Rig Contest. Win the ultimate home theatre/video game rig. You'll win all the audio/video components shown plus the Sega Genesis, Gaming Gear (w/TV tuner), Power Clutches, Intruder and Joystick. Bonus options include: CD-ROM drive, VCR, $1,000.00 in games, cash, accessories and more! Computer Gaming Contest. Win a 50 Mhz '486 with 17\" SVGA monitor, 8 meg RAM, 340 meg hard drive monster machine (upgrade to \"586 or 66 Mhz at your option). Bonus options include: CD-ROM, Thrustmaster joystick and weapons controller, Sound Blaster Pro, modem, cash, games and more! We're talkin' GAMING HEAVEN! Directions. Fill in the Mystery Word Grid with words going across that spell out the Mystery Word down the middle. Hint: use the Mystery Word Clue. In the future. There will be four more puzzles at $2.00 each and one tiebreaker at $1.50 for each prize package which will be sent to you by mail. You will have 3 weeks to solve each puzzle. We don't know how many will play but typically 47% will have the highest score possible score to Phase 1,30% to Phase II, 25% to Phase III, and 20% to Phase IV. The tie-breaker determines the winner, 'If players are still tied they will split the value of the prizes. N Mystery Word Grid ENTER ME TODAY, HERE'S MY ENTREE FEE: ($3.00) Video Gaming Rig Contest ($3.00) Computer Gaming Contest ($5.00) SPECIAL! Enter Both (SAVE $1.00) CLIP AND MAIL Name Address EEEEE WORD LIST RANGE ARC QUEST APE TURBO ASK MAJOR ANT WINGS ACE MUTANTS INDIANA INVADER RUNNING CRAWLER CHASE EAT TOWER SIT FLINT PET MICRO SET DREAM FIT MYSTERY WORD CLUE: One who practices the ancient Japanese martial art of assassination and terrorism. City State Zip MP SEND CASH, M.O., OR CHECK TO: PANDEMONIUM, P.O. BOX 26247 MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55426-0247 VOID WHERE PROHIBITED. ENTRY DEADLINE: POSTMARKED BY JANUARY 16, 1993 ENTRY FEE MUST BE INCLUDED Only one entry per person. Employees of Pandemonium, Inc. and its suppliers are ineligible. Judges decisions are final Where judges are in error the sponsor's liability is limited to the amount of entry fees paid. Not responsible for lost, delayed or stolen mail Merchandise names and models are trademarks of their respective companies who have no affiliation with this contest 1992 Pandemonium, Inc. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"Review Laveny Spring Break Errs Even Homer nods, or so the saying goes, and as talented as he is, Steve Meretzky is no Homer. The game does have a handful of flaws which, if they had been corrected, would have made playing Spellcasting 301 an even more enjoyable experience. The most striking flaw is a technical one: if one is impatient with the game, it crashes. Specifically, if one tries to alter one's bet when playing Blockjock after typing \"Play Blockjock\" but before the special Blockjock screen comes up, the computer goes haywire, beeping endlessly until rebooted. Also, if one tries to sell a second item at the pawn shop before the first sale has been fully processed, the result is an on-screen memmum wawa ory dump followed by the player getting Map kicked out of the program. Fortunately, there is a simple way to avoid these bugs: slow down a little and wait until a command is requested before typing one in. More trivial, but also fixable, are vocabulary quirks such as the fact that when trying to heave a sack of gold off a flying carpet the player can say \"Throw sack\" or \"Throw bag,\" but not \"Throw gold.\" Then, there are occasional throwbacks to the old days of adventure gaming which I wish would be thrown back: if I never love again see questions of the form, «Which door do you mean, the front door, the back door, or the refrigerator door?» (when the best choice is obvious) and comments such as \"You are not holding your spellbook\" (when it is stashed in a valise one is carrying), it will be too soon. Other gripes could be raised as well, but these are mostly matters of taste. For instance, there is a bit too much attention given to exactly how much money Ernie has at any given time and how many items he is carrying for my taste. If I had written the game, I would have removed all instances of the response \"You are holding too much to pick that up,\" because it serves no useful function. For the most part, though, gameplay is extremely smooth. The game understands a lot of synonyms, many puzzles have multiple solutions, and the plot is structured with enough care to make it almost impossible for the player to slip accidentally into a no-win situation. In the 30-or-so hours it will take the average player to finish the game, problems will crop up only sporadically, maybe three or four times in all. The rest of the time, Spellcasting 301: Spring Break offers great entertainment and nothing but. There is more creativity and cleverness Em evident in a typical sequence of Spellcasting 307 than there is in some entire games; when you play this game, you are constantly aware that you are in the hands of a master. The game may not have much about it that is socially redeeming, but as low comedy goes, it is peerless. And now that Benny Hill is gone, we need Steve Meretzky more than ever. It comes down to this: I can think of no better way to while away some cold winter nights than with this sexy, funny, nutty little treasure of a game. Or, at least, none that could be printed in a family magazine. Cow coin Aquarium the Point Blatter ariun la one of the rear areas TOT spell Intel Instruction repository of the ferocious Lok PIL Muster. capture . couple of were again lagannar Tert Black . I longck loloslu tanya Tatl. vide doorvay lead south and west. To the eal. watendew with sin It is closed. Save Word Otto's suitcase table bar You can't so that way est Grachar Snechatda hech Beach by Smach Ser k ring bewer The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Circle Reader Service #77 Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"CAPE COD CONNECTION'S SCROLL TO ADVENTURE  STRATEGY. SIMULATION lying ortress IMGPON In the QOP Tradition of .......... MS-DOS Simulation MS-DOS Strategy Uncharted Waters...... $37.07 MS-DOS Role VFor Victory ............. $41.27 Migh/CloudXoen....... $37.07 Seven Cities of Gold Il Software Software Western Front ............ $31.77 Wes Playing & Rex Nebular ... ...... $37.07 Shadow President Membership Priceslistedonly. Alinein/Sand........... $21.17 Adventure Games Seven Cities II............... tba SimLife Please Callior Non-Momber AncArtWar/Sky ....... $31.77M S-DOS Sports AD&D Coll. ll .......... $41.27 Spellcraft ................ $31.77 Star Control2 Pricing!! Action Sta. Util........... $11.12 AD&D Starterit......... $41.27 Software Shadow President......... tba A-Train.... Strike Commander .......... $37.07 Action Stations.......... $26.47 APBA Baseball.......... $21.17 Crus, Dark Savant...... $37.07 Spaceward Ho!............. tba Tank 2.0(Spec. Holo) Wizardry. Third Reich Carl Lewis Challen..... $26.47 Daggar Amon Ra........ $37.07 Summoning............. $35,37 CRUSADERS Duork's BBall Encyl.... $21.17 Dark Queen Krynn...... $29.47 Carries the beauty and Fant. Football92 ........ $21.17 Darks grace of the Popular Bane HardballII. $31.77 Dark Seed................. $37.07 DARK SAVANT Take on war time Germany of the Cosmic Forge Hardball3 Teams ....... $13.22 Darklands.................. $37.07 in WWII with your B-17 system with 256 colors. J. Nick. Sign. Golf ...... $37.07 Daemonsgate..... $37.07 Flying Fortress. Fly using outdoor campaigns, sound J. Nick. Course 1........ $13.22 Dune.....................$31.77 flight dynamics, ordnances effects, auto mapping. T.LaRussa BBall......... $29.47 Dungeon Master ........ $26.47 an WWII atmosphere, while point and click interface, LaRussa 90 Teams..... $10.57 ForgeofVirtue............ $13.22 ................. $21.17 taking control with a 10 and a deep wonderful story LaRussa 91 Teams..... $10.57 Goblins member crew, with varying line. Check out the low LaRussa Fant. Mgr..... $10.57 I. Jones Fate At.......... $31.77 skills. CCC Member Price CCC Member Price $37.07 In the QOP Tradition of MICROPROSE $37.07 quality comes a game that blonds strategy and tactics Two Towers................ $31.77 Ultrabots Sanction Earth Acesinthe Pacific...... $42.37 Battlechess 4.......... $26.47 in a Medieval World. Nine Ult. Underworld.......... $42.37 Airbus A-320.............. $42.37 Battle Isle $29.47 scenarios, random map Ultima VII................. $42.37 CDROM Titles Airbucks .................... $31.71 Battle isle Scen S.. $20.62 generator, 21 levels of play Multi-Media Upgrade Aircraft & Adven........ $26.47 Bridge 7.0............. $26.47 and campaign option. Pro 16. $969 Air Force Comman..... $31.77 Buzz Aldrin's Rac ..... $37.07 MS-DOS Games Yet Battle Chess Enh.....$50 Anc. ArtWar/Sky ........ $31.77 Campaign............. $31.77 Better yet, pick this game A.T.A.C.................. .........................$55 To Be Released Loom $31.77 Carrier Strike............ as a CCC Member at the $37.07 B-17 Flying Fort...... Lost Treas. Infocom.....$50 .. $37.07 Carriers at War .......... $37.07 best price in the industry. Look For Them Phoenix Shareware...... $55 Birds of Prey............... $29.47 Castles...................... $31.77 Soon?? Sec. Monkey Isl...........$50 F-15111 ........... .... $42.37 Castles North Ca....... $15.87 AH-64 (Spec. Holobyte) Sec Weap. Luff........... $65 F-117A....................... $42.37 Castles ll ................... $31.77 Links 386 Pro............. $37.07 KGB.............................. tba Air Force Pilot Trainer Ult. Underg/W Com2..... $55 Falcon 3.0.................. $42.37 Chessmaste 3000..... $29.47 Madden FBallll........ . $29.47 Lather Goddess Il....... $37.07 Avenger A10(Spec Holo) W.Comm. llw/all Data ... S55 Falcon 3 Missions....... $21.17 Chess 3 for Wind..... $35.37 NFL Chall.3.0........... $26.47 Legend ....................... $37.07 Celtic Legends FS Pro (Mallard) ......... $21.17 Civilization... $37.07 Pro League BBall........ $31.77 Leg. Kyrandia........... $31.77 Conquestof Japan Grand Canyon Sce.... $15.87 Civ. Collectors $42.37 Dark Sun (SSI) Great NavalBat.'s...... $41.27 Conflict: Korea $31.77 Dragons Lair III Gunship 2000 .......... $37.07 Conflit: M-East. $31.77 Naval WWII action in the Buy either B-17 Flying Fleet Commander (RAW) Gunship 2 Scen........ $21.17 Conq. Kingdoms.... .. tba Pacific is brought to you by Harpoon Gold Fortress or Task Force Hawaii Scenery......... $15.87 Crises Kremlin........... $37.07 Hero's 357th ............. Harpoon Patriot $29.47 Cyber Empires.......... $29.47 Micropose. Command 1942 and receive a free Hyperspeed............... $31.77 Flames of Freed. ....... $26.47 destroyers, cruisers, Jump Jet (Microprose) Liberty or Death (Koei) B-17/Task Force Nonbattleships from each side Mantis, ExpFight....... $37.07 Grigsby Pac War....... $42.37 Magic Candle !!! Mantis SpchAcc......... $15.87 GlobalConquets....... $31.77 and fight an entire skid Mug ($9.95 value) Oper Lightning Sim.... $15.87 Global Effect ......... Pacific War (SSI) campaign in single duals. $29.47 while supplies last. JAVICE NATION MIGRE RailroadTycoon ....... $15.87 Harpoon .......... Pirates Gold Simply the best! $35.37 Red Baron.................. Pirates of Realm Space $37.07 Harp. Designer...... CCC Member Price $29.47 PTO:Pacific Theater of War Red Baron Miss. D....... $15.87 High Command........ $45.00 $37.07 Scen. Enhancer Ed.... $21.17 L'Empereur .......... Rulesof Engagement Il MICROPROSE $31.77 Sec. Weap.Luff........... $37.07 Nob. Ambition il ....... $31.77 Sec. W. Miss. 1.......... $15.87 Powermonger........... $29.47 Summer Chall............ $29.12 Lost Files S. Holme..... $41.27 The Cape Cod Connection Membership Sec. W. Miss.2........ $15.87 Railroad Tycoon ....... $15.87 Strato-Mat-BBall........ $21.17 Lost Treas. Il. ............ $26.47 Plan gives YOU: Sec. W.Miss. 3............ S15.87 Ramparts................. $23.57 Tom Landry FBall....... $26.47 Magic Candlell .......... $35.37 Sec. W. Miss.4... $15.87 Scrabble DeluxW...... $26.49 Magic Candlelll ........ ... tba The Best Prices for Entertainment SimAnt $31.77 Siege ................ $35.37 You've worked M&M Clouds Xeen ..... $37.07 Sim Antfor Window .... $31.77 Solitaire Journey...... $31.77 Software and Tabletop War and Role Hard All Week OutofThisWorld........ $31.77 Task Force42.......... $37.07 Spoils of War ........... ... $31.77 Pirates Gold ............... $37.07 Playing Games in the Industry Today! Tahiti ScenUpgr. ....... $21.17 Star Trek Anniv.......... $31.77 Treat Yourself to a Piratesrealm Spac........ tba All it COSTS is $20 for a FULL Year. Team Yankee 2 .. ... $26.47 The Perf. General ...... $31.77 Game. Questfor Glory III........ $37.07 Tracon for Window..... $31.77 Per. GenScen's ........ $18.52 Realms.................... $15.37 The Lost Admiral ....... $31.77 Prices listed in this ad are member prices Pric Sea Rogue................. $26.47 CAPE COD CONNECTION has essentially evolved into a Membership Club. Simply the finest club in the industry today. Club members receive the Best Price, the Best Service, and the Best Information. For that reason the product prices listed above are for MEMBERS ONLY. You do not have to become a CCC Member to order from us. Please call for Non-Member Pricing. Memberships cost $20.00 for a full years benefits!ll CCC offers every electronic means known to mankind for ordering. We are open Monday Friday 10 AM 8 PM and Saturday 10 AM 5 PM. CCC now has a store location at 845 Main St., Falmouth, MA 02540, drop in and browse. All phone numbers are the same. Overseas Dealer Inquiries welcome. (Prices and availability may vary.) CCC policy is to replace defective software with the same. MAIL TO: TASK FORCE .......... 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02540 VOICE ORDERS 1-800-729-6733  1-508-457-0738. FAX 1-508-457-4558 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"Letters GREETINGS from without having the wave pass by quickly. But for a brief moment in time ... One article I have not seen in 100 issues was how each of your gaming staff would purchase a computer given a reasonable amount of money, and what features they would insist on and why. Would M. Evan Brooks insist on the same speed as Scorpia? Would Johnny Wilson buy the same sound card as Russell Sipe? While on the subject of sound cards, a few years ago, you published an article on picking the \"right\" sound card. With the technological changes, is it time for an update? It was interesting to re-read Chris Crawford's article in Volume 1.1 to see how clearly he could see through time. I hope to be able to write you a letter after your 200th issue with the same enjoyment it gives me to write this one. Bruce Johnson Buckeye, AZ The truth is that Scorpia is faster than Evan (just kidding Scorp, I was talking about your machine, could you put down that axe? Please? Preferably somewhere besides in my head). Actually, Evan upgraded to his present 386 prior to Scorpia's upgrade, but Scorpia increased her processor speed very recently. Wargames do not usually require as much processing power as graphic adventures and CRPGs, but Evan also likes simulations and they require the faster processors. Evan is looking to upgrade. Also, while Johnny and Russell both like the Roland, Johnny's too cheap to buy one. As for the sound card article, we had intended to publish one in this issue. Unfortunately, we are still waiting for several manufacturers to release some of the cards we were getting excited about. We'll have to give you the same answer they give us, our next sound card article will be RSN (Real Soon Now). requie Johnny ancor the sounfortunatel Long Time Passing I would like to congratulate you and your staff on your 100th issue. It is remarkable considering the tremendous changes that have taken place since your magazine was established in 1981, I picked up a copy of your first issue in some forgotten computer store in Costa Mesa in December of 1981 I subscribed without hesitation and my subscription has run without interruption for 10 years. I am not sure how many of us there are, but I have every issue, 1.1 through 100. However, I have not collected them for sake of collection alone. I would like to compliment you by stating without reservation that I enjoyed every issue. Although I am a wargamer at heart, growing up with Avalon Hill boardgames in the mid-late '60s, I want to let you know that I enjoy reading about all the various facets of the industry. I don't play the role-playing, sports or arcade games, but still enjoy reading the reviews and articles because I want to know what direction the industry is heading. I entered the computer age partially due to the vision that someday I could sit down and play Third Reich without having to coerce an unwilling friend, travel umpteen miles through rural Arizona to find another gamer, or endure the necessary delays of PBM. I have owned and enjoyed an Atari 800, an Amiga 1000 and currently own a 386/25 clone. I am now laying down the specifications for my next generation of computer. Although it will be used for business purposes on my Arabian horse breeding farm, 1 will also ensure that it has the state of the art technology to keep me entertained. After all, what is the fun of growing older if you can't afford to indulge yourself now and then. Even if I get less and less time to game on the computer, I can at least make it \"quality\" time! Although, the research is incomplete, I will generally be looking at a 486/33 local bus with 32-bit hard drive controller and video card. A 16-bit sound card to tie into my stereo system at 100 watts/channel. An oversized monitor. CD-ROM to position myself for future advances in that technology. 8 MB RAM, 256K cache, 340 MB hard drive, etc. With all of the advances in computer technology, it is hard to climb to the crest of the technological wave and ride it very far Bomber, Man! In the October, 1992 article by Mr. Brooks, \"Carrier Strike: A Campaign Replay II,\" he laments that the Japanese dive bombers can only deliver a 250 lb. bomb (as opposed to the American 1000 pounder). It should be noted that in the game it is a 250 kilogram bomb (one kilogram = 2.2046 pounds), so the bombs he laments are equivalent to 551.15 pounds. Keith Maehren Tigard, OR Gee, no wonder his deck crew had hernias. Hundred Years Score The HYW review in CGW #100 was nicely done, but I have a few comments on some of the erroneous statements made. Ken went on about the value of the ducat and the cost of things in the game. Apparently he missed the item in the documentation (specifically the glossary) that stated: \"Ducat — A currency invented for this game because of the multiplicity of different currencies used during the period. One English Pound is worth 600 Ducats, one French Livre is worth 132 Ducats. All prices in the game are expressed in terms of Ducats (which, coincidentally, are also worth one dollar US (1992 period). A common unit of currency in the game is the kDucat (1,000 Ducats).\" Al [Nofi] and I really dissected the medieval economy, which was possible because they kept a lot of financial records during the period and used vellum (which does not rot) rather than paper. We built models for individual farmers as well as noble housePage 116 Computer Gaming World "


"New! TRISTAN Available for IBM PC and Macintosh \"Best Simulation\" Finalist 1991 computers. -Software Publishers Association \"(TRISTAN) should be a big winner.\" John Sculley \"You can easily forget you are playing on a computer -Miami Herald L 1000 \"TRISTAN puts a new tilt on old fashion pinball.\" -MacWEEK \"Superbly lives up to its billing as solid state pinball.\" -MAWORLD Enjoy the Excitement of Real Pinball!  Authentic Ball Action  Wild Pinball Devices  Fabulous Sound  TILT and much more... TRISTAN To Order: Contact your favorite retailer or call (613) 967-7900. SERIENCEDORA Solid State PINBALL COPYRIG 100 WEEGST 915830 GALLE Compatible with Windows 3.x, Sound BlasterTM, Adlib SoundTM, and 256 color VGA. AMTEX SOFTWARE CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #45 Amtex Software Corporation  206 George Street  Belleville, Ontario Canada K8N 3H4  voice (613) 967-7900  fax (613) 967-7902 "


"MISSION CONTROL SOFTWARE HEADQUARTERS A Full Selection of Software and Accessories for the IBM. and save. .....32 ...37 A Train CALL 37 DRAGOS LAIR 1: Leisure Larry 1, 2 or 3 VGA Scrabble Deluxe. Sexxy Software Lemmings Scenery Upgrade: Hawaii.. Must over twenty one to order! The Ultimate Sound Solution! UltraSound-Now you can add Lemmings 2.... Secret of Monkey Island II ...... Three CD's to choose from...or order all three \"unheard of audio realism to your m or order allehre Les Manley Lost in L.A. 16 Bit 32 Voice Ster Secret of Monkey Island VGA....27 Sound Lexicross... Secret of the Silver Blades ........33 games and presentations. Life & Death Shadow of the Sorcerer. Ultrasound is the most advanced Disk I contains 5.268 explicit VGA pictures SOFTS Life & Death It:The Brain ShadowLands... sound technology available. in GIF format, 87 animated movies, 574 Light Quest Shanghai It:Dragons's Eye.. stories, tales & jokes and 1200 viewers, delivering 16 bit, crystal dear sound Loom Shuttle Space Flight Simulator..37 games and utilities Lord of the Rings I. Siege ... to your IBM. Supports Windows, Disk 2 is an exclusive collection containg Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...47 Sim Ant. compatible with SoundBlaster & A Turn on Lost Treasures of Infocom.... Sim City over 900 Super VGA pictures and over 400 Lib, 8 bit digital sampling 256K WITH YOUR Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 VGA pictures. Sim City for Windows... onboard memory, amplified output COMPUTER The Lost Tribe.. Sim City Graphic:Ancient Cities 23 Disk 3 is another collection of over 650 mb Lure of the Temptress.. Sim City Graphic:Future Cities....23 joystick port, standard MIDI of the hottest pictures available. Oh No! More Lemmings .32 Sim Earth........... interface, one year warranty. Onc for $89./Two for $70./Three for $199. Magic Candle 2 Sim Earth for Windows ..... .41 Magic Candle 3 1.40 Solitaire for Windows by Advanced Gravis.....$129. Magnetic Scrolls Collection........37 Solitaire's Journey... 37 Dagger of Amon Ra.................43 Maniac Mansion w/clue book...19 Sound, Graphics & Air Upgrade...29 Where in USA is Carmen..........32 IBM GAMES Pirates GOLD........ ............43 Daemonsgate... Mantis:Experimental Fighter......43 Space Ace 2:Bor's Revenge.....37 Where in World is Carmen.........32 P.T.O.......... Dark Half Martian Memorandum .............26 Space Ace.... Where in World is Carmen VGA..48 Red Baron ..................37 $43 Darklands.... Wing Commander 2.................47 Secret Weapon P38 Missions ...22 Arbucks, CALL Dark Queen of Krynn. Strike Back. Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak17 Secret Weapon P30 Missions ...22 Amazon... DarkSeed...... APS 2001 Cobra Wing 2 Special Operations 1.....22 Secret Weapon Heinkel 162.....22 American Gladiators.... Dark Sun...... Strike back and surprise your opponent Wing 2 Special Operations 2.....22 Secret Weapon Dornier 335...22 American Tail.......... Double Dragon 3........ Wing Commander Deluxe..........47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe ...44 A. Slim's Dealer's Choice... with the APS 2001 Cobra, the only Dragon's Lair Singe's Castle.....37 Wings of Fury ............ ......21 Silent Service I....... ........37 ATAC... Dragon's Lair:Il: Timewarp... fully programmable, microprocessor Wizardry Trilogy .............. Spectre... Armor Alley.......... Dragon's Lair 3...... WordTns.. Spoils of War.......................CALL Batman Returns....................43 Duck Tales: Quest for Gold... controlled, optical joystick that works Wrath of the Demon ...... Task Force 1942........ . Bandit Kings of Ancient China...37 Dune 2... through the keyboard port. Experience UMS II Planet Editor ........... Barbie Fashion Design & Color. 27 Dvorak's Top 30 UMS II: Nations at War...... Barbie's Glamorous Quest........27 Eco Quest 2. the ultimate in joystick performance WARGAMES Uncharted Waters......... Barbie's Print Palace.............22 Empire Deluxe. without paying for costly gamecards or 698 Attack Sub.......... V for Victory... Bard's Tale Construction Sel....34 Eye of the Beholder 2.. Aces of the Pacific ......... Waterloo ....... Bard's Tale III.......................31 Femme Fatale. separate control devices. Action Stations ..... Western Front. Bart Simpson Arcade Game......32 Femme Fatale Data Disk 1.2.3.20 Air Force Commander........... CALL X-Wing... Bart Simpson/House Weirdness32 Femme Fatale Data Disk 4.. Air Warrior ............ Battle Chess....... Maxximum Company...$69. . Flight Planner... Ancient Art of War at Sea..........31 SPORTS Battle Choss 4000..... Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs ... Ancient Art of War in Skies........37 Battle Chess II.. Game Pack 1............... ATAC............. 4-D Boxing.... ... ..22 Beat the House ..... Gateway to Savage Frontier.......33 Matrix Cubed. Space Quest 4.. A.T.P. Flight Commander...........37 Action Sports Soccer..............27 Beverly Hills 90210 Genghis Khan. MegaTraveller 3 Space Wrecked. B-17 Flying Fortress...... ...43 All American College Football....37 Mercenaries Spellcasting 2013 Dragon's Lair III: Merchant Colony Spellcasting 301 Mickey & Minnie's Print Kit. The Curse of Mordread Spellcraft..... AN Might & Magic 3 Spelljammer # GURSEVERDRLA After destroying the evil wizard Mordroc Might & Magic:Clouds of Xeen 243 Star Control 2 in his bid for marriage to your beloved Millenium 27 Starflight 2. Daphne in Dragon's Lair II, his sister, Monopoly Star Trek 25th Anniversary... Monopoly Deluxe Edition... the evil witch Mordrcad is demanding Stratego ......... Sale! Murder Strike Commander revenge. You, as Dirk the Daring, must Ninja Gaiden 2. Strip Poker 3 test your skills as you are thrust into a Ninja Turtles: Arcade.. Stunt Island. frantic quest through time to save Ninja Turtles:Manhattan Mission 32 The Summoning No Greater Glory Super Jeopardy. This multi-voice sound synthesizer and digital-to-analog converter for stereo Daphne and the children before they are Nobunaga's Ambition II 37 Super Space Invaders playback of music, and sound effects and speech features a microphone trapped forever in the vortex of Eternity Nova 9 Super Tetris. input for digital recording, midi in and out, 20 channels of synthesized Obitus Terminator........ Omar Sharif on Bridge Terminator 2029 sound and more! by ReadySoft.........$33. Orbits. Test Drive III Out of this World Tetris Classic.... Palladin 11. Theatre of War............. Birds of Prey........................33 Andretti's Racing Challenge...22 Black Crypt Global Effect.. Paperboy 2... Three in 1 Player's Pack........37 Campaign Bil Elliot's Nascar Challenge....32 Breach 2 GODS. Pitrighter Tracon I:Air Traffic Controller ....32 Carriers at War.. . 3 Califomia Games II.... Bridge 7.0..... Gold of the Americas Planet's Edge... Tracon Il for Windows..... ...43 Carrier Strike .... .. .... 43 Car & Driver Bug's Bunny Cartoon Workshop 32 Grand Slam Bridge 2 Playroom..... 29 Treasures of Savage Frontier ....34 Conflict: Korea..... .............37 Carl Lewis Challenge.... ..... Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space...43 Guy Spy Conflict:Middle East............. Earl Weaver Baseball 2............ Captain Comic ll... .17 Halls of Montezuma RMINATOR F15 Stnke Eagle 3.... Castles 2: Siege & Conquest... 37 Terminator 2029 .....47 Front Page Sports Football.......43 Heaven and Earth F15 Strike Eagle 3:Ace Pack..52 Games Winter Challenge.......35 Challenge of the 5 Realms...... 37 Heimdall...... 2029 F.19 Stealth Fighter....... ...43 Greens Ultimate Golf Simulator 37 Champions of Krynn Heroes of the Lance. Battle Skynet's forces on the twisted Falcon 3.0............................47 HardBall 3............. . .....37 Chessmaster 3000. Home Alone and charred landscape of L.A. in the Great Naval Battles.................47 International Sports Challenge.32 Chessmaster 3000 Windows... Home Alone 2:Lost in NY vear 2029. Choose from more than a Gunship 2000 VGA........ Jack Nicklaus Golf Unlimited ....37 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat.....40 Hoyle's Book of Games 3 dozen lethal weapons and defensives Harpoon. Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed.......43 Civilization Hoyle's Book of Games 2 Harpoon BattleSet #2.3...... John Madden Football 2...........33 Classic 5. Hoyle's Book of Games 1 systems to aid you in terminating Harpoon Battle Set #4....... Links Barton Creek Course ......20 Clue Master Detective... The Humans Skynet's assault units. Meet the Harpoon Challenger Pak ........ Links Bayhill Course Disk........20 Coaster... Indiana Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis ultimate killing machine, the CSM Harpoon Scenario Editor .........28 Links Bountiful Course Disk......20 Comic Book Creator.... Island of Dr. Brain Model 101-E: The Terminator! Do Heroes of the 357th............ Links Dorado Course Disk Conan the Cimmerian.. K.G.B... .... it right and you'll be at the ultimate Kampfgruppe ....... Links Firestone Course Disk..... Conquest of Longbow.. King's Quest 5 LHX Attack Chopper......... showdown, Skynet Central Links Pinehurst Course Disk.....20 Corporation.......... King's Quest 6. A Line in the Sand........... .. Links Troon North Course .......20 Creepers... L.A. Law............. Mac Arthur's War...... ...... Links 386 PRO....... . Cribbage King/Gin King... L'Empereur...... MegaFartress Mission Disk2...27 Links: The Challenge of Golf....27 Crisis in the Kremlin.... Land, Sea, Air Trilogy 2. MegaFortress: Flight of Old Dog 40 Mike Ditka Ultimate Football.....35 Crusaders of the Dark Savant...43 Leather Goddess of Phobos 2...43 Mig 29 NCAA: Road to the Final Four... 34 Curse of the Azure Bonds.. ..33 Legend of Kyrandia.... Pools of Darkness......... Trump Castle 3............... NAM... NFL Full Motion Video.............47 Cyber Empires........ Leyons of Krella.......... Police Quest 3... Turbo OutRun.... . Patton Strikes Back........... NFL Pro League Football........47 Populous:Promised Lands. Ultima Underworld Patriot PGA Course Disk............. .. Ad Lib Music Card Powerhits: Battletech Series Ultima Trilogy.... Powerhits: Sci-Fi Ultima Trilogy 2.. Powerhits Sports Ultima 7......... Turn Your Aircraft into a For a limited time we are offering Powermonger... Ultima 7:Forge of Virtue realistic air-craft style yoke! Prince of Persia.... Ultima 7: Serpent Iste AdLib the Ad Lib MSC card at an MOUSE Prophecy of the Shadow .. Ultima 6............ unbelievable price. And if you The Prophecy Uncharted Waters.... YOKE Innovative design converts your mouse Quest for Glory 3 Vengeance of Excalibur. a full size aircraft-style yoke for realistic order before January 31, we will Railroad Tycoon Vette. flight simulation. Adds realistic, precise include an IBM joystick (S29.95 Rampart... Video Poker... yoke movement to any simulation Reach for the Stars.. Virtual Reality Studio. list price) for only $6.00. Realms Volpheed program that utilizes a mouse for A great way to get started with Rex Nebular. Waxworks directional control. No gameport or Robosport for Windows........ Wayne's World.... gameport required. Assembles in second Se sound at a really fantastic price! Romance of Three Kingdoms 2.43 Wheel of Fortune Vanna White... 27 Du Makes and stores casily in a drawer, Rules of Engagement Where America's Past Carmen..37 Rules of Engagement 2... Where in Europe is Carmen..... Sargon 5... Where in Time is Carmen....... * AdLib Gold 1000........$175. CE 37 21 34 37 Bethesda Softworks...$43. 32 32 ......40 ...19 39 by Ad Lib..........$47. .......32 Colorado Spectrum...$35 "


"We Specialize in International Sales! Call 800-999-7995 in NY State 212-962-7168 Fax 212-962-7263 MISSION Maxximum Presents! Get a Real Feel to Flight! by Maxximum Maxx Yoke gives you the precision you always wanted. It's a full sized multifunctional aircraft joystick for your PC..... ....$69. Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven independent controls including radar mode. weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures control...............................$89. Flight Control The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 button joystick.........................$69. Flight Control Pro............ $115. Rudder Pedals...................$115. Design Your Own Railroad........37 Dream House Professional.......48 Dvorak on Typing Dvorak's Top 30 Estimating & Invoicing.. . Estimator Plus.. . FailSale: Computer Guardian....37 Fast Pack Mail Floor Plan Plus Form Tool Gold Lottery Trend Analysis ...........18 Mavis Beacon 2.0 Mavis Beacon 2.0 Windows... Pacioli 2000 Personal Lawyer... Printshop New Quicken for Windows............ Screen Works ... .22 Speed Reader for Windows ..... Sprout!........................... Studio of Greetings.............. Sharif on Bridge... Sherlock Holmes Detective... Sherlock Holmes Detective 2...47 Sleeping Beauty.... Software Jukebox ........... Spirit of Excalibur ............. Star Trek 25th Anniversary........47 Time Table:Science & Innovation..59 Time Table:Arts & Entertainment 49 Time Table:Bus. Politics & Media 49 Ultima 1 to 6........................59 U.S. Atlas w/ AutoMap............79 U.S. History.... . 249 U.S. Presidents... 39 Where in the World is Carmen...74 Wing Commander/Ultima .......57 Wing Commander Deluxe Edition 47 World View... Wrath of the Demon...... ...32 WC2/Ultima Underworld ...........54 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe.......54 Maxx Pedals are floor style modular attachments which are fully assembled and ready to plug in and play. ..$39. Maxx Yoke & Pedal Bundle ...599. 379 A Limited Edition................$46 A Tour Golf.... bymaker Football Football Analyst League Baseball mmer Challenge...... am Suruki....... m Landry Football... my LaRussa Al Stadium .......... 18 ny LaRussa Baseball ny LaRussa Great Teams......18 ny LaRussa NL Stadium...... 18 Gretzky Hockey League Sim. 30 Byne Gretzky 2 Canada's Cup 35 ayne Gretzky Hockey 3.........37 Saver 2.Commemorative.....59 EDUCATIONAL 479 Mickey's Memory Challenge......22 Mickey's Runaway Zoo...... Midnight Rescue Nigel's World.............. Number Munchers Operation Neptune Oregon Trail... Outnumbered..... PC Globe 5 PCU.S.A. 2.0 Personal Trainer S.A.T. Read & Roll VGA Reader Rabbit 2. Reading & Me Speed Reader Spell it Plus Talking SpellBound Storybook Weaver ... Super Munchers Super Spellicopter.......... Think Quick Time Riders in American History37 Treasure Cove .....................37 Design Your Own Home Remodeling your home's interior: Interiors Choose an appropriate scale, then draw your room from a top view. Select furniture or fixtures from the dozens of pre-drawn objects provided and place them in your room. Use your mouse to manipulate these objects, then view your room from any one of four side views. Design Your Own Home Interiors....$37. Design Your Own Architecturc......$37. Design Your Own Landscape.........537. by Abracadata 02.09 Harvard Draw........ 379 Harvard Graphics.. LapLink Pro 4 Letter Perfect....... 109 Lotus 1-2-3 ver 2.4.... Lotus 1-2-3 ver.3.1 ...... 389 Lotus 1-2-3 Windows.......... Lotus Agenda................ Lotus Magellan... Lotus Symphony ............... Managing Your Money ........ ...99 Windows 3.1 ............ Microsoft Word for Windows....299 Microsoft Word 5.5............. Norton Commander ........ Norton Anti-Virus ............. Omnipage Professional...........639 0 & A............. Sidekick................ .............57 Superbase 4 for Windows......469 Willmaker by NOLO Software.....37 Wordstar 7.0........................259 Grade A Vocabulary 2.3.4.........14 Grade A Vocabulary 4,5,6.... Grade A Vocabulary 6,7,8 Grade A SAT Vocabulary Gremlins Game...... Gremlins Print Kit Expert File & Calc. Expert Home Design .... Expert Utilities.... Expert Perfect Typing ...... ExpertPersonal Finance Expert Pet Care... Grade A Algebra.. Grade A Math 1.2.3 Grade A Math 4,5,6 BOHNB 209 ...95 .85 ..249 OO Call Us For the Newest and Latest in Software. Prices based on M.S.R.P Not responsible for Typographical errors. Please Check Compatibility before ordering. Prices subject to change without notice. All sales are final. Defectives replaced with same item only. 290 geblaster Plus.................. renstain Bears: Counting...... 18 tenstain Bears: Letters...... renstain Bears:Colors. ........27 Super Mario Teaches Typing .....27 Ten Best Publisher's........... ....19 Travel Partner .......... Turn Your Ideas Into Business 27 Webster's Dictionary Webster's Dictionary/Thesaurus32 Weather Brief... World Atlas World Atlas for Windows ...... TIME EAGLE ..54 F-15 Strike Eagle III Includes a new visual system that blends 3D polygon and bitmapped graphics. Features campaign mode, 2 player head to head by modem, and 2 player cooperative in separate planes or in the same F-15. CD ROM SOUNDCARDS Ad Lib Gold 1000................199 Ad Lib Music Card................. Ad Lib Micro Channel............. Ad Lib Personal Music System..99 Sound Blaster Pro Basic Pkg...199 Sound Commander FX.............109 Sound Commander Gold.........169 UltraSound Board...................129 ACCESSORIES Disk Holder for 5.25 or 3.5........9 GameCard 3 Automatic............32 GameCard 3 Microchannel .......48 Mouse/MenuDirect/Lemmings 24 Suncom controller PC............49 MaxFax 9624 Fax/Modem........89 MaxFax 9624 Portable ...... Max Fax 9696 Analog Plus .................. Analog Sabre Flight Stick by CH .... Gravis Joystick for PC......... Mach II by CH Products ....... Groundbreaking 3D Flight Simulation! In Strike Commander, you'll command Stern's Wildcats. an elite squadron of mercenaries trying to fly straight in a world of deceit and violence. You'll pilot a staggering variety of fighter aircraft, from the lowly P38 to the 122 Lightning 2, as you engage rival squadrons, renegade third world dictators. neo-nazis, and the armies of the dreaded IRS all in the service of Corporation and Country by Origin..............$43. 5 Game Pack by Capstone...... Amanda Stories ..... Audubon Mammals............. BattleChess... Beauty & the Beast Book of Lists 3...... Britannica's Family Choice....... Case of the Cautious Condor....44 Conan the Cimmerian......... 37 Compton Family Encyclopedia 295 Electronic Cookbook.. European & American Art.... Future Wars Game Pack 1. by Micro Prose......$43. BUDGET ...28 49 37 AMAZON erenstain Bears:Junior Jigsaw 18 ushbuck Adventures...............27 mallenge of Ancient Empire ....32 Signosaurus II............. nald's Alphabet Chase ........14 arthQuest osaurus 27 sher Price: Farm sher Price Picture Dictionary...27 Sher Price Neighborhood eo Jigsaw... Sofy's Railway Express ammar Gremlins adline Harry EGA eadline Harry VGA ero by Night..... Works 2.... Treasure Math Storm.............. 37 Treasure Mountain U.S. Atlas..... U.S. Atlas for Windows. What's My Angle Where America's Past Carmen 37 Where in Europe is Carmen... Where in Time is Carmen 32 Where in USA is Carmen Where in World is Carmen Where in World is Carmen VGA 48 Word Attack Plus..... Word Munchers......... Writer Rabbit .. Writing/Publishing Center.........42 PRODUCTIVITY Lets the usct feel that they are involved in a real life movie adventure, Cinematic effects are carried to new heights with multiple digitized characters on screen, multiple camera angles. Flasbacks, in cut action scenes and much more. A full score, digitized voices and sound effects actually carry You to the thick jungles of the Amazon. With such high production values, you become a part of the story, characters seem to actually come to life. by Access Software....$38. Addams Family Print Kit............19 Adventures of Beetlejuice ........ Beetlejuice Print Kit............ Bugs Bunny's Adventure........ Chip N Dale's Rescue Rangers..19 Daffy Duck P.I........ Expert Astronomer............ Expert Calendar ................. Expert Checkwriter.......... Expert DOS Tutor Expert Fax Forms...... Expert File & Calc... Expert Home Design. Expert Utilities .... ExpenPerfect Typing ExpenPersonal Finance Expert Pet Care Grade A Algebra... Grade A Math 1.2.3 Grade A Math 4.5.6.. Grade A Math 5,6,7 Grade A Spanish ....... Grade A Spelling 2.3.4 Grade A Spelling 4.5.6 Grade A Spelling 6.7.8... Hours: 9am to 7pm Monday Friday (Saturday 10am 5pm) Methods of Payment: We accept Visa. M/C. Discover Card, certified checks & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping: UPS ($5 min). APO/FPO( $5 min.) 2 Day Air ($7 min.) CAN. HI. AK & PR ($9 min). Overseas minimum $30 (please fax orders if possible). Pre-Orders on New Releases get shipped 2 Day Air-$5 (U.S. Only). NY residents add 8.25% Sales Tax. Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL 43 Warren Street, Dept. CGW 193 New York, NY 10007 Military Orders given special attention! 34 .79 ath and Me. th Blaster Mystery Eith Blaster Plus ath Blaster Plus Windows... sath Rabbit sckey's 123 chey's ABC.... ckey's Colors & Shapes ........27 ckey's Crossword Puzzle........22 ckey's Jigsaw Puzzle.............27 AccuWeather America's 25 Best Home Finance15 Animation Studio Architecture:Design Your HomeCALL Auto Map 57 Auto Map: Europe AutoWorks... Bannemania... Body Works .... Chemistry Works .......... FEMME FATALE Putt-Putt Joins the Parade EDOFTAL PUZZLE FOA ARUS Game Pack 2.................... ......69 Golf Guide:CA and Hl edition.....44 Grammy Awards.......... .....49 Grolier's Encyclopedia .........239 Guinness Disc of Records 92....39 I Photograph to Remember ...... Information U.S.A............... Jets & Props... 44 Jones in the Fast Lane .............43 KGB/CIA Fact Book... 39 King's Quest 5... ...43 Learn to Speak Spanish ............64 Legend of Kyrandia .................43 Loom ................ McMillan Dictionary for Children 40 Mammals Encyclopedia ........... Money Money, Money.........30 Murder Make StrangeDeadfellow 37 PC Globe. 7th Guest.. Secret of Monkey Island ...........47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe ....59 Femme Fatale Build the Girl of Your Dreams! by Graphic Expressions Femme Fatale is a jigsaw puzzle consisting of a group of exquisite girls digitized in full color. These LARGE FULL SCREEN images may be scrambled into varying numbers of pieces including 25.40.64.80 or 100. Numerous features include audio assistance, 16 ravishing girls, import feature & more. Warning: Must be 21 of over to order! Data Disk I thru 4...$20.ca Femme Fatale...............$25. Mach III by CH Products..........33 Maxx Flight Pedals. Maxx Flight Yoke..... . Merlin . Mouse Yoke .... Quickshot Aviator 5........... Quickshot Intruder 5.......... Quickshot Warrior 5........... Yoke/Pedal Bundle ......... .....99 Thrustmaster Flight Control.......69 Thrust Master Weapons Control.89 Thrustmaster Pro ..................105 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals...105 BUSINESS 162 PRE 99 Grab your car wax and buff your bumpers it's time for the annual Cartown Pet Parade. Help Pute-Putt tackle the local car wash. tesue a puppy, put out a fire and more. This interactive graphic adventure brings a new level of sophistication to children's softwarc: logic puzzles with sound and animation Talking characters, original music, simple interface. For IBM CD ROM or DISK by Humongous....$34. 199 AmiPro 2.0 (SPECIAL).... Central Point's Anti-Virus Central Paint's Back-up...... Copy II PC... Geoworks Designer............ Geoworks Desktop. Circle Reader Service #107 "


"Letters now, just imagine how it would be with crude auctions at border marketplaces for foreign exchange and having to deal with all sorts of traveling moneychangers\"-p. 149). Also, Johnny Wilson insists that the file he downloaded only had definitions of characteristics (pages and pages of them) and nothing about how to raise or lower them. You didn't expect him to download more than one file did you? You think he has enough room on his cheap little hard drive for all your documentation?<grin> GOY Not So Polloi You gave Sid Meier the Game of the Year award again. It took guts to recognize brilliance. It would have been easy in the cigar smoke filled back rooms) to say, \"Well, we already gave this guy Game of the Year awards, let someone else have it for a change (spread it around so to speak).\" You didn't. My hat's off to you! Putting my hat back on, can't you make the awards ceremonies longer and more detailed? Also, announce the month before that the awards are coming. It's a big deal! Steve Gatewood Brownsville, TX What guts? Our readers would have destroyed Civilization as we know it if we hadn't. If you thought the L.A. riots were something, imagine what would have happened if we had denied Sid on this one. By the way, Sid also has the most titles of any designer in the CGW Hall of Fame. Duty Full Observation holds. A lot of that is transparent to the players, but the fact remains that mercenaries were expensive and there was no way of getting around it and still remaining historical. He also mentioned how long it took to do things. He mentioned this in the round table (forum) and other players were astounded that it took him so long. I played a large position in the alpha test (the Count of Armagnac) and had 16 fiefs to manage, plus I was running around with an army most of the time. I kept track of how long it took me to take care of business each day and it averaged 20-30 minutes. Not only that, but I was tinkering with my fiefs to test new routines and seducing every female in sight to test the pregnancy routines. He was told that he probably had a slow node and there was nothing the HYW crew could do about that. The game was designed to be cheap to play (at least, compared to the other on-line games). We only have a few players who are spending $100 per month and many who are spending less than $50. We have constantly tweaked the menus (and even added an \"expert\" mode) to cut down on time needed to do things. Ken was the only player to make a big stink about this and we never could figure out what his problem was. As for there being too much in the game, you don't expect grognards to come on-line and be happy with electronic Chutes and Ladders? The game is modular, you don't have to play every aspect of it in order to play. You don't even have to manage your fiefs (some players don't, but rather hire themselves out as hired swords or live off plunder). Some of the non-grognard types pay more attention to the social aspects of the game. Since email is free on GEnie, they spend most of their time in the game» at no charge by writing a lot of email. Even the round table can be very cheap if you download and reply to messages off-line (particularly, if using GEnie's Aladdin communications program). Johnny questioned the play balance in the game. The beta game has been going for over two months and neither side shows any sign of imminent victory. He mentioned the inattentive French king, but didn't mention that several of the major French nobles, in effect, deposed the king a few weeks into the game. In the beta game, the well-organized French are currently raiding and pillaging throughout England (using a historically accurate scheme I cannot divulge at the moment, as the English could make use of such information...). In another area, Johnny wondered why all his pillaging and storming fiefs did not increase his stature. The fact is, those two activities decrease stature. He didn't look at the Stature list to see those actions that will increase Stature (taking a keep through negotiation, winning pitched battles, etc.) The same thing is true about the use of many skills. The beta docs point out that not all skills are implemented yet, but the system for generating them is. About half the skills were live during beta and, every week or so, a new one would kick in and an announcement would be made. Other than the above, it was a nice review. James F. Dunnigan New York City, NY Would you believe we only said those things so we could list Jim Dunnigan as a contributor to CGW? The sneak preview (we try not to review games until they are fully implemented) was designed to let readers get a glimpse of a work in progress. If we waited to cover the game until it was finished, a lot of gamers would miss out on a fascinating experience. Note that Johnny Wilson also disagreed with St. Andre about the ducats during the latter portion of the article in question (\"If he thinks the game is complicated I am in the U.S. Army, stationed in Germany. If it wasn't for CGW, I wouldn't have a clue to what's going on in the gaming world. Thank you for being there for US so far away from home. Love those reviews and previews. Michael Davila 45th Med Co (AA) We think it's fair enough. You folks wear fatigues, these massive issues are giving us editorial fatigue. What's New in a CPU? I'm just a guy who reads your magazine and doesn't even own a computer. Could you tell me how to find out what would be the best computer investment for me. I need something that plays all the fantastic games in your magazine and, at the same time, can put up with those business programs nobody I know ever uses. Money is an object, but I might win the lottery. By the way, your magazine makes excellent written entertainment! Darin Kalpakoff Bellflower, CA We think it would be a mistake to get anything less than a 386 clone with, at least, a clock speed of 33 mhz. If possible, get a 486 clone with a faster speed. Get four megabytes of RAM and at least 100 MB on your hard disk. If you've never dealt with a C> prompt before, do yourself a favor and put Windows on the machine as your primary interface. If you're comfortable with the same DOS that you see on your friends' machines, go with DOS 5.0. Get a mouse, if you can afford it, and a sound card that is either Adlib or Soundblaster compatible. If you do win the lottery, throw in a CD-ROM, too. That's the basic game machine for today's games. Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 1/93 Top Titles at the Lowest Price 800-554-9925 ComputAbility 800-554-9925 800-554-9 0-554-9925 Since 1982 Consumer Electronics HOURS: Mon-Fri 9am-9pm Sat 11am-5pm FAX (012) 357-7814 INFO (414) 357-8181 PO Box 17882, Milwaukee, WI 53217 IBM 34.95 19.96 34.95 37.95 29.95 39 95 31 95 34.95 39.95 31.95 Lenimings II. 34.95 Liberty or Death 34.95 Line in the Sand 24.95 Links 386 Pro... 39.95 Lord of the Rings 11. Two Towers ... 34.95 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes ... Lost Treasures of Infocom .............. 39.95 Magic Candle lll...... 3795 Mantis / Speech Pack............. ...39.95/19.95 Megafortress Mega Pak.............. 37.95 Megatraveler Il or Ill... ..34.95/39.95 Mercenaries..... .37.95 Michael Jordan Flight 42.95 Microleague Football II. .. 32.95 Might & Magic III ....... 34.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win 29.95 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 Nam 1965 1975. 29.95 NFL Pro League Football.... 44.95 No Greater Glory..... 39.95 Omar Shantton Bridge/Windows ......29.95/29.95 Out of this World 34.95 PGA Tour Golf ... 31.95 Course Disk for Windows ........ . 17.95 42.95 ecret Weapons/Luftwaffe....... ......39.95 Expansion Disk 1,23 or 4................ 19.95 Shadowgate for Windows ........... 31.95 ShadowLands ... 29.95 Sharif on Bridge for DOSWindows 29.95 Sherlock Holmes: Lost Files 3795 Sid Meier's Bundle 29.95 Siege / Expansion Disk 37 95/20.95 Sim Ant DOS Windows 34.95/34.95 Sim City DOS/Windows............ 29.95/34.95 Sim Earth / Windows ............... 39.95/39.95 Sim Life......... ..39.95 Solitaire's Journey ...... 34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 24.95 Space Hulk 39.95 Space Inc. 34.95 Space Quest 5 39.95 Spaceward HO! 34.95 Spell Craft. 34.95 Spellcasting 301 34.95 Spelljammer Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 Spoils of War ......... 34.95 Star Control Il... 34,95 Star Legions .......... Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary ........... ... 34.95 Forge of Virture Data Disk Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Underworld Ultrabits Uncharted Waters V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory it: Russion Front Wayne Gretzke 3.......... Warlord........... Wax Works ............. Weaver Baseball ...... Where...Carmen San Diego, Each Where. Carmen Past Where... Carmen USA Deluxe Where...Carmen World Deluxe .. White Death ........... Wing Commander 11 Speech Accessory Pack Special Operations lotil Wing Corrimander Deluxe Wizardry Crusaders Dark Savant.. World Circuit Grand Prix ..... WWII 1945...... Yeager's Air Combat..... xWing . 17.95 44.95 47.95 37.95 39.95 42.95 42.95 34.95 29.95 34.95 18 95 29.95 34.95 44.95 44.95 29.95 44.95 14.95 24.95 44.95 39.95 34.95 24.95 25.95 39.95 119.95 30.95 31.95 34.95 43.95 34.95 29.95 24.95 39.95 3795 29.95 29.95 34.95 Patriot... SOUND CARDS 29.95 34.95 31.95 31.95 MEDIA M VISION CREATIVE LAUS. INC. NEW ITEM!  PRO AUDIO LDEOTOM MPC Multimedia FC CREATIVE SOUND BLASTER.16 $219  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible SPECTRUIR 16 $195 29.95 17.95 34.95 29.95 16 Bit / MIDI Interface True 16 Bit Stereo Sound Advanced 20 Voice Stereo Synthesizer . Joystick, Amplifier, Software Call for List! 37.95 25.95 Castles.. Campaign Disk Castles 11 Civil War Conquest of Japan Creepers Crusaders of the Dark Savant Cyber Empires Daemonsgate Dark Seed Death Knights of Krynn.... Deluxe Paint IV (while supplies last) Deluxe Paint IV AGA Demoniak ............. Desert Strike ........ Discovery Columbus Disney Animation Studio Dragon's Lair 3 Dune.......... ECO Phantoms Elvira 11. Jaws of Cerberus.. Eye of the Beholder I or it. Eye of the Storm F-14/F-18 Fables & Fiends: Legend of Kyrandia... Fighter Dual Final Conflict.. Gateway to the Savage Frontier .. . Global Effect Great Navel Battles Harpoon Designers' Series Battleset Harpoon Signature Edition Battleset 4....... Heimdall............... Indy Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis ....... International Sports Challenge... Jack Nicklaus Unlimited. KGB Legend of Kyrandia Lemmings 1 or 2 Light Quest........................ Firestone. Bountiful Course Disks... Lord of the Rings 1.2 or 3 Lords of Time.......... Lost Treasures of Infocom Madden Footbal Mantis. Mavis Beacon Typing... Mega Fortress........ Mission Disk #1 or 2... Mercenaries. Megatraveller 2 ......... Mig-29... Might & Magic III Napoleon Navy Seals... No Greater Glory. Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone Oh No! More Lemm add-on Out of this World PGA Tour Golt.... Gall Tournament Course disk... Perfect General ......... WWII Edition .... WWII Scenario Disk Pinball Dreams Pinball Fantasy Pit-Fighter Plan 9 from Space Pools of Darkness PopulousPopulous ll ......... Powermonger.... Prehistoric Prophecy of the Shadow Realms Red Zone Road Rash Rules of Engagement........ Secret of Monkey Island I or II. Shadow of the Beast Il or Ill. Shanton Bridge... Shuttle Sim Ant......... Sim City Sim Earth.. Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Star Control 11 Star Trek 25th Anniversary ............ Strip Poker 3 Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow Terrain Envoy... The Light Corridor Tom Landry Football Treasure of the Savage Frontier ... Twighlight 2000 Ultima 6 Utopia Viking Field of Conquest... Warlord ..... Warriors of Legends ..... Where in the ... Carmen each...... World Circuit ... S A Line in the Sand 24.95 Aces of the Pacific 39.95 Aces Over Europe... 44.95 AD&D Collector's Edition 11 42.95 AD&D Starter Kit 42.95 Air Bucks ......... 34.95 Air Support... 29.95 Air Traffic Controller ... 34.95 Air Warrior 34.95 Aircraft & Adventure Factory ....... 24.95 Rescue Air 911. Flight 685 or 701, ea 17.95 Amazon 39.95 Ancient Art of War in the Skies 34.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 ATAC 30.95 B-17 Flying Fortress..... ... 39.95 Bane of the Cosmic Forge....... 36.95 Bards Tale III 31.95 Batman Returns 39.95 Battles of Destiny 34.95 BattleChess 4000 29.95 Battlefield 2000 37.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Black Crypt 31.95 Body Illustrated 44.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space 34.95 Campaign 34.95 Car & Driver 37.95 Carl Lewis Challenge 29.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific... 39 95 Expansion Set 20.95 Carners of War 34.95 Castles 1 or ll. 34.95/34.95 Challenge of the Five Realms 34.95 Champions ......... 34.95 Civilization ........ 39.95 Clouds of Xeen ......... 39,95 Cobra Mission 44.95 Comanche: Maximum Overkil 42.95 Data Disk 20.95 Conquered Kingdoms 34.95 Conquest of Japan 34.95 Creepers...... 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 41.95 Curse of Amon Ra 39.95 Cyber Empires ....... 31.95 Daemonsgate 34.95 Dagger of Amonra... 39.95 Dark Oueen of Krynin... 31.95 Darklands 39.95 Dark Mall 34.95 Dark Sun...... 47.95 Daughter of Serpents 31.95 Dominant Species... 29.95 Dr. Thorps Black Jack 30.95 Dragon's Lair 3 34.95 Dune 11. 34,95 Eagle's Rider 29.95 Elvira ll .. 39.95 Empire Deluxe 34 95 Eye of the Beholder 2: Legend of Dark Moon 37.95 Eye of the Storm ..... ..30.95 F-15 Strike Eagle Il or lll ................... 34.95/44.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III Limted Edition ............. 52.95 Fables & Fiends. Legend of Kyrandia............ 34.95 Falcon 3.0 Disk Operation Fighting Tiger ...24.95 Final Contlict...... 29.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force 39 95 Flight Simulator 4.0 39 95 Add an Disks................. CALL Four Crystals to Trazere..... ........ 29.95 Frederick Pohl's Gateway 34.95 Front Page Supports: Football . 39.95 Gary Gisby's Pacific War 39.95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier ..... 31.95 Gemtite. 29.95 Global Effect ..... 31.95 Grand Canyon Scenery... ... 19.95 Grand Slam Bridge il... .. 31.95 Great Naval Battles / Exp Disk 42.95/20.95 Hard Bail Il or lll. 29.95/3495 Player Data Disk for HB III ... 17.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Heaven & Earth...... 29.95 Heroes of the 357th ...... 31.95 Humans ... 24,95 Incredible Machine 29.95 Indy Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis 37.95 International Sports Challenge 29.95 Island of Dr. Brain ....... 29.95 J. Nicklaus Sign. Goll .. 39.95 Data Disk 17.95 Jet Fighter Adventure il 39 95 John Madden Football 2 31.95 Jump Jel 39.95 KGB 29.95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced 39.95 King's Quest 6 44.95 Legends of Valour .37.95 Leisure Suit Lary 5...... 39.95 Lemmings 29.95 JOYSTICKS MODEMS $ & ZOOM $31 .... $75 $19 V.32 bis Internal/External .. ........... $209/$225 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Int. .............. V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext ............... $249 ............ $219 S Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick vysuck . Eliminator Game Card ................. PC MouseStick CH Products: Flight Stick $44 Hi Speed Adaptor .................... Gamecard 3 Auto ...... Gamecard 3-PS/2.... MACH 3 Joystick ...... $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke MAXX Pedal NEW ............... Kralt: Kraft KC3...... Kraft Trackball w/Ft Cntir .... Kraft Thunderstick Thrustmaster: Flight Control $75 Weapons Control ..... Thrustmater Pro. $119 $69 & && Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows... $219 / $219 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone............$279 with Fax Software, DOS/Win .......... $299 / $299 & & AMIGA   . & Perfect General ...... Pinball for Windows .... Pirates of Gold Edition Pools of Darkness.... Populous 11 Power Politics Powermonger PrintShop Deluxe...................... Graphics Libraries: Business ... Graphics Libraries: Sampler Pro League Baseball Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory 3 Rat in the Pacific ....... Rampart.... Rex Nebular....... Risky Woods Road & Track Grand Prix Unlimit. Robocop 3-D  34.95 29.95 39.95 37.95 37.95 29.95 31.95 44.95 29.95 29.95 34 95 37.95 39.95 24.95 25.95 39.95 23.95 34.95 ... 31.95 Strike Commander ............... Strip Poker 3........ Stunt Island .......... Summer Challenge... Summoning TA Break Pinball ............ TA Break Pool ........ Tales of Magic: Proph. Shadow... Task Force 1942 Terminator 2029 Tetris Classic/Windows Theatre of War 44.95 29.95 34.95 34 95 37.95 29.95 29.95 37.95 39.95 39 95 29.95 31.95 24.95 29.95 34.95 29.95 31.95 29.95 44.95 ATrain Agory Air Force Commander ......... Air Support ATAC B-17 Flying Fortress Ball Game Bard's Taile Construction Battle Toads Birds of Prey Black Crypt Boombox Campaign Carmen San Diego/Each .... Carmen San Diego America......... 39.95 29.95 34.95 29.95 30.95 39.95 24.95 29.95 24.95 31.95 31.95 36.95 34.95 ... 30.95 ..........36.95 Tilt 28.95 29.95 29.95 31.95 34.95 39.95 29.95 36.95 29.95 19.95 29.95 3495 Tom Landry Football Tracon for Windows... Traders.... Treasures of the Savage Frontier Tristan ... Ultima VII ... ORDERING INFO: Specity system. For fast delivery send cashier's check or money order. Personal & company checks allow 14 business days to clear. P.O.'s welcome.C.O.O. charges are $5.00 Jn Continental U.S.A. include $5.00 for software orders 5% shipping for hardware, minimum $5.00. MasterCard and Visa orders please include card , expiration date and signature. Wi residents please include 5% sales tax. HI, AK, FPO, APO, $6.00. All other foreign orders add 15% shipping, min $15.00 All orders shipped outside the Continental U.S.A are shipped first class insured U.S. mail, where available. If foreign shipping charges exceed the minimum amount, you will be charged the additional amount All goods are new and include factory warranty. We do not guarantee compatability & version is. Due to our low prices all sales are final. All Delective returns must have a return authorization number. Call (414) 357-8181 to obtain an R.A. or your return will not be accepted. Prices and availability subject to change without notice. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. We ship the latest versions available to us, updates must be handled by end user directly with the manufacturer. Not responsible for typographical errors. In an effort to be complete, some new products may not be available from the manufacturer at press time. Circle Reader Service #61 "


"Letters The Darker Half First, congratulations on Computer Gaming World's 100th issue. Your magazine is a continuing force in our industry and you all are to be commended. Next topic: THE HORROR-ible review of The Dark Half in your November issue. We greatly appreciate publicity from reviews of our products, respect the opinions expressed and try to learn from reviewers' remarks. However, in the case of Charles Ardai's review of our graphic adventure, The Dark Half, we believe he went too far in his criticism. We sent a beta version to you for pre-release analysis. The accompanying letter stated that it was only a beta version and that there were bugs in the program. Apparently, Mr. Ardai used this beta version in writing his article. Except for the \"double\" Thad in one screen, after the save/restore menu is used at the restaurant (which is being fixed), none of the bugs mentioned are in the master version of the program. Mr. Ardai spent an inordinate amount of space in his article citing bugs that do not exist in the final product. Of even greater concern is Mr. Ardai's complaint about the changes from the novel's storyline. Our license is for the Orion movie based upon Stephen King's novel so we were obligated to follow the Hollywood script. Yes, in retrospect, there are changes we would like to incorporate into The Dark Half, but as our first entry into the graphic adventure genre, we believe that we have delivered a solid game faithful to the King tradition. Isn't it also a tradition of die-hard King fans that they despise any adaptation of his work? Could this be at least a partial motivation for Mr. Ardai's scathing comments? Fortunately, there are lots of other King fans who have purchased the program and are enjoying it. We only hope that Mr. Ardai's zealous remarks will not discourage others from giving it a try. Angie Niehoff Director of Marketing, IntraCorp, Inc. Why, yes. It is a tradition of die-hard Stephen King fans to despise any adaptation of his work. It also seems to be a tradition of software publishers to object to any of Ardai's reviews (grin). Maybe the fact that Charles (as editor of the Great Tales of Madness and the Macabre anthology from Galahad Books) likes King well enough to have purchased the most non-King-like King short story ever should have disqualified him from writing this review. In all honesty, however, we thought his knowledge of King would provide a wonderful perspective from which to view The Dark Half. Of more concern to us, however, from your remarks is the fact that you believe that the review was based on a beta version. Unless the beta version came in a box with the actual shrink wrap on it, Charles did not review the beta. It is our policy to only sneak preview beta versions (in which case we give the benefit of the doubt to such bugs) and to review only released versions of the game. We are glad that there are people who are enjoying the game and realize that no everyone is the same type of literary purist that we consider Charles Ardai to be. Of course, what would one expect from a published fiction writer in both the science-fiction and mystery genres? CGW PORTINIUM II ENCHANTED HORIZONS ANNOUNCES: A new, low cost version of the original PORTINIUM Play-By Mail game is now available. PORTINIUM II incorporates all the features of the original game version. Players receive five standard game units on each of the primitive and medieval levels of game play. Timetravel into the conventional and futuristic technology ages affords players the opportunity to capture additional pieces to equal or surpass levels of conquest in PORTINIUM. The struggle to become a dominant player and participate in \"The Gathering of the Four\" remains a challenge for the strategy-minded player. Receive over twenty double-sided pages of high-quality Laser Graphics output per turn. Over 24,000 sectors to explore. No hidden costs. $10.00 per turn. 3-week turnaround. ALSO AVAILABLE: PORTINIUM, the original time-travel P.B.M. fantasy at a new, reduced price. The PORTINIUM Hi-Tech and Lo-Tech games offer many of the larger game features, in one age of play. PORTINIUM $15.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) PORTINIUM HI or LO-TECH $5.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) One-time, LIFETIME setup fee of $25.00 includes; 198-page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide,startup packet, free start-up turn, plus free turn and subscription to game newsletter. www . s esi.com Writo or call for free brochure ENCHANTED HORIZONS P.O.. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle Reader Service #75 Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"S MEET SANTA'S NEWEST HELPER T DIGITAL WUNGEON Task Force 1942. Quest for Glory 3 ..............$42 B17 Flying Fortress............$39 Sim Life............................$42 Distant Suns ..................$59 Might & Magic 4............$43 Legend of Kyrandia...$36 CAGLE Serpent STRIKE COMMANDER THE SOURCE FOR SOFTWARE, THE GUIDE TO GAMES 1-800-624-8228 Internat'l Fax/Phone: 1-718-624-8228 HOURS: 12PM 12AM EST, M-F ADDRESS: Digital Dungeon 45 Duffield St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 TERMS: We accept money orders, personal checks, wire transfers. Credit Card and CASH/CERT C.O.D.'s from established customers. SHIPPING: We charge by shipping weight/class + 15%. We use U.S. Mail, UPS, Federal Express & Airborne Express. APO's are no problem, charged 1st class mail rate. Foreign shipping by weight & courier + 25%. N.Y.S. residents add 8.25% sales tax. All products are new and guaranteed. Call for exchange/return policy. NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR TPOS! Circle Reader Service #67 "


"Review SON ENT Channeling in Kulthea GEnie's GemStone III by Johnny L. Wilson Things are looking better in Kelfour's Landing considerably better. Even though the red dragon high atop lorak's Reach seems to be awakening from his Loul the Enchanter induced sleep; even though there are hints that indicate there may be a cult of dragon worshippers nearby: even though the unlife threatens to permeate the kingdom with undead once again; and even though the dwarven messenger has prophesied that there are only 13 days before \"THE END,\" things are looking better. In fact, things are looking better all over Kulthea since the last time I ventured there. Kulthea is the realm, the cyburb, that one visits on GEnie after typing \"m930\" or \"Gemstone\" from any prompt. The last time I entered Kulthea, I was filled to brim with high expectations. I had undergone a rigorous character creation (using the RoleMaster \"pen and paper\" method published by Iron Crown Enterprises) and created a bard character. I had tried to read the documentation as it scrolled down the screen (rather than cogently printing it out or copying it to disk for a later print out) and entered the realm. As CGW #79 (p. 53) recounts, I could not get shopkeepers to talk to me; I could not attract the attention of experienced adventurers to help me; I could not get the universe (i.e. the parser) to understand me; I could not examine items which were present in the rooms I explored; and I left with very atypical, but hostile feelings toward the game. I noted that the documentation was available, but pointed out that the \"meter\" was running while it was being downloaded and many gamers would not take the time to get into it. I suggested that they needed some kind of on-line help. It was a very frustrating commentary to write. Since I didn't really get into the game very much, I could not call the article a review, but I had promised readers and game designers alike that there would be an article on GemStone in that issue. I had heard of the marvelous bard contests, the special quests and the Infocom-style puzzles, but I was able to experience none of it. I knew there must be some good experiences there, because the room descriptions were the most well-written I had ever encountered in a text adventure. Still, good descriptions don't accomplish very much if one cannot get into the action. Fortunately, as good is occasionally born out of the bad and dawn regularly breaks forth from the dark, Simutronics (designers of the game) were frustrated about my experience (or lack thereof) and did some redesign. They urged me to return to the environs of Kulthea. «We heard you,\" they told me. I am glad that they did. This time, my sojourn in Kulthea was a rewarding experience. Oh, my character was simply along for the ride with a bunch of more powerful adventurers, but what a ride it was. First, by printing out the documentation, I discovered that I needed to type the command, \"Order,\" to bargain with the merchants. The command opened up an entirely new menu. Yet, what would have happened if I had acted as before and simply perused (rather than read) the documentation? An experienced character or one of the design team's NPCs would have come along and explained everything, even as I observed occurring with other novices on my very first foray into the land. Plus, I was approached, during a time when I was trying to get my bearings, by either a more experienced adventurer or a member of the design team in NPC guise. The character politely informed me that he could see I was exploring and hesitated to bother me, but if I needed any help, to type the \"Assist\" command. The \"Assist\" command is a wonderful addition to the command list which enables novice players to get a quick instruction about the parser or important locations. It is essentially an on-line hint service with a heart. I particularly liked the unobtrusive way I was informed about the command. That is the friendly touch of humanity I needed to feel during my first venture. On that last sojourn. I lamented the fact that I had created a bard character and could not find a place to perform. This time, I was matched to a master bard. After some preliminary training, he took me to a small tavern and showed me the \"Sing\" command. With that command, bards can type long verses with each phrase separated by a semicolon. For example: Sing She must have been pretty, her destiny starred,; Before her complexion was marred.; Here's a warning to orcs, trolls and kobolds and fiends,; To beware of fair Megan the Scarred. Then, the program will print out the verse to read: She must have been pretty, her destiny starred, Before her complexion was marred. Here's a warning to orcs, trolls and kobolds and fiends, To beware of fair Megan the Scarred. (For masochists, the full text of the song is printed in a sidebar within this article.) Another welcome sight I observed during this peregrination was that experienced characters were taking novice adventurers on training expeditions. One particularly important aspect of training was the explanation of Parry Tag.\" In the GemStone (RoleMaster) combat system, characters can rob Peter to pay Paul in order to modify either their offensive or defensive stances. As in many systems, characters are given combat bonuses based on attributes, superior weapons, skill ratings and magical enhancements. There are bonuses for offense (OB) and defense (DB) which are, in turn, affected by adverse conditions (e.g. being knocked down, stunned, or seriously injured). The nice touch is that gamers can set their Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Ilonde & IBM EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE LMIGA HARDWARE Gospel AMIGA RECREATIONAL SOFTWARE Men Bridge 70 Artworx: Bridge 7.0 trip Poker Dune Dick Stip Pekat Delo Wri Pode 11 DaDa Serie Pour HDD Strip Pokeilusete Bock S kills Date de Sulod tud Urinal. CD When Wall Dale ( Win kel Delce CD Wat/hime Underworld MACINTOSH HOME PRODUCTIVITY L TAX SOFTWARE Despi Tour Own Mendered Design Your Outfition Deal Delupe Model: 1048 Follow Wigs Cices Companion Iedut 1040 Maristed MACINTOSH RECREATIONAL SOFTWARE icon ADD Dark One Key Bohlech Books Pineythmichael Banda rogether SAT Persada Where is the world. Dela IBM HOME PRODUCTIVITY L TAX SOFTWARE O D tohy Taktor Poker Polo Wide Make Over the Parte Cunho 2009 Heart luks Porter he Polo Rallarve Baba Sport See Monkey Honda Shadow of the Best R&RSCREE   Retail: $49.95 Our Price: $3000 Might. My Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen S ommy In the Sehat PED Ses Mal De Du Sei ten Sokat tidak Sri Port Deed Duk Marks Im Gadi Cookbook Betty Cad Cabo Wedin Design Your Own Hot Design Your Orelse Dragon Desloral Die Sus Wadens Layla Dos Fire Font Elu Imepw/ Mokada Mesa Comen Wede Perotypert lep Deluxe Print Step Belum Pride Shop Orhat Sample Pat Shop Deluxe viders In 1040 SFL Tuscat 104 Windows Sport WATUS. Hattory Ladinutes of Ilocan Last Press of becom Ne Get Cluny PCAT PGA Tour Coll town Pede Foted Coins Free Porn lored A complete bridge playing program that allows you and your computer partner to bid against 2 computer opponents and play out the hand. Features digitized hi-resolution graphics, hint modes that tell what to bid and why, auto bid and play, digitized speech for all opponents, and more! Retait: 569.95 Our Price: $4200 RRDD***** watt La Sally Rabe Spuit La Bottet i Mathi Seret of Merkry Ward Cola Seite wurden Blonde Sim Sy letnie = Apabandy Airport/Alle Fockey Berat olisin 21 yegformes Betlehe 4000 World Gan Gandhar IBM SOUND BOARDS & CD-ROM SYSTEMS GA = Sink Surgeon 3 The Bunlar Your personalized party of adventurers must save the 3-D world that hos fallen under the control of the diabolical Lord Xeen. Your explo. rations will take you on fantastic quests: fooing fearsome monsters and challenges beyond compare. Features state of the or illustrations and animated grophics, musical scores, sound effects and digitized speech * = 16 he Last Sharluck Mlinn Lane Leben Lo u ise Catadion Mouto Esprit Valentin Westerol Media/ Mr Jan 1 Call for Woden Mapely Deler ely Bele w Wiel Gametek: The Humans MALL MACINTOSH CD-ROM TITLES to Dean Storm Diakol Beads = * Back Pool = Tok Tebis W = Cated De CATS Coro Codes Carlege Core College Les Close Took Comet Date Sund Dallastsuti Dok Allst vch Tungarita Di Materih Dungeon www H15 Sklapellen F-15 Sunoglo F:19 Sto Fighter Class Falk 30 Pole Opere Tipe Sierra: King's Quest VI Retcit: $39.95 Our Price: Price Qual VGA et and Dufayl VEA Orissy Parol Tomtenbylobal Tristan What the lock Ylfoze Vote 20 Bo Y der Vepuses for Walews Mellow White $ 2400 ===b Working with your tribe and discovering new tools (fire, weapons, the wheel...) is the key to survival in this cruel world of chaos and carnivores. It's a struggle against extinction, where you score points by finishing levels with as many of your tribesmen intactos Retail: $79.95 Our Price: $4500 possible! Grand Canyon Sony Grand Slam de fadder Valbereich Balet Pre 16 Tale Sports N ews Surabble bleue de Vede Seven Cries Gold Sensi Spall Striglede    Seurs de Silent Service Small S weden Sinay Wednes Sith Saund Graphie Upprudt Space Owl Bunde Specs Body Speleting 201 Spragtuk Star Camal Salik 754 Star Trek Shy Stunden 319 Tela 100 point Tubes 150 W IBM RECREATIONAL SOFTWARE ADD ADED OSS Starter CDR Pris God    Bolig 1000VA Curabi 2000 S ora it H ome By  Day Harley Herely bly JTV IBM CD-ROM TITLES DEXAMI D G De Got B RE Co Bus. M oks/Canoda 3000 Windows Gaya Road (DGD Trots Corner ( DC Conte Fusco DIS'GA ADAM F1  Dog GV ( (latino Darder Segelton Se essa histle CD Sunday D ech Dad 1 Salvat e Collection (Spitalu Mette SS System A shipwrecked prince must find his way ocross a series of islands in search of a princess in peril. You'll need all your wits and imagination to overcome the gauntler of baffling puzzles and fantastic creatures that block you on your quest. Features multiple paths and different endings, more flexible game design allows you to overcome obstacles in almost any order, cost of costumed, video-coplured live actors and more! In af Poly laste front  Didelis Eerder Gol Gomes Les ress Special Start Your New Year Right! Sample and Save with Electronic Arts Distribution CD ROM Sampler! $5 The Ultimate On-Line Superstore Now for only S5 you can receive ono CD ROM disk containing 17 CD ROM nitles in All formats: MPC, DOS & MACI Titles include Total Distortion, Goferwinkel's Adventure. The lavender lond, Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective II, Pull Punt Join the Parede, Renaissance Masters Il, Aesop's Fables, Don Quixote and more! AND -in each c Sampler you receive a S5 Electronic Arts check-good towards your purchase of any featured Mile! COMPUTEE press 1-800-228-7449 * * XI. 3 *! ATA OFAX:0011-508-443-5645 E 1-9--E2+ X-:1. D. 70 007. 1531 /Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8:30 10 5:30 EST. Visa, MasterCard & Discover card accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours. Continental US shipments; UPS ground SS, Airborne Overnight S7. Corp, Gov't, Educ, APO, FPO, International orders accepted. No sales tax except for Mass add 5%. Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee. Defective software replaced immediately. No COD's. Item availability & price subject to change witout notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective relurns. Shop our on-line stores located on Prodigy, CompuServe, Genie, Delphi, LA Online and America On-line. Mothercard Prodigy, CompuServe, Cenio, Delphi, LA Online and America Online are trademarks of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #59 Savoy Products, Inc. 31 Union Avenue Sudbury, MA 01776 VISA "


"Review puzzles are there and the possibilities for using one's skills are realistic. There is more to this on-line CRPG than combat. Indeed, I cannot wait for the next bard contest. I want to regale listeners with some of my exploits (I'm a bard. It's my job to have an ego!). GemStone III is available to all GEnie users and costs $6.00 per hour. It is one of the most popular games on the service and, at last, I know why. Cow Parry Percentage from 0% (absolutely no protection/berserk mode) to 100% (super cautious). In what the veterans call \"Parry Tag,\" an adventurer sets the Parry Percentage to 100% and ventures into a part of the forest where the vicious furred torkaans reside. When the torkaan tries to bite the character, usually failing because of the added defense). there is a time lag before the beastie can attack again (the game calls this round time). If the player adjusts his/her Parry Percentage to 0% and types ATT TOR (all commands can be abbreviated to their first three letters) fast enough (most experienced players create macros for combat commands), there is a good chance of stunning the torkaan before it can renew the attack. By bouncing between 100% and 0%, the player gets the best of all possible worlds. Thanks to Llorien, my master bard mentor, I was actually able to encounter some of the Infocom-style puzzles. One was a diabolical set of runes in which one served as a cipher and stone steps were raised or lowered according to a tricky little formula. Even Infocom veterans are liable to spend a while trying various systems with that one. Another was a variation on the original Zork's puzzle with the dam. This time, we needed the water from the dam to work the paddlewheel to power our conveyance. As lousy as I am at solving puzzles, I managed to solve this one ahead of my colleagues. Finally, we encountered the most unique variation on a maze. This time, the twisty little passages all looked alike, but they were filled with rushing water and swept us down the stream. We could lean forward, left, right or back to adjust speed and direction. It was the only time I've really enjoyed a maze puzzle, even though it took entirely too long for me to get through it. So, the upshot of my experience is that Gemstone III is no longer a \"Gem in the Rough\" as I called it in that earlier opinion column. If one can match up with the right parties (and Simutronics is making a spectacular effort to help gamers do so), the classic-style Megan the Scared She is light on her feet, on a path or the street, And she turns torkaans into minced meat. And karnelian blood she will turn into mud For she kills without missing a beat. Chorus: Oh, she must have been pretty, her destiny starred, Before her complexion was marred. Here's a warning to orrs, trolls and kpbolds and friends, To beware of fair Megan the Scarred. Though she handles her papier with delicate touch, She doth nun villains through in the clutch. And wien dragonts doth stoop, Megan serves dragont soup, For dealing with Megan's too much! Chorus: So, you see why I love her and I can't resist, Though I know I am taking a risk. If she found me unfaithful, she'd call me ungrateful And rip out my heart with her fist. Modified Chonis: Oh, she must have been pretty, her destiny starred, Before her complexion was marred. Here's a warning to orrs, trolls and suitors and friends To beware of fair Megan the Scarred. MABOARD) COMM. WDER CORPS W PREMIUM TEMPLATES PR Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on ilyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another. W Watch 'yor Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember.. sixl!\" Yorg QUEST OF THE GREAT JEWELS In Quest of the Great Jewels, choose to be one of four races: The Azoni, builders of great citadels; the Quntag, rulers of vast empires; the Rilris, hoarders of great wealth, or the Slenth, destroyers and ravagers of the land. Begin as the ruler of a single province and send your armies out to fulfill your race's destiny. Quest is a fantasy wargame combining elements of strategy and tactics with a healthy dose of magic. Over 90 magical talismans abound in the game, each granting its owner the ability to bend the rules in some way. 449 w 3-17 TAAS III IIT OTIT XT LAYOUTS COMING SOON COCOND Falcon 3.0 A-10 Tank Killer Acos of the Pacific F-15 Strike Eagle II Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe F-117A Nighthawk Jeftfighter I & II Megafortress B-17 Flying Fortress ATP CY Air Combat Flight Simulator 4.0 ** WINNER BEST FANTASY PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME ORIGINS 1985 & 1986 ** Flying Dutahman Send $15 for the rules, setup information, and the first three turns, or $5.00 for the rules alone. * High-quallty, 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard * Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards * Sturdy, laminated stock I Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! 1 $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 laster celery Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 each Country S & H add $3.00 or c.o.o. add $6.00...CALL Address city KCC, Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 Items Discounts per order only: Allow 7.4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-b0bb Circle Reader Service # 86 Flying Dutchman Games Dept. C P.O. Box 957434 Hoffman Estates, IL 60195 IN a me GAMES Circle Reader Service # 78 Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


" Fly In The Face Of Reality. VIRTUAL PILOT Whether you're diving blind through fog to find a runway or loop-de-looping to save your tail, get your VIRTUAL ML01 hands on VIRTUAL PILOT, the flight yoke that looks and feels exactly real... because it is. Designed by an airplane builder, VIRTUAL PILOT flies any simulation or game that supports a joystick. Works with all IBM and compatibles. And you won't have to fly halfway around the world to buy it. Just buzz your local store. TTM VIRTUAL PILOT PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #57 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619 698 2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 "


"Announcing Computer Gaming World's T year's ballot. Remember you are judging the ad, not the game. Here are the rules. THE RULES elcome to the Fifth Annual Computer Gaming World Top Ad Awards. Every January we ask the most discerning gamers in the computer gaming world (i.e. our readers) to pick the best computer game ads. Last year's full page winner, Strategic Simulations (with their Eye of the Beholder II \"Bigger... Better... Meaner Than Ever\" ad) faces some tough competition. The undead cast from last year's ad were the first to record repeat victories in the CGW Top Ad awards. You see, those lovable undead fellows were featured in the prior year's winner as well. However, the competition this year is better, meaner, louder, funnier, more colorful and, in some cases, sexier than ever. All computer gamedom awaits to see what the readers of the premier computer game magazine declare to be the best ads in this year's contest. As always, we ask you to determine the best ads. On the CGW Poll post card is this vote for three different ads. These are ads which are less than a full page in size. 6. On the ballot, list the company names and page numbers of the ads you are voting for. For example: to place a first place vote for Acme Company's one-half page ad on page 345, write «Acme pg. 345\" on the line for first place in the fractional ad column. 7. The criteria for evaluation are very simple: consider the graphics, copy, and Overall impact of the ad. 1. Use the Ballot Section of this month's Reader Input Device card located opposite page 16, or a facsimile thereof, to cast your votes. 2. In the \"Full Page and Spreads\" category, vote for three different full-page and/or two-page spread ads. 3. A two-page spread ad would be an ad that appears on adjoining and facing leftand right-hand pages and is one continous advertisement. A two-page spread ad counts as a single ad for voting purposes. 4. Select a first place, a second place, and a third place ad. 5. In the \"Fractional Page\" category, 8. The votes will be weighted, added and then averaged. 9. The reader that comes closest to picking the final correct order of winners will win $250.00 cash and a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World. 10. Entries must be postmarked by February 1, 1993. No purchase is necessary. Winners will be notified by mail. cow Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. IS 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE QR QUQABU 87 &&&888 ddon 22 37 37 coRER 19 31 NEAU 45 62 37 46 37 47  37 VAA 37 MASTERCARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESSACCEPTED WITHNOSURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCTINFO & OTHER BUSINESS: NOTPERITEM 908-396-8880 Laffer Utility 22 Phonics Plus 25 Sludyware LSAT 30 | Illustrated Shakesper27 | Fontmonger Sound Cards Leather God Phb 2 42 Pinball Studyware for SAT 30 Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Geoworks Pro Pitfighter Legend Stunt Island 37 Intro to Game Fren 79 Grammatik 5 Ad Lib Sound Card 65 57 Legend of Kyrandia 35 Plan 9 Outer Space Summer Challenge 34 Intro to Games Span79 Hijaak DOS or Win 129 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 Legion's of Krella Planets Edge 37 Summoning 38 Jones in Fast Lane 37 ATI Stereo FIX Info Select 139 Leisur Suit Lar Bndl 39 Playroom w/ Sound Super Tetris Kings Quest 5 42 Language Assistant VGA StreoF/X 1MB 369 Leisur Suit Larry 5 37 Polce Quest 3 Take a break X-Word29 Languages of World 99 Fr. Gr. Heb ltal, Span 42 CoVox Shamster Pools of Darkness 38 Lemmings Pool Learn to Speak Span69 Laplink 4 Pro Gravis Ultra Sound 129 99 Oh No More Addon Populous 2 Tank (new version) 37 Library of Future 99 Lotus Works 99 Modia Vision Lemm.-Oh No More 31 Power Hits Sports Task Force 1942 39 Loom Microsoft Ock Basic 65 65 Audio Port L'Empereur Sci-Fi Team Yankee M-1 Tank Platoon 62 Microsoft Quick C CDPC 65 Lexicross Battletech-Mech Tengens Arcade Hit 25 MacMillian Child. Dict.49 139 MS DOS 5.0 47 Pro Audio Spec+ Liberty or Death Powermonger Terminator Manhole 49 MS DOS 5.0 Upgrd 62 M.M.pecaden Life and Death 2 Principles of Biology 25 Terminator 2 Magazine Rack Norton Desktop v2.95 Pro Audio Spec 16 Links Principle of Calculus 25 Tetris Classic Marketing Master 39 Norton Dsktp DOS 115 Pro 16 Multimedia Links 386 Pro Principle ofChemsty 25 Theatre of War Mavis Beacon Norton Utilities 111 Upgrade Kit Course Diskea 16 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Thunderhawk MIG 29/ MIG 29M 62 One Write Acct. 100 Thunderboard 3 or more (ea) Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Time Riders America35 Mixed Up Mother Gse37 Pacioli 2000v2.0 31 Thunder & Lightng 229 Loney Tune Prnt Ply 19 Print Shop. New Time Treks 36 36 MS DOS Archives 35 99 PC Animate Plus 115 Sound Blaster Lord of Rings 2 37 Graphics (ea) 22 Tom Landry Football 30 Presidnt:It Start Geo 105 PC Anywhere 4 115 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Lost Admiral 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Tony LaRussa Base 17 Prince Persia/Nam 6565 PC Kwik Powerpak 72 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Lost File Sherick H 41 Privateer LaRussa addon 15 Railroad Tycoon 62 PC Paintbrush 5+ 99 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Pro League Baseball35 Tracon 2 Red Strm/Carr Cmd 62 PC Tools 109 SB MM Starter Kit 459 Lost Treasures 2 29 Quest for Glory 1 Tracon Windows 37 Reference Library 80 Peachtree Basic 75 SB CDROM Intrnl 360 Magic Candle 2 38 Quest for Glory 3 Treasure Cove 35 Shakespeare 37 PFS: First Choice 75 SB CDROM Extrl 429 75 SB Main St Creatvily Kit 17 Ragnarok Treasure Math Storm35 Sherlock Holme Cnslt42 PFS: First Publisher 75 Sun Moon Star w/ Sony Manhole Railroad Tycoon 599 Treasure Mountain 31 Sleeping Beauty 37 PFS:Prospect 75 CD. SB Pro, S/W Mantis Rampart 26 Treasure Savg Frntr 32 So Much Software 59 PFS:Publisher Wind 75 Roland SCC-1GS 375 Mario Teaches Type 25 Random Hs Encycl Treehouse Sophisticat Santa Fe 45 PFS: Window Works 75 Sound Canvas 559 Martian Memorndm 32 Reader Rabbit 31 Tristan Pinball Space Quest 4 PFS:Write w/Grmtk 69 Roland MA-12Cea 105 Marvin Moose 1/2 31 Reader Rabbit 2 Trump Castle 2 Spirit of Excalibur Presention Task Frc119 SPEAKERS Shielded28 Math Blaster Mystry 29 Read 'n Roll VGA 31 Trump Castle 2 Delx 42 Stat Pack Print Shop 36 wl3 band Equilizer 45 Math Blaster Plus 29 Red Baron Twilight 2000 Stellar 7 Procomm Plus 2.0 69 Altec Lansing 200 219 Math Blaster Wind 36 Mission Disk Ultima 7 47 Strange Bedfellows 39 Procomm/Window 82 ACS 300 w/subwof 299 Math Rabbit Realms Forge of Virtue 17 Street Atlas Pyro Screen Saver 35 MIDI Interface Math Zone 31 Rex Nebular 39 Ultima 7 P12 45 Time Mag Almanac 129 QEMM Midiator 101 Serial 95 Matrix Cubed Riders of Rohan 31 Ultima Trilogy 1 37 Time Table History 69 O DOS 3 Mavis Beacon Type 32 Risk for Windows PC Midi Card Ultima Trilogy 2 Time Table Science 59 Quicken 6.0/Win 45 MOX-32 179 Mavis Beacon Wind 38 Risky Woods Ultima Underworld 47 Quicken Quick Book 84 Ultima 1-6 McGee at Fun Fair 25 Road & Track Pres 35 BO MPU-IPC Ultrabots Ultimate Basketball Sitback DOS or Win 59 Mean Streets Vin 19 a Cakewalk Apprentic145 Road to Final Four 37 U.S.Atlas U.S. or World Allas 49 Stacker 325 Medieval Lords Robosports Wind Utopia Vintage Aloha Stacker 16 Bit Card 179 The Miracle Mega Fortress Romance 3 King 2 Vfor Victory #1/42 44 Wild Places Superstor MIDI Software Mission Disk Rorkes Drift Vegas Games Wind. 19 Wing Comm & Miss Turbo Cadd v2.0 79 Ballade Mega Traveller 1/2 37 Rules Engagement Vengeance Excalibur30 Wing Com/Ultima 6 Word Perfct5.1/Win249 Band in a Box Mega Man 3 17 Rule Engagment 2 38 Warlords 31 Wing Comm 2 49 Windows 3.1 92 Cadenza Mental Math Games 35 Scrabble Deluxe Wyn Gretzky Hcky 235 WC 2/Ulti. Undrwld 49 Winfax Pro 74 Cakewalk Merchant Colony 31 Scrabble Dix Win Western Front 38 World Atlas Mice & Truckball Cakewalk Pro MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Roque What's My Angle World View 30 Michael Jordon Flight42 Second Front Where Crm San Diego Wrath of Demon Appoint MousePen 70 Cakewalk Window 85 Drummer Mickey ABC's. Secret Monkey Is. 2 38 in America's Past 36 Adults Only Must be 21 Microsoft Mouse 69 Encore Color or 1-2-3's 25 Sort Weapon Luftwf 42 30 Mouseman Serial in Europe Animation Fantasy 65 79 Piano Works Mickey's Crossword 19 Dornier 335 in Time 30 FAO Set Trackman Serial Play it by Ear 69 Mickey Jigsaw Pzl 31 P-38 Mission Dsk 20 in USA 30 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Mickey ABC Combo 37 P-80 Shoot Star 20 in USA Deluxe 45 Private Collection 65 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Music Printer Plus 419 Mickey Word Advent 25 Heinkel 162 2 0 in World Deluxe 49 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Maxlite 9624PC 189 Music Time 169 MicroCookbook 31 Sesame St. Lrn Clas 31 Wild Wheels Storm 1 or 2 Maxlite 96/96 3 49 Musicator Microleagu 4 BaseB 39 Sesame St.Publish 25 Wing Comm 1 Dixe 49 Visual Fantasy Maxlite 14.4/14.4 419 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Microleague FB Dix 42 Sesame St.Vol.1 17 Wing Commander 2 49 Volcano 65 Practical Peripherals Recording Studio 75 Microsoft Golf 39 Sesame St Vol. 2 17 Special Oper Disk 25 Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 PM 2400 Internal129 Rhythm Ace Midnight Rescue 30 Seven Cities of Gold 38 Speech Disk 15 . Utilities PM 2400 External175 Songwright5 Might and Magic 3/4 38 Shadow Prophecy Wizardry Trilogy Sportster 2400 Ext. 149 Trax for Windows 60 Millennium 2200 25 Shanghai II 386 Max Word Muncher Sportster 2400 Int. 129 Milliken Storyteller 32 Shuttle Adobe Type Mgr Wordtris Joysticks Sportstr 14.4v.42bis 309 Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 After Dark for Wind World Circuit 67 CH Flightstick Zoom External Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Silent Service 2 Writer Rabbit All Type 30 Zoom Internal 65 CH Game Card 3 31 Mixed-Up Mother Gs 30 Sim Ant Your Prsnl Train SAT30 Autodesk Explorer 119 CH Mach3 Monopoly Deluxe 34 Sim City Zoo Keeper Bannermania Scanners Eliminator Game Cd 26 Moonbase Sim City Graphic Zug's Spelling Ady 22 Calendar Creator + Microtek 600G 829 Gravis Joystick Muncher Bundle 30 Sim City Windows 37 Adv of Eco Island 22 Carbon Copy Microtek 60OZ 1359 Gravis PC GamePad21 Murder 29 Sim Earth 41 Dinosaur World 22 Central Pt AntiVirus 84 Scanman 32 160 Kraft KC3 Joystick 18 Mutanoid Math Chlg 31 Simpson Adventure 31 Race Thru Space 22 Choas Scanman 256 265 Kraft Thunderstick 28 NFL Challenge Prem59 Snap Dragon Colorix CD ROM NFL Print Pro Skins & Pads Maxx Flight Yoke 69 Snoopy Game Club Copy II PC 5 Maxx Pedal 39 NFL Pro League FB 35 Solitaires Journey 3D Cnstrct/Casti Mst 62 Dust Covers Corel Draw V3.0 379 & Mouse Yoke 32 Nigel's World 31 Space Ace 2:Borf Aloha Hawaii 45 Grounded Wrist Straps 9 M Dala Ease Personal 68 Ninja Turtle Arcade 25 Space Quest Bundl 39 Atlas Pack Quickshot Aviator 5 32 Desqview 2.4 Keyboard Skins Ninja Turtle: Adventr 31 Space Quest 4 Quickshot Game Cd 14 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 37 Desgview 386 Static Packs Nobunagas Ambition 37 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Space Quest 5 DOS Fax 51 Quickshot Intruder 5 30 Large-System 15 No Greater Glory 1Quickshot Warrior Audubon Mammals 37 42 18 Speedball 2 Dvorkon Typing 31 Wrist Pads Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Speedreader Autodesk Explorer 119 Thrustmaster Fight 69 Express Publisher 99 Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro Operation Neptune 35 109 Spell-a-saurus Barney Bear School 26 Facelift StatxComplete Cleaning Weapons Control Orbits Spellbound Batik Designs Far Side Calendar 49 79 Sistem 15 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Oregon Trail Battlechess Spellcasting 301 Origin FX Spell Craft Beethoven Ninth 59 Hours: MF 9AM to 8PM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Once Upon Time Spell-it Plus Store Hours: M.F 9AM LO 6PM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Bible Library Spellammer Out of This World Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Ralway N.J. 07065 Bookshelf Outnumbered Spirit of Excalibur Britanica Family Chc 75 Overlord Spoils of War Britannica Family Dr 59 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Pacific Islands Sports Adventure 47 Business Master 39 Sprout! Paladin 2 Master Card, Visa American Express Carmen World Dixe 65 Discover Accepted. No Star Control 2 Paperboy 2 Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3, Carteret. N.J. Cautious Condor Patriot Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 CD Game Pack 07008. All Sales Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective 55 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 PC Globe CIA World Fact merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All 39 Stickbr Pre-School 30 PC USA Products are new. We do not guarentee compatability. Shipping Compton Encydpd 409 Stickbr Read Tutor 30 PC Study Bible charges: 48 contiguous states. $4 por order. Alaska, Hawaii. Conquest Longbow 37 Penthouse Jigsaw Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 26 and Puerto Rico $10 1st pc.. $1 a. add. APO/FPO and P.O. Boxes Corel Draw Upgd 149 Strip Poker 3 Perfect General 32 56 1st pc. Si eu. add. Canadia SH ist pc. $1 ca.add. Heavier Electronic Cookbook 75 Data Disk Strip Poker Data (ea) 17 items extra. Foreign orders call for shipping charges. N.J. Font Master Strike Commander 45 PGA Tour Golf Residents add sales tax. Call for current price and Food Analyst Storybook Weaver PGA Golf Windows 38 34 availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'s WELCOMED. Game Collection Does not Course Disk Studyware for ACT 30 19 include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities and Game Master 39 Studyware GMAT PGA Golf Complete 49 30 product must be shipping Golden Immortal for your protection, we will only Studyware GRE 30 Gunship/Midwinter 62 ship to the address the credit card company has on file.  3 4D Boxing 20 Dr. Quandry. 31 A Train 39 Dragon's Lair Construction Set 22 Dragon's Lair 2 A320 Airbus 52 Dragon Lr:Sing Cst 37 ABC Wide Wrld Box 30 Duck Tale:Qst Gld 15 ABPA Baseball 25 Duerk BaseB. Encyl 20 Aces of the Pacific 39 Dune Mission Disk 25 Dungeon Master Action Stations 29 Dusk of the Gods 38 Addon Disk 22-45 14 Dynamix Bundle AD&D Collect Ed 2 44 Earl Weaver 2 AD&D Starter Kit 44 Commisioner Dsk 12 Adv Willy Beamish 37 Play & Mgr. Disk 12 Air Bucks Earthquest Air Force Command 36 Eco Phantoms 31 AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Eco-Quest 1 Algebra Made Easy 25 Elvira 2:Jaws Amarillo Slim DICh 32 Entr Pak Win (ea) 28 American Gladiators 25 Eye of Beholder Ancient Art War Sky 35 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Animation Studio 69 EZ Cosmos Are We There Yet? 18 F-14 Tomcat Armada 2525 30 F 15 111 Armourgeddon F 15 11 Master Edit. 49 A.T.A.C. F117a Stealth Fighter41 Automap Facts in Action 31 Automap Windows Falcon 3.0 Automap Europe 74 Oper Fight Tiger 25 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Family Tree Maker Back to Future 3 25 Far Side Calendr Backgamn By Geo 26 Farm Creativity Kit 17 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Femme Fatale Barbie Design 16 F.F. Data Disk Barbie Fashion Fighting for Rome Barbie Adventure 25 Final Conflict Bart Simpson Hous Flames of Freedom 31 Battlechess (allver) 30 Flight of Intruder 37 Battlechess 2 Flight Simul A.T.P. Battlechess 400 Flight Simul (M.S.) Battle Isle Arctt/Scen Dsgn 28 Battles of Napoleon 31 California 37 Battlestorm Flight Planner Berenstn Bear Cnt 19 FS Pro Berensin Bear Color 25 Great Britian Berensin Bear Lettr 25 Hawaii Berlitz Interpreter 37 Instant Facit Loc. 26 Bicycle Poker Instrumnt Pilot Scen Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 East/West U.S. 59 Birds of Prey Scenery Set A 37 Blitzkrieg Scenery Set B 37 Bloodwych Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Bo Jackson BaseB Sound & Graphic 25 Bodyworks Tahiti Bridgemaster Western Europe 19 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Floor 13 Buzz Aldrin Fly Grand Canyon Captain Comic Follow the Reader Carl Lewis Challng 29 Four Crystal Trazer Carrier Strike Free DC Carriers at War Front Page Sports Casino Pack 1 Gateway Castles Global Conquest Northern Campgn 19 Gobblins Castle 2 Godfather Castle of Dr. Brain 30 Gods Cathy Daily Planner 43 Gold of the Aztec 31 Ching Ancient Emp 30 Gold Sheet ProFB 37 Challenge 5 Realms 35 Grand Slam Brdge 231 Champions Great Naval Battles 44 Champions of Kryon 20 Greens Chemistry Works 38 Gunship 2000 36 Chessmaster 3000 32 Scenario Disk 24 Chessmstr 3000 Win 38 Guy Spy Children Writ & Publ 39 Hardball 3 Chip'n Dale 15 Data Disk Civilization 39 Hare Raising Havoc 29 Civilization MPE 47 Harpoon Classics Headline Harry Coaster Heimdall Comic Book Creator 17 Heros of 357th Conan: Cimmerian 30 Hole in One Golf 22 Conflict: Middle East 32 Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Conflict Korea Hoyle Bk Game 1/2 22 Conquest Longbow 39 Hoyle Bk Game 3 30 Conquest of Japan 35 Humans Crime Wave Indiana Jones 4 37 Crisis in the Kremlin 39 Island of Dr. Brain 29 Crossword Magic 32 Jack Nicklaus Signtr 42 Cruise for a Corpse 33 J. Nick. Crse 3,4,5 14 Daffy Duck P.I. 15 J. Nicklaus Clip Art 17 Dagger of Amon Ra 39 Jetfighter 2 Daik Half Adv. Mission Disk 19 Dark Queen Krynn 32 Jobhunt Darklands 39 John Madden 2 Darkseed Jump Jet Dark Sun 50 Kid Pix Death Knight Krynn 32 Kid Pix Companion Dlx Paint Animation 85 Kid Works Dlx Paint II Enhncd 85 Kings Quest Bundle 39 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Design Your Railrd 35 King's Quest 5 42 Railroad Robbery 19 King's Quest 6 Designasaurus II 23 Knowledge Advent 47 Disney Entertain Pk 47 Konami NFL FootB 30 e 30 19 Modems & Fax Masterpiler Plus 419 Play ito tracks Pro 249 SON ABT 8981 32 375 32 488 69 61 ROS 88 37 25 35 31 380 X 37  823 Pertenduse Jigsa Dix Paint Animann 33/Kid fixer  35 / Wings Quel bundle 30 Railroad Railrd "


"Rumor Bag Rumbles Cheese The Artful Bagman 1 SOUP Jest by Andy Pollack I don't really think I look anything at all like a burglar, even with the bag on. Yet, it didn't matter where I waited in the East Wing of the National Gallery of Art, the ubiquitous security guards were watching my every move. I wanted to point at that empty space where the Matisse exhibit (that had been loaned to the Metropolitan Museum of Art) usually rested and tell them I wasn't responsible. They kept looking at me as though I were going to bag a Degas. I know my head is supposed to be big, but the bag still won't hold one of those ballet dancer paintings I've always wanted. I turned the corner and came face-to-face with one of the ugliest monstrosities I have ever seen. I mean, I don't understand these off-white canvases with one big black stripe on them. Give me Surrealism, Pointilism or Impressionism, but don't give me this. Of course, I could almost say the same thing about RAW Entertainment's upcoming experiment. It seems they are going to put out a platform-style arcade game on the Amiga, IBM and believe it or not) C-64. The game was probably named after the canvas I had just seen, Ugh! Anyway, that's the way that company is. Just when you think you've got them pegged, they try something else. Needless to say, the camouflage green smudge on the canvas next to it didn't offer much more encouragement. It did serve to provide a mental reminder that Steve Jackson Games' Awful Green Things From Outer Space is being converted into a computer game. It seems that QQP has retained a developer to program the conversion and it should come out sometime in '93. I know QQP is working to improve their graphics, but as I looked at yet another canvas I didn't appreciate, I sure hoped they weren't going to retain the artist responsible for that piece of art. Instead of hanging around in an alcove where I wasn't impressed, I walked over to where I was supposed to meet a source. I hoped she was going to tell me about Nintendo's new raster chip that fits right into the cartridge and makes it possible to do vector graphics, terraced shading and all that stuff you couldn't do on SNES before. Maybe she'd even tell me if Activision plans to use those chips in MechWarrior II. If I could take the action from the newest Battle Tech Centers and offer graphics significantly better than the ones in their upcoming MechWarrior, I could be in absolute heaven. As I was thinking, I stopped in front of the 30 soup can paintings by Andy Warhol and tried to figure out their significance. It was an incredible amount of work to be positioned in front of my unappreciative eyes. Then again, there were plenty of people who really liked his visual statement that common items could be elevated to art. Maybe that's why so many construction set products sold in the computer game world. Even though gamers might spend months of their lives creating scenarios that only a few friends would play, they got a chance to make their own personal statements. \"It's like SSI's Unlimited Adventures, the gold box construction set I had written about in an earlier column,\" I thought. \"They're giving gamers the chance to make masterpiece CRPGs from the heart.\" Then I was looking at another masterpiece. She was dressed in white like the protagonist in one of those gothic romances and that served to emphasize her ebony black eyes and rich, full lips. In fact, she looked a lot like a mature version of Winona Ryder and she mesmerized me just like a vampiress in Sony Imagesoft's new multimedia Dracula game, to be published for multimedia platforms. It's supposed to use actual footage from the Francis Ford Coppola film and I was anxious to see both. As usual, though, didn't expect to see the game until at least six months after the movie was to open. We greeted each other with our traditional kiss and she turned to look at the soup cans. \"So, how do I look?\" she asked with that breathless way she has of speaking out the side of her mouth. I told her that she looked like something out of a gothic novel and she said that was appropriate. She had wanted to tell me about Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Veil of Darkness. It's a new CRPG from the makers of The Summoning. The player's character is a WWII pilot who gets shot down over the Transylvania Alps. Naturally. the character encounters some pretty strange creatures. \"Well,\" I countered, \"if they encounter anyone who looks like you, O undeath where is thy sting?\" She laughed graciously and I gave her the line about how she ought to be in pictures. \"Any particular ones?\" she asked. \"After all, I just saw some of the most beautiful Renoir portraits upstairs.\" \"He couldn't do you justice,\" I flattered, although I couldn't think of a time I had ever seen a Renoir without wondering how he had captured so much of the vivaciousness in every model's face, and I didn't mean you should be in paintings. I meant you should be in film.\" I told her that I had just visited the set where Activision was filming footage for Return to Zork and was very impressed. They hadn't cast Winona Ryder, but they had cast Jason Hervey (Wayne on \"The Wonder Years\"), Ernie Lively (Cooter from «Dukes of Hazzard\") and Robyn Lively (who appeared on \"Twin Peaks\") in the roles of troll, adventurer and fairy, respectively. \"You're so sweet!\" she responded. (Well, actually, she said that I was so full of something that started with the same sibbilant as what my meddling, censoring editor put into this column.) \"Actually, I wasn't quite sure where we should meet for this month's rumors,\" she told me. \"We could have met at the Natural History Museum and I could have told you about Sega's upcoming Jurassic Park title. It's supposed to be multimedia, but it's very hush-hush. We could even have met at the Air & Space Museum and talked about Microsoft's Flight Simulator 5. Of course, they haven't even announced either one of them and I don't have the faintest idea when to expect them to be released, but I knew you'd be interested. \"Interested?\" I shouted vigorously enough that two security guards immediately began to converge on our position, \"Why, I'd let you bite my neck for those kinds of rumors!\" \"Sorry,\" she laughed as the guards drew nearer, \"I'm afraid I'd get paper cuts.\" One of the guards asked us to keep our voices down and, as they departed, she giggled, \"You should have seen your face! I thought you were going to make like Tearaway Thomas and zip up those stairs faster than Sonic.\" \"Tearaway Thomas?\" I asked. \"Sure,\" she answered, \"It's from RAW Entertainment and it's like Accolade's SNES game, Bubsy in Claws Encounters of the Furred Kind or Sega's Sonic the Hedgehog, only it's going to be on the Amiga. Then, she left me standing beside the soup cans as she began to glide up the stairs faster than, well, Sonic, Bubsy or Thomas. Was it something I said? Cow Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"An epic too big for one player... ... Introducing the first on-line, multi-player Fantasy Role-Playing game. Trial HPPERRect INVERTORY ITEMS DEUTOUS MEMBERSHIP KIT HERD COVER 11 COSTURES NOSES EYE COLOR 1 KHUI HITY | CRMCEL WA TIM Duffond 44ct voor herector's eye color OU 30 CASA ARCUS Truth WOU that 9901 OU Seel Mund Nad ou see Head chans ou reema Potion HABE. Save your stats and inventory at the end of each session. Your character grows every time you play. Create your own face and personality, modifying your skills, attributes, and character class. 151646604 TMOETUS TO THE RINES You seeLeather cap You feel cloth Jacket You Seel Short Sword you encounter 1 Seleta fra Choose Party Rotion Join others or set out alone but beware. Anyone you meet could be a real person... or a deadly foe! Recruit real people from coast-to-coast to help find the secret at the heart of an ancient volcano. Real People. Real Time... Join real people from all over the country in your quest to find the secrets of The Shadow of Yserbious. A kingdom has been buried by an ancient curse. The bravest adventurers have been called to band together to penetrate these shadowy dungeons, challenging monsters and madmen along the way. Will you take up the cause? Quest with real people in real time, in an epic that's as real as a fantasy can get. Try it! FREE! If you have an IBM PC or compatible (286-16mhz or better) with VGA and modem. Call: 1-800-SIERRA-1 for a FREE TSN Start-Up Kit and 3 FREE HOURS of game play. Circle Reader Service #128 Excellence in Multi-Player Games. The Sierra Network "


"Editorial COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"I Came, I Played, I Conquered\" Broadsides & Gripeshot SSG'S ROGER KEATING TELLS ALL! (well, some...) Interview by Alan Emrich CGW: Welcome to CGW, Roger. It's a long way from Sydney to here. We're all glad that you stopped by while you were sightseeing in Southern California. have their own graphics program, such as DPaint, to generate original ships, planes, etc. CGW: Naturally, the legion of CAW players want more information about taking the game to the Atlantic Ocean. Any plans for that in the future? Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1992 RK: It's always good to stop off at CGW. After spending the last six months working seven days a week on Carriers at War I thought I needed a break and what better place than here? HOMPUTER WARMAMITIA World In this issue... CGW: Right now, there's a great deal of excitement and anticipation about the Carriers at War Creation Kit. Can you tell us, specifically, what it will do? RK: We programmed the surface action module into CAW so that scenarios potentially could be created with only a few real carriers around. This would allow several of the North Atlantic battles to be represented within the CAW system. At the moment we are working on a number of North Atlantic scenarios although we will wait until we see the reaction to CAW before proceeding with the extension kit. CGW: When and where is the Macintosh version of CAW? An Interview with SSG's Roger Keating. 132 Red Baron Mission Builder.... 134 Great Naval Battles: Review ......... 136 Great Naval Battles: Designer's Notes ... 139 Carriers at War Replay . 142 B-17 Flying Fortress Review ......... 148 Conquered Kingdoms Preview ........ 154 ASL Game Assistance Program ........ 158 Gunship 2000: New Look & Scenario Disk.... 162 Theatre of War Review 166 Operation Fighting Tiger: Falcon 3.0 Flies Again! 170 Home Built Cockpits . . 174 RK: The Creation Kit is basically made up of the three separate sections that are needed to make a CAW scenario. First, the data section allows you to enter all the fixed forces in the game such as ships, planes, carriers, etc. The second section allows you to type in the messages about the forces in the game. Each ship in Carriers carries with it a breakdown of its armament, complement and a brief history (mostly where it was sunk or when it was broken up). The last and, to me, the most interesting section is WarRoom, the place where the Al is added to a scenario. The intelligence for any scenario is carried in a kit which allows the shifting and changing of forces within the scenario data, and any number of various plans to go out and destroy the opponent. Two friends could design each side separately and then merge them to see which will win in a best out of 10 contest. All the graphics from the original game will be provided but the user will have to RK: When CAW was originally designed, I tried to keep the interface compatible with the Mac interface. During its development, I was given considerable advice as to changes that would make the conversion easier. It still surprised me when we discovered that the whole conversion project took about two months, considering the Warlords project that took about nine months. Our one compromise is that only a color version will be done. Most computer companies now have a policy of only producing color Mac games and the extra effort to support black and white would not be justified. CGW: Are there any plans to do a new version of Warlords in the future? Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"Editorial RK: We have been working on an improved version of Warlords for about 12 months now and will be putting it into a final development cycle soon. All of the design work has been finished and only a few minor points have to be cleared up before we will announce the game and dates to the world. We expect to have it on sale next year but I do not want to be too specific, only to say that anyone who enjoyed Warlords will have to buy this program. operate. Due to the fact that a map may be random, a boat is now produced in cities and moved to the surrounding sea, but it is a warship only; it cannot be used for transporting armies. If you wish to transport armies you must go to a port (something similar to temples in the original game) and hire boats (the details here are still to be finalized) and each army will maintain their \"boat\" status until it reenters a land area. As each army is equipped with its own boat, it will be easy to break up stacks at sea for maximum flexibility, but using boats to ferry armies will not be allowed. CGW: What new features can we expect to see in this, the CGW Wargame of the Year for 1991? Will the revisions be minor, or is it a complete overhaul of the Warlords system? Roger Keating over and over again. This system is still in initial development, so don't expect to hear much about it till the middle of next year. RK: Originally we looked at setting the game in a completely different format but decided to go back to the basic Warlords look. There are many new features in Warlords II including random maps, diplomacy, and different hero/army structures, but anyone who has played the original game will quickly cope with these new features. I don't want to be more specific about these at the moment. Official statements from SSG will announce these soon. CGW: Okay, everyone has been asking about the 10-year-delayed Road to Appomatox Civil War game. Well...? CGW: What other wargame projects are pending at SSG? RK: Well, the project has never been abandoned! We did a lot of work on the game before we realized that we just did not have the necessary ability at that time to do it justice. We merely put that project on hold while proceeding to do others. It is still a topic that is very close to the people at SSG and, when possible, it will be resurrected. RK: At the moment, we are starting development on a new land based wargame, but have not defined the scale or area to be developed. After completing the WarRoom system for CAW, we would like to incorporate it into a land based design. One of the ideas I am currently working on is an intelligence system that learns from game to game even to the extent that the computer could learn the system by playing itself CGW: How about the navies? They were the weak link in the original Warlords game. Will you be doing something with the Al so that there will be naval campaigns? CGW: Unbelievable! Thanks, Roger. RK: We have changed the way boats SSC Fiie vata Listing treate Hip HEGED Ito 2017 ] Launched Jun 1941: Sunk Jun 1944(Philippine Sea) XJCUT -> Ship Picture Nane CLASS I SYA Displacenen: 38A200 g 37 Machinery2915 knots & 56,258shp Arnanent 112-5/40DP (6x2), 76-25 RAA RN B leur HERFLEX Complement :12. Anes 26 Ship Scalemiy U Carrier : Damage RTL ORODHUOmom som Fire HORSLOOT Orion Exploping song GLOBAL Boh Have Nunher Display Data Sirle Explosion 11 Got un 123 12376 Bouqu-sou Gomme GAL ERIE sorta HP HREForecast Forecast Zone_1 Gussing Stabic BU Pondom Direction Build VINODORO January 1993 Page 133 "


"Review Iding on Succe The Red Baron Mission Builder B3827 by Doug Fick ynamix has released the first of their expansion disks for the Great Warplanes Series of flight simulators. Using the Red Baron program as the basic vehicle, the Red Baron Mission Builder (RBMB) adds a lot of chrome and accessories to what is already a hot-rodded simulation. hed What's \"Nieu\" Tired of shooting down the same aces in the same planes time after time? RBMB provides some relief to the dogfight blues with several new aces and five new aircraft. 'Nieu' for the allies are the nimble early war Nieuport 11 and the mediocre Nieuport 28 (which was outdated even before making its first combat appearance). The Germans can take to the skies in the (fragile Fokker DVIII, the excellent Siemens Shuckert DIII or the early-war Halberstadt DII. .DOS 15. By themselves, these new birds are a nice SAS VGA addition, but it is what can be done with all these aces and planes that makes RBMB really fly. As can be surmised by the program title, SYSTEM: PRICE: Red Baron Mission Builder allows one to DESIGNER: create unique air combat scenarios. In its PUBLISHER: original form, Red Baron gave quite a few options when selecting single missions — everything from dogfighting a single ace through busting balloons and on to taking a four ship formation against an enemy formation of four. Hmm, that number four keeps popping up and only one ace and one type of aircraft could be selected for any one mission. A lot of Red Baron fans asked Dynamix to open up the single mission options and RBMB is their response. To get a feel for what the RBMB is all about, I'll jump in and design a mission. When the Fly a Single Mission option is selected, two new choices appear: 'Build a Custom Mission' and 'Fly a Custom Mission.' The program does come with several custom missions included, but for now, I'll build. The build menu is very easy to use. With the mouse and just a few minutes of experimenting, the interface and options are easily mastered. Five different maps are user selectable and for my mission, I selected a hypothetical battle over the city of London. I'll be heading eastbound with my four planes, two SE5a's and two Sopwith Camels, at the tree-hugging altitude of 200 feet. To my northeast are two observation balloons that I've been assigned to protect. To my southeast, and set to intercept my flight, are two Fokker DRI's and two Albatross D5's led by the Red Baron himself. www o d ayam ROS TITLE: Red Baron Mission Builder IBM $29.95 Chris Shen, Damon Slye Sierra/Dynamix Oakhurst, CA Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"Review aroup A* IF 'About RBMB.. Group Assignment Group A* Total objects in group Formation Wing 4 Scouts Point 1 1900 Point 2 2000, Point 2000Ft Point 1000 ft Point 5 22000 Ft Point 6 13500 Ft Point 800 ft Point 2000 ft Herignment.. Orders dogtight Target Allied supply dump Position Players Regular Pilot Loewenhardt Voss Aircraft Type Fokker D. VII Fokker D Halberstadt 0 Sehens Schuckert Ammunition Encendiary r eguar regular incendiary New Group | List All Mission Grid Allied railroad station Cancel Accept R Graphics, adversary logic and overall game play are also unchanged. No gripes here, as all areas were already excellent and a redesign would have required writing a whole new program. Summary This group will be at 5.000 feet in order to set up a good bounce on my formation. A little farther to the east and set to enter the fight about a minute after the first battle is joined are two more DRI's led by Carl Degelow. His job will be to take out the balloons while the Baron keeps my flight busy. Lastly, the 'fat man', Hermann Goering will enter the fight in one of the 'flying razors otherwise known as a Fokker DVIII. Taking a look at the totals shows 11 aircraft, five types of aircraft. two balloons and three aces. I could elect to have every aircraft flown by an ace if I'd wanted. This whole mission took 20 minutes to build. If I want, I can add briefing text so when someone else plays the mission, they'll know what to expect and what they're tasked to do. These numbers are typical of the maximum levels the program will allow in any one mission. The flight planning menu shows a bar at the top that lets me know how much more I can add until exceeding the capabilities of computer memory. This limit is a function of the basic 640K and expanded or extended memory seemed to make no difference to the size of scenario available. kroup AB File About RBM8... What RBMB offers is the capacity for devout Red Baron fans to design and play their own missions, as well as those designed by others. There is no doubt that bulletin boards around the country will soon be filled with custom missions available for anyone to download. While the program is not essential to enjoy an already excellent program, it sure does a nice job of spicing the game up for the true connoisseur. As CGW has said, \"Two flaps up! Red Baron Mission Builder is an addition to an already great product and worthy of a medal.\" Cow A NATIONAL WILL Scouts Pointa100ft Point 1000 ft Point 3 500 ft Point 4 1500 ft Point 5 1500 Ft Point 500 ft Foint 7 2000 ft Point 8 500 Ft Assignment. New Group... Alliance Group type: German Scout Allied Recon Bomber \"A National Will\" is a computer moderated play-by-mail game where each player runs an economy of a country. Players make decisions on production, labor allocation, revenue, trade, ect. The strength of a country's military depends on the vitality of its economy. Ballon zeppelin Cancel New Group List All | Mission Grid What's Not Nieu To order the rule book and take your first turn, please send $6.50 or $3.00 for the book only with your name and address to Career game play is identical to the basic Red Baron game. The only changes are that the player can choose one of the new aircraft as their personal steed once the rank of Captain (Hauptmann) is achieved. Although I didn't have a chance to play through too many careers, I did not see any of the new aircraft in enemy formations nor any of the new aces show up. Additionally, the missions are all the same. It would have been nice, seeing how flexible the mission builder is, to have added a lot more variability into the career option. Simcoarum Systems P.O. Box 520861  Salt Lake City, Utah 84152 Turn fees are $3.50 Circle Reader Service #135 January 1993 Page 135 "


"Review Locking Under by Johnny L. Wilson Srategie Simulations Erant Not Battles: North Atlantic 11939 ADVANCED SIMULATOR BERIES TITLE: GREAT NAVAL BATTLES ANOTHER SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DEVELOPER: PUBLISHER: Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43 IBM $69.95 None O Design Group Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA SEL T have spent my share of time 1939-43 crawling about on the floor with protractors and tape measures as we moved scale model ships about and rolled percentage dice to determine whether or not we had managed to \"hit\" our targets. I can remember purchasing said models and avidly reading about each ship in Jane's Fighting Ships in order to find strengths to exploit and weaknesses to avoid, as well as a sense of history regarding my ships. I remember the pain of placing an \"X\"in each box as the referee ruled that a shell had penetrated the armor of my ships. With fondness, I remember the times I was commanding a fleet and watched the gamers serving as my captains turn simultaneously out of \"Line Ahead\" formation or when one of my captains managed to \"cross the T\" on a larger ship (allowing both a better chance of hitting the target ship, while reducing the number of guns which the enemy could bring to bear on himself). As one can readily tell, tactical naval miniatures gaming has always been very satisfying to me. Unfortunately, it is not as easy as it used to be for me to be able to locate two fleets worth of captains. So, regular readers to CGW may remember how that I said that Simulations Canada's series of tactical level naval wargames (Long Lance, In Harm's Way and Grand Fleet) had something of the feel of naval miniatures, yet they did not have the tactile satisfaction of holding a model in my hand or the visual satisfaction of seeing two fleets spread out over a large floor space. RAW Entertainment's Action Stations offered a more realistic combat and command model, even down to the handling of damage control, but did not possess anything like the aesthetic appeal to be found in a miniatures battle. Some may note that I felt a certain amount of satisfaction in MicroProse's Silent Service II. I thought the digitized ship (i.e. target) images offered something of the visual thrill I had experienced in miniatures battles. Yet, I've never come as close, in a computer game, to experiencing that \"joy of miniatures\" as I have with Great Naval Batles: North Atlantic 1939-43 (GNBNA). Contemplating My «Naval» GNBNA has managed to convey to this miniatures gamer something of the thrill of watching several ships maneuver in action. The tactical screen enables me to access and command each ship of my fleet, as well as to observe them engaging the enemy in much the same way as I used to observe my fellow-gamer captains in the Falls of the Ohio Wargame Society maneuvering their ships across a large floor. GNBNA allows the satisfaction of resolving large naval actions and allowing gamers to see the overall battle without having to gather human skippers. But that's not all! GNBNA offers a view in the gunnery station of each ship that allows the gamer to see the full deck and superstructure of that ship. The deck views of the ships are beautifully rendered (better than we ever painted our miniatures — some said we painted our ships, others called them \"primed\") as though they were colorized versions of those drawings we studied so intently in Jane's Fighting Ships. The best part, however, is that these deck views are animated so that the guns swing into full broadsides and there is a sequence where the barrels belch flame and smoke after they are fired. One has, in essence, the sense that the miniatures have come alive. Now, of course, any person can easily object that the perspectives from which the gamer is allowed to view the battles (on the tactical screen) and the actual broadsides of a given ship (at the gunnery station) are unrealistic. After all, no one (except, perhaps, a pilot flying overhead) is going to see the battles from these perspectives. Both fleet commanders and gunnery directors see a much more limited portion of the action. Yet, these are satisfying perspectives for those of us who like the aesthetics of miniatures along with the challenge of tactical wargaming. For those who are more concerned with a realistic portrayal of the target ships, GNBNA offers a satisfying aesthetic, as well. The target ships are depicted in a similar way to those in Silent Service II, but the resolution seems better and the animated explosions (and resulting smoke) are much more satisfying. I even liked the way that smoke was realistically used by the computer as a smokescreen in order to cover destroyer movements in some scenarios. Though some gamers would like to see more variety in the way the ships actually sink, it is clear that the overall presentation of the battles is superior to products which have come before. What's So Great? As a game, GNBNA is satisfying on many different levels. It has a nice variety of ships (with more on their way via add-on disks), Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"Review DEESECI WIDE SPOT DO LIEBE   VILRETET ME DEDO VODA eight set-piece scenarios, three \"tour of duty\" style operations mal\" speed or cruise at up to eight times that speed. When one is (extended scenarios) and a campaign game where the player can in the Admiralty, one views a campaign map of the North Atlantic take on the role of grand admiral. Whether one is playing the with color-coded convoys and task forces steaming across the scenarios, operations or the campaign, one can play either side of ocean from port to port. There is also an outside window which the conflict. changes from a light sky to a dark sky behind the flag in order to Further, it is a layered game that allows players to control as simulate the changes from night to day. This can be important much or as little of each battle as they desire. Every portion of the when determining whether or not to follow-up on an aerial or interface has a control to toggle besurface sighting of enemy task forces tween automatic (computer-controlled) or convoys. The sightings themselves and manual (player-controlled). This is are displayed in two different ways. marvelous because it allows one to see The player-admiral can be informed how the game is supposed to operate by a pop-up message window of either without feeling like one used to feel in a surface sighting or a report from the Epyx' classic Destroyer (on the C-64) intelligence branch and a color-coded where the player was required to jump enemy task force symbol will appear from station to station so often that PO WALIS on the campaign map. Sometimes, the ships often went aground (the fate player as admiral must consider which which occurred whenever one left the of several contacts to prosecute in limited map). In the old game, one often terms of what assets he has at his disfelt alone on the ship. In GNBNA, the posal and how vulnerable the merchant player gets enough feedback from the shipping may be at another map coorcomputer-controlled subordinates to dinate. That's when the game really feel like there really is a crew under his/her command. starts to come to life, when the admiral makes his decision and In addition, most naval games seem to emphasize either air starts maneuvering his forces to encounter the enemy. Then, when battles or tactical surface battles, but rarely both. In GNBNA, I contact is made and battle is imminent, it really gets good. managed to turn more than a few surface battles around with a At least, the point of surface combat is when it should get good. judicious amount of air power. Indeed, most of the battles in the It does and it doesn't. It does get good because the admiral gets to North Atlantic involved capital ships, but its doubtful if the Allies choose between engaging in tactical combat, avoiding combat or could have sunk the Bismarck without those Swordfish torpedo shadowing the enemy task force until one is reinforced with more planes. It is nice to have the air assets available as in GNBNA and capital ships. It is possible to do this, but that's where the first not to have them function as omnipotently as they did in the Pacific major problem with the campaign game comes into play. The theater of operations. To me, it makes for a more exciting battle to \"Shadow\" command does not work. Even on the main screen, task require both capital ships and air assets in order to win certain forces can lose their target (according to messages that flash on decisive victories. the screen), but maintain station on the enemy force. In tactical Game play is similar to that in Silent Service Il in one sense. combat, the command doesn't work at all. Once an encounter occurs, it uses a tactical screen in which Unfortunately, the \"Form\" command, which is supposed to have dynamic ship images are presented on a grid. From this screen, the all ships in a task force form up with the active ship directly player could handle almost everything about the battle except for commanded by the player, doesn't work either. This means that air attacks. Players have to manually commit the desired amount the player will have to quickly scroll through ships and take of air assets into any battle. Neverthemanual control of the entire force if he less, this screen is efficient and allows: wants to form a serious line of battle. the game speed to be set anywhere from It is an unfortunate bug (as is the normal to eight times normal speed; \"Shadow\" one), but one which the enemy ships to be targeted, movements company is expected to fix eventually. of all ships and planes to be charted; course corrections to be ordered and TURN RATE 30 MATACUAS 10 14\" C45 A HNOI 1000 The Al Mutiny battle results to be reported in pop-up ACCELERATION DECELERATION 2.6 In general, the computer-controlled windows. MAX. SPEED 23 subordinates are fairly competent, but AIRCRAFT 03 HALRUS From the tactical screen, players can there are occasions when they player jump to the bridge, gunnery station, will need to toggle ships or stations damage control command or flight deck under their control. The damage conof any appropriate ship. One simply co trol teams usually work on the most pulls down the menu and clicks on the important systems, first. There may be desired ship and station. Frankly, I find a times, however, when they opt to be myself regularly drawn to the gunnery station of the flagship in dealing with minor damage when the ship is sitting there like a order to view the action I've ordered and the havoc our gunfire is duck decoy. The gunnery crews are usually fairly efficient, but causing on enemy ships. there were plenty of times when I needed to order them to take low percentage shots because I was outnumbered enough that I had Multi-Task Forcing more ammunition that I did armor. I needed to take the chance. The campaign game adds an entirely new dimension to the game. The most bizarre experience I had with Al occurred when a It allows gamers to assume the role of the theater commander and convoy was intercepted by a large German task force. The escort coordinate all of the assets for either the British or German navies. immediately began to flee, intending to leave the merchant vessels One can create, reform and assign task forces according to any to their fate. I had to toggle every vessel to manual control and desired mix. Then, one can plot the task force movements or assign switch between ships in order to change their courses. I would have patrol areas with a quick point and click. The goal, of course, is to thought it was a freak event, except that I kept reading notes on protect or disrupt merchant shipping. GEnie and Compuserve from other users who were experiencing As in the tactical battles, players can let the clock tick at \"nor this phenomenon, even when they were playing the Germans and 2.4 16 ANNO 1800 SEC. GUAS TORPEDOES 5.25\" C50 NOME  , 720 January 1993 Page 137 "


"Review plete SEMI 101 AGNE came across British convoys. My theory is that this is an Al routine Naturally, the same limitations one encounters in the AI routines which performs threat evaluation as part of the combat module for for the computer-controlled subordinates work to one's advantage every fighting ship. Ships are probably ordered to flee when they when facing the computer-controlled enemy. Escorts can run are outgunned. Unfortunately, if my theory is correct, someone away; air assets can be underutilized; a particular vessel's forgot to write some code to override that threat evaluation when strengths can be ignored (e.g. the more maneuverable and faster the ships are escorting convoys. Gneisenau faces the heavier armored Rodney in one scenario, but Another frustrating experience when dealing with computerthe computer commander does not take advantage of its speed and controlled subordinates is their inability to follow certain orders allows the human player to close at will in the slower Rodney): that should be undertaken without question. This refers to glitches and smaller ships always seem to be targeted first (as opposed to which keep the computer-commanded lowering the combat capability of the ships in a task force from \"forming' on G 12:30:32 81 larger capital ships). Hence, gamers the flagship (even though there is a who are expecting sophisticated AI \"Form\" command listed on the interroutines can safely give GNBNA a wide face screen) and which, likewise, keep berth. computer-controlled ships from being LAUNCH RECALL able to \"shadow\" enemy ships until reGNBNA's Contribution to Rrade Ar 196 inforcements arrive. Once I discovered MAX SPEED 193 MPH the War Effort the two commands did not work, how TWO 20MM CANNON The truth is, however, that for all the ever, the omission did not concern me. problems in Great Naval Batles: I'm enough of a control freak to want North Atlantic 1939-43, there are a to give orders to each individual ship, half-dozen very nice features. For anyway. CE every minor disappointment, there Finally, one must be careful when seem to be several glitzy positives. plotting routes for the task forces in the Frankly, I'm spending a lot of time campaign game. Once, I almost let a task force run completely out playing it. The campaign is testing me to the logistical limit and I of fuel because I had clicked carelessly on the port to which I had love getting those commendations from Churchill after each sucordered it to return, refit and refuel. Even though I had told the task cessful engagement (and when I temporarily quit the game). Right force to return to base, it stopped outside the port and the program now, it's more convenient and more compelling than even crawlkept giving me messages that the task force was nearly out of fuel. ing around on meeting room floors and holding 1/2400 scale Also, if one intends for the ships in a given task force to be repaired, models in my hands. Of course, I miss all that cotton ball smoke one has to give the order manually (contrary to the manual, this and having clumsy gamers step on my ships <grin and wink>. CGW does not occur automatically). RANGE 620 MILES ARMAMENT: ONE 7.92MM THE ROAD FROM SUMTER  APPMATTOX June 25, 1861... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers Nel-ork on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union Daily Tribune the cry mounts . . . ON TO RICHMOND.\" Union forces under General McLellan size The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the Harper's Terry. entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic might of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. FEATURES:  Human or computer opponents. Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels. Over 100 individually named and rated generals. Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners. Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals. Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-whenever to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda you like.  Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles. Full control over the national production system. Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles or A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included.  IBM or AMIGA Send cheque or money order to: $59.95 Must have: ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP. $54.95 1 MB H.D., Mouse, 102_1345 West 4th Avenue plus $5.00 S&H plus $5.00 S&H Keyboard, 286 or more Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8 TOTAL $64.95 am MasterCard TOTAL $59.95 US Telephone: (604) 739-1162 Canadian Residents only Phone Orders Accepted Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"Game Design North Atlantic, 1939-43 meiteners Notes from Besign@roup 22 HAY 41 Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic originated when Roy Gib to prevent controlling cruisers. Even destroyers are not that differson, the designer/programmer, and Kim Biscoe, the artist, both ent, so they were included as well. happened to see a National Geographic special on Robert D. Ballard's undersea explorations in search of the battleship BisFrom Simulator to Campaign Game marck. At the time that it aired, they were in the midst of discus Naturally, inexorably, the logic of being able to control multiple sions with SSI, searching for a topic for a new project. When they ships in battle led to the idea of commanding multiple ships over saw this TV special, the same inspirational spark touched them time. In other words, of being able to take the role of task force both. When they, together, bought Ballard's beautifully illustrated commander as well as ship captain. This step in the progression of book The Discovery of the Bismarck, that cinched it for them. SSI ideas, however, led to two of the greatest design challenges. was equally enthusiastic when the suggestion reached them and The first was the technical problem of designing mechanics to soon work began on \"The Bismarck Game.\" SSI assigned Ken make this diffuse perspective manageable. The player would have Humphries as associate producer to the project and iO Design to be able to tell at all times which systems were under his control Group added Edward Bever to ensure the historical accuracy of and which were on automatic pilot, as well as be able to adjust the scenarios. Then, the team was complete. them easily. Thus, the program would have to be able to keep track Defining the Challenge of these constantly changing settings and seamlessly reconcile the controls at multiple stations. While this may sound simple enough To focus on a single ship made sense given that the goal was to (the programmer's lament), as we got into the nitty-gritty of create a simulator. Simulators, by nature, focus on command of a codifying the program, it proved to be anything but simple. In the single vehicle. Unlike a fighter, howend, there were simply too many posever (which is controlled by a single sible ways of doing things. We went pilot), or a tank (which is controlled by D2 0000' x1 back and forth between approaches PAUSED a handful of men), or even a submarine that gave players so much leeway that (in which all activity is essentially fo they became downright confusing and cused on a single goal), a battleship other approaches that seemed far too contains thousands of sailors manning restrictive. Gradually, though, we hundreds of stations — from multiple evolved the mechanisms that ended up big-gun turrets to innumerable seconCHALIFAN in the final version. A player can jump dary and anti-aircraft batteries to the from the admiral's \"Flag Bridge\" to navigation and engine rooms all enany station on any ship in his task force gaged in diverse and often disconnected and back again at will. Furthermore, activities. It became clear from the beeach ship can be tailored to any comginning that this would be a simulator bination of automatic and manual 413796 with a difference. One in which players (player controlled) systems desired. would have to be able to jump from This proves the programmer's adage station to station; not just to man different controls but, quite that elegant solutions for the user often create programming nightpossibly, to fight different enemies. mares for the developer. Of course, the same program and graphics that simulate one The second way this leap to the multiple command perspective vehicle can be easily modified to simulate other, similar vehicles, created difficulties was that it tempted us to a further leap to so it became the logical next step to enable players to command simulate command of the surface forces as a whole, either for the not just the Bismarck, but any of the battleships that fought in the duration of a single major operation or even for the decisive first same general area (the North Atlantic) on both sides. Working years of the war. From the beginning we had wanted to give some from that reasoning, if one can control a battleship, there is nothing feel for the overall strategic situation of the German navy, but so CAUCAMIELE WESTLADIES LH:31 January 1993 Page 139 "


"Game Design long as the focus was on command of a single ship this could only by done by implication (ie., by setting up battle scenarios with \"typical» situations). Once the single-vehicle barrier was broken, however, it was easy to envision how to give the player control of the whole campaign. Or so it seemed. This aspect of the simulation proved the most challenging of all to develop. The simple reason was that this portion of the game had to be much more abstracted, partly because we didn't have the time or disk space to simulate the entire Atlantic Campaign in detail equal to our simulation of individual ships and, partly, because that much detail would have been more than everyone but the most 0 120 130 140 1501 1900 dedicated players would care to handle anyway. For both reasons, we had to choose carefully which aspects of the situation to give the player control over, which to handle automatically, and LUTZON 5020. YOS which to handle abstractly. In the end, we chose to keep the game tightly fo000 cused on the operations of major surface vessels, keeping other aspects of the naval campaign in the background. Thus, land-based air operations, both reconnaissance and airstrikes, are handled automatically, as are assignments of ships to patrol stations and convoy escorts. Submarines are abstracted completely since subs almost never cooperated directly with surface units, with attacks on major warships handled as random events. Land combat, too, happens in the background, conveyed via periodic news reports. We feel that this disciplined focus pays off in spades since it makes possible a clean, manageable game with plenty of strategic options and exciting tactical interludes. Problems in Miniature(s) While the strategic game posed many of the most serious challenges, it would be a mistaken impression to think that the tactical game posed none. The ships, in particular, posed two very different problems: how to represent them internally (as data structures and game elements, and how to represent them graphically when the player is aboard. On the first aspect, we started with the conventional wargame approach of treating the ship as a series of boxes, which get checked off as hits are sustained until all the boxes are gone or a \"critical hit» occurs by chance. However, it quickly became apparent that this approach squanders the strengths of the computer (ie., its abil. ity to hold lots of data and manipulate it quickly). Therefore, we switched to a much more sophisticated conceptualization based on compartments, each of which represents an actual (albeit A OMSLCA abstracted) location in the ship. Some of the compartments contain portions of the ship's vital systems and critical hits\" can occur when one is penetrated by a shell. This penetration is not a random or arbitrary occurrence but, instead, is based on a careful calculation of the armor thickness of the bulkheads at the point of impact and the caliber of the shell. Additionally, if the shell's warhead does not go off, its path is tracked from compartment to compartment until it either explodes or passes through the ship. If it does explode, the effect of the blast is calculated on the compartment it is in and, where appropriate, on adjacent compartments as well. This conceptualization of the ship's compartments can be seen on WETTERE 00 ABBU TEE READY 00 MICROLEAGUE -ACTION SPORTS MICROLEAGUE ACTION SPORTS SOCCER MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL4. BASEBAN 4   D OEL.GEHRIGES Arcade-style action! European critics raved, and you will, too. Test your coordination and your managerial skills, as you play for the European-championships. More than 170 actual clubs are included. VGA and EGA. Arcade, management and full simulation modes. Real life action: corner kicks, free kicks, trick shots. Much morel It's the best game yet for the soccer buff-and a perfect way for the novice to learn the game. HEBEWS THE 2-2 PITCH The newest and the greatest! Take your choice: manage 54 teams, past and present. With multimedia, digitized sound, 256-color, 3-D VGA Graphics. You control the players and all the action. More stats than ever! Plus: programmable computer manager, detailed Stadium Graphics. You can set up your schedule... \"Quickplay\" a season in minutes. Print out complete post-game summaries...much more! GM/Owner Disk available (separate purchase). FOR NEW EXCITEMENT T "


"Game Design the game's Damage Screen. Here, players can even select an option that enables them to watch the progress of each shell as it penetrates a ship, if so desired. While the solution to the first problem of representing the ships came early and easily, the solution to the problem of graphical representation came relatively late. In fact, it came only after we completed the alpha version of the game (the software equivalent of a rough draft). The core problem was how to give a feeling of immediacy to the training and firing of the big guns when they were actually controlled by operators encased in heavy armor far removed from the turrets that housed them. The solution we hit upon was to partially abandon the first person perspective in favor of a \"bird's eye\" view. By combining on a single screen the \"out the window\" view generally associated with simulators with an overhead view more remiHAC DE niscent of table-top gaming, we realized we could have the best of both worlds. Now, one can look through the director at the target in the top portion of the screen while below seeing the turrets trained in the appropriate direction. Then — boom! — players can watch the blast of fire and smoke as the guns fire. It is Written... Another feature of Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic that was added around this same time was the historical section. We knew that SSI was interested in including some of the background 13000D WISHERITE 125 TERG information within the game itself (rather than just in the manual) and, when we happened to visit an archive overflowing with old photos, we knew we had struck gold. We digitized a slew of the pictures, matched them to the historical material we were preparing, and the result was the on-line historical information included in the program. We think that by deepening the player's knowledge of this era of naval warfare, it would add to their overall enjoyment of the game. The material that we uncovered in 119. 120. 150.140.150 creating this game was so rich, in fact, that it proved impossible to include everything we would have liked. In particular, we were intrigued by the many \"what-if\" possibilities in the situation, both on the strategic and the tactical levels. On the strategic level, we wondered how different the contest would have been if the Germans had SUNSET stuck to the \"Z-Plan,\" the strategy by which they were to delay hostilities until the mid-1940s in order to build up a fleet of massive warships. Tactically, there are a host of ships that could have fought but didn't, particularly if the hypothetical ships and the Americans are considered (an Iowa class battlewagon versus the Bismarck, for instance, is a fascinating duel). All of these possibilities, as well as a \"personal career\" role-playing game, are under development right now to be released as a series of Expansion Disks over the course of the coming year. Thus, we plan to keep Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic on people's hard drives indefinitely (or at least until we finish its full-blown successor). CGW EEAUFORT SUNRISE MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL2 $10 COUPON IM na mia OVER THE MIDDLETORICE on any auxiliary MicroLeague COMING product purchase when you SOON: buy any MicroLeague game at EXCITING NEW ... most major GAMES Software Retailers. FROM Send proof of purchase to MicroLeague. MICROLEAGUE We'll send you your $10 coupon. Ollicially Licensed by the National Officially Licensed by the Major Football League Players Association. League Baseball Players Association AL LOOTEARE MLB MLA ULLIR MILD LALTE Coach your own team, using real NFL players. 28 current teams, plus all-time greats! As close as you can get to the real thing: all the stats, real action, real strategy. 3D VGA Graphics. Digitized Video and Sound. Quickplay Option for a game or an entire season with playoffs!). You can program different coaching profiles. Print out post-game box scores and summaries. Input new stats. And more! Free GM/Owner disk. See box at right. Circle Reader Service #100 2201 Drummond Plaza, Newark, DE 19711 (302) 368-9990 FREE WITH MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL2 FREE GM/Owner disk ($29.95 value). Input stats, make trades between teams, even between eras. Wheel and deal. Season disks available, too. (Separate purchase.) Coming soon: Auxiliary Disk to convert pro game into college game...featuring the great college bowls! E NAME OF THE GAME IS "


"Replay Flattops Ho! A Carriers ad War Replay by Michael Peck Japanese player: Michael Peck American player: Carlos Gomez The following article is a replay of Carriers at War by Strategic Studies Group. The article describes a random Midway scenario in which the computer secretly chooses whether the scenario will follow the historical battle or whether the starting positions of the American ships will be changed. Prologue The early summer of 1942 was a glorious time for the Imperial Japanese Navy. Fresh from their attack upon Pearl Harbor and a naval blitzkrieg throughout the Pacific which succeeded beyond imagination, the Combined Fleet was eager to destroy the last remaining obstacle to Japanese naval supremacy the American carrier forces. AdFute Piay display Control miral Yama-moto's plan was to o send a strongly escorted invasion force to the island of Midway, forcing the U.S. Navy to commit the last of its outnumbered fleet to defending the vital outpost. Unbeknownst to Yamamoto, deciphered Japanese codes had warned Admiral Nimitz that the Combined Fleet was sailing for Midway. The extra intelligence gave Nimitz an edge in surprise but could not make up for his lack in numbers. He had only three carriers one of which was still damaged from the recent Battle of the Coral Sea. This was pitted against four heavy and two light Japanese carriers, backed by an overwhelming battleship fleet. American plan was to stay out of range until the Japanese carriers had been sighted, then close in and attack in concert with Midway's airplanes. During the night, Admiral Spruance's carriers steamed to the northeast of Midway to put some distance between themselves and the approaching Japanese carrier-led armada. First contact came shortly after midnight (around 0100), when the Japanese submarine 1-166 attacked a task force near French Shoals, far to the south of Midway. Though the sub commander reported the group contained two carriers, its position made it likely it was a minor force whose size had merely been exaggerated. Commanders must expect to deal with a lot of inaccurate reports and try to find the kernel of truth which they might contain. Midway's planes were fueled and armed at night to be launched immediately the next morning. The stage was set for the curtain (and dawn) to rise... Dawn of Decision As dawn broke, the Japanese were quickly spotted by Midway's search planes. With Nagumo's force about 200 miles southwest of Midway, the Japanese elected to launch a coordinated strike from all four carriers (which takes longer to launch, but has a more devastating effect on the target and preserves the attacker's forces). The all-or-nothing nature of carrier warfare discouraged keeping a reserve, and it seemed more important to the Japanese commander to concentrate on immediately destroying Midway's aerial threat. Meanwhile, part of Midway's planes were launched at the Japanese carriers, while the remainder flew to Pearl to sit out the initial enemy blows which the Yanks rightly expected would come. As the veteran Japanese air crews launched into the rays of the rising sun, inspired by the significance of the sight, their commander shuddered when he realized with horror that he had forgotten to strengthen the Combat Air Patrol (CAP) over his carriers. Lacking radar, Japanese task forces required stronger standing CAP than their American counterparts. But it was too late Advance to Contact (P.M. June 3, 1942) As the battle commenced on the night of June 3, the Japanese fleet was split into several task forces scattered to the west and northwest of Midway. The Japanese plan was to bomb the Midway airfield into dust and then destroy the American fleet by exploiting the greater range of their carrier-based aircraft. (Ed: A masterpiece of simplicity in military planning. I A few hundred miles away, the American fleet waited south of Midway (Ed: Historically, they were deployed to the north). The Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"5 Big Software Titles Included N-Key Play Music from Your Computer Keyboard wih Your Own Back-up Band. 11E 3 | | | Audio-Toys Direct-To-Disk Recording, Editing and Playback Software Wolfenstein 3D A 3 Dimensional Shoot Em'up Rambo Style Action Game Commander Keen A Multi Level Mario Style Adventure Game. O RIOS CaltanSIAK We Are WC PACHOMAYE in COODBYE. chun ! Cakewalk Pro for Windows DEMO, A Working MIDI Sequencing Studio DO TI MITTE MIT IN TIT MEGA Don't Play Games Without It... Okey Dokey Sound Card FEATURES:  Digital Sampling, Recording Sample Playback . Music, Sound Effect Speech Voice Playback YAMAHA Sound Chip CD-ROM Connectable . Low Noice Rate  Multiple Compression Rates . MIDI Kit & Cable Included . 4 Watt Amplifier & Volume Control . No Joystick Jumper Adjustment  Easy Installation COMPATIBILITY  Sound Blaster  Ad-Lib   Thunder Board  Sound Commander  Sound Galaxy   Sound Magic . MPU-UART Mode  Window 3.1  Multi-Media  Supported by The Largest SOFTWARE Library  Have You Ever Played Games with Live Sound & Speech? . Do You Want to Play CD-Software with Realistic Feeling? . Do You Want to Sample and Edit Any Sound? .Do You Want to Run Window 3.1 with Sound? . Free MIDI Kit & Cable Will Save You $69.00 SINCE for the Of Apo VISA Mastercard DISCOVER MIDI Land, Inc. Sound Blaster, Ad-lb. Po Auso Spectrum Thurber Board, Sound Commor, Sourd Gazwy, Sard Magis. Www 31, YAMAHA Corowak, oro trademark and propostos o trespective comparsa  Dealer and Distributor Inquiries Welcome . Please Call for Your Local Dealer Information lied Ma Palddy 398 Lemon Creek Drive, Suite L, Walnut, CA 91789 Tel:(714)595-0708  Fax:(714)595-4106 Circle Reader Service #99 "


"Replay ECAP EAT OPE so Plan IT donte the strikes could not really be aborted without enormous Revenge (A.M June 5) disruption of their mission (an unacceptable option). The Japanese commander could only rub his temples, light some incense and Japan's battered hopes grew as search planes reported the range pray that the Americans would simply miss their opportunity and to the American fleet narrowing during the night. The American not come. fleet was hovering off of Midway awaiting their planes' return. The Americans tried night strikes with their B-17's and torpedoApocalypse (A.M. June 4) armed PBY search planes, but with no effect. The Japanese scored around 2000 when a cruiser force wrecked Midway's airfield and Divine intervention was not forthcoming for the Japanese on this aircraft. Fortunately for the Americans, their carrier planes landed fateful morning. Concurrent with the Japanese bombers hammerafter the attack. By 0200 both sides had lost contact with each other ing Midway, the first Midway strike planes were spotted by while the Japanese continued to hasten to the surface battle they lookouts on the Japanese carriers (this would be at 0650). Amid were hoping for. the puffy gray bursts of flak, the obsolete Vindicators and their green pilots dived toward the Imperial Japanese Navy with a The question for the Japanese was whether the Americans would vengeful purpose — and hit with effect. Soon geysers of flame and slip away during the night; for the Americans, it was whether they smoke billowed from the pale orange flight decks. (How can this could escape the Japanese net they saw closing around them. be explained to the Emperor?) Meanwhile, the Japanese planes Unfortunately, carriers which have aircraft in the air cannot move, and once the carrier planes took off at dawn from Midway (as per bombing Midway found only empty tarmac—their targets busy destroying the Japanese fleet. the plan from the previous late afternoon attack which finished off the three Japanese carriers), Spruance's carriers could not leave By 7 a.m. the heart of Japanese naval aviation was smoking into the area until they retrieved them. The Americans would, in effect, the blue Pacific skies. The Kaga and Hiryu had suffered critical be nailed in place with Japanese rapidly closing. It would be a damage which closed their flight decks, while the Akagi had taken deadly race at sunrise. substantial damage. Most of the Just after dawn, Nagumo's cruiser Japanese squadrons were out of 556 Fiin pian Display Control Thursday, 2 days 14 hour ceraining 09400 JO1992 escorts spotted the main American commission for lack of working carriers to operate off of. Stung and force containing the Enterprise and X GU writto shaken, the Japanese commander Hornet. A game of tag ensued in AGENT decided to throw caution to the DS which pursuit was difficult; Ameriwind by steaming towards the can carriers (built on battlecruiser American fleet in the faint hope of hulls) were almost as fast as the Japanese destroyers, and could actually forcing a night surface action. Saud IF launch CAP and recover planes Buoyed by their success, while retiring at full speed. Hornet's Spruance's carriers reversed course luck finally ran out, however, when and sailed to finish off Nagumo's the Japanese battleships caught up battered force. But the day was with her; the awesome 18.1-inch salwaning, and his planes would not be in range for hours. The AmeriPDF vos of the Yamato pulverized the American carrier. Two light cruiser cans elected to do a risky strike forces dueled with the American estransfer, in which they would fly to corts with the result that the U.S lost their targets, land at Midway that night, then return to their carriers three heavy cruisers to torpedo attacks while the Japanese lost two the following morning. A logistical exercise of daunting proporlight cruisers and several destroyers. tions, the \"can do\" attitude of the Yanks, however, set them eagerly to task. At this point, the combatants called a truce, although the surviving American carriers could still have been hunted down. It had been a wild battle with air, surface and underwater combat all Running the Gauntlet (P.M. June 4) playing their part. The carnage had been frightful; three Japanese and one American carrier, as well the cream of the remaining Swiftly, the Combined Fleet changed course and increased to American surface fleet. It was a battle that neither side could flank speed; the heavy battleships bore in from the northwest while rightfully call a great victory. the carrier force and Admiral Kondo's cruisers headed east in an attempt to catch the Americans in a nautical pincer. Soryu and the Assessment two light carriers were still operational, so a limited air strike was still possible should the opportunity arise. Hoping for the best, Both the Japanese and American admirals would have been shot Soryu paused to launch her aircraft while the remaining ships for incompetence when they returned home. A brief moment of sailed on. haste and oversight regarding CAP had gutted Nippon's naval aviation, while the precious American carriers and cruisers had The American response was not long in coming. By 1600 the been squandered in a surface battle. (Ed: Historical losses were, Midway air forces had returned, reinforced by bombers transferred for the US: 99 carrier aircraft, 38 Midway-based aircraft, the from Pearl Harbor. Although the hammer was set to deal a finishYorktown and one destroyer for the Japanese: four fleet carriing blow to the Japanese fleet, this time the damage was only ers, a heavy cruiser, an oiler and an entire air group of over 250 minimal. However, at 1800, the American carrier strike planes aircraft and crews. Thus, the results of this replay were not too far arrived to finish the job. Again bereft of CAP, Soryu, Hiryu and off from history, despite the radically different way in which the Kaga finally succumbed to the repeated American attacks, while battle developed. / With the war six months old, both sides had hits were scored on the battlecruiser Kirishima and the cruiser learned some important lessons about naval warfare, each taught Mogami. Akagi's Kate torpedo planes found the carrier Hornet, by the enemy \"the hard way.\" only to fall victim to the CAP screen of American Wildcats. To begin with, timing is everything, particularly in carrier warAs prophetic as the dawn of this day seemed to Japanese pilots fare. Unlike in the gargantuan European conflict, Pacific battles who set off to bomb Midway, so the sunset felt prophetic to were decided by handfuls of ships and a few score airplanes. Even Nagumo. Was this to be the Imperial sunset? a small strike has a chance of inflicting a devastating hit on a CAP Unge level Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"EE INO MICROPROSE ST Combat Flight Simulator Super 3-D Graphics With While Supplier upplies Last AL041 OCHODEM D THUNDER BOARD. PC GAMES LIKE YOU'VE NEVER HEARD THEM BEFORE. AdLib\" and library of gamer Board has ! Lend us your ear. And we'll stuff it with a calibre of sound that's ears ahead of the competition. Introducing Thunder Board from Media Vision. No other sound card out there today can soar to such incredible heights. Or plunge to such awesome lows. And Thunder Board's dynamic filtering means dynamite sound. Higher fidelity. Bigger ka-booms. And more bang for the buck. Our guarantee is that we put the quality where your ears are. And the money where our mouth is. In fact, we'll refund your money if you don't agree Thunder Board is the best sound board for your PC games. In addition, with Thunder Board you get three free PC action game samplers: Nova 9\", Lemmings\", and Lexi-Cross. Plus, free Thunder Master software that lets you record and edit sound files with a Wave Form Editor. And Thunder Board is fully compatible with all the newest PC games. Plus 100% compatible with AdLib\" and Sound Blaster applications-to support the largest library of games possible. What's more, Thunder Board has breakthrough fea tures to let you break all the sound barriers. Like twice the Digitized Audio Playback and Recording Capability at an explosive 22kHz-compared to the competition's puny 11kHz. Also, you get a squadron of powerful extras. Like a Joystick Port. Headphone Jack. An 11 Voice FM Music Synthesizer that lets you score music as well as score points. And a Power Amplifier with built-in Volume Control, so you can have yourself a real blast-without blasting the neighbors. So take off-for a dealer near you. And go from static to ecstatic. Because, with Thunder Board, hearing is believing. MEDIA MAS VISION X COMME Approved by INV Microprose Gunship 2000 Interplay Productions Star Trek Sierra On-Line Conquest of the Longbow Electronics Arts PGA Golf Tour Broderbund Software Prince of Persia For the name of a Thunder Board dealer or simply some good sound advice, call Media Vision. 1-800-845-5870. Media Vision, 47221 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538.510-770-8600, FAX: 510-770-9592. Media Vision, Thunder Board, and Thunder Master are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. , Media Vision, Inc. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"Replay 23:00 Jun 6 1942 L AMA. F RANCUTECE carrier, so the best and only defense is to get the enemy flattops first. The worst thing for a carrier is to be hit while its planes are being armed and fueled, so it may be better to launch a strike too soon rather than too late. A major Japanese advantage in CAW is that their carrier-based planes have a much longer range as much as 100-miles — than their American counterparts. A hunHileliau UDA contrai dred miles may not sound like much, but for a 25-knot American carrier, it means steaming for four hours within enemy air range without being able to reply to hostile action. Worse, the American Wildcat fighter's range is so poor (170 miles each way) that the Americans are better off keeping all their fighters on CAP and letting the bombers fend for themselves. The second lesson is to keep a strong CAP screen up. This is particularly true for the Japanese, whose lack of radar means less warning time. Also, Japanese carriers are more prone to damage and less likely to self-repair than their American counterparts. Although escorting friendly bombers is important, it's more important to keep an adequate screen; if one's bombers are on the way towards the enemy, count on an enemy strike heading back to counterstrike. A third lesson is that carriers are often sitting ducks. When they have launched planes or have transferred them to land bases, they cannot move out of the local area until the planes return. Given that four or five hours might elapse before an air wing returns from a strike, players must consider where the enemy will be later in the day, or even if the targets will be in range once the planes arrive. This is compounded by CAW's limited intelligence system. Put simply, most search reports are erroneous in the numbers and types of ships they report. A task force that previously had two cruisers ---..--. and three destroyers can abruptly mutate into a reported force of carriers and battleships. Nor are pilots able to distinguish well between seaplane carriers and aircraft carriers. The only way to increase cer2 SHAPE tainty is to wait 15 or 20 minutes for LO PIA as several consistent reports to conne UP firm the sighting. Finally, the weaker side should beware of surface combat. Surface GIUS I Ships combat might seem easy to avoid PEPE but it happens with surprising freOPUP'E quency. A 300 mile gap at dusk between a friendly carrier group and enemy battleships may seem vast, but when ships are steaming at 30 knots and darkness lasts 10 hours.... Worse, both sides normally lose contact with each other at night, so fleets could be steaming towards each other and not know it until the disconcerting sights and sounds of gun flashes erupt. Carriers At War requires players to focus on only a few key decisions which must be made regarding movement and combat — particularly as to their timing. Yet, battles will rest upon these plainly obvious choices and victory will to go the admiral who makes the best prediction as to his enemy's intent. Cow 10 Pines American Decisive A Military, Economic, and Political Simulation of World War II in Europe HIGH COMMAND The War in Europe: 1939-1945 \"High Command is one of the most exciting computer wargames I've ever seen and is packed with many clever design elements.\" Alan Emrich, Computer Gaming World \"The best strategy/simulation of 1992.\" Strategy Plus Not just a war game, this is the ultimate game of integrated grand strategy for World War II in Europe. In this game, just as in the real world, economics and politics are just as important as the military. Will you spend your time and resources on your economy, diplomatic initiatives, or the production of a war machine second to none? Will you develop your industry, provide economic aid, or plow resources into research and development? Conduct land, air, and naval operations with 15 types of units and 16 types of missions. Transport units across the seas, perform amphibious assaults and airborne operations, launch an armored blitzkrieg, or use your submarines to prowl for enemy merchant marine. Conduct strategic bombing campaigns and naval blockades to bring your enemies to their knees. And you can assign almost any activity to your computer high command so you can concentrate on the strategy that most deserves your attention. Whatever your philosophy, High Command provides you with the means to implement your strategy on the huge 72x68 hex full-color map that spans more than 40 countries and territories. Assess the current situation on the strategic map with 20 display modes that can be activated alone or in combination with others. Review the progress of the game in the General's Notebook, which automatically records major events for the entire game. The menudriven game system, makes this game easy to learn and play. A Product of Colorado Computer Creations, Inc. 640K PC or Compatible Required: Only $44.95 plus $4.00 for prompt UPS shipping and handling. Add $2.00 for Second-Day Air. Demo disk 5.00. Colorado residents add 3% sales tax. Visa, MasterCard, Discover, Personal Checks, and Money Orders Welcome. No CODs. Mail orders specify disk size. On-line support is provided on CompuServe, GEnie, Prodigy, and America Online. Microtech 4725 N. Academy Blvd., Colorado Springs, Colorado 80918 Phone: (719) 593-1100 (10:00 am 6:00 PM MDT Monday through Saturday) Circle Reader Service #58 Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"are in SAS SE INOAMALI DATES THE PENGUIN UD TOR rigid winter winds swept over an already chilled Gotham City. Random street crimes were running at an all-time high, despite the holidays. Down below, in the city's frozen sewers, Oswald Cobblepot, known as The Penguin, planned more mayhem and schemed the takeover of the frightened metropolis. Gotham City is in trouble. A desperate call to Batman goes up. Partner with Batman to salvage Gotham City from The Penguin's cold-hearted plot. Guide him in swift, life-like moves from dark alleys to rooftops in vivid scenes straight from the hit movie, \"Batman Returns! Control his combat style, and help conduct relentless interrogations of The Penguin's gang. Use the Batcave computer to input clues, analyze evidence, and review enemy bios. You're in charge of weapons and utilities, too. Save Gotham City... and put The Penguin on ice. KELL GE AT THE CARX AT MIDNIGHT. RETURN MONAMI Spirit e lascia Lod BATMAN and all related elements are the property of DC Comics Inc. c 1992 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. c 1992 Konami. Spirit of Discovery is a trademark of Park Place Productions. 1992 Park Place Productions, All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint & Tip Line: 1 (900) 896-HINT (4486).Calls are $.70 per minute. Touch tone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before calling KONAMI: Spirit A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP / Discovery Circle Reader Service #91 "


"Alcanbus MicroProse UK'S B-17 Flying Fortress by William J. Shefski 3:17 bomb doors kicking open, but most actions in TITLE: B-17 Flying Fortress this mode will be in the cause of first aid for SYSTEM: IBM Wil War Il Berkurs Artion the overwhelmingly minor wounds of other PRICE: $69.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up crewmen. These scratches, oddly, are serious DESIGNER: Mike Brunton enough to knock a crewman off his job, but PUBLISHER: MicroProse Software Hunt Valley, Maryland rarely do they require more than a few minFITTIME T utes of attention. The waist gunners, manning ome believe, and apparently the dethe least effective gun positions, soon become signer of B-17 Flying Fortress is the player's medics of choice and triage beamong them, that the U.S. Eighth Air comes paramount. It is a distinctly non-lethal Force missions in World War II had little environment. On rare occasions a man is hurt effect on the war effort, except to reduce enough to be sent to the hospital upon landthe Luftwaffe (this game comes from Miing, perhaps never to return. More likely he'll croProse's UK division. Devaluing U.S. be back in a few missions. contributions to the war is more common The only death in the game occurs when the outside the U.S.). If this led to the stated MICROPROSE plane hits the ground with all hands, achievintent of the game to concentrate on the able solely through willful negligence on the crews and not their effect on the big picture then the right choice part of the human pilot, most times involving was made for the wrong reason. unfortunate use of the time compression feature. The strength of the game is its depiction of \"crew management.\" More romantically, the human player can be regarded as the crew's The Bombs-Eye View heroic spirit or guardian angel. Jumping into the body of any of The look of the game is engaging. There are a wide variety of the 10 crew members, the player can direct the bombardier to look highly individualized targets. Target detail is sometimes startling through his bombsight or his gun sights. The navigator can consult (i.e. the cranes in the shipyards.). Also, a player may opt, during the charts to estimate the formation's position or he can control the mission briefing, to view a reconnaissance fly-by film of the his own gun. The pilot or co-pilot can choose to look out the target. The realism of the effect gives a pleasant jolt. It is detailed cockpit windows, or at one of three views of the crowded instrudown to the stray hair fluttering on the projector lens. ment panel. There are some dramatic outside views of the action available, The 10 crew members are rated poor, fair, good, excellent or including a god-like overview centered on any aircraft, enemy or superb in seven areas: morale, health, medical, navigation, pilotfriendly, on the screen at the time. In addition, the \"chase view\" ing, bombing and gunnery. The manual mentions technical ability, from behind any of the closing enemy fighters is particularly but is nowhere to be seen in the program. The crew's abilities in chilling these categories can improve with experience. It soon becomes painfully obvious, though, from these outside The player, alternately, may also choose to let the computer do views, that the player's bomber is the only one in the group firing just about everything, including fly the plane and shoot all the its guns. The five other B-17's, while they last, are little more than guns. However, there are certain times when it is imperative for target dummies, serving to absorb fire that would otherwise be the human player to interfere. The bombardier won't push the directed at the player-controlled bomber. button himself and the computer-as-pilot tends to stay in formation, even at the risk of overheating and, eventually, incinerating The Poverty of the Written Word what remains of the engines. (Documentation) The player can toggle between controlling a crewman and viewing the crew from well-rendered perspective views of five cutaway The designer confesses to a preference for keeping game features sections. This third person mode is where the controls for crew hidden. In the long history, now apparently a proud tradition, of juggling are found. Occasionally a gun will need fixing or the unhelpful computer game documentation, this package may be the Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"yang pangar a p wapi War Room 1 SPORTS  ROLLIN DO Bed A football fan's fantasy. NFL VideoPro is your ticket to the 50-yard line of 14 pro contests each week. The FIRST to capture pro football's fury at knee-level, using actual, fully-digitized B&W NFL video footage. Stalk the sidelines this season, barking out commands from a playbook of 150 offensive, defensive and special situation moves. Coach one key game or go where you're needed; lead all 28 NFL teams, if you're up to it. Digitized announcers and crowds react to your coaching decisions on every play. Take the winners to the post-season. Good luck... it's a long off-season for the losers. Team names and logos are the registered trademarks of The NFL and of teams depicted. Ron Ross/NFL Photos, David Boss/NFL Photos, Al Messerschmidt/NFL Photos, Video Pro\"and Spirit of Discovery are trademarks of Park Place Productions. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd.  1992 Konami. 1992 Park Place Productions. All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint & Tip Line: 1 (900) 896-HINT (4486). Calls are $.70 per minute. Touch tone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before calling. A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP 1. Circle Reader, Service #92 DisCOVERY you want "


"Review No 25 AIRSO 26 sthitiliated STTHE ABC ON LOCK standard by which all future products are judged. The 230-page manual is scattershot and, at times, seems to serve merely to pad out the copy protection scheme. There is a totally useless bomber identification chapter. The section on German fighters omits an important type, the Bf-110, that is abundant in the skies of the game. A player unfamiliar with German craft of the era may think he has come up against a huge German trove of captured De Havilland Mosquitos — the only small, two-engine craft identified in the booklet. As is common these days, there are discussions of features in the manual that did not 300 make the final cut. Two are acknowledged in the READ.ME file. For example, a player can no longer let the computer land the plane. Apparently, allowing this meant that the human player might be able to go through an entire flight without putting his/her mitts on the aircraft controls. The change is a pedantic one. Landing correctly, as in most other flight simulators, is a tedious and pain-staking process. Here, the player can, at least, choose an easy landing mode, in which putting the plane down becomes a kind of horseshoes-and-hand-grenades affair (close is good enough). However, this reduces the rewards for the mission, such as they are. Those rewards, of course, consist of medals and promotions for the crew, and the knowledge that the human player is one step closer to a 25-mission goal. There are no numerical ratings or measures in the game. It is a worthy notion and a tip of the hat to simulated realism, but may not be gratifying enough to the average, possibly more number-oriented computer bomber jockey. More pertinent to the theme of the game, however, is the problem of fighting fires inside the aircraft, or lack thereof. Described in the manual, this occurrence has been summarily excised from the final design. Additionally, problems with the crew oxygen and heating systems, also mentioned in the manual, never arise (or didn't, in the nearly fifty missions flown by this reviewer.). Lastminute changes are understandable, but this book shows much that might have been. One yearns for the game that the inaccurate manual hangs teasingly before the player's nose rather than the WO 2007 limited one which was actually published. Career Decisions The most important deficiency is the inflexibility of the campaign game. A campaign consists of following one bomber crew from 1 NOVEMBER 1943 until they are either killed, captured or fly 25 missions. There are no collateral crews to follow and there is no skipping ahead. That is, if a player wants to start a new crew, that crew travels mysteriously back in time to 1 NOVEMBER '43, even though the player will be working from the same \"campaign\" file that contains a bomber that has flown missions. If the player dares to set up more than one bomber at a time, strange things happen when the file is saved, and then, loaded later — like the loss of entire bombers, along with their accumulated missions. Again, the documentation is not forthcoming on this facet of the program. Perhaps too much was read into line on page 38 that states there are \"six Flying Fortresses available to your squadron.\" Perhaps it was just wishful thinking. Look Up LOOK CENTER --> LOOK RIGHT Look LEFT FIRE MISSLES Look BACK FIRE GUNS Select Missles RADAR ON/OFF COMPATIBLE WITH ALL FLIGHT SIMULATOR PACKAGES AS A Two BUTTON JOYSTICK. THRUSTMASTER INC. 10150 S.W. Nimbus Ave Ste E-7 Tigard, Oregon 97223 (503) 639-3200 9 Dealer Inquiries Welcome Thrustmaster STANDARD GAME PORT INTERFACE. FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM A Circle Reader Service #142 "


"\"...no other game, no matter how graphically advanced, captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Compter Game Review, Oct. 1992) \"...a remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Compter Gaming World, Aug. 1992) Do you own a modem?  Then live out your favorite roleplaying fantasies in the finest multiplayer interactive fiction game ever Legends of Future of past NICOLE NEO 92 Every day, the intrepid, the romantic, the imaginative and the adventurous meet as player characters in the Shattered Realms, a virtual fantasy world created trom shared imagination on the Digital Dreams Network Explore the dark reaches beneath the Teeth of Shartan or enjoy a casual stroll with friends through the enchanted Grymwood Forest. Become a champion of justice, or a force for darkness. Delve into political intrigue or play the lone wolf on a personal quest, Share adventures and make friends with people calling from across the country. Skilled authors create special quests nightly that allow you to become part of an ongoing plot within a never ending tale, Call 800-937-7644 to join the adventure (1200/2400 bps, 8N1, full duplex) or 800-274-2814 for more information (votel As low as $3.00 per hour all day every day Visa  MasterCard  American Express Circle Reader Service #85 Legends of Future Past\" is available only on the Digital Dreams NetworkTM, a service of Inner Circle Technologies, Inc. Other features include forums containing thousands of files and featuring discussions on a wide range of topics from science fiction to PC computing. Other entertainment products, teleconferencing, nationwide matchmaking and news serviceas are also available. "


"Review Even when one manages to get a crew through 25 missions, the With regard to landing, the best technique I found was to: next crew starts back on 1 NOV 43. This is a bit of a comedown stay in formation, time skip at five minute intervals until the and tends to discourage repeated play. formation has reached rock External View bottom, a little over 1,700 Limping Home feet. Then, time skip one minute, or just accelerate This flight simulator points the way for future game (Alt-A), until the fordesigns in the genre with its character-oriented mation is on the leg of the approach. The player gets a sense of what a lovely pattern with the 60-degrees sight those (yes, white) cliffs at Dover must have heading. Go to manual conbeen for a crew limping home out of formation trol. Descend a bit to let the and nursing two engines. It will not, however, formation pass overhead satisfy those who expect a comprehensive, flex(there's a mid-air collision ible treatment of the subject. danger here) as they reach the end of this leg. Travel B-17 Flying Fortress: Playing tips straight out until you've lost Do not \"time skip\" while any engine is sight of them. Then, hold losing oil. It is possible to come out of the down the Alt-A combination time warp with burning engines or the ground rising\" for about twenty pulses. Turn sharply right until the 230-degrees toward the plane at an uncomfortably fast pace. heading is achieved. This should put the bomber roughly on course Take care of any medical problems before landing or the for Alconbury Airfield and allow the player to start the descent. affected crewmen will go to the hospital for one or more The Shift key not only gives the gunners fine tracking of missions. targets, but also locks onto them, as if one's B-17 were Remember that the reverse equipped with radar-guided guns of the modern era. tactical view (looking out On two engines or less, keep the computer from the target, or other pilot from committing arson on engines by nearby ground feature) can be getting into the skin of one of the pilots. a great aid in navigation, as Switch to manual control and cut the throttle. can Shift-F10, the god-like This will enable the computer-controlled target overview. Pinpointing locadrones that serve as the rest of the bomber fortion is a cruel exercise in patmation to fly ahead. Let them. If one is over tern recognition. enemy territory and the gunners are rated excellent or better, it won't increase the danger too Stay in formation on the bombing run by ramuch and it is better than the inevitable burning dioing \"Bomb on my engines. When the formation is out of sight, the computer can be trusted to drive the plane again. command.\" Forget the charted course and take the shortest If jolted by flak or othheading home. erwise failing to make Fly the single available \"training mission\" a successful bomb run, make an improved second run once or twice, no more, to get the feel of by deactivating bombsight, then radioing \"Abort bomb run. Go the controls and the bomb run. Players around again.\" Pinpoint location on navigation map when directly shouldn't expect any gunnery practice unless they break formation over target. After turning around, radio \"Bomb on my command.\" and head for France (and there, it's for real!). A training crew on Go to bombardier. Activate bombsight. a joyride to the Continent could very well end up as POW's. Navigator needs more help at \"Good\" or less rating. Don't Wise players will make sure they drop bombs on something, F even some target not originally assigned for the mission. time skip past coastlines, use them and major cities to This provides credit for hitting a \"target of opportunity.\" navigate. Note also that the game will count as There is one minor glitch in the aborted any mission where bombs fall game. The very top of the map is not available during the flight (it TURNHOU far from a target, even though the crew VENLOS can only be accessed during briefing) GENT fought its way there, made a good faith MONCHENGLADBACH effort to put the bombs on the target and This makes the mission to PenneST-OMER made its way back to Alconbury airmunde a blind mission (or an impossifield. ble one). If the peninsula that contains the town of Sasnitz does not show an Sightseeing in England can be GDOUA MONS DEE airfield to the northwest, the PenneCHARLERDI HAMUR fun, particularly with a load of 8C TULEE AREAS VALENCIENNES CHARLEROI HALMEDY munde rocket site may be out of reach. 500-pound bombs in one's lugBLEERT CAMERA DINANT gage. Vicious players can \"tour» the ist Yes, there is a key to the naviga AMIENSA T tor's map. It is at the upper left ST-QUENTIN HIRSON BASTOGNE sights in England to their heart's conBITEURS tent. One successful \"visit\" along these corner. RELON lines a direct hit on the Houses of The IBM sound is not worth in[COMPEGNE Parliament drew the simple admonistalling. There are no engine tion \"Not a valid target.\" No court marsounds or chatter on the intertial or firing squad. Buckingham coms, only guns and explosions. One will only want to reinstall Palace, by the way, is a particularly fat and tempting \"point without it because the wonky tunes that accompany the title of interest.\" Cow sequences cannot be shut off otherwise. . CALAIS DUNKERQUE BRUSSELS HASSELT MAASTRICHT OUREI E-SUR-MER ROUBAIX | t BELGIUM near S-PLAGE BETHUNE LIEGEN BEAUVAIS Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"LEMPIRE The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic  An Addictive Strategy War Game  Network and Modem Compatible  Super VGA Giaphies.  Advanced Scenario Editors  Superior Computer Al.  Digitized Sound Effects  Various Difficulty Settings are cCompletely Re-Playable By Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky icolas AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818-999-0607 outside U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302) 1992 New World Comouting, Ine and White Welt Productions. Empire Deluxe is a trademark o! New World Computing, Inc. New World Computing is a registered trademark of New World Computing, Inc IBM serpens shown. Actual screens may vary. NEW WORLD COMPUTING Circle Reader Service #159 "


"Sneak Preview There's a New King in Town A Sneak Preview of QQP's Conquered Kingdoms by Alan Emrich Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final work on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. damage JUILLLLLLLLLLLLLL 1 detail shasie gadvanced buta! forces mol sfiol long game D difficulty level AL 1: Win up to 1 notches. Po C n normal angliaudte itgai gon game length W start cities abort starlgameINICIO magine a wizard, eyes blazing with inner vision beneath furrowed, wizened brows and crowned by a pointy hat with a crescent moon on it. Now, picture that wizard mixing together the arcane ingredients required to make powerful magic; not the commonplace conjuror's confectionery like eye of newt or lizard's tongue (rescuing some helpless princess won't bring this story to a happy ending). No, this is a great wizard pulling out all the stops for the mighty task ahead — bowel of ogre and a necklace of dragon's teeth will be required for him to teleport entire armies and cast fireballs the size of meteors onto his foes. After all, there are kingdoms to conquer this time! Powerful magic, like powerful games, usually requires the blending of strong, proven elements in order to get the results which will become the stuff of legend. No one knows this better than one of the hobby's newest game wizards, Bruce Williams Zaccagnino. While he might look a bit comical wearing a pointy hat bearing a crescent moon (but then, who wouldn't?), the magic in the games his company, QQP, has released to date tells an undeniable success story. Bruce has had his hand in the cauldron as each of his games has stewed to perfection, and now his latest conjuration is ready to once again enchant strategy gamers. Brain of Admiral & Brawn of General Within the ever-improving graphic look of the QQP game box (be sure to look for the tiny giraffe hidden in the cover art of Conquered Kingdoms), a fine set of standard QQP game components resides. Players familiar with The Lost Admiral or The Perfect General will recognize the black and white manual and attractive color battle map cards. More importantly, veteran strategy gamers will quickly decipher the gaming ingredients which were sprinkled into Conquered Kingdoms. Personally, it appears to me to be three parts Lost Admiral, two parts The Perfect General and a pleasant dash of SSG's Warlords thrown in for atmosphere. Describing how all these elements have been combined, of course, will be this gourmet gamer's delicious task. Naturally, having many flavored ingredients does not a delicacy make. Faithfully assisting Bruce Williams is his programming sidekick extraordinaire, Thurston Searfoss, whom many will remember as the programmer behind The Lost Admiral and its challenging levels of computer opponent skill. Fortunately for strategy gamers, the team of Bruce & Thurston is at it again, doing what they do best. Put Out The Cascatia In Conquered Kingdoms, players fight battles over one of eight different, finely-crafted game maps. Varying in size and complexity of terrain, through repeated play one will become familiar with many of their nuances and see that each was carefully designed to prohibit \"perfect plans\" from emerging. There are multiple ways to siege and sally across each one and, to add to the need to do so, every new game finds the game's crucial resources gold, coal and wood — randomly scattered across the map. Thus, opting to fight from a favored position on, say, map #2, might leave a player at an economic disadvantage. Successful Conquered Kingdoms players will have to maintain skills and flexibility rather than Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"Sneak Preview relying on set, \"perfect plans.\" To further add to the adventure, there is even a random map scenario where anything can happen! Topping off all this variety are the varying ways to adjust the game set-up options: single city starts, normal two to three city starts, etc. Basically, one is never playing the same game twice, even though it might be on a familiar map. Besides the economic objectives and a wide variety of terrain types (oceans, rivers and bridges), the two key objectives are cities and castles. Cities, naturally, are straight point generators, as in The Perfect General. They must be garrisoned and the points flow in every turn that they remain under unchallenged control. Gargale Gangolgets Dragons T EST Luengo PS4883 OROSH HETE Perfect General). For example, spies can assassinate officers with considerable ease, but are themselves quite vulnerable if caught (fortunately, they have a sighting range twice that of other units and can only themselves be seen if the enemy happens to blunder into their exact square). Likewise, the antidote to enemy cavalry is friendly lancers; enemy lancers are best dealt with by friendly swordsmen; enemy archers by friendly gargoyles; enemy gargoyles by friendly catapults, and on and on In other words, no piece is invincible or singularly decisive. There is an antidote for every problem and keeping a combined arms force is invariably a key to victory. Combining the right blend of exotic abilities is another important element of success in playing Conquered Kingdoms. Having spies scout out enemy strength, phantoms amidst friendly forces to scare enemies within three space to doing only one half damage, trolls as front line fodder to blunt enemy cavalry and regenerate four (of their 16 maximum) hit points back per turn, catapults and archers for missile support from the rear, ships and rogs for amphibious support or gargoyles, and dragons for air support can all be decisive \"combined arms\" elements in every battle. There are many ways to fight and win each battle with such a wide variety of pieces to choose from and much of the replayability comes from this very delicious diversity of combat units. Thus, the most routine element in the game has been made one of the most intriguing. Conquered Campaigns While the game maps use the hex-brick pattern found in The Lost Admiral (where each space has a stacking limit of two units), this hexagon pattern is also found on the eight different campaign game maps. These are the Cascatia campaigns which can range from a reasonably short number of games that are required to win the campaign, to outright epics. Each area on the campaign map has two pieces of information on it. The first character indicates which battle map is used when fighting for that area (numbered one to eight or \"R\" for a random selection. The second character denotes what special bonus is afforded the owner of that area in future battles (\"D\"ragons, \"Wizards, \"$\" for gold and \"#\" for additional officers). COTOON MA Castles, too, produce points (in geometrically increasing amounts as one acquires more of them — similar to owning multiple railroads in Monopoly). More importantly, however, castles are one's recruitment centers. Newly produced units (which all take two turns to arrive) are placed in friendly controlled castles. Finally, castles are tough nuts to crack. There are a variety of ways to try to capture them, but none are particularly easy and each requires a fairly powerful force to attempt their liberation while an enemy resides there. At the end of a prescribed number of turns (game length may vary by player selection of either the short, normal or long play game option), both player's points are compared, modified for game length, and then displayed in terms of \"notches.\" These notches will adjust a player's rank, which begins at \"seri\" and rises through \"marquis,\" \"duke,\" and so on. Naturally, in the best QQP traditions, map scores, player scores, averages, and such, are all stored so that one can reference them later. A player's legacy in the land of Cascatia will continue as long as the game remains on his or her hard drive (which, in the case of Conquered Kingdoms, could be a very long time). N auary Prum. 40 sa UPS E22832 DUT Fantasy Chess comiat! The pieces used in the game give it the same distinctive boardgame-on-a-computer feel that the three games Conquered Kingdom emulates happen to possess. Players may opt to use either of two sets of pieces, normal or advanced. The normal set includes all of the various human army units, including: swordsmen, lancers, knights, cavalry, archers, catapults, ships, spies and officers (the latter only being available when playing a campaign game). The advanced set adds gargoyles, trolls, ogres, rogs, phantoms, wizards and dragons (the latter two being the much dreaded \"heavy\" units in the game). In the tradition of The Lost Admiral, each unit has almost a Scissors-Rock-Paper combat quality against certain other pieces, particularly when playing with fixed combat results (as opposed to random — an excellent choice of features borrowed from The A campaign is decided by either conquering a certain number of areas on the campaign map or by capturing all of the thrones\" hidden upon it. A player begins with a single area and selects an adjacent region upon which to fight the first battle. When that game is over, the winner receives a new fief on the campaign map with additional ones awarded for achieving more decisive victories. Basically, this system works fine between two balanced players, but once things start to snowball between less evenly matched opponents. A campaign could really go downhill fast! January 1993 Page 155 "


"Sneak Preview UPMBER FRISBEE themselves (slowly) in castles. Di 2113 Knight In the Cascatia campaign games, officers are introduced into turn based play system, Conquered Kingdoms still moves fast each player's unit mix. Both players get a king, who is a reasonably enough to maintain player interest. Whereas The Perfect General tough hombre and the player's first officer piece (others are afforded the passive player a chance for opportunity fire, no such acquired through conquered phase exists in Conquered Kingprovinces on the campaign Archiep, shoots fichier.chits doms. However, one can always pemap). Like the flagship in Lost LALU STINGEE ruse the turn-by-turn graphs showing Admiral, officers improve victory point earnings, casualties and from battle to battle (should I the various resource income levels they survive — if not, they be(and possibly more, as features were gin anew as lowly squires). Ofbeing added to the beta version I preficers have a special ability to viewed regularly as this article was heal human units in their written). Additionally, writing mes\"command range\" and heal sages to one's opponent is a snap; this themselves (slowly) in castles. ACESON is important for guys like me who Furthermore, as officers rise in enjoy engaging in the propaganda rank between battles, they gain phase\" while waiting for my turn. more hit points. Regrettably, officers can only comThe Wizard's Familiar mand/heal the standard human Archer If Bruce Williams is some sort of troop types. Exotic units, inANG rising game wizard, then Conquered cluding wizards, cannot be Kingdoms would have to be his \"fahealed by officers since, in the miliar.\" A familiar, of course, is the land of Cascatia, they follow wizard's companion which is often a no king. shape-changing creature of infinite help and amusement. Since Conquered Kingdoms keeps shifting shape in my mind between Conquered Companions appearing as a The Lost Admiral, The Perfect General, Warlords Besides creating levels of solitaire play that are supposed to rival and a refreshingly new game, I can never be too sure which game The Lost Admiral (although, I admit, I'm doing much better against it most resembles. However, one thing is certain: if there is a magic the computer opponent in Conquered Kingdoms than I ever did that can compel players to spend countless hours of repeated play against the Al in The Lost Admiral), Conquered Kingdoms also with a game, Bruce Williams and Thurston Searfoss have comoffers what has become a delightful strategy gaming standard bined once again to cast such a spell — this time upon QQP's modem play. Although the action is not real time (a la Command Conquered Kingdoms. Cow HQ or Global Conquest), even with the \"Igo, Hugo\" (I go, you go) PAPER SIDELINE SOFTWARE orders 1-800-888-9273 only Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES TYPE 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Need Info? Call (305)-491-9519 DISCOUNT TITLES 18.95 18.95 RPG 16.95 \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 Epic Arcade Simulation Eternam RPG Captive WWF, T2, The Simpsons: all Arcade Strategy Pushover Arcade Strategy Hook Adventure Magic Pockets Arcade Ishar: Legend of the Fortress RPG First Samurai Arcade Strategy Moonstone Arcade Strategy Special Forces Arcade Strategy A 320 Airbus Flight Sim. Daemonsgate RPG Risky Woods Arcade Strategy Laser Squad War Strategy Wizkid Arcade Strategy World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation 4-D Sports Boxing 4-D Sports Driving Advanced Destroyer Sim Arkanoid 2 Armor Alley Austerlitz Bard's Tale 3 BAT Battlechess Battletech Bloodwych Centurion Colorado Conan the Cimmaron Conflict: Europe Die Hard 2 Drakkhan F16 Falcon Flight of the Intruder Fool's Errand Greg Norman Goll Heart of China Hoverforce Imperium Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 Killing Cloud King of Chicago Mig 29 Fulcrum Monty Python Neuromancer Panza Kick Boxing Paperboy 2 Plt Fighter RBI Baseball 2 Sherman M-4 Shufficpuck Cafe Sleeping Gods Lie Spot Star Saga One Stunt Car Racer Super Off Road Three Stooges T.V. Sports Basketball T.V. Sports Football Vollied Wing Commander Wolfpack RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRIERE PERRETERESTROBERIE PROSES EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, lull color magazines also leature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format or PC Review. $10 each. FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00; 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreian subscriptions are asked to use Intemational Money Order in US funds. SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00  C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping, Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject lo change! No refunds or exchanges. Delective products exchanged with same item. Producls warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL: (305) 491-6134 R Circle Reader Service #117 Circle Reader Service #127 Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The best simulator I've ever seen!\" Rick Zalud, Computer Game Review \"Makes the term virtual redundant!\" Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment TEAR INTO A NEW REALITY! BEYOND THE EDGE OF THE ENVELOPE MAX \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations! Arnie Katz, Electronic Games \"Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics!\" : Computer Gaming World From Novalogich the creators of WOLFPACKIM COMANCHE SIA UMUM OVERKILLENTS: the promise of simulation action come true! You camntand the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Helicopters the Boeing Sikorsky RAH-66 Comanche, not just over, but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to Novalogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACEM which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar througl pulse-pounding combat in stunning cloud-filled skies. So get ready for awesome graphics, unprecedented speed, and sweat-dripping, teeth-clenching, white-lenuckle excitement unlike anything you've ever experienced on a personal computer. Tear out to your naarast software dealer and tear into a new reality!  REATE .   Smoothest, richest terrain graphics ever seen in a real-time simulator First simulator with real-time controls of RAH-66 Comanche Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data One-minute learning curve Superb musical score and sound IM LOGIC I CIE 1 ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS ICRAFT13 FLARE 36 C : 231 FLAC for the IBM-PC_380 SX or gratar. 386486.32 but mode game with mwgwbylos ollow addressed power! Wolfpack Comenche. Maximum Overkill VOXEL SPACE NovaLogic, and the Novologic logo are trademarks of Novalogic, Inc. 19510 Ventura Blv. Sre. 200, Tarzana CA 91356 0 1992 by Novalogic, Inc. All rights reserved "


"Review Advanced Squad Leader Game Assistance Program Computer Help for a Complex Boardgame by Richard Savage OR. MacGowan TITLE: Advanced Squad Leader Game Assistance Program SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: Shareware, S20 upon registration PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: Steven Zunde! PUBLISHER: None (Genie shareware download) ong before I played my first com by the computer to aid the player even puter wargame, Eastern Front by further with this treasured, complex board Chris Crawford, I'd cut my wargam wargame. ing teeth on the Avalon Hill boardgame, This happy state of affairs lasted only Afrika Korps. Since those early years, several months, as I had to sell my Apple both computer and board wargames have Ilc and buy an IBM if I wanted to keep become increasingly more complex. pace with the rapidly changing and ever Through the years, I have found myself expanding world of computer wargaming. alternating between playing computer and I sadly packed my ASL games away, since board wargames. I would fight battles on there was no IBM GAP for the ASL the computer for a few weeks, then have boardgames. My months of using the coman irresistible urge to pull out a board puter to help me with my board wargamwargame and push some counters around ing had seemingly come to an end. on a lavishly illustrated, full-size, mounted mapboard. Bridging The GAPs My dilemma seemed to be solved a few In the summer of 1992, while perusing years ago when Avalon Hill produced a through the bulletin boards on the Prodigy Game Assistance Program (GAP) for its network, a note caught my eye. To my massively detailed tactical board wardelight, it was about an ASL GAP that was game, Advanced Squad Leader (lovingly available for download from Genie as known as ASL by its legions of enthusiasshareware. Not being on GEnie myself, I tic players). Many delightful evenings called a wargaming friend who was on the were spent playing and learning the techservice and he downloaded the program nically demanding ASL game system. for me. Approaching the program with Players could use the GAP as a crutch some trepidation due to the often uneven since it kept track of the myriad of small quality of shareware prodAdam Tito Thuse ucts, I braced myself for some cheap, bug-ridden piece of software, halfStart of AFPh: baked in both concept and A Fred Place Delfting CRAY execution. It never felt so good to be proved wrong! The ASL GAP turned out to be programmed by Steven Zundel, a professional programmer for a giCheck for unhampered and unpinned Flano to Blaze Spread (25.15-151), ant company in the industry. CHOTHI Rameua Prep Fire. Intensive Fira. No Fire, and Bounding Fire counters. Far from half-baked, the ASL GAP is a feast! Done Phase FEEL FINAFFAIRPR in beautiful, color VGA, rules, even while rolling the dice (i.e., if EGA or even CGA(!) graphics, this proone rolled doubles, the GAP would remind gram is everything an ASL fan could hope players that the \"cowering rules\" would for and much, much more. Although it is come into effect). Although the GAP not really considered good form for a rehelped a lot, it left me with the feeling that viewer to simply list items, reporting on there was still a lot more that could be done the many features of this ASL GAP would be impossible without listing some of the abilities it has. Since this is a GAP, it is assumed that readers have some familiarity with Advanced Squad Leader, which this program supports. (Even wargamers who have never played ASL will get an impression of the sheer complexity of this program, since it does all of the following items automatically): 1. Performs Sniper Checks. 2. Performs Heat of Battle Results (Hero Creation and Surrender). 3. Implements Commissar Rules. 4. Tells players when a flame is started in a hex. 5. Performs Rubble Checks. 6. Tells gamers when an attack causes a breach. 7. Tracks Vehicle Ammunition Capabilities. 8. Tracks vehicles that are low on ammo, and applies the appropriate penalty. 9. Performs Leader Creation during Rally and Close Combat Phases (when appropriate). 10. Tracks Casualty Victory Points. 11. Applies Environmental Condition Modifiers (dust, etc.). 12. Performs Overruns. 13. Tracks Panzerfaust usage for the German player. 14. Applies Experience Level Rating penalties. 15. Performs radio contact. 16. Performs Radio Repair Attempts. 17. Gives the player the option to use either the Original or highly popular Incremental Infantry Fire Table. 18. Keeps track of the die rolls (and analyzes one's luck at rolling during a game). 19. Performs Bog Check and Bog ReCame Turn 1 Player Turn Allied cdle 2 udle 4 Total 6 461) & dispersed LP C8.6). Rally Prep Fire Movement Defensive Fire Advance Fire  Advance Close Combat Cane Parameters During AFPHE Allied Firu units that did MMC HMG Mortar.5/8\" Allied Opportunity Firers, (for 1 & 2 about. qu RITled Linber or unlimber C Rilled Resolve Placod DC at nilied Berserk units becon RE phase at half FP (87.24/0.4) god location in MPN cannot fire ing T! If unlimbering inatine Bonymito (A15.46). End or AFPh: (BOTH (DOTH) Check for spreading Blaze (B25.5). Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"w ww Go where no cowboy has gone before. No two games are exactly alike. Full network modem.compatability.. Bee 0 ther conquesti Game or the seas: 11. SPACEWARD KO. 19.1 I....bila Design your own ships, create your own galaxy, personalize your opponents, Enjoyable \"point and click» interface makes playing a snap. Explore, colonize and conquer in à galaxy of your own design, Up to 20 human and or computer players each game. Full Windows support with menu driven commands.. Rustle up some stars and get ready for action. A minute to learn, an hour to kick butt, Spaceward Ho! is a space strategy ame for the conquest of the universe. Players start out with a rather low level of technology and income with which to build Ships, explore. and colonize planets, and aventually take over the universe, Spaceward Hol is an adventure lasting many hours and days, and is never the same game twice. Due to the multiplayer compatability you and your frienos can go head to head, against the computer, or BOTH.: at Tales in 2238 Cages Scou 2SM S232 2 Round em up and head 'em out. It's time for a showdown Aucune parodon 1 /2 Celery She NEW WORLD COMPUTING EAT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT SOUV.2 .0090 (OR 1.818.999.0607 OUTSIDE U.S.) P.O.BOX:4302 HOLLYWOOD. CALIFORNIA 90078-4302 COPYRIGHT 1992 NEW WORLD COMITING INC SPACEWARO HOS A TUDEMEK OF DELTA TAO UNDER LICENSE TO NEW WORLD COMPUTINO. NEW WORLD COMPUTING IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF NEW WORLD COMPUTING INC. IM SCREENS SHOWN ACTUAL SCREENS MAY VARY. Circle Reader Service #110 "


"Review fier. Rally Phase Came Turu 3 Infantru Ralli Pour MMC R atlant our formed as location this st IS HOT disruptud. HUST allunt lu ralluma Lule locale. Unilu which allo rally under hudiracliun of C a r Ort Lead Mod Units in hoxenchond 1 moval as well as Excessive Speed Break the rules or flip through charts, everything Here is where to get this ingenious little down for vehicles. is at one's fingertips and can be sum bit of programming: 20. Tracks the Terrain Effects Modifier moned with the click of a mousebutton or On GEnie, M:805, \"Games Libraries,\" on the Infantry Fire Table, which greatly stroked in with a keyboard command. DOS games. File number 4186, ASLhelps prevent applying an incorrect modi Novice ASL players who are hesitant to GAP.ZIP. Alternately, one can contact get involved in the game because of the Steven Zundel on Prodigy at his email vast rules book will now address there, which is SRBJ13A. Finally, find that they have a treone can use the U.S. Postal Service and mendous ally in this prowrite to Steven Zundel, 128 Jewel Street, SUIT Rally proud NO Bond neile leader in the tra gram. It easily cuts the Enumclaw, WA, 99022. learning curve in half, if not more. Virtually all of This product is a real bargain, too. Sharecopisced by the next low ware this good begs to be programmed for the number crunching quality unit of itu size-Rulo: 25.222 has been taken away and other monster boardgames out there. Who knows, Steve Zundel might start a trend aptly dealt with by the Rating tutt and the wargaming hobby will be all the Entur init Hall 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 computer. 11 (A: 18. 1.11 For example, tankbetter for it. Oat MMC SOLERATU DICORU PURUT versus-tank combat beAccording to designer/programmer comes as easy as Steve Zundel, the ASL GAP was three clicking a mouse button years in the making (and is constantly FI Phase F3. Ronair Fuser Info AUK FASAD EMON on the tune oftank firing on the type of tank firing being upgraded). The $20 registration fee GAP as Peacemaker/Educator and the type of tank being fired at. Click covered the Russian and German Orders The above list constitutes a considerable in the range and whether the target is mov of Battle (OOB) which I initially downinvestment in rules questions and die rolls ing or not and presto, one has either hit or loaded from GEnie. For $10 more apiece, that players won't have to worry about. missed. The program also states if one has Mr. Zundel sends registered users the BritFor instance, if a novice ASL player a multiple Rate of Fire, and asks the player ish and American OOBs. Right now, he's shoots at an enemy squad in a building, if he wants to shoot again and if he has hard at work with the Japanese OOB, there are three empty boxes where the retained his rate of fire (which, in turn, is which mates up with the Code of Bushido player can click in the terrain modifiers. If also tracked by the program). If a tank hits, supplement. To put the frosting on the the novice player clicked on Stone Buildthe program automatically brings on an cake, Mr. Zundel is also working on a ing and Wall, as the two terrain effects other page where players will see the re play-by-email version of the ASL GAP. modifiers, the program automatically dissults of the hit. Nothing could be easier. CGW misses the wall as a terrain effects modifier as it knows that a squad in a stone Strategies of the Month Vol. 16 building cannot get both the wall and the stone building as modifiers. Neat, eh? Equally appealing as what the program A monthly column to improve the quality of play does is what it doesn't let the player do. If one attempts an illegal action, the ASL SOLITAIRE\"S JOURNEY: The key to winning the game \"Eight Off» as GAP not only prevents it, but cites the quickly as possible is to clear one of your tableaus. Chapter and Section of the ASL rules the player is violating! This allows players to read up on exactly what has gone wrong. THE LOST ADMIRAL: Just got the Strategy Game of the Year Award It is a great idea, well executed. (CGW Nov. 92). If you tried the game earlier and had difficulty beating levels 1 or 2, Having used this GAP for a few weeks give it another chance. It's a powerful game with great depth, worthy of some now, I cannot recommend it highly practice play. enough. For ASL players, it is simply a must. Allowing players to concentrate on THE PERFECT GENERAL: (Greatest Battles of the 20th century scenario disk) the game, rather than trying to remember In the Battle of \"Kursk\", artillery can and should win the day. OOP's BATTLES OF DESTINY: Do not underestimate the naval aspects of this game. Naval dominance makes taking an island much easier. Try not to send an un-escorted transport to take an enemy city. Many a game, here at Q.Q.P., has been won by using a strong naval contingent. COMPUTER WARGAMES Historically Accurate...Easy To Use For IBM PC and Compatibles BIG THREE la GRANDE (V 2.01) ARMEE WWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns Seven Scenarios, Map Seven Scenarios, Map World-Renown New Release Hard Drive Required Challenging, Intense European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo $25 Each. Send check or money order to: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Department C (314) 966-5602 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. Evenings Only St. Louis, MO 63131 Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk CONQUERED KINGDOMS: Spies, though expensive to buy, make great units to quickly take towns at the start of a game. They move 6, (faster than any other unit). They are not very useful in combat though. When playing a Cascatia campaign (and officers are used) spies are invaluable in sneaking through enemy front lines and attacking officers. Spies kill 12 of an officer! Spies have many other important (and sneaky) attributes. See if you can discover them. Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 Circle Reader Service # 120 (908) 788-2799| Circle Reader Service # 126 Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVENTURE LIKE NEVER BEFORE... I he year is 999 A.D. The time of great dread has come. Long have the Viking prophets foretold of RAGNAROK, the final battle of the gods, which will determine the fate of the world. to OOOOO From before the ancient times, the great gods of your people Odin, Thor and the forces of Asgard have championed the human race and have withstood the power of evil Surtr and his hoards of fire demons. Now the days have become dark and cold. Many travelers and warriors have passed through your village into the wild lands beyond. Strange tales of distant lands, wizards, powerful creatures and magic are whispered by firelight. Some of the boldest warriors say that the final great Viking quest is to aid the gods themselves as they prepare for RAGNAROK. The outlook is grim, but to stay behind and wait for the end is worse. You have packed your belongings and have decided to follow the dark trail into the forest... It's time to break the mold. Step up to RAGNAROK and experience the vast, unbounded world of Norse mythology.  Explore over 100 action-packed realms, featuring vivid, superfast VGA graphics. Enter a highly interactive world where you pursue quests and adventures as you see fit... no set story line to follow. Challenging and Intriguing.  Master the use of over 200 magical artifacts. Encounter up to 200 distinct races of beings Acquire the skills and knowledge needed to finally defeat Surtr and his hoards of Fire Demons. Why be human?  Shed your human form as you learn the arcane skills of polymorph and transformation. Easy to play! Extensive on-line help and intuitive interfaces have you playing immediately. Infinite variability and non-stop action will keep you coming back. Sraveller's 99 The village PAMIC Qur   KT NOW AVAILABLE FOR IBM & COMPATIBLES! TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-892-3488 to order. VISA/MC and checks accepted. Norsehelm Productions, Inc.; P.O. Box 494388; Redding, California 96049-4388. Circle Reader Service #112 ORSEHELM PRODUCTIONS "


"Update eturn to Target fog Microprocess -GUNSHIP ria. Disk Reminders D e light simt ator det tanpa be r gull war, he-is euro peo olyan via e-mail on G M A wana wa IDEOS als article are those of the p o ment of the. A Department or the V le W of additional external fuel tanks. AH-64s in the Gulf War used this configuration extensively. ince my initial review of Gunship 2000 appeared in the December 1991 issue, MicroProse has released several revisions and patches for the game. The most significant of these releases is the new Islands and Ice Scenario Disk (1&/), which contains all of the previously released patches and much more. This review focuses on the effects of upgrading the initial release of Gunship 2000 (Version 2) with the new scenario disk. TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: SOUND: DESIGNERS: Islands and Ice: Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk IBM (286, 10 MHz or higher recommended) $29.95 Documentation Look-Up Adlib, Roland, Sound Blaster, ATI Stereo James M. Day, Darrell Dennies, Delmar Peterke, Chris Clarke MicroProse Software Hunt Valley, MD More Sound-Card Support PUBLISHER: Installation 1&I is painless to incorporate into GS2000. The excellent documentation explains the new features and provides detailed histories about the new theatres. After a disk swap or two, and perhaps changing some settings to take advantage of the new hardware options, the player is ready to enjoy the following new features: Owners of Soundblaster and ATI Stereo cards will be pleased to know that I&I acknowledges their hardware. A glitch I encountered with my ProAudio Spectrum in the Version 6 upgrade has apparently been eliminated in 1&l. While the sounds presented with the different cards are still, in my opinion, anemic, at least a broader base of hardware owners can enjoy them. Of course, I am used to hearing sounds in a specific decibel range when it comes to this aircraft. I don't know if other gamers would consider the sounds anemic or not. a two-joystick control option. I&T provides this and much more. Additional control choices include joystick emulation for the keyboard, foot-pedals and the popular Thrustmaster control system. (Designer Jim Day advised me that there have been hardware conflicts when using the Thrustmaster and Soundblaster together.) These new control options take some getting used to, but significantly reduce the player's workload and increase the enjoyment of the game. ET More Fuel With most combat helicopters having a two hour endurance on internal fuel, I was irritated to find the helicopters in Version 2 running dry after a mere 30 minutes of game time. I&I provides more endurance, which helps, but still not nearly enough. If the designers insist on leaving the internal fuel endurance at its current level, then players should be allowed to equip the helicopters with the \"Zippo\" configuration Improved Flight Model Perhaps the most offensive fault of Version 2 was the atrocious flight model the player was forced to deal with. A smoother and more flyable model was fortunately incorporated into I&I. I'm sorry to say that the aerobatic capabilities of a combat helicopter are still missing, making air-to-air engagements trying at times. Nonetheless, the improvement over the original GS2000 is pronounced. Land More Control Options While evaluating Version 2, I longed for Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"SUBVERSIONTM 1.0 Var has been declared! As Commander of the Attack Submarine \"Nautilus\", your mission is to engage any and all enemy vessels within the region and obliterate them. Warning! They are armed with high-tech equipment and they are out to sink you! Chase down and sink destroyers with either a speedy torpedo or a nuclear-tipped missile. Blow enemy submarines out of the water as they close in on you. Dodge the cumbersome but sensitive mines -snaga cable and it's off to a watery grave. Send out your frogmen for some demolition work. Watch your resources! With only two supply ships, you'll have to be careful. Use them unwisely and you may find yourself sinking helplessly towards an implosive end. SubVersionTM is a challenging balance of strategy and tactics. With 10 levels and over 300,000 combinations of game play, Sub Version is sure to provide you with hours of destroyer-bashing fun. Suthersion Situation Dispon Torpedo Sonar Missile 12 1861 15 Stalus Crew 30 16 | Supply Depth 36 Convert Engine SO4 You destroyed 2 mines, Captain Nemo. You sank 2 destroyers, sir. Depth charges! light damage Captain Nemo Your supply ship was sunk by gunfire! Score 170 Timer 0500 Ships 2-1 Level 5 Auxiliaru Controls Available for Macintosh and compatible machines. Coming soon for IBM PCs and other computer systems. Macintosh 16 color screen shown See your local retailer or call: Game Created by: Captain Byte's Bit Shop e Point Of View Computing, Inc. Box Artwork by: Josh Stigers 5050 Edison, Suite 221 Computer Artwork by: Steve Laveirge Colorado Springs, CO 80915 719 591 5320 Copyright  1992 Captain Byte's Bit Shop. All rights reserved worldwide. SubVersion is a trademark of Point Of View Computing, Inc. Circle Reader Service #118 "


"Update Improved Sights any caution, particularly in rugged terrain, The Antarctic region can be particularly can take 45-60 minutes of game-time. UrMast-mounted sighting systems are the challenging, with heavy winds, haywire gent missions make nice variant scenarios, compasses and superb white-out effects. hot ticket with today's helicopter designbut there's no need to be rushed every (I would still like to see similar brownout ers. I&I makes the mast-mounted sights of time. effects added to the Persian Gulf region the game's AH-6G, OH-58D and Longduring low/slow flight profiles.) Besides bow Apache helicopters much more effecFire Support the new theatres, the player will also face tive. Using this improved feature, the action in the new Persian Gulf rugged player can provide remote target designaConsiderable help in accomplishing the tion for other helicopters in the flight. tougher missions comes via the addition terrain model and the Central Europe urHovering behind a hilltop with only the ban (city) terrain model. The rugged terof friendly Close Air Support (CAS) and rain artillery fire support. Easily activated from MMS peering over and designating for a model strongly resembles the Northern Iraq region, while the urban enthe map screen, the player simply places a sister ship's missiles is the way to dispatch cursor over the target location and lets the vironment subjects the player to closea 256 on high troop-quality settings. friendly assets carry on from there. This range combat in the claustrophobic Trusting an NPC pilot to perform a SAR feature is a nice touch, even if not particuconfines of a large city's streets. The rugor evacuation mission autonomously was larly realistic. ged terrain is very challenging, but the an act of purest optimism in Version 2. urban model steals the show. Images of the Fortunately, the NPCs in the update have There are many other minor improvemovie «Blue Thunder\" are going to be enhanced search capabilities. This means ments to the game's mechanics, including prancing in many a player's head when less frustration for the player while acan improved map screen, in-flight mission complishing the primary and secondary changes and \"hot key\" commands to other taking the mission downtown. missions simultaneously. This feature helicopters in the flight. However, the bigBeing All It Can Be could still be improved upon, but it's a big gest selling points to I&I have yet to be help nonetheless. addressed — the new theatres of conflict, As gamers are notoriously difficult to terrain and the mission builder! satisfy, I can't suppress the urge to request further features that would help vault 0000 GS2000 to the next level: A Double Main Event Add modem play, with cooperative and Advertised during the early competitive modes. dia gestation of GS2000, the mission Create a \"living battlefield\" a la builder makes its debut with I&I. Falcon 3.0. Players will find the mouseand Take full advantage of 386, 486 and icon-driven mission building SVGA power. system simple and powerful. Flesh out the campaign game with Auto-scrolling maps of various realistic units, personnel considerations scales allow pinpoint placement and news updates. Teliti of a tremendous range of single and group targets. The terrain Add some \"oomph» to the sound Ololo FL 3613 models literally become easels effects. for the player to paint MicroProse's dedication to the cusBORZA DELLE on! Moving targets can MISSION BUILDER easily be integrated 37038 Location 32-50 Easier Opponents into the scenarios. Various inacSHREE Location 19-35 A major problem with Version 2 was the tive objects can be added to each ERNEREYE Fixed Radar Site exaggerated enemy capability, particuscenario, adding flavor or even larly at the \"Poor\" and \"Average» troophumor to the proceedings. (Can SEPERTI ARA Battery quality settings. I&I reduces the response the player stop the advancing artime and accuracy of the low-grade enemored forces before the penguin mies, helping the new player to avoid getrookery is overrun?!) The ability ting flamed in every mission. to display weapon-range overUnfortunately, even in I&I, enemy units lays and moving target paths such as Infantry or AML-90s still have a helps considerably in seasoning WESEK JIRILE ICONREALL MAP supernatural ability to detect and engage a mission to the player's taste. T-80 Mech Group helicopters at night and at extended Even the weather can be altered. ranges. I've found my vocabulary skidAfter working with the mission ding into the gutter more than once when builder for only a few minutes, I encountering this howling inaccuracy. could recreate missions from my Real wartime experience clearly shows own wartime experience with surprising tomer has helped transform what was a that enemy units such as these would be accuracy. A topnotch feature, the mission mediocre title into a much better gaming \"meat on the table\" after the sun went builder could be improved even further value. GS2000 fans will be ecstatic with down. with a terrain builder/editor. the new improvements. Gamers disappointed with the original GS2000 could In addition to the excellent mission More Time very well find I&lto be just the shot in the builder, players can now enjoy action in arm the game needed. Regardless of my I&I also extends the previous 20 minute new theatres of conflict. The Philippine previous observations, the Islands and Ice mission time constraints to 30 minutes. and Antarctic theatres present a wide scenario disk is an excellent product, earnHowever, as with the artificially low fuel range of new challenges. New enemy ing GS2000 my vote as \"Most Improved endurance, I can't find a solid reason why equipment is plentiful, and the terrain Game of the Year.\" Cow the time constraints are there at all. Using models are reasonably well-rendered. ONLIEB Olon 2, EYCH 29 Olelse 230 ANNON Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"12 June les Chabrol ATTLESET SHERCOURS FOR VICTORY EDUA \"A LANDMARK IN COMPUTER WARGAMING JUNE 7, 1944 FOR VIETURY Computer Gaming World \"As can be expected, sound and graphics are superb.\" -COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"By far one of the most graphically pleasing and downright beautiful games ever designed.\" -STRATEGY PLUS \"Near-fanatical attention to historical accuracy.\" -COMPUTER GAME REVIEW \"Particularly noteworthy is the quality of the computer Artificial Intelligence (AI) routines used to control the computer opponents. As either the American or German, the computer presents a tough, competent foe.\" -CGW \"VFV has set a new standard for computer wargaming in terms of detail and programming.\" -SP \"While taking full advantage of the computer format, it preserves the tactile feel of classic board wargaming.\" -CGW THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC 2105 S. BASCOM AVE. CAMPBELL, CA 95008 408-879-9144 Available at Babbages, Egghead Software, Electronic Boutique, Software Etc., Waldensoftware and other fine software retailers. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"Review FULL OF SOUND AND FURY, SIGNIFYING NOTHING Three-Sixty's Theatre of War by Tim Carter THEATRE WR World First Super VGA Gomol Theatre of War is Three-Sixty Paand the micro-management of tiny details. cific's latest foray into the strategy Orders can be given through the mouse, the I gaming market. It is an abstracted keyboard, or a combination of both (using chess type game that plays in real time. \"hot\" keys). In addition to simple moveTheatre of War looks a little like a project ment and fire orders, units can be comwhere the designers took the game of chess manded to alter terrain, retreat and recover, and added on everything they could think or simply hold their position and fire at any of to make it more interesting and more STRATEGY AND targets of opportunity. accessible to the casual wargamer. CONQUEST IN REAL-TIME Skillful Cinematography The Plot Thickens Theatre of War also boasts an artistic The game offers three different sets of approach to the strategy game, using pieces, depending on the era being simuSVGA capabilities and smooth flowing lated: Ancient, World War I and Modern. graphics. The SVGA graphics are impresEach set has distinct capabilities based on sive; a combat information screen can be an abstraction of the nature of warfare durcalled up with displays of the combative ing that period. Although the interface repieces swinging away at each other in inmains the same for each set of pieces, this credibly smooth animation. Unfortunately, is about all that does. The board, the comI think the designers took the approach too mands, and the nature of the game changes far when they present the game board in with each set. three dimensions. While this looks good, it A key word here is \"abstraction.\" While IBM PC is not particularly functional. cach set generally reflects the capabilities In 3-D mode it is very difficult to propof units in each era, Theatre of War is not a erly see the battlefield; orders are difficult to wargame in the sense that it seeks to replicate Theatre of War TITLE: coordinate and group planning is hindered. SYSTEM: IBM specific battles or even specific types of bat # PLAYERS Fortunately an overhead mode is provided tles. Rather its objective seems to be to present PRICE: $49.95 which makes planning and order-giving conGRAPHICS: VGA (640K RAM), SVGA (2MB RAM) different sets of theoretical problems for the DESIGNERS: Rick Banks, Paul Butler siderably easier. Unfortunately, however, player to solve, based on the weaponry avail PUBLISHER: Three-Sixty Pacific some of the auxiliary screens provided in 3-D Campbell, CA able. mode are unavailable when operating from Each set of pieces is accompanied by a series overhead. Two key items which are missing of scenarios, none of which takes longer than 30-45 minutes to would be the status of the active unit and the radar-like screen play. The emphasis is on playability and action, rather than realism which provides a rough understanding of the enemy's movements. Furthermore, in order to get a reading of the combat status of one's 1-2 Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"All those who think \"Patriot\" is the ultimate Gulf War simulation, please raise your hands.  PATRIOT The experts agree. PATRIOT is more than the most authentic re-creation of Desert Storm ever made, PATRIOT is the definitive land warfare simulation for the IBM PC. With its initial Battleset, you'll engage in the mother of all battles\" as Coalition forces meet battalion-tobattalion with the defiant troops of Saddam Hussein Command over 2000 units from either the Coalition or Iraqi side -the most lethal high-tech arsenal of firepowereverto scorch the face of the Earth. Stunning 256 color Super VGA graphics capture the fury of modern ground warfare as never before. A stateof-the-art database, interface and mapping system Harpoon and Patriot are registered trademarks of Three-Sixty Inc. All other product and corporate names are trademarks and registered provide authenticity that other wargames can only dream of. And future Battlesets make PATRIOT expandable: always combat-ready for future global conflicts. Like World War III in Europe or land wars in Asia and South America. A revolutionary simulation as current as the morning headlines. That's PATRIOT. But what else would you expect CSI from the creators of HARPOON? To order, visit your favorite software retailer or call 409-776-2187 trademarks of their respective owners.  1992 Three-Sixty, Inc. All rights reserved. PHOTO REUTERS RETTMANN Circle Reader Service #41 "


"Review OPO own army, it is necessary to click on an entirely different screen. When numerous battles are taking place and the clock is running, this is not necessarily a costeffective option. Plot Twists One of the most interesting elements of the game is the addition of logistics. Pieces exhaust energy and health through movement and combat. Many pieces are capable of missile fire and may run out of ammunition. Pieces can only be eliminated when they are out of both health and energy. Keeping one's army healthy and armed is, therefore, one of the primary keys to victory. Logistics are different for each set, but can make the difference between winning and losing in each. For instance, in the Ancient set, the catapult unit can destroy any enemy unit on the board at (relatively) long range. However, it loses energy with each shot and too many consecutive shots will result in it becoming immobile and highly vulnerable. Since damage is never permanent, logistics emphasize the need to keep one's army intact, fighting limited engagements and retreating units when they have become weakened. The use of realtime, however, reduces the decision making role of the player. There are simply too many things happening at once to effectively control the flow of battle. The game is set out in such a way that operational planning requires one to establish a battle plan and organize one's forces based on this plan. Once battle is joined, there is little that one can do to alter the overall nature of the melee, at least until the initial uproar has died down. In one sense this is more realistic than most wargames, since they usually allow unlikely levels of micromanagment, but in another sense, it is less enjoyable to play. A Predictable Ending By far the most critical weakness of this program is its artificial intelligence. Simply put, the game is much too easy to win. If scenarios are going to be only 30 minutes long, they have to be challenging or at least have serious replay value. Neither is evident here. For each set of pieces a few experimental games should reveal the most effective deployment WERP strategy. Once this has been determined, the scenarios become both easy and repetitious. Furthermore, a generic strategy for each set of pieces is effective regardless of the scenario. For instance, using the Great War set, the most effective strategy revolves around the use of missile units. While the computer opponent advances, I deploy my machine guns and cannon so as to have clear lines of fire and to be easily supplied. Then, all of them are set on auto-fire and the rest of my army is held in reserve. The enemy attack is usually broken up by massed fire before it can mount an effective counter-attack. Compounded with the fact that the computer does not make effective use of its missile units in any of the scenarios, this means that all of the Great War scenarios can be fought and won in a single evening. One note when using missile units. For some reason, when missiles are fired over the heads of friendly units those units suffer damage. Therefore, it is important to leave missile units up front, and to stop firing ifenemy forces get behind the firing line. When using the Modern set, this can lead to some innovative tactics. Because of the speed of aircraft and the slow rate of fire of missile units, a clever player can cause enemy units on auto-fire to shoot at their own pieces. This is done by flying over squares onto which the enemy is advancing. Enemy missile units will fire at the aircraft when it is in the square. However, unless the aircraft lands, it will not be in the square when the missile arrives. Instead, advancing enemy forces will take the hits. In the process of adding so many options to the game of chess, the designers have inadvertently removed the element of chess that makes it so attractive to so many people a variety of structured strategic approaches. This game represents the triumph of style over substance. It looks impressive and, with a few minor quirks, the interface is effective. However, it is simply not enough of a challenge to hold the serious gamer's attention for any amount of time. Once the basic commands are under28813 stood, there is very little to actually do. cow PEDAS 2212 DELEA Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"LAND! AIR! SEA! GARY GRIGSBY'S STRATEGIC COMBAT ON A MASSIVE SCALE! FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER, YOU COMMAND IT ALL! Finally! In Gary Grigsby's PACIFIC WAR, PACIFIC WAR delivers nothing less than a truly the entire Pacific Theater of operations is at your monumental simulation of the entire Pacific War. command. Never before has there been a strategic You will change the course of history ... war game of such massive scale. On all fronts— FEATURES land, air and sea—you are in control ... As either the Allied or Japanese Supreme  10-100 hours playing time for 1-2 players Commander, all land forces from battalions to  Strategic simulation of WWII's entire divisions-air forces in individual squadrons-and Pacific War naval forces of individual ships await your orders!  3 play levels of human and computer From the Aleutians to Australia, from involvement Burma to America's own West Coast,  5 campaign games and 2 scenarios i Circle Reader Service #139 STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. TO ORDER: VISIT YOUR RETAILER OR CALL SSI DIRECT SALES: 408/737-6800. TO RECEIVE A CATALOG, SEND) $1.00 TO SSI, 675 ALMANOR AVE., SUITE 201, SUNNYVALE, CA 94086 1992 STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. "


"Review TII Falcon 3.0 to done before the line OOOOO DEE < Soecilam Vespe dion'fio Mareer oo Basham TITLE: SYSTEM: #PLAYERS: ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES' CAMPAIGN DISK FALCON30 PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Operation Fighting Tiger IBM Supports dired connect, modem and network play $39.95 None Gilman Louie Spectrum HoloByte Alameda, CA OPERATION: FIGHTING TIGER ATWRATES pectrum HoloByte's latest addition to the Falcon family, the Operation: Fighting Tiger add-on package (also called Falcon 3.01), is composed of two major components: bug fixes and new features. Regardless of which version of Falcon 3.0 one currently owns, Operation Fighting Tiger will upgrade it to version 3.01. At the time of this writing, Spectrum HoloByte has released one patch to Operation: Fighting Tiger, entitled version 3.01.1. This patch is free, and can be obtained directly from Spectrum HoloByte. Despite the introduction of such an odd numbering scheme, Operation: Fighting Tiger and its associated patch hold many nice surprises for Falcon 3.0 pilots. Unfortunately, Operation: Fighting Tiger has many incompatibilities with prior versions; any campaigns one has in progress will be wiped out, and one will need upgrades to the user-made utilities, Falconr and F3maps. Originally, Spectrum HoloByte stated that the bug fix portion of Operation: Fighting Tiger version 3.01 would be made available as a free upgrade to registered owners. This patch, entitled Falcon 3.0e, would not introduce the new campaign theaters and features of Operation: Fighting Tiger. However, immediately after the release of Operation: Fighting TiFurthermore, the Operation: Fighting Tiger 3.01.1 communications mode is compatible with version 3.0d, provided that the player with 3.0d originates the call. During a several hour, direct-connect, allied play session several glitches were encountered and both the calling and answering machine experienced an occasional lockup. Overall, the allied play was highly successful. Be warned however, due to the large amount of data being transmitted, 2400 baud is the minimum usable data transmission rate. Below 2400, screen updates are simply too slow. Users at 2400 baud will want to reduce the graphics detail levels to the Medium setting to ensure playability. Despite the problems, Falcon 3.01. 1 has what this reviewer considers to be the best multi-player flight system currently available for the IBM. Campaign debriefings have been overhauled, but still fail to be reliable, unfortunately. The briefing is much more informative, giving detailed stats on kills, Spectrum HoloByte. ORADALOZITETIT Bug Killer In the category of bug fixes, Operation: Fighting Tiger version 3.01.1 corrects the majority of problems associated with landings that remained in version 3.0d. For example, the ILS system now has two modes of operation: the previously incorrect \"beacon\" mode, and a new, correct, \"directional mode. Beacon mode ILS still operates incorrectly, simply directing the pilot toward base, while the new directional mode ILS actually aligns the pilot with the runway like an ILS should. Also corrected is the extremely annoying forward view shift whenever the ILS is engaged or the gear is lowered. By default, the view shift still occurs, but users may disable it. Finally, VASI approach lights have been added to runways in new theaters, but not to runways in the original three theaters. Communications mode has been vastly improved. While some instabilities still exist, direct serial port connections and modem-to-modem play is highly reliable. After several hours of modem-to-modem play, no lockups have been encountered. ger, Spectrum HoloByte announced that it would take at least 30 days to generate version 3.0e. At the time of this writing, Spectrum HoloByte has made no further indication of when version 3.0e will be released. friendly pilots and aircraft survival information, but is often inaccurate. It is not uncommon for the debriefing to report more F-16s were shot down on the mission than were present. Kill stats are often inPage 170 Computer Gaming World "


"Review accurate, often reporting close range kills as Beyond Visual Range (BVR) kills. It appears that anytime a BVR weapon strikes an enemy aircraft, no matter what the range, the kill is listed as BVR. SuperSoft... 1-800-285-1881 Orders Outside the U.S: 206-542-1518 HOURS: 10 A.M to 5 P.M. PST M-F Fighting Chance DON T LET THIS ONE GET AWAY! IBM SPECIALS : IBM   LucasFilm Classics........$36 (Zak McKracken, Loom,Indy. Secret Monkey Isle 1) MegaFortress Mega Pak...43 (MegaFortress, Operation Sledgehammer, Mission Editor) Max Pak..........................30 (Star Control, Hover Force, Test Drive 3) AMIGA CT Beyond fixes, Operation: Fighting Tiger has many new features and three new theaters of conflict: the Kurile Islands, Pakistan and Korea. All three theaters place the United States in the \"limited warfare\" role, with only a handful of units in the region to fulfill political promises. Between these theaters, both friendly and enemy forces are equipped many new weapons, aircraft, ground forces and ships. By far, the most interesting theater is the Kurile Islands, where the player must take a single squadron and support Japanese troops on the islands which are under assault by the Russian Fleet. A new, upgraded F-16 called the FSX is available in the Kurile Islands scenario. Although it does have improved performance, most pilots will probably find the improvements negligible during combat. However, with the FSX comes many new weapons, including improved AIM-120 missiles, the AIM-9R Sidewinder and the AGM-86 Harpoon anti-ship missile. These new weapons and platforms, however, do not make the Kurile Islands an easy place to fight. The player is equipped with only a single 18-plane squadron and ordered to protect Japanese forces in the Kurile Islands against a formidable Russian naval task force led by the aircraft carrier, Admiral of the Fleet Kuznetsov. To further complicate matters, the player's squadron is not permitted to start a war between the US and Russia. Instead, strict rules of engagement (ROE) prohibit the player from firing on targets in many circumstances. Violating ROE can result in escalated levels of conflict and/or the court martial of the offending pilot. Based on the ability scores, computer pilots (both friendly and enemy) can occasionally lose their nerve, and either run for home or open fire and violate ROE. This sets the stage for some very intense air combat where the participants are constantly jockeying for position, waiting for the enemy to run for home. Version 3.01.1 greatly improves sound support. Although some glitches still exist for IBM speaker users, anyone equipped with a soundboard will be greatly pleased with the new performance. Many new digitized voices have been added, vocalizing the text of old messages as well as announcing new messages. Falcon version 3.01.1 is clearly the industry leader in terms of digitized sound effects; no other simulator product on the market interAD&D Pool/Curse/Sec....$38 AD&D Trilogy 2............43 Allied Forces. Altered Destiny..............10 Amazon Guardians.. Ancient Art of War..... Bar Games................. Battle Isle........ Battle Tech. Trilogy.... Birds of Prey....... B-17......................4 Clouds of Xeen.............43 Crusaders Drk.Savant.... Cyber Empires..............3 Dragon Strike...... Falcon:Op.Fight. Tiger... Global Conquest........... Great Naval Battles.. Gunboat................. Harrier........................... Heroes of 357th..... ....... Kings Quest 6...................46 Legend of Kryandia...............35 Lemmings 3. Line In Sand.. Lost Files Sherlock Mantis..... 42 MS Golf.......................50 Prophecy of Shadow..................38 Ragnarok...........................36 Red Baron/Rise Dragn/KngsQ5...46 Realms..................20 Search for the king.... .10 Seige....***...*..************* Shadowlands.... Terminator 2029.............42 Twilight 2000 VGA. UltraBots.................... .DEC Ultima Underworld.... Ultimate Challenge Golf... ...36 V for Victory....................49 War in Middle Earth..... Wax Works.......................36 Wayne Gretsky 3...............36 Wing Commander. CT AD&D Tril. Pool/Curse/Secret....$38 Altered Beast... Black Crypt.. Bravo-Romeo-Delta... Breach 2......... Civilization......... . Crusaders Drk. Savant.. Oyber Empires....... Dragon Force... Epic..... Eye of the Beholder 2..... holder 2.... Fighter Duel Pro...... Flames of Freedom... 4D Sports Driving...... Harpoon Sig. Ed.... Keef the Thiet... Kngdms Eng 2:Vikings MegaTraveller 1... No Greater Glory... Out of this world.. Pinball Dreams...... Plan 9 Outer Spce. Project x.... Projectile........ Secret Monkey Isle 2.. Shadow of Beast 3.. Spider Man.......... The Summoning.... Tracon 2. UMS2... OM WWWOW OOO OOOWINOULD NOOOOOOOOOOO W PONOA ........31 .46 Amiga Euro Mags $7 to $9 TIP: $7.00 S/H covers up to 3 Lbs. That means you can order approx. 3 boxes for the same shipping price. w availability/Prices This ad produced on a Commodore Amiga using Soft Logik's Page Stream 2.2. ASDG's AdPro 2. Newtek's DigiView Subject to change Mail to: 110 N. 201 St. Seattle, WA 98133-3012 Products are waranteed thorugh Manufacturer Circle Reader Service #141 January 1993 Page 171 "


"Review been fixed. The auto-range function is still present (this is an actual feature of the APG-66 radar), but no longer resets the elevation scans. Also, ACM mode now has two user-selectable scan patterns for different combat situations. The dusk missions at 1900 hours have FOSCA mation regarding bandits, and the Hi-Fidelity flight model is still unflyable when the aircraft is loaded over 30,000 pounds. G-limits are not enforced when the aircraft is heavily laden (pulling 9G with 30,000 pounds of ordnance on the wings would rip them off). Most notably, no flight path information is provided for other friendly aircraft in the area, not even for aircraft the player is assigned to escort. Overall, despite the weaknesses Operation: Fighting Tiger makes Falcon 3.0 a stable, reliable platform, correcting most technical problems and adding new challenges. Based on technology available in Falcon 3.0, the features available, and the RBS mixes such complex digitized phrases during real-time combat. Campaign mode has received some attention, also. First, users now have three choices of campaign difficulty level (at easier levels, enemy units receive fewer supplies at longer intervals, limiting their offensive potential). Many new types of missions have been added, especially in the Kurile Islands theater, such as suppression of enemy air defenses (SEAD) and anti-shipping strikes. Falcon pilots should be warned that the Russian fleet has heavy surface-to-air defenses, and attacking the Russian warships will usually result in heavy allied casualties. The High Fidelity Radar (HFR) has also been modified. The problem with radar locks being broken when the auto-ranging function resets the elevation scans has been removed and replaced with night missions at 2100 hours. The night missions use a very nice dark palette, rendering most objects invisible except at extremely close ranges. Pilots are forced to rely on their HUD and their instrumentation to fly and fight. Termite Inspection Operation: Fighting Tiger does still have some serious flaws, though. The AWACS still do not provide useful inforgeneral user-interface, Operation: Fighting Tiger earns a high commendation on its performance review. CGW TWIN ENGINE GAMING PRESENTS: Out Time Days Space Combat a game of Time Travel in an alternate dimension a game of pure tactical combat.. THE EXPERIENCE: OTD is a game of life on a in a rather unique environment strange world. Although populated by a variety of You'll be lighting in an ccgclass contest zone aboard livsemi-humanoid races, it is nothing like the Earth ing creatures. Space Combat is almost all combat, with that your character left behind. Gone is the industrisome room for diplomacy. Offensive actions include al might of large nations. The multi-talented worker thc crcaturc's Psychic Scrcams to mentally disrupt is a thing of the past. Even your famed Time JumpBler others, launching Inverse Mincs that will implode ing skills have been checked to a certain degree. .. near your enemy, freeing Sporcs to destroy interHowever, you do happen to be one of the few Time nals, using Nerve Pulses to paralyze posky scouts, Jumpers on this world, and that in itself is a major strength. and Virally Infecting your opponent in the hopes of You'll choose one of several sects to work with, or attempt to taking over their alicn. Each turn comes with a special full-pagc graphic create your own from scratch, which will help set your general methprintout of your ending position to aid od of operation. As each new time opens, there are new discoveries to you in planning. make, new lands to chart, and new people to meet. The world awaits change, and you are the catalyst. Spacc Combat was designed to be casy to learn, but difficult to master. OUT TIME DAYS is a highly interactive role-playing Play-By-Mail Every game starts with ton players, game with tums processed weekly. It has received excellent reviews, and as cach is climinated, the chances notably from Flagship and Paper Mayhem. Turn cost of the game ending will increase. is $5.00. The game is open ended and 99% computer Turnshccts arc custom made on a laser moderated. The rulebook may be obtained for $5.00 printer to aid you in filling out your (refundable with startup). A special startup is next turn. The games run about 12-18 available that gives you the rulebook, the startup turns. Cost is $3.50 per tum. A rulcturn, and five turns for only $15.00. book (required before you can join) is Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 $1.00 (free if you mention this ad!). S Twin Engine Gaming; Dept 631; 3254 Maple Leaf Ct.; San Jose, CA 95121 Circle Reader Service #144 Page 172 Computer Gaming World zar "


"MasterCard VISK Win $500 Worth of Computer Software!! Help us name our company! The name will change from No-name Software to ...?? Here's the details: 1) Mail or FAX your entry to us, or give it to us over the phone when you place an 5) All decisions are final. order. Sorry, entries will not be accepted over the phone without an order. 6) Winner agrees to have their name and hometown printed in a future ad. 2) Deadline for entries extended to January 15, 1993! 7) We retain all rights to the new name. 3) A winning entry will be selected from all entries by the management. 8) The winner has until Dec. 31, 1993 to order all free software. 4) In the event of multiple winning entries, one will be chosen at random to be the 9) We'll pay the shipping for the software. prizewinner. 10) Have fun! No-name Software  800-788-GAME (4263)  FAX: 205-980-1953 For Fax orders please include MC/Visa credit card number, expiration date, and shipping address ........ ..$40 $17 25 Star Trek: 25th Anniversary..........$35 The Two Towers (*).. $35 KOEI Gemlire ....... Nobabunaga's Ambition 2.......... Romance of the Three Kingdoms 2... Uncharted Waters ................ .$41 LEGEND $45 $31 .$36 $41 $17 $17 $17 Eye of the Beholder 2 ........... Gateway to the Savage Frontier ... Pool of Darkness ... Prophesy of the Shadow ......... Spell Jammer..................... The Summoning ........... Treasures of the Savage Frontier .... A Line in The Sand ................$25 Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed .........$35 Carrier Strike ...... $44 Cyber Empires......... .$35 Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43....... No Greater Glory ....... .....$35 $17 *****.........$40 S40 $35 $35 $36 $35 Ultima Underworld... $45 Wing Commander 1...... Secret Missions 1................$20 Secret Missions 2 $20 Wing Commander 2. Special Operations 1 $25 Special Operations 2. $25 Speech Accessory Pack ......... $15 PARAGON Mantis Mantis Speech Pack .............$20 Twilight 2000 VGA.... PSYGNOSIS Armourgeddon....................$30 Atomino (*) ......................$30 Lemmings VGA ..................$30 Lemmings Additional Levels (*).....$23 Oh No! More Lemmings (*)........ ...$30 QQP Battles of Destiny................. Conquered Kingdoms .... $35 Solitaire's Journey. The Lost Admiral $38 The Perfect General ... $38 SIERRA ON-LINE Conquests of the Longbow VGA.... EcoQuest......... $35 King's Quest 5 VGA.............. $40 King's Quest 6.......... $45 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA. $39 Police Quest 3 VGA... $35 Quest for Glory 3............... $39 Space Quest 4 VGA ...............$39 The Dagger of AMON RA......... .$40 SIR-TECH Bane of the Cosmic Forge.... Crusaders of the Dark Savant ........$40 S4 $35 $35 $35 ACCESS Amazon Amazon ................. Links ............**** $27 Links 386 ........... Bountiful CC Course .... Firestone CC Course ....... Bay Hill CC Course ......... Pinehurst CC Course ........... Dorado Beach CC Course ....... .$17 Barton Creek CC Course ........ Troon North CC Course ...........$17 ACCOLADE Elvira 2..............** ****** Hardball 3 ................... Hardball 3 Data Disk .............$18 Mike Ditka Ultimate Football .........$33 Spellcasting 301 ................ Star Control 2 .................. Super Space Invaders ......... ACTIVISION Leather Goddesses II ............ $40 Lost Treasures of Infocom (\") ...... Lost Treasures of Infocom 2(*)..... BRODERBUND Prince of Persia () ...............$25 The Ancient Art of War (*)...........$27 The Ancient Art of War at Sea (*) . . . . . $27 DYNAMIX A-10 Tank Killer Enhanced()........$35 Aces of the Pacific.... ..$45 Castle of Dr. Brain .................$30 Nova 90).......................$22 Red Baron VGA.... $40 Red Baron Mission Builder ...... . . $20 Rise of the Dragon VGA)....... .$35 Willy Beamish ELECTRONIC ARTS Birds of Prey Chuck Yeager's Air Combat .... $35 Earl Weaver Baseball 2........ $32 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...... $46 IMPRESSIONS Air Bucks Conquest of Japan ....... Discovery ...... $35 Paladin 2 $35 INTERPLAY Battlechess 4000..................$35 Buzz Aldren's Race into Space....... $35 Castles 2 ........................$35 Future Wars..... Lord of the Rings ..................$32 Out of this World (*)................$35 Power Politics (Windows 3.5\" only) ...$30 $39 Spellcasting 201 ................ .$35 TimeQuest...................... $35 LUCASFILM Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis ......$35 Secret of Monkey Island 2.......... .$35 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe .... $40 X-Wing .......... $44 MAXIS SimAnt (*) SimCity (*).... SimEarth (*)... SimEarth for Windows (\") ........ $41 MICROPLAY Challenge of The Five Realms ..... $35 Command HQ Global Conquest.............. Megatraveller 3........... $40 Twilight 2001 .... .$40 MICROPROSE ATAC $34 B17 Flying Fortress ............... $39 Civilization .$39 Civilization MPE ................ $45 Darklands $39 F-15 Strike Eagle 3........ $44 Greens................ $30 Jump Jet ................ $40 Rex Nebular................. $39 Task Force: 1942............. $39 The Ancient Art of War in the Skies ...$35 MINDCRAFT Magic Candle 2 ................. $35 Siege ...........................$35 NEW WORLD COMPUTING Might & Magic 3.... Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen....... $38 Planet's Edge .................... $35 Spaceword Ho! ...................$36 $36 ORIGIN Strike Commander .............. ..$45 Ultima 6 .................... $40 Ultima 7.........................$45 Forge of Virtue ............. Ultima 7 Part 2-Serpont Isle .........$45 THREE-SIXTY Harpoon .......... Harpoon Battle Set #2..... Harpoon Battle Set #3 Harpoon Battle Set #4. Harpoon Challenger Pak. Patriot .......... V for Victory .................. VIRGIN GAMES Dune 2 Heimdall.......... Magnetic Scrolls Collection ....... Overlord..................... Spirit of Excalibur ................ Vengeance of Excalibur ........... MISC Aspects of Valor ..................$36 Cobra Mission Demon's Gate ................. Front Page Sports Football...... Goblins ......... Legend of Kyrandia ........... Lure of the Temptress.......... Micro League Football 2...... Plan 9 From Outer Space ...... Ragnarok (*) ........ Terminator 2029 ........ Tom Landry Football .... Tristan Pinball (\")....... The Dark Half ....................$35 Utopia ......... ................$30 SOUND BOARDS Sound Blaster Pro ................$155 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus ..........$135 Pro Audio Spectrum 16............$195 $45 $35 $35 $35 SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE Falcon 3.0 Operation: Fighting Tiger ..........$25 Super Tetris ..$30 Tetris Classic .....................$30 Tetris for Windows............... $30 SSG Carriers at War ................. Reach for the Stars...... Warlords ... $30  ..$35 $35 ....$39 $25 SSI AD&D Collectors Edition 2 ..........$42 AD&D Starter Kit ..................$41 Dark Queen of Krynn...............$35 Eye of the Beholder................$23 *Both 32\" and 5/4\" disks included. Order all other titles by specifying the proper disk size. No-Name Software  P.O. Box 381463  Birmingham, AL 35238-1463 Orders/Info: 800-788-4263 FAX (24 Hrs): 205-980-1953 Hours: 9 AM 9 PM Central Time 7 Days We accept MC, Visa, Money Orders and personal checks (held 10 business days). No surcharge for MC/Visa. Orders received before 2 PM shipped the same day whenever possible. Pre-orders for new releases shipped 2nd day air for $5 Continental U.S. only. Shipping rates: UPS: UPS: $4 for the first item plus $1 for each additional item. Defectives replaced with the same title. 2nd Day Air: Add $3 to UPS shipping rate. Alabama residents add 4% tax for hardware & books. Overnight: Add $6 to UPS shipping rate. We have lots more not listed. Call our 800 number for a quote. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"Hardware Review Homegrown Flight Simulation Enhancements Brad Bowman by Mike «Moondawg\" Weksler Yurrently, entertainment software companies are hard at work pushing the envelope for state-of-the-art flight simulation software. The following, however, represents what is being done by an elite few in their garages and basements during their spare time. They represent the vanguard of flight simulation enthusiasts and the genre as a whole will benefit from their endeavors. Jeff Heeszel sitting in the nearly completed Hellseat 2000. Home Cockpit: The Hellseat 2000 Recently, out of the clear blue sky, we received a communication from Jeff Heeszel which described an inexpensive home-built cockpit for flight simulations. This is, by far, the most significant attempt (as the accompanying photos disclose) at a realistic fighter cockpit that we've seen. Not just a cheezy car seat setup, the Hellseat 2000, as Jeff refers to it, is based on the plans for a 1/12th scale model kit of the F-16 cockpit and ACES II ejection seat (manufactured by AMT). On either panel, one can see the Thrustmaster equipment mounted at a forward angle of 30 degrees for comfort. The rudder pedals, seen in the accompanying photographs, are entirely of Jeff's design. The sound system Jeff has installed is thundrous, consisting of a 12\" kicker woofer, a base speaker (installed in the lumbar portion of the seat), and a boombox for the mids and highs. To quote Jeff, \"Sitting in this thing with the bass pounding you in the back as you fire your cannons cannot be described!\" With a sound rig like that, Jeff's roof probably raises a few inches and blasts the entire neighborhood with air combat sounds and explosions. I can't help but wonder how well it would play Metallica or Guns 'n Roses <grin>. One key fires up the rig with all its peripheral equipment, using a sophiscated array of timers, sequencers and latching relays. The panels light up and provide switches and sound amp controls. The materials, in addition to the sound equipment and other electronics, merely consist of a good deal of plywood and over 1,000 1.5\" screws. As for the cost, Jeff sums it up best: \"For the basic cockpit, maybe $45 in lumber. Paint, $25 or so. The Kicker woofer, $125. The bass amp was purchased at a garage sale for $40 and I had the other amp as a boombox with detachable speakers. It is most costly in manpower to build, which is free, but might cost a few sixpacks to get your buddies to help you.\" For more information regarding the Hellseat 2000, contact: Jeff Heeszel 5946 W. Feemster Ct. Visalia, CA 93277 Steve Edwards' HOTAS, The Next Generation Joystick Controller Of the more innovative products I've had the privilege to try out here at the CGW Labs, Steve Edwards' and Ralph Robinson's HOTAS (Hands-on Throttle and Stick) system seems to be the most promising. It is a system of hardware and software that allows one to use multiple analog joysticks and controllers. It is unique in that one may program any button to perform any function in a given simulation. Additionally, the analog devices may be programmed to reproduce keypresses in other words, one can program an analog joystick to return keyboard values to control an aircraft in simulations which do not allow for analog joystick control. I received a HOTAS prototype system in an alpha state. That is, it was very rough, had no Graphical User Interface for software, featured no cases for the hardware and arrived with almost no documentation. Even so, it was impressive! At the heart of the system is the proprietary controller card. The keyboard plugs into it, and then another connector runs from the card to the keyboard input on the motherboard. The joystick connector (attached by ribbon connector to the controller card) has connectors for the provided modified Thrustmaster Weapons Control System (throttle), the modified Thrustmaster Flight Control System (joystick), and even a rewired video game controller which was included as an additional device for more optional buttons. Two more connectors would allow for rudder pedals and another joystick. One can select the Thrustmaster FCS as joystick #1, the throttle on the Thrustmaster WCS as the Y axis of joystick #2, and the rudder pedals as the X axis of joystick #2 (joystick mapping), and still have extra connectors for more buttons or another joystick. To accomplish this, the HOTAS system has eight analog channels allowing the user up to four joysticks, rudder pedals and up to 40 buttons! While Ralph was the hardware virtuoso who actually built the system, Steve (known online as \"Auger\") performed the software wizardry. Button mapping is accomplished with the HOTAS programming language and events may be triggered based on button pressing and button releasing. Once functions are defined, the following actions may be assigned: key press, key release, delay, and flag setting, allowing for an almost limitless combination of keyboard commands. The most notable feature of the HOTAS Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"Attention Dealers! Strike Back, AdLib The Software Company is a worldwide, full service distributor of entertainment software, CD Rom and accessories. Computer Stores, Importers, Exporters, and Resellers are welcome to contact us to set up an account. Minimum opening order of $250 is required. Then you can take advantage of our monthly specials such as buy five get one free or additional discounts on selected items. Satisfaction Guaranteed. Manufacturers and Publishers: The Software Company has an extensive network to distribute your products worldwide. Contact our VP of Sales for Info at (212) 608-9150 or fax us at (212) 608-9153. Compare & Save Amazon $37.77 Madden II S29.97 Autoworks $43.17 Monopoly Deluxe S32.37 Battle Chess 4 $32.37 NFL Football $26.97 Buzz Aldrin Race $37.77 Sherlock Holmes S41.97 Carrier Strike $37.77 Spellcasting 301 $32.37 Castles II $32.37 Strike Commander $43.17 Civilization $37.77 Seventh Guest $53.97 Darklands $37.77 Terminator 2029 $37.77 Dark Seed $37.77 World Circuit Race $32.37 Dragon's Lair III $32.37 ACCESSORIES MSC Card $42. F-15 Strike III $40.00 2400 Internal $55.00 Femme Fatale $21.57 Virtual Pilot $59.37 Ad Lib Gold $169. Greens $32.37 Mouse Yoke $29.00 Gretsky III $32.37 Flight Stick $39.97 APS 2001 Cobra $59. Jump Jet $37.77 Speakers S 7.00 Landry Football $26.97 Hi Res Mouse $20.00 Links 386 $37.77 PC Gamepad S17.97 Lemmings II $32.37 G-Force Yoke $41.97  \" Our Family of Vendors 1 Joystick PRECISION Anaky joyed ya APPLE'A 16M compatible Omega IBM Joystick $72 per dozen Abracaduta Access Accolade Activision Ad Lib, Inc. Adan America Advanced Gravis Allsop Artworx Software Automap, Inc. Bethesda Softworks BLOC Publishing Bondwell Corporation Broderbund Software Capstone Software CH Products Colorado Spectrum Compton's New Media Computer Easy Creative Labs Davidson Dynamix Electronic Arts Epys Expert Software Exponent Corporation Fisher Price Gametek Graphic Expressions Hi Tech Expressions ICOM Simulations Imsi Corporation Interplay Interstel KOEI Konami LucasArts M-USA Macronix Mallard Sonware Maverick Maxximum Company MECC Software Merit Software Microleague Sports MicroProse Software Millennium Mindcraft My Software Company New World Computing Origin Systems Paragon Software PC Globe Psygnosis Ltd. Quantum Quality Prod. Raw Entertainment Read: Soft, Inc. Round Lake Publishing Sierra On-Line Sir-Tech Smartworks Software Marketing Software Toolworks Sony Imageso Spectrum Holobyte SSC Strategic Simulations Sublogic Sancom Three Sixty Software Thrustmaster UBI Soft Video Professor Villa Crespo Software Virgin Ciames Maxx Yoke & Pedals by Maxximum $85. Thrustmaster FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM $120. Ultra Sound Card Flight Control $62. THE SOFTWARE COMPANY Weapons Control $72. 51 Murray Street New York, NY 10007 608 9150 212 608 9153 fax Circle Reader Service #143 Wholesale Distributors of Computer Software and Perinherals for the IRM since 1985 "


"Hardware Review system is the extensive macros capabilitythe ability to program navigate, full power, missile view, instrument, repeat, left, a series of commands such as a custom radar search routine in right, infra-red, chase plane, autopilot, exit. Occasionally, I Falcon 3.0 that could be executed with the mere keypress of an would speak one word and the software would misinterpret me. arbitrarily assigned button on one of the controllers. The HCL Most often, the software would mistake my \"navigate\" command (HOTAS command language) allows for an almost unlimited size with \"landing gear,\" resulting in my ripping said equipment clean to these command macros. Included were several HCL files for off the aircraft. At other times, I would give the command \"new various air combat simulations and the Aces of the Pacific and target,\" only to be switched to a rear-looking view. But these Falcon 3.0 files worked quite well. The HCL files are easily problems were few and far between, and I generally found using modified, the HCL syntax resembling that of the C programming the Voice Commander software to be extremely enjoyable and, language. Before entering a simulation, one must upload their while not as flexible as the Covox VMkey voice recognition softcompiled HCL files (.DEF files) to the controller card with a quick ware, it was more user-friendly and reliable in its interpretation of DOS command. Since these .DEF configuramy voice commands. (I would imagine tion files are uploaded directly to the HOTAS You said \"tactical view 34 that the reliability factor would vary hardware, there are no TSRs to take up preupon a given individual's voice.) cious conventional (lower 640K) memory! The voice commands are entered by Another unique feature of the HOTAS sysholding the tab key down while speaktem is the ability to create Progressive Rate ing. This is analogous to a pilot holding controls for the joystick. This allows one to the mike button in a push-to-talk mancustomize the rate at which a joystick controls ner. One thing that comes to mind would one's simulation. Ordinary analog joysticks be to use the Voice Commander softincrease the rate at which they control as the ware with the HOTAS system. A button distance from the center increases. The HOon one of the controllers could be conTAS system would allow one to place the figured to emulate a tab key, allowing change of control rate anywhere along the one to use that button to push-to-talk throw of the joystick, allowing the gamer to with the Voice Commander software customize the sensitivity of the device for and an off-the-shelf Soundblaster. If his/her needs. Developers are urged to look John writes modules for use with such Testing the Voice Commander prior to flying F-117A. into this new technology to support not just sims as Falcon 3.0 and Aces of the flight simulations, but driving simulations as Pacific, when combined with the HOwell. Even in its alpha state, the hardware proved to work as TAS system, one may set it up so that the keyboard is not even promised. HOTAS is years ahead of anything currently available. needed! One could use buttons for flight tasks, and the push-to-talk One can only hope that Steve and Ralph license or market their button for voice commands to his/her wingman or other members truly innovative system. Until then, the only way to get one of their of one's flight! Perhaps the only drawback to the Voice ComHOTAS rigs is to obtain a custom setup from them. This is not mander software is that it requires 71K of RAM. With such a high off-the-shelf compatible and even regular joysticks such as the CH memory requirement, it is doubtful that the software would be able flightstick are in need of a minor modification. Also, one's Thrust to work with many of the current crop of flight simulations. The master equipment will have to be sent in for a permanent modifi software does, however, come with a boot disk for those who are cation (converting the Thrustmaster WCS into an analog device). not comfortable with the arcane workings of creating a clean boot For more information regarding the HOTAS system, contact: configuration. Of the items discussed in this article, this is the only Steve Edwards, one commercially available (from Chips and Bits for $29). John Ralph Robinson plans to have modules available for Wing Commander soon, as R&R Electronics well as for F-15 Strike Eagle III as it becomes available. 4009 Parkwood St. For more information regarding the Voice Commander, contact: Brentwood MD 20722 John Donovan (301) 699-5277 Island Imaging CompuServe 71610,2736 201Plantation Club Dr. #1012 HOTAS.ZIP information file is available on CompuServe, in the Melbourne, FL 32940 Flight Simulation Forum in Library #13. (407)255-9327 CompuServe 71223,3661 Voice Commander: Voice Recognition With An \"Shaken Not Stirred» Off-The-Shelf Soundblaster So far, I've discussed these innovative flight simulation items The Voice Commander is an innovative TSR utility which gives separately. Imagine if these guys got together and built the ultimate voice recognition capability to anyone with a soundblaster and a flight rig! halfway decent microphone. So far, designer John Donovan has We'd like to welcome letters from anyone who enjoyed this implemented the software to be compatible with F-117A Stealth article and has some software or hardware related to computer Fighter from MicroProse. The program executes and prompts the gaming that they've hacked together. We know there are more of user as to whether or not he/she is new to the software. A \"no\" you basement hackers out their dreaming up the next advance in answer will allow the user to test the default voice file, while a the state-of-the-art. This irregular column is a graet forum for you \"yes\" response will allow the user to enter the voice training mode. to expose your ideas to your fellow hackers. Think of it as the The gamer is prompted to speak the list of program commands HomeBrew Computer Cockpit Club. Remember to include phowords three times. Then the program allows the gamer to test tos. his/her voice against the stored voice file. I achieved a 95% success Send all submissions to: rate by speaking calmly and clearly. Multiple words are spoken as Mike Weksler one word. For instance, \"landing gear\" is pronounced: \"landing Computer Gaming World gear\" with no pause. The following is a list of words for F-117A Dept: Dawg House Stealth Fighter: rear view, target, forward, landing gear, ahead, 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260 missile, video 1, video 2, tactical view, inverse, new target, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 CGW Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S PC WAREHOUSE 6472-B Windy Road, Las Vegas, NV 89118 (800)788-2193 (orders) 8-6 M-F, 9-4 Sa (702)897-1571 FAX *** (702)897-2797 Tech Support ALL IBM COMPATIBLE 3 BEAT THE WINTER DOLDRUMS AND E-X-P-A-N-D YOUR WORLD! Ask About Our COMPUTER STARTER KITS BOARD CASINO MM HARDWARE ENTERTAINMENT SOUND BOARDS SOFTWARE FLIGHT STICKS RUDDER PEDALS MODEMS Save the Prince VIDEO CAPTURE or Princess with our BOARDS state of the art adventure games. SHOW GAMES * * * HOME, MUSIC, OFFICE, PAINT AND PRINT SOFTWARE ******* SPORTS Baseball Basketball Football Golf Soccer Summer games Winter games WINDOWS PROGRAMS ....n..d.. UTILITIES ....n..d.. GAMES * * * **** ***** CD ROM Drives & ** Call or Write ----Flight Sim & War GAMES EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE Come FLY with our Adventure large selection of And FUN While FLIGHT Learning ! SIMS! CALL For Pricing & Availability. °Art Files & Programs ° Education  Games Research for full Price List. Wide range of MM and Entertainment Hardware, CD ROMS, ° Shareware and  Utilities Software. VISA Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened, We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l h in cont. US, 2nd Day Air S6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Cont.US. COD add $4. All prices are US S. MasterCard Circle Reader Service #149 "


"Taking A Peek Access Salt Lake City, UT (800) 800-4880 lar comic book hero; and Ghostbusters Il upon the block-buster movie series featuring Bill Murray and Dan Akroyd. None of these games made much of a stir upon their original release, but they may be worth a second look with their new budget price tag. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #3. ONEZA PETITA Amazon Guardians of Eden ASCIIware San Mateo, CA (415) 570-7005 PS AMAZON GUARDIANS OF EDEN: As previewed in issue #98, this campy adventure takes the episodic adventures of early TV and the Saturday afternoon movie serials as its inspiration in creating a story built of self-contained scenarios that end with \"spine-tingling\" cliff-hangers. As in previous Access adventures, Amazon makes extensive use of digitized images for its backgrounds, digitized video footage of live actors for its characters, and a speech track, in addition to a nice jungle-rhythms score. Unlike previous Access adventures, Amazon offers an SVGA reducedscreen graphics mode, in addition to a standard full-screen VGA mode. The story is, of course, set in the lush jungles of South America and can easily be compared to a \"B\" Romancing The Stone. The puzzles are very involved and some are real-time, but frustrated adventurers can access the tiered on-line hints to help them along. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #1. TAVS IS112 I ( 3.76 Chicago Texas SPELLCRAFT — ASPECTS OF VALOR: Wizards, warlocks and witches take note. This role-playing/action gaming hybrid offers the most extensive magic system we've ever seen in a game. Fifty-six ingredients combine in an unlimited number of combinations to create 100 spells of varying effect and quality. Magic users will hop back and forth between planes of existance as they seek out ingredients and spell recipies in both the real world and in the planes of an alternate dimension. With the proper supplies, players enter their workshop to experiment with their ingredients, searching for the combinations that generate the most powerful spell. Then, with spellbook in hand, they venture forth into realms teaming with nasties and battle with them in real-time. Of course, the 50+ hours of game time all leads up to a battle with the Ultimate Evil Wizard Dude. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Harball III MLPBA Players Disk POWER HITS Accolade San Jose, CA (408) 985-1700 DIE HARD ACTIU Powerhits Movies Bethesda Softworks Rockville, MD (301) 926-8300 HARDBALL III MLBPA PLAYERS DISK: All 650 major league players have been captured in their mid-'92 season state and stored on this expansion disk for the Hardball III system. The player's simulated ballyard will no longer be populated by generic stand-ins for the real major leaguers. No sir! This disk will add names, digitized photos and mid-season stats for all of one's favorite diamond heroes. The add-on disk deluge will continue shortly when the ballpark disk is released, offering to construct all 18 major league stadiums on the player's hard drive. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #2. DIGOPAL Ponders 2 of 10 Stones 307 1518 Activision Los Angeles, CA (310) 207-4500 Spellcraft Aspects of Valor EL THE TERMINATOR 2029: When Dark Horse Comics does a graphic novelization, each page is crammed with exhaustive detail, particularly when the subject matter involves a dark future with cyberpunk edges where technology has gone awry or violent aliens from an inhuman society present a horrendous threat. So, when Bethesda Softworks optioned Terminator 2029 from the comic publisher, it is no wonder that they created an impressive dark blue palette in finely detailed VGA graphics with plenty of pyrotechnic special effects to convey the hard-hitting fastpaced violence of that epic. The perspective is first-person; the scrolling is fast; the tactics and strategy are as reminiscent of a simulation as of an action game; and the story is tied closely to the universe of the Terminator films. Colonel John Connor assigns the player to perform the first operational field test of a new prototype A.C.E. (Advanced Cybergenetic Exoskeleton) Assault ArTERRAZTOS TORRES POWERHITS MOVIES: In a word — shovelware. This first of several repackaging efforts by Activision includes four older titles developed from big box office movie licenses. All four games are graphic adventures with a heavy action emphasis. Die Hard is, of course, based upon the intense action-thriller staring Bruce Willis; Hare Raising Havoc upon the animated extravaganza staring Roger Rabbit; The Rocketeer upon the film interpretation of the popuTerminator 2029 Pane 178 Computer Gaming World "


"If You Use CompuServe or GEnie, You Could Lose Some Very Close Friends. 000 $327.95 MONTHLY FEE MONTHLY FEL COST OF 25 HOURS USAGE S154.95 $71.95 $34 95 DELPHI 104 PLAN GENIE COMPUSERVE 20/20 PLAN Compuserve and GEnie promote \"flat rate» membership plans, which are fine if you just want to use basic services. Unfortunately, to get \"extra value» on those networks you'll have to pay extra. At DELPHI, we recognize that interacting with friends is what being online is all about. We believe that you shouldn't have to pay extra to be a part of the DELPHI community. That's why DELPHI's membership plans include access to tens of thousands of downloadable files, \"chat\" lines with hundreds of participants, exciting multi-player games, computer support, and special interest groups for almost every type of hobby. Of course, there's also news, electronic mail, and all the other basic features you expect from a quality online service. *Comparison is based on total evening weekend sese in one month of Genie Value Services and CompuServe Extended Services at 2400bps. Rates are crorrent as of October 25, 1992. Genie is a service mark of General Electric Company. CompuSere is a trademark of HOR Block, Inc. So join today through this special trial offer and hang on to your close friends Alex, George, and Andy while you make new friends on DELPHI. TWO GREAT PLANS! 10/4 Plan: $10 per month includes your first 4 hours of use. Additional use is $4 per hour. 20/20 Advantage Plan: $20 per month includes 20 hours of use. Additional time is only $1.80 per hour. This plan has a one-time entry fee of $19. Rates apply for evening and weekend access from within the mainland 48 states. Access during business hours carries a surcharge of $9 per hour for both plans. TRY US. 5 HOURS FOR FREE! Join today through this special trial offer and get 5 hours of evening and weekend access for FREE. 5 HOUR FREE TRIAL! DIAL BY MODEM 1-800-365-4636 PRESS RETURN ONCE OR TWICE AT PASSWORD, ENTER CGW23 DELPHI A service of General Videotex Corporation 1030 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138 Tel 1-800-695-4005 Circle Reader Service #81 "


"Taking A Peek mor. The whole feel of the game is something like MechWarrior meets Terminator, except that the graphics are much more lavish than the former's polygon-filled graphics and the latter's combination EGA/VGA pastiche. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #5. SHBA rolled before the 4 or 10 is rolled). Another feature which most craps simulations have not used in the past is the ability to \"work\" or call off bets during the \"come out\" rolls. This is a common question at any table and it is nice to see it in the game. With its statistical features and excellent documentation, this is definitely the craps sim for serious gamblers and interested gamers. IBM ($60.00). Circle Reader Service #8. Compton's New Media Carlsbad, CA (619) 929-2500 SELIDIKIRUNT 22888 Desert Storm with Coalition Command Disney Software Burbank, CA (818) 841-3326 Merdie USA WARS: DESERT STORM WITH COALITION COMMAND: If one bought a CD player with the justification that he or she wanted a fact-filled, multi-media encyclopedia at their fingertips, then this product could easily relieve any buyer's remorse. The database covers a vast array of Gulf War topics, is well presented (although less well organized), is crammed with meticulous detail, and provides a fairly unbiased presentation of its topic with sterling clarity. The Coalition Command game, however, is not up to the encyclopedia's standards. Looking like the rushed product it was, the game element of this CD leaves a lot to be desired. IBM CD-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6. in tiss CD BUE ING je Blackjack Trainer 2.0 STRISNO STUNT ISLAND: For the player who has ever wanted to fly a crop duster through a barn or a Mig 29 through a tight canyon, or for those who wanted to film such daring feats, there's Stunt Island from Disney. The player assumes the role of stunt pilot, director, film editor, or dons a mixture of roles for a Hollywood production company. As the pilot, the player can compete in a Stunt Pilot of the Year contest, fly various stunts in front of the camera, or just explore the island setting. There are 40 different planes to try out, including an F-16, U2, F117 Stealth Fighter, 747, Cessna 172 and a pterodactyl! As director, the player will build sets and scenery, position cameras and choose the type of stunt to be flown. And finally, as film editor, players will put together scintillating action shots using an editing deck that may set the standard for future VCR features. IBM($59.95). Circle Reader Service #9. . SH X 3 ConJelCo 5922 Howe Street, Suite 104 Pittsburgh, PA 15232-2834 (412) 362-2669 -4 10 11 Datott. Har !!!! PASES 31000 makro CrapSim 1.0 Ebook c/o Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 CZ 28 01 0 URITIES MIA KUKABILI LIDE Focos TRAINTNL S Cut Fin eveda Toca woestination DEX 082) Becundo PHIA 621 Leod IS BLACKJACK TRAINER 2.0: This program is here to pump you up! The serious card player should come to this product prepared for an intense cardtossing workout. It will not only teach its pupil the basics of good \"21\" play, but it offers tutelage in several card counting techniques and will drill the player until those flabby mental muscles are pumped to perfection. In addition, one can design their own playing strategy and run the strategy through an extended simulation to test its long term outcome. Girlygamers need not apply. ($75.00). Circle Reader Service #7. KEN ELLIOTT'S CRAPSIM 1.0: There are plenty of entertaining craps simulations on the market, but this simulation allows bets that casual gamers don't even know they can make. Many do not know that in addition to placing\" bets to win (i.e. taking 9 to 5 that the 4 or 10 will win rather than getting the true 2 to 1 odds) or to lose (i.e. risking 11 to 5 that a 7 will be rolled before the 4 or 10) on the numbers, it is possible to buy bets (i.e. getting 2 to l odds on a 4 or 10 after a 5% commission is paid) or lay bets (i.e. offering 2 to l odds plus the same 5% commission that a 7 will be Stunt Island fie La Bokmark Hela Cuando r a At that moment a slight e up and the great blades began to tum. I dont care low many as you live on Quote Commenting his soul to his Lady Daikinca, te Taised his shit and lungod beadot, sucking his Luxe arainst the lowest te of the fast windmill But the deathering ass rose, dashed his Lance to pieces, lifting both Borse ander het in the air, then huling them down ceito the plain AESOP'S FABLES: The Tortoise and the Hare, The Fox and the Grapes, The Gnat and the Bull, along with 50 other aesopic tales come fully illustrated and narrated for owners of MPC or Mac CD-ROM systems. To help out young readers, the EBook story-viewing system highlights difficult words which can be clicked upon for a definition, and offers small audio surprises in each story. The CD is designed so that owners can play the narration on an audio CDplayer as they would a music CD, if they do not want to use it on the computer. (Not Pictured) IBM CD-ROM (MPC), Mac CD-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. DON QUIXOTE: Some might call publishing CD-ROM titles a quixotic venture, and this product goes to show how right they are. Miguel de CervanSancho Panza rushed to help them \"Good God he cried when he saw that neither Dan Quirode whistle could be to you Uy were windmills Don Quixote Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"Ets you choose to e zone awareces and alerts nize Files Au sur calendar deng TM nat THE LINES THE RECOMING.... 119 Fou name it on n. Link any sama manually, even if ach hard disk. No na -ur files up to date! Sy on a schedule you defin background anytime yo Hers from the simple Fi ting features to automat e, location, name, file copied files, lets you ced since the last syn p one or both vers asparently dea THE INTEC The Tinies are mischievous, hairy The Tiny Controller lets you maneuver beings from the planet Sklumph. the Tinies back to their sleep pods, Cute but unruly, the Tinies are but your mission will not be easy! messy creatures whose highest Tinies are single-minded and cultural achievement is uncooperative, and strange the practical joke. And devices lurk aboard their now a group of the messy ship. Teleporters, craziest Tinies arrow chutes, explosives, have decided to and other goodies hinder take a trip to Earth. your progress as you Unless you stop them, maneuver the Tinies they will turn our around walls, traps, planet upside down... house plants and You have been chosen by each other. the King of Tinies to find The little beasts these boisterous critters, will heckle you every and put them back in their step of the way. By the color-coded sleepers the only time you realize that you place where they will lie down are descending into madness, and shut up. it may be... too late... To Order, See Your Local Retailer Or Call 1-800-453-7671 solutic 308 Main Street Lakeville, CT 06039 203-435-4995 Fax: 203-435-1091 mmerc Available for IBM PC and compatibles and Macintosh. The Tinies is a registered trademark of ATREID Concepts, S.A. 5. onthly, or in the lect files and folc Circle Reader Service #84 powerful scrip abination of dat "


"Taking A Peek Electronic L ary Art, Volume Hallen flessissance Data Ulla Ortuin LV VALVE CORSE Vuoco L u ud suurt of pati ent the fo u rtes wengths tatot t TIPS sve of the NUM tutto tes's classic tale of romance, honor and idealism has been outfitted with beautiful illustrations, music, and full voice narration for its incarnation on electronic media. Of course the story has been seriously abridged and rewritten for a younger audience, though the general spirit of the tale remains the same (sort of like the Classics Ilustrated graphic novels). IBM CD-ROM (MPC) ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #11. THE ELECTRONIC LIBRARY OF ART: Students of art will fall in love with this series of multimedia databases which are divided into eras and sold separately. The two disks we saw, Renaissance Masters and Renaissance Masters II, were jammed full of images (1300 in the second package!) that one can index and browse by artist, title, medium, school and subject. Most of the 256-color images have weathered the transition from print to digital media quite well, appearing crisp and colorful. Though a bit pricey, the complete set of disks would make an invaluable reference for the art lover. IBM CD-ROM (MPC) ($99.95 each). Circle Reader Service #12. graphic adventure category, The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes. The adventure features a rich use of Holmes trivia and attempts to reward the gamer for keeping the game afoot in true Sherlock fashion. Travel is handled via a delightful map of the London of the 1890s that functions similar to the map in Rise of the Dragon. Interior locales are handled via a modified SCUMM-style interface (instead of the icon-based menus of the present LucasArts products, EA has opted for the original one word commands, placed on wooden drawers). Finally, the game uses a journal as a device for auto-notetaking a la The Magic Candle to make it easy for gamers to keep track of the story thus far.\" All in all, the Jack the Ripper-style mystery looks like an intriguing entry into the genre. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Electronic Library of Art SOS -11 TRIES SOUTH VOL: Nettet NORTH is the trick NORTH Empire Software c/o Readysoft Software (416) 731-4175 Grand Slam Bridge II als Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 TAK TOUE FICK UP SOREN NICIO REDTC192 UUSE Journal ASICS ESETRun ark VE CAMPAIGN: From England to the US via Canada, Campaign looks and feels so much like a Euro-Amiga game that one can almost forget their interfacing with the IBM. While the game doesn't live up to all of its promises, Campaign does offer both a decent, operational-level wargame and tactical arcade vehicle simulator \"shoot 'em up\" (the later with some interesting panache). Unfortunately, the interface is very European. American wargamers will find symbols where they might expect text and vice versa. Furthermore, there is no joystick support for the many vehicles which one can operate. An amusing diversion, Campaign tries hard to deliver on so much, but comes up a bit short. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #15. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes TRE Ta Arnd Diy h ler 141209 GRAND SLAM BRIDGE II: This simulation of the classic variation on Whist is for gamers who enjoy bridge but are tired of having their partners slam down their cards and say, «Don't you even know the Italian Blue bidding convention?» With simple mouseor keyboard-driven interface, gamers can set up themselves and their partners, as well as the computer opponent pair with one of seven different bidding conventions (including: cue bid, four or five card major, Jacoby Transfer and Weak two-bid, among others) and one of three levels of aggressiveness. Serious bridge players can even load in special hands from a separate Mike Lawrence Bridge Dealer program sold through Electronic Arts. Those of us less patient, can use the dealing options to get strong two-bid hands (expected to make game or slam bids) and work on our play, as much as on our bidding the predominant exercise in random hands). The \"creme de la creme of bridge games,\" as the Washington Post once called it, has risen even higher with the latest release. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13. THE LOST FILES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES: Gamers who would know to look for Mycroft Holmes at the Diogenes Club should enjoy the flavor of Electronic Arts' first foray into the HOLLYWARE Entertainment 13464 Washington Blvd. Marina del Rey, CA 90291 (310) 822-9200 Campaign LORDS OF TIME: Straight out of the Lord British Academy of Adventure Design comes this all too typical role-playing game. From the hokey time-portal fiction, in which test pilot Major Tom is sucked through a space-time anomaly into a world of fantasy, to the 3-D isometric overhead view, this CRPG is reminiscent of many other titles. Though the solutions to the puzzles are randomly selected to encourage replay, this game may not even have enough originality to get hard-nosed adventurers to play it all Lords of Time Page 182 Computer Gaming World "


"Fight for the Cer@ Birth of a Nation Liberty The first shots have The first shots have rung out. The American Revolution has begun! Assume General George Washington's post and prepare the colonists to fight for independence. Or, as Lord Cornwallis, you have the chance to redirect the outcome of the war. Build forts, forge weapons and gather wartime supplies. Then approach the battlefield with bayonets in an imposing array. In these turbulent times you must watch your military closely for insurgents and deserters. Maneuver your ships along the coast to gain control to key ports of entry. Then pillage enemy ships and win over extra supplies. The battle is set: the Colonists vs. the British Empire. The outcome is in your hands! AERO A+ * IBM PC * 640 K * EGA Color * Mouse Support * Ad-Lib Sound * 1-2 Players os Command colonial regiments. Defend ports of entry. *Pre-Release Version Screenshots We Supply The Past, You Make The History KOEI KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415) 348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). 1350 Bayshore Hwy, Suite 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 Liberty or Death is a trademark of KOEI Corporation. Circle Reader Service #87 "


"Taking A Peek the way through the first time. Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #16. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Interplay Irvine, CA (800) 969-GAME Lifestyle Software Group 63 Orange Street Saint Augustine, FL 32084 (904) 825-4922 Battlechess Enhanced CD-ROM 8 9 323 Gether Food cenziate Bulld Castle completa Infantry emplete Merchant complete STOCZAT (EUROOM BATTLECHESS ENHANCED CDROM: Interplay's latest edition to its award-winning animated chess system improves upon the original CD-ROM release by adding more animations (there are now 31 megs in all), 45 minutes of digital CD audio and a 25 minute tutorial in which each chess piece explains its function and suggests strategies on its use. These new improvements should, for a while at least, reserve this game's distinction as one of the showcase CD-ROM products on the shelves. IBM CD-ROM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #17. CASTLES II SIEGE & CONQUEST: While Castles was born a simulation game (Sim Mason?), Castles Il was conceived from the start as a strategy/wargame, and so it has become. Players must unite a medieval land torn apart by civil war in an attempt to get themselves crowned king by the Pope himself. While castle building still plays an important strategic part, the emphasis of the game is managementmanagement of one's economy, army recruiting, campaigning, spying and trading. Players will also have to deal with a bunch of jazzy new storylines which will increase the already heavy burden of the player's crown. With the inclusion of ambient video, player controlled battles, and truly interesting siege battles, Castles II deserves a fresh look from both Castles fans as well as strategy gamers. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #18. MULTIMEDIA TAROT FOR WINDOWS: For everyone who ever enjoyed palmists, horoscopes or reading tea leaves, this experience in Tarot is a journey well worth taking. Using a traditional Tarot deck (from which users select cards by using their mouse as a Ouija-like device), it offers prophetically vague advice on the question of one's choice. The graphic presentation of the cards and their detailed explanations really steal the show. For those who know there is magic in 3s, one is pleasantly rewarded with three different computerized soothsayers (Nostradamus, Queen Victoria and Solitaire — the Southern Belle) and three different spreads to choose from (including the traditional Celtic Cross). Though the title uses the nearly meaningless term \"multimedia,\" the game has none of the properties usually assigned to \"true\" multimedia titles (i.e., CD-ROM, extended music, digitized video), though it does have nice sound affects to match each card. Admittedly, persons using this software will probably have little more luck telling their future than with most lottery programs, but then why spoil a good time with reality? IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #20. Castles 11 Look At Door Lure of the Temptress clieTM LTIC CROSS SITE AL w eest Mallard Software P.O. Box 292606 Lewisville, TX 75029 (800) WEB-FEET Konami Buffalo Grove, IL (708) 215-5100 Benel Mulher Multimedia Tarot LURE OF THE TEMPTRESS: This European import appears to be an attemptat a mix of Ultima VI and a graphic adventure. Like Ultima VI, the story occurs in a dynamic world (which they call Virtual Theatre) where the daily life of the world's characters proceeds in spite of the player's actions. The NPC interaction system allows one to ask fairly complex questions of NPCs and to recruit them for important tasks requiring their help. As for the story and setting, it's rather typical; the player must stop the evil doings of a seductive enchantress who has made it her aim in life to make everyone's life miserable. Amiga, AIRCRAFT AND ADVENTURE FACTORY: If one knows their IFR from their DME, this latest development from the Bruce Artwick Organization (BAO) might get their props rotating. The package comes in two parts; an aircraft factory in which amateur aerospace engineers can design, build and paint their own birds, adding personal insignias and tail numbers; and an adventure creation kit that enables one to program very specific Flight Simulator scenarios using a BASIC-like programming language. A perfect product for the irrepressible armchair pilot. (Not Pictured) IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #21. Cobra Mission Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine. Cobra Mission \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOME!! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and BOND WAS HOT STUFF. SO WAS ARNIE. NOW IT'S YOUR TURN. To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258-MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 System requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 800-258 MEGA R E KATED R (This program is voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences only!!! No sales to minor under 18 and where prohibited by law. Crete Reader service 105 MEGATECH Circle Reader Service #95 "


"Taking A Peek Megatech Software Torrance, CA (310) 539-9177 Log LOTO Push Pull duction that feels very much like watching a cartoon. As for the game mechanics, they have been dumbed-down a bit to become more Nintendo-like and the graphics have lost some detail, but the game still plays much like the original Amiga/IBM release. The most disturbing thing about this, the most interesting title of any we've seen on the platform, is the sound track, which is an absolutely inappropriate, generic video game theme that clashes horribly with the game's ancient Japanese setting. The games on the TurboGrafx system still have a long way to go before they will draw much interest from hard-core computer gamers. TurboGrafx-16 with CDROM. Circle Reader Service #24. Son diesem Rex Nebular SEX COBRA MISSION: Ja'porn'imation has finally made its way to the U.S. in this package oozing with repressed adolescent sexuality. Voluntarily rated \"R\" by the manufacturer and promising \"nudity in graphical and text (?) form», this game seems typical of the pitifully executed smutware we've seen in the Japanese software magazines for years. The stated objective of this wretched quest is the destruction of an international sex slavery ring, but the real point, it seems, is to break into houses to steal women's underwear so that one can trade the articles with the town pornographer for photos of naked young girls. The graphics take one back to the early days of the Apple II, the interface and combat system are primitive, the story is absolutely horrendous, and the game's text reads like it was translated in Japan by a first year student of English (J.R. take 14 damages!\"). Though we usually try to reserve such strong criticism for full reviews, this game begs for a beating. IBM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #22. SA St Ninga Software #330, 736 Eighth Avenue SW Calgary, Alberta T2P 1H4 (800) 265-5555 ARVIS IKI YAMSEY POWER Lords of the Rising Sun Y U Tile Game Optione CAIPANGE WABTER O Marie MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-0440 Yeaf I To Di T with 2. XONBAD DISCARD UNDO Cribbage Master 11/662 Sperl Gard Organizer Sports Cards Set Cadet Card Minder Hurber la Set: REX NEBULAR AND THE COSMIC GENDER BENDER: MicroProse's first launch into the universe of graphic adventures will put players into the boots of space stud, Rex Nebular. Rex's search for pottery of universal importance will lead him to the planet Terra Androgena an ego-testicle daydream infested with undersexed and overwilling women — where he may take his cross-dressing fantasies a bit too far. This promises to be a bawdy romp in its Naughty mode and a goofy, though still suggestive, game when played on the Nice setting. It features rotoscoped animation, hand-painted backgrounds, sprite scaling motion, digitized speech and other gee-whiz flash that will ensure its competitiveness in the graphic adventure arena, and may well give that Larry guy a run for his honey. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #23. Quantity: FIAT Locatleri Your S0121 Candille: Total Costa Wear Purchased Total Walue Talal Sale! CRIBBAGE MASTER: Cut for crib and peg the points. This straight-forward translation of the strategy/card game classic is solid and playable, with few added embellishments. Besides the requisite computer opponents, it offers a simple on-line tutor for new players, and the option to play with the \"Muggins\" feature, where players must count their points correctly or else the other player can claim them. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #25. SPORTCARD ORGANIZER: Topps, Bowman, Fleer, Dondruss, Upper Deck. If these names mean anything to you then this simple database system may help you get that card collection in order. Casual hobbyists will be able to catalogue their collectibles and print out \"Wish Lists\" for cards they're missing from their sets. Serious investors will be able to track the value of their collection and keep a tally on the profits and losses accrued over time. New price information is available through periodic update disks. IBM, Mac ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #26. WORLD CHAMPION BACKGAMMON: While it would be hard to miss with a simple translation of this classic parlor game into a computer medium, there is less to this game than meets the eye. While a fascinating Backgammon variant scenario is included (along with a \"design your own\" kit for player generated situations), this supposely \"world champion\" product simply doesn't have a \"world champion\" look or feel to it. The Al plays a decent game, but Backgammon aficionados will probably beat it most of the time. Still, it is a faithful translation, although offering little of the computerized glitz which might compel Plager Selected Mint VEFG Complete satt Mat: Ouick 104 Change (Delete Illeguire MIA SELECTION PLEASE Sportcard Organizer 2. PROCEEDING S NEC Technologies Wood Dale, IL 000600000000000 200000000000000 LORDS OF THE RISING SUN: Cinemaware's 1988 action-adventure release, has found it's way onto the CD-ROM platform after undergoing a mostly unflattering facelift. The most impressive thing about this product is the ten minute, sparsely animated introTER IGREE TO LIVE World Champion Backgammon Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"To CHALLENGE THE EMPIRE IN AN X-WING, YOU NEED DESIRE. BURNING DESIRE. STAR WARS Climb into the cockpit of an X-Wing and battle for freedom. The galaxy is being plundered by the Dark Side, and you are desperately needed by the Rebel Alliance. Take the controls of the X-Wing Starfighter-now! Experience the incredible realism of polygon graphics and bit-mapped special effects as you fly against deadly TIE Fighters and menacing Star Destroyers. Be swept along by the interactive musical score and digitized Star Wars movie sound effects. At last, a new generation of space combat technology to challenge the evil Empire. Destroy the Emperor's ultimate weapon and end his tyranny. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-STARWARS New Integration of polygon graphles and bitmapped special effects 17 different views from any of three cockpits Star Wars is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd. All rights reserved. Used under authorization. X-Wing game 1992 LucasArts Entertainment Company. LucasArts is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company Advanced 3-D modeling of spacecraft TIE fighters unique roar, one of many digitized movie sound effects Cinematic sequences Infamous characters LUCAS Arts JOIN THE REBEL ALLIANCE NOW Circle Reader Service #96 "


"Taking A Peek one to play this product over its leather bound counterpart in everyone's hall closet. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #27. Oolong Games 1641 N. 201 Street Seattle, WA 98133 (206) 546-2242 Tangram TANGRAM: This homespun program is a rather crude computer version of the Tangram puzzle. The Tangram is simply seven pieces of basic geometry formed by the dissection of a square. Players are given a model figure formed of the pieces and are challenged to create that form with their pieces. It is a very simple puzzle system that is currently used by many grammar school teachers to educate their young pupils about geometric relationships and fractions, in the guise of creative play. Why anyone would feel the need to create a computer version of this simple puzzle is beyond us. Rather than fighting the cumbersome interface, it seems it would be infinitely easier to get a physical version of the puzzle and play with it on the kitchen table. IBM ($15.00). Circle Reader Service #28. Shadow of the Beast III EARBGSSE 20. Wishful thinkers 26. Judge'gart BO. N.Y.G. Binancial Psygnosis Brookline, MA (617) 731-3553 30. Seuss'.renye solvers to try their cruciverbalist skills at three levels of difficulty; compete against other players by time and score; get on-line hints; enjoy cheese screens full of congratulatory animation sequences; and print out blank or partially completed puzzles to be completed away from the computer. Unfortunately, the program doesn't include a crossword construction utility, though it is rumored that a construction kit add-on disk may be on its way. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #30. Sir-Tech Ogdensburg, NY (315) 393-6633 WIZARDRY VII: David Bradley's merger of fantasy and science-fiction (begun in Bane of the Cosmic Forge) continues in the seventh installment in the famous Wizardry series. Bane players will be able to start the game from any one of the three possible endings to that episode, and new players will begin from a special starting position for novices. As Bradley continues to massage the role-playing system, skills are becoming more and more important for the party (\"swimming\" in particular for some of the dungeons in the game). Further, the reputation of the party among different races can affect the type and quality of information received and the likelihood of an alliance between the party and other NPCs. We also think of having the player's party competing against computer-controlled parties should be extremely interesting. Computer gamers will also appreciate the fact that Crusaders of the Dark Savant uses a maximum of 6.5 MB (including all saved games) on the hard drive. IBM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #31. UBI SOFT 1505 Bridgeway Sausalito, CA 94965 (415) 332-8749 BATTLE ISLE SCENARIO DISK VOL. 1: One computer wargame that has carved out a bit of a niche is the Herzog Zwei-like Battle Isle. For those who have the original and have plowed through all the solitaire and two-player scenarios, listen up! Scenario Disk Volume / not only adds 25 new solitaire and nine new two-player scenarios, but increases the map size as well. New terrain features tundra, deserts and rivers add some interesting tactical and strategic elements to battles, making the initial board set-up stickier. Now the only question is, who's up for another toe-totoe shoot-out? Amiga, IBM ($34.95). Not shown Circle Reader Service #32. CGW Separate UIT ZDOW.222 Take-A-Break Crosswords SHADOW OF THE BEAST III: Psygnosis continues to be one of the few remaining oases in the desert of Amiga releases. Action gamers will twitch with paroxysms of delight when they get a load of the intense action and incredible graphics in their latest Roman numeral in their popular series . Players battle a relentless onslaught of baddies as they parallax scroll their way through many levels of puzzles on their way to the final joystick joust with the Ultimate Incarnation of Naughtiness. A pumpin' musical score accompanies players on the entire journey to game's end. Amiga ($59.99). Circle Reader Service #29. Wizardry VII Sierra On-Line Oakhurst, CA (209) 683-4468 TAKE-A-BREAK CROSSWORDS: Anyone who doubts the appeal of this product needs to look at the number of crossword magazines that hit the newsstands every month, or try to pick up an airline magazine where the crossword isn't at least partially filled in. Take-ABreak Crossword provides Windows users with 375 puzzles out of the Dell crossword collection and allows puzzleBattle Isle Scenario Disk 1 Page 188 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. this one wants to rip pur lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some people are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So real fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player put some new life into your joystick, and sign on. We'll see Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some of just how good you are. Sign up now: 1. Set your modem the best players around the world. Splash a bandit in Air for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. Warrior, and you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter be back gunning for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter XTX99327,BLAST Battle TechTM, and who knows? Could be that jerk from the then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your coast. Could be a mercenary who's looking for a few good checking account number ready. For more information friends. With Genie, the possibilities are endless, the in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. BEO L LA E D PO GEnie GEnie. 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS 10% ORGANIC OPPONENTS multi-player games AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR NKESMAL corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation Circle Reader Service #80 "


"12.00 Top Adventure Games 11.00 Polla97 Poll #98 Poll #99 Poll 100 Top 100 Games COMPUTER Reader Poll #100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 10.00 The Magazine of lateractive Entertainment Indiana Jones Fate of Allantis Monkey Island 2 Le Chuck's Revenge Secret of Monkey Island 12.00 Top Role Playing Games ST 10.72 10.56 10.54 10.40 10.29 10.11 10.02 9.87 11.00 Poll #97 Poll 98 Poll #99 Poil #100 AD AD SI WG 9.77 10.00 5257 9.00 8.00 Ultima Underworld Eye of the Beholder Might & Magic EEEE SI RP WG.ST WG 12.00 Simulation Games 11.00 Poll 97 Poil 98 Poll 99 Poll 100 Civilization Links 386 Pro Ultima Underworld Wing Commander II Solitaire's Journey Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge Red Baron The Perfect General Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hardball III The Secret of Monkey Island Eye of the Beholder II Links Tetris Classic Aces of the Pacific Wolfenstein 3-D Falcon 3.0 Might & Magie III Warlords V for Victory: Utah Beach Chessmaster 3000 Ultima VII Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Lemmings High Command Wings Legend of Kyrandia Conflict: Korea Second Front The Dagger of Amon Ra Eye of the Beholder Gunship 2000 Quest for Glory 11 The Castle of Dr. Brain Carriers At War Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Silent Service II Bane of the Cosmic Forge Populous II Red Stonn Rising Conquests of the Longbow Quest for Glory Ultima V Space Quest IV Western Front Space Quest III The Lost Admiral Police Quest 3 MicroProse Access Origin Origin OOP LucasArts Lucas Arts Dynamix QQP Electonic Arts Accolade LucasArts SSI Access Spectrum HoloByte Dynamix Id Software Spectrum HoloByte New World Computing SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Software Toolworks Origin Accolade LucasArts Psygnosis Colorado Comp. Cinemaware Virgin SSI SSI Sierra SSI MicroProse Sierra Sierra SSG Electronic Arts MicroProse Sir-Tech Electronic Arts MicroProse Sierra Sierra Origin Sierra SSI Sierra QQP Sierra 343************** ********* $9333333333333EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 10.00 9.72 9.71 9.70 9.69 9.63 9.59 9.58 9.58 9.56 9.51 9.48 9.46 9.42 9.39 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.25 9.22 9.21 9.21 9.18 9.16 9.12 9.12 9.11 9.11 9.09 9.08 9.08 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.02 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.97 8.97 AC AD WG WG AD RP 9.00 SI 8,00 AD.RP Red Baron Aces of Aces of the Pacific Falcon 3.0 12,00 Top Strategy Games Poll #97 Poll 98 Poll 99 11.00 Poll 100 10.00 AD.RP RP AD WG AD ST AD 9.00 8.00 Civilization Solitaire's Journey Hong Kong "


"12.00 Top Wargames 8.96 8.96 8.95 8.95 11.00 Poll #97 Poll #98 Poll #99 Poll #100 AC.SI AD ST.SI RP RP W, WG AC 8.94 8.93 10.00 9.00 8888888 AD 8.00 Perfect General Warlords V for Victory Utah Beach POH 103, oludes new BM Version) ST ST.RP SP AC.ST S7 12.00 Top Action Games RP W, RP 11.00 Pall #97 Poll #98 Poll.99 Poll #100 S7 LucasArts Dynamix Activision Electronic Arts SSI SSI SSI Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte MicroProse Accolade Dynamix Access XOR Corporation Koei Electronic Arts Spectrum Holo Byte Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay New World Computing Mindcraft Wesson International Mindcraft SSI Sierra Electronic Arts Dynamix MicroProse SSI Interplay Legend Omnitrend Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Interplay MicroProse RAW Entertainment SSI SSI LucasArts Psygnosis Interstel Bethesda Softworks ST Battlehawks 1942 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Mech Warrior Wasteland Pools of Darkness Sword of Aragon Overrun Oh No! More Lemmings Falcon F-117A Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum NFL Challenge Romance of the 3 Kingdoms Indianapolis 500 Super Tetris Populous Elvira Command HQ Might & Magic II Rules of Engagement Tracon The Magic Candle Gateway to the Savage Frontier Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Bard's Tale III Heart of China Covert Action Battles of Napoleon Battlechess Gateway Breach 2 Starflight II 4-D Boxing Neuromancer F-15 Strike Eagle 11 Action Stations Typhoon of Steel Curse of the Azure Bonds Indiana Jones/Graphic Adv. Ballistyx Armada 2525 Wayne Gretzky Hockey Pool of Radiance Megafortress Darklands Tony Larussa's Ultimate Baseball King's Quest IV Wide World of Sports Boxing 8.93 8.92 8.90 8.90 8.89 8.89 8.89 8.87 8.86 8.85 8.85 8.84 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.77 8.75 8.73 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.71 8.71 8.70 8.69 10.00 19:11 RP 9.00 8.00 AD AC.AD WG ST AD ST.RP RP SP AD SI Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings 12.00 Top Sports Games WG 8.68 11.00 Poll #97 Poll #98 Poil #99 Poll 5100 WG RP AD 8.67 AC 10.00 SSI ST AC.ST RP SI.ST RP 9.00 8.65 8.65 8.63 8.62 8.61 8.61 8.60 8.60 8.59 8.59 Three-Sixty Pacific MicroProse SSI Sierra Data East SP 8.00 AD Links 386 Pro Hardball III Links The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What's Hot PC Research Hits List What You Have Been Playing Lately The Feedback Forum of Reader Response 1. citron September, 1992 PC Games (MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source Falcon 3.0 Operation Fighting Tiger (Spectrum HoloByte) Darklands (MicroProse) Wing Commander (Origin) Might & Magic: Clouds/Xeen (New World Computing) B-17 Flying Fortress (MicroProse) Civilization (MicroProse) Birds of Prey (Electronic Arts) Quest for Glory III (Sierra On-Line) Hardball III (Accolade) Links 386 Pro (Accolade) 11. Quest for Glory 1 (Sierra On-Line) Police Quest III (Sierra On-Line) 13. Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Gunship 2000 (Micro Prose) 15. F117A Stealth Fighter 2.0 (MicroProse) Monopoly (Virgin Games) Police Quest (Sierra On-Line) Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis (LucasArts) SimCity (Maxis) 20. Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) Every month our mailbox fills to capacity with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from hundreds of our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of the release of our latest issue we can expect to see dozens of cards begin pouring in with comments, suggestions, encouragements and tirades, in addition to the data for our game poll. Through our reader's efforts we know which articles were hits, which flopped, how many tyypos an grammatical errors we've let slip through in addition to the many well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This page is set aside to give these readers a voice and to display the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" field on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill out these cards and keep 'em coming! 10. Feedback from CGW #100, November 1992: Civilization (MicroProse) 2. Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir Tech) Clouds of Xeen (New World) Darklands (MicroProse) 5. V For Victory: Utah Beach (Three-Sixty) 6. Ultima VII (Origin) 7. Links 386 Pro (Access) 8. The Perfect General (QQP) 9. Wing Commander II (Origin) 10. Aces of the Pacific (Dynamix) Interesting responses of the month: Capture the Flag (Carr Software) Yserbius (The Sierra Network) Super Nintendo \"(God help me)\" Broadsides — on my Apple II Amiga Games Rank Title and Source Civilization (MicroProse) 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) AD&D Dark Queen of Krynn (Strategic Simulations) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) AD&D Eye of the Beholder II (Strategic Simulations) = c + a riniti Macintosh Games Rank Title and Source SimCity Supreme (Maxis) Award Winners (Sierra On-Line) Prince of Persia (Broderbund) AD&D Pools of Darkness (Activision) Tristan Pinball (Amtex) Games You'd Like To See \"My First Spreadsheet: Zap the numbers into the spread sheet, avoiding the animated green alphabet characters. Senior Citizen Spreadsheet: Extra large characters, pulse monitor, asks 'Are you sure? 5 times and 'Don't you remember?' when you forget a file name.\" Houston, TX \"A wargame requiring a 486-33 with 8 megs of RAM and 30 megs of HD space based on the invasion of Grenada.\" R. Faust, No. Hollywood, CA \"Where in Hell is Carmen San Diego: Based in the netherworld of Dante's Inferno, you learn about the various circles of hell and meet the famous people in them! Recover the missing minutes of the Watergate Tapes, Jimmy Hoffa and Howard Hughes's true will! Fun for ages 12 and up.\" Sacramento, CA \"An RPG that my wife could relate to.\" Hampton Roads, VA \"SimCat (mouse optional).\" Miles K. Goosens, Nashville, TN \"1. Aces of the Pacific: George Bush Expansion Disk 2. Lemmings: Bill Clinton Scenario Disk 3. Ding Commander II: Ross Perot's Secret Missions\" James Silsby, Jr., Ellsworth, ME \"How about 'Squirrels' where the player must (a) keep an army of squirrels out of his birdfeeder, or (b) get the squirrels into the feeder? First person perspective?\" Paul Green, Wheeling, IL \"Wolfenstein 90210: Take your mini-gun to Beverly Hills and rid the world of obnoxious mall rats!» Dave Stumme, Rochester, NY Stay tuned for more Games You'd Like To See next issue... Home Education (MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing (Software Toolworks) Your Personal Trainer for the S.A.T. (Davidson) New Math Blaster Plus (Davidson) Algeblaster Plus (Davidson) Mario Teaches Typing (Interplay) Reader Rabbit (Learning Company) Mickey's ABCs (Disney) Playroom (Broderbund) 10. Where in the U.S.A. is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) cintoro This list is based on units sold by Software Etc., Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025. Page 192 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Each month, we will highlight at least two of these games as part of this listing. Dungeon Master FTL Software, 1987 Many Formats YoundDungeon Master, originally introduced on the Atari ST, virtually established its own genre of first-person perspective dungeon romps. With state-of-the-art graphics that moved away from the \"windowed» screen look, as well as realistic sound effects to set the tone of the adventure, Dungeon Master became a showcase product that has been much emulated within the CRPG genre. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster 2000 (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Many formats Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Many formats F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Many formats Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Many formats M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (Micro Prose, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (Micro Prose, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Many formats Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Many formats Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats Earl Weaver Baseball Electronic Arts, 1986 Amiga, IBM, Macintosh GRANDES EARI WEAVER Baseball In its original form, Earl Weaver Baseball was the quintessential sports game. It offered reasonable statistical accuracy, was the first to use a \"physics\" model as opposed to strictly using a statistical model in resolving plays, featured both an action and manageonly mode, allowed complete flexibility in drafting and editing players, and was the first to allow customization of stadiums and team uniforms. January 1993 Page 193 "


"Editorial Back to the Retailer by Johnny L. Wilson State of the Industry: Gamers say that the publishers have dug their own graves with \"buggy\" and unsatisfying software. They claim they are sending a message about quality to the software publishers in a language they will understand, sales. Publishers say that consumers are stealing from them by copying the software and returning it. Retailers and distributors claim that they are stuck in the middle. Who is right when it comes to software returns? It seems reasonable to expect that a gamer could return a game that doesn't do what he/she wanted it to do. Yet, there is something more than the age-old \"satisfaction guaranteed» ideal at stake. Some retailers, even in major chains, are willing to take returns and reshrink wrap the products for resale. Other retailers are concerned about the possibilities for virus infections and wisely refrain from \"reshrinking.\" Is it to the gamer's advantage for a retailer to be so free with software return policies that it may put the gamer's computer system at risk after a future purchase? Probably not. In the early '80s, gamers who had a defective product were inevitably referred back to the manufacturer for satisfaction. The retailers functioned under a \"We just sell the stuff attitude. This meant that it was difficult for consumers to get defective disks replaced or get a refund on games they didn't like. Fortunately, customer service and discounts eventually put stores like Egghead, Babbages, Software Etc. and Electronics Boutique on the map and the cornerstone of this pro-consumer revolution was the ability to return unsatisfactory software. Unfortunately, open return policies have led to retailer expenses in handling returns (they must be physically sent back to the distributor or publisher) and publisher fears that gamers are copying their products, keeping them on their hard drives and then, returning them for a full refund. For the publishers, this means reduced sales and extra shipping expense. For the retailers/distributors, this means extra employee hours to tabulate, package and ship returns. Like the retailer, the publisher cannot resell the copy of a returned game (if it has been on a consumer's machine), so the disks are degaussed and used as extra disks in-house and the package materials are usually destroyed. This is a wasteful procedure and now one current marketing strategy has been suggested where publishers cough up an additional percentage discount to retailers/distributors in order to cover returns. Then, the retail end would destroy the game and the publisher would save on the shipping charges. Publishers, naturally, are afraid that the retailers may claim higher returns than they really receive. What this means is that publishers would receive affidavit returns (the retailer tells the distributor that they had X amount of returns and the distributor tells the manufacturer that the total from all of his/her retail accounts was many times X). That's the way it is in the magazine business. As it is now, the software publisher can physically count returns, but must pay for the shipping in order to do so. Further, the return percentage is going up. Retailers estimate a 5% increase this year alone. Of course, this may relate to more complex games (where more can go wrong) and an economy, of late, where every consumer dollar must count. What this proposal means, of course, is that the retail end of the market is going to, in effect, charge the publishers for having to deal with returns. In turn, the publishers are going to be unsure of the reasons behind the returns. If consumers are trying to send publishers a message about quality, it isn't working because the publishers simply believe their products are being used at no charge. As a result, the publishers will simply pass along the extra charges to the consumers. In turn, raising the prices for everyone where, ultimately, the honest users end up paying for the dishonest ones. We have had reports of consumers purchasing games that were obviously resealed, even from major chains. They complain that a \"new\" price for \"used\" software is not fair and, worse yet, that they don't know where that software has been. Perhaps, it has been corrupted while with its previous owner. Even more alarming might be the spread of a potential computer virus. If a consumer picks up a consumer virus in this manner, we would venture to think that there could be a stink like this industry has not seen in a long time imagine the potential law suits as deep pockets are picked from all directions! For publishers, besides having the possibility of being hit for their deep pockets in the case of such a law suit, there is another major problem. Since they have to back up that software to the hilt, they must answer customer service calls the same for a pirate as they would for a legitimate owner of their game. They must also offer an olive branch to the retailer. Plans such as stock balancing, fixture allowances, marketing development funds, shelf talker fees, etc. to extend both the economic viability and shelf life of computer games, but these mean that the manufacturer has to accept a reduced profit for the game(s) involved. So, it seems, where there is a software return to the local retailer, the store's policy may create something of a consumer crisis if the product is resealed and sold again; a cash flow and employee time crunch for retailers if they follow established return procedures, and an economic crisis for the software publishers if they have to accept additional discounts and affidavit returns to assuage the feelings of the retailers. Naturally, one can see that the additional discounts to retailers come out of the publishers' profit so that retail prices will be raised to cover the new expenses and are passed on to the consumers. So, we would like to urge consumers to think about the chain reaction that is beginning in this industry the next time they are tempted to return a product just because they don't care for it and decide to keep something on the hard drive (just for their trouble). We would like to urge retailers to provide that \"satisfaction guaranteed\" for each customer by following the proper procedure. Those re-shrink shortcuts are a disaster waiting to happen. We would further urge publishers to choose whether to opt for better and more comprehensive quality assurance from the beginning or to get ready to bite that bullet of affidavit returns. It's everybody's problem! CGW Page 194 Computer Gaming World "


"We've just extended your flight plan. FALCS PRAS Spectrum HokoByte STATUS JAPAN  PAKISTANI INDIA    2-PLA INCLUDES Now Falcon 3.0\"takes you places you've never flown before. Operation: Fighting Tiger takes you on action-packed missions in three new Asian campaigns. Fly your F-16 to Korea, to the Pakistan/India border, to Japan and the disputed Kurile Islands, where you can also fly FALCON FALCON30 OPERATION TILTINIGER the advanced FSX. The incredible scope of Falcon 3.0 delivers everything from Instant Action arcade excitement to plotting your own Red Flag training missions to engaging in a dramatically different campaign every time you play. The flight models and terrain are real. The radar and weapons are real. The enemies, missions and campaigns nothing less than spinetingling. Joining forces with the most sophisticated flight simulation of all time, Operation: Fighting Tiger broadens your horizons as never before. And makes the wild blue yonder a whole lot wilder. DANI Serrum/ Operation: Fighting Tiger requires Falcon 3.0 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a wook: 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions and availability call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9am-5pm PST) Operation: Fighting Tiger and Falcon 30 are trademarks and Spectrum HoloByte is a registered trademark of Sphere, Inc. Spectrum HoloByte A Division of Sphere, Inc. 2061 Challenger Drive, Alameda, CA 94501 Circle Reader Service #138 "


"SERPENT ISLE SERPENT ISLE FEATURES: An original story line continuing the Ultima VII adventure, but no previous Ultima experience is necessary. Serpent Isle is a stand alone game. An unexplored region of Britannia with new terrain features you'll even trudge through ice and snow. \"Paper-doll\" system that lets you select clothing, armor and weapons from a detailed, full-length view. Large, close-up portraits of every character you meet in 256color VGA/MCGA graphics. Digitized speech, enhanced sound effects and a dynamic musical score (with supported sound boards). Available for 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. TM ORIGIN We create worlds Available at your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-999-4939 for MC/VISA. Copyright  1992 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima is a registered trademark of Richard Garriott. Origin is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Serpont Islo is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. We create worlds is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Circle Reader Service #114 "

