a

-

Vol. 4 No. 3

June 1984

Features
SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD
The View from a Playtester

UNIVERSE
Dual Views

9
Sandra Carlisle
14
Fitzsimmons & Battles

MIG ALLEY ACE

17
David Patton

Review

QUESTRON
Review

18
James McPherson

TO MARKET, TO MARKET...

21
Johnny Wilson

Two Games from Blue Chip

BROADSIDES

24
Jay Selover

A Replay

CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER
Review

28
Stewart MacKames

Departments
TAKING A PEEK

6

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY

12

Participate in Our Survey

SCORPION'S TALE

13

Enchanter Tips

INDUSTRY NEWS

16

What's Going On?

COMMODORE KEY

19

For the C-64 Gamer

TELEGAMING

20

Exploring On-line Gaming

ATARI PLAYFIELD

23

For the Atari Gamer

THE LEARNING GAME

26

Shopping Guide for Children's Games

MICRO-REVIEWS

30

(Under Southern Skies, Movie Maker, Bruce Lee, Chivalry,
The Alpine Encounter, Planetmaster)

READER INPUT DEVICE

46

You Rate the Games

GAME RATINGS
Over 100 Games Rated

47

Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD
COMPUTER TITLE BOUT:
Avalon Hill's popular board game
is now on the Atari home computer. A statistics based boxing
simulation that contains stats for
over 300 historical fighters. Instructions are included for creating
your own fighters. $30.00.
JUPITER MISSION 1999: A four
disk interactive space adventure
for the Atari home computer. The
game is made up of 11 programs
which combine arcade segments,
puzzles, and adventure elements to
make a challenging game. Look for
a review in a future issue. $50.00.

Davka Corp.
845 North Michigan Ave.
Chicago, IL
I.Q. BASEBALL: Here is
something different. Test your
knowledge of baseball as you play
the game. You can choose between
'Major League' or 'Minor League'
questions (although we know
baseball fairly well, we found some
of the minor league questions quite
difficult. The questions will
challenge even baseball fanatics).
Correctly answering questions gets
you hits (if you are 'up') or creates

outs (if you are in the field). You can
play against another person or
against the computer. Supplemental questions diskettes available.
Apple.

Epyx Computer Software
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
DRAGONRIDERS OF PERN:
Fans of Anne McCaffrey's books
will find much enjoyment in this
computerized version of the PERN
saga. The game centers around the
diplomacy and negotiations that
occur among the Weyrs and the
people. The standard game also includes thread fighting (in arcade
style of course). You need to do well
in negotiations to win the game, but
failure to stop the thread invasions
can destroy your diplomatic efforts. One to four players. Atari.
FTL Games
7907 Ostrow St. Suite F
San Diego, CA 92111
SUNDOG: Even though Sundog
was designed by one of our regular
columnists (Bruce Webster's
Silicon Cerebrum covers artificial
intelligence in computer gaming);
we feel we are unbiased and accurate when we say that this game
is a real winner. Sundog:Frozen
Legacy is a science fiction adven-

ture game in which you a star
freighter captain fulfilling a contract to help establish a religious
colony. The ZoomAction graphics
are outstanding and the game
system presents many interesting
challenges as you seek to fulfill the
conditions of your contract. But
watch out! Pirates and muggers
will seek to waylay you. A review is
coming but don't wait. At $40 this
is one of the best buys around. Apple II series (look for a Macintosh
version early in 1985).

Funsoft
28611 Canwood St.
Agoura Hills, CA 91301
FLAK: You fly your AGX fighter
over 28 continuous game screens
as you seek to penetrate past intelligent flak batteries and destroy
Computer Control (perhaps an appeal to the computerphobia in each
of us?). One or two players and two
levels of play. Apple, Atari, C-64
and PCjr. $34.95.

Infocom
55 Wheeler St.

Cambridge, MA 02138
SORCERER: This is the second
release in Infocom's Enchanter
series of adventures in the mystic
arts. The Enchanter series goes

beyond the Zorks and gives players
a new type of challenge, reaching
goals through the use of magical
powers they acquire along the way.
Many systems. $49.95.

KRENtek Software
P.O. BOX 3372
Kansas City, KA 66103

NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO: A
simulation of Napoleon's final
climatic battle at Waterloo. Scrolling graphics cover the entire battlefield. Each unit is rated for both
fire power and moral. Don't let the
low cost packaging fool you, this
game is better than average. Atari.
$35.00.

ROME AND THE BARBARIANS: An "Eastern Front"
style game in which you, as
Emperor, attempt to preserve the
Empire by using loyal Roman
troops to defeat Barbarians and
traitorous Roman legions. Military,
economic and diplomatic elements
must be manipulated in the game.
Atari. $35.00.
Mind Systems
P.O. Box 506
Northhampton, MA 01061

AIRSIM-3: A detailed flight
simulator which was developed as
an aid to pilots who wish to use their
home computer as an aid for practicing instrument flying. Airsim-3
allows the user to fly a high perfor-

mance light aircraft up and down
the California coast. In addition to
the practice landing field, six airports between San Francisco and
San Diego are in the program and
you can fly between any of them.
AIRSIM-3 includes the standard instrumentation (airspeed, turn indicator, attitude indicator, compass
heading, altimeter, climb-rate indicator, throttle setting, engine
RPM) plus all instrumentation required for navigation and
instrument-flying practice (ADF,
HSI/VOR, VOR, DEM, OM, and
MM displays). The program allows
a pilot to set up a customized instrument approach anywhere in the
world. Apple.
Continued on page 42

Seven Cities of Gold
by Sandra Carlisle

Seven Cities of Gold
NAME:
Strategy
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
Atari (C-64 coming)
FORMAT:
Disk
AUTHOR:
Ozark Softscape
#PLAYERS: One
$40
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts
Menlo Park, CA

The following article comes from a playtester of SEVEN
CITIES OF GOLD. She combines a good overview of the
game with insights to the game from Dan Bunten of Ozark
Softscape. Due, in part, to the length of this article, Dail
Bunten's regular column, DISPATCHES, will not appear in
this issue.
The month is March. The year 1492. I am triumphantly
standing before the Royal Palace. This time I have finally
convinced the King of Spain to finance my expedition. The
two thousand in gold has been used to purchase four ships,
a full complement of sailors, 100 soldiers, food for 52
weeks, and 300 lots of goods for trading.
I pass the Outfitters Shop, but decide that for my first
trip I had better go with my present equipment. Next, I
see my flag ship—an impressive three-master. With a push
of the joystick button I leave Spain and head west into the
unknown. Anxiously, the weeks pass by, with still no land
sign of land. Suddenly, the long awaited cry is heard from
the crow's nest. Land Ho! There it is .... China!
I eagerly give the command to anchor off the lush coast.
With my men carrying as much food and goods as possible, I lead them ashore. A fanfare sounds as I receive credit
for discovering the New World. (Well, perhaps this isn't
China after all.) Avoiding the swamps, the expedition
locates a native village. They are not hostile but curious,
and in their excitement crowd too close. One of my men,
out of fear, hurts one of the natives. To placate them, I offer a gift which they quickly take. I ask to trade, but am
informed that I must speak to their chief. Carefully moving through the village, the chief is finally located. Giving
him a gift, I again try to trade . . .GOLD! They have gold!
I quickly trade for a few pieces and head back to the ships.
Having been given native bearers at the village, much more
may now be carried.

We pause to look around. Excitedly, the word is passed
to me that the natives have mentioned a gold mine located
to the east of the village. Encouraged, we force march
through the swamp and find the mine. Gathering all the
gold we can carry, I again turn toward the ships.
After loading the gold and getting more goods, the expedition returns to the village. Now that I know my way
around, I head directly for the chief. This time he is greedy,
and will not trade until given four more gifts. I trade for
the rest of the village's gold and leave. Since this is a small
island with only the one village, I decide to set sail again.
Sailing north around the island I locate more land to the
northwest. Heading that way, the lookout spots a native
village, but I decide to continue sailing west off the coast.
Is this another island, or is it a continent? I see two more
villages, then the coastline suddenly dips to the south and
eventually back to the east .... another island. There is yet
one more island to the south of this one. A very small one
with no villages.
It is now July. I stop to check my maps and to take a bearing. It shows me to be at latitude 20 degrees north, and
in the middle of an island group. Somehow it looks
familiar. (I check an atlas and recognize Cuba, Jamaica, and
Hispaniola. Ah ha, now I know where I am!)
After sailing back to where the two villages were located
close together on Cuba, I disembark and head for the chief.
But, wait....these natives are hostile. I quickly drop a gift.
Bought off, they eventually settle down. Now I can look
for the chief. Finding him, I try to amaze him, but only
manage to drive the others away. I trade for all of the gold
available, and then go back to the ships for more goods.
With only 81 goods left, I am hoping for the best.
Leaving the ships, I stop to think. While stopped, one
of the natives mentions another gold mine to the south.
More gold! I quickly head for it. Once there, I decide to

leave it until after visiting the other village. Leaving the
mine, I notice that an X marks the location of the mine on
the map. Entering the village, I immediately amaze the
natives to get them away from me. I rush through the gap
formed and confront the chief. I try to amaze him but to
no apparent effect. I attempt to trade with marvelous
results. The chief is so impressed with me that he asks me
to build a mission! On top of this he offers me anything
in the village.
Leaving enough men behind to staff the mission, I take
all of the gold and some of their food. I make certain,
though, to leave enough food behind for my men. Returning to the gold mine, I mine all the gold available and return
to the ships.
Deciding to go south to check the third village on this
island, I move them overland at a moderate pace. Entering the village at this speed, my men accidentally kill
several natives. Suddenly, my men have drawn their
swords and the natives are on us like a swarm of angry
hornets. Fighting desperately, we manage to defeat the
village, and can take what we want. I take all of the gold
and leave. After leaving, however, I realize that we need
more food. We return to the village, ready for a battle but,
to our surprise, the natives run away. As soon as I approach
the chief, he informs us that we may take anything we like
as tribute. I order some food collected and leave enough
men to form a fort.
It is now November. In seven months I have learned how
to survive in the New World through trading and fighting.

I've also learned the wisdom of listening to the native
bearers. A total of two gold mines have been discovered,
a mission has been established and a fort built to hold down
the locals. With new confidence, I set sail to further explore this New World.
All this and more happened to me the first time I sat
down to play SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD(SCOG). No matter how many times I booted the game up to test it, I always
found it exciting and compelling to play (usually ending
up playing far longer than planned). There was always one
more mountain to cross, one more river to explore, or one
more gold mine to find. Unlike most games, there are no
set solutions or predetermined goals. There is no puzzle
to solve which, once solved, ends the game's mystery.
Every time that I played the game was different. I have
never, for example, found all of the gold mines. Also, for
the determined searchers, the historical game contains a
lost village on an uncharted island.
SCOG is a game full of adventure, treasures, and
discovery. It has animation, excellent graphics, arcade-type
action, strategy and challenge. The game is a believable
simulation of the Spanish discovery and conquest of the
New World. In it you are an explorer in the 16th Century
with the goal being to travel west in search of fame and
fortune. The depth and variety of SCOG rivals that of the
better written text games. The game has the equivalent of
2,800 screens! The playfield from a 13 inch TV, if printed,
would form a giant mural of approximately 12 by 19 feet.
It is so vast, that it has been estimated that it would take
over eight hours in order to transit every sector of land
without stopping. In the game, I could sail my ships from
Newfoundland to the Straights of Magellan and up the
Pacific coast to Alaska. This map is not just one simple
5-10K load, but occupies approximately 65K of disk
memory. However, not only is there the Historical world
to rediscover, SCOG has a Random Worldoption which
enables it to create entirely NEW worlds to conquer.
SCOG comes in the usual Electronic Arts package with
excellent documentation. The cover is a beautiful
reproduction of a 16th Century painting showing the
Spanish Conquistadors landing in the New World. The
game begins with an wonderful opening sequence accompanied by a piece of period Spanish music called "La
Bomba".Althugedcmnaioslytepgn,
it is complete and enjoyable to read. It contains numerous
playing tips, historical notes and even a bibliography for
those interested in further research. Designed to be a realtime adventure with the excitement of discovery and
achievement, they deliberately made the instructions into
guidelines rather than rules.
The sound in the game is definitely understated, but effective in conveying information. A short fanfare is, for
example, played when a discovery is made. When your expedition is moving on land, you hear the sound of marching men. The speed of he men is directly proportional
to the tempo of the sound. When you enter a village, you
immediately hear drumbeats, the intensity of which

notifies you of the natives level of hostility. And, in water,
you hear the sound of waves rushing past your ship. In
the shallows, this sound increases to warn you of the
danger of grounding.
Historically, the major problem faced by the Spanish explorers was food supply. I found the same to be true for
my expeditions. Once in the new world, the only additional
food was in the native villages. The subtlety of this game
really became apparent when I had to deal with the natives.
There is no common language. How could I communicate
with a totally alien culture. The many variables possible
give the game its authenticity, its flavor and its challenge.
I could slaughter and plunder, try trickery or treachery,
or simply trade for my most pressing needs. If I desired,
I could even try to convert the natives and establish missions. Success with any of the methods chosen will depend
upon your dexterity in fighting or in your skill in negotiations. It will also depend upon the type of village with
which you are dealing. And, no matter how many times
you play the same map, none of the villages will ever be
exactly the same.
The game has three distinct levels. The beginner is well
advised to start at the Novice level, where you have a
chance to survive long enough to get a feel for the game.
At the next level, Journeyman, you have to contend with
storms at sea, native ambushes, food spoilage, ship wrecks,
or even with your ships disappearing under the command
of mutinous officers and crew. At the highest level, Master,
all of the above happens but with greater frequency. Also,
at either level above novice, the native villages are not seen.
They can only be located by stopping and looking for
"signs".
There are three different sequences in the game, with
different types of screens for each. The game begins in the
European Sequence with you in Spain as a full sized
animated character dressed as a Spanish Conquistador.
Here you can outfit your expeditions, visit your home to
view the map created on your journeys, visit the Royal
Court for additional funds, higher titles, etc...., or visit the
Pub to save the game. Every place you visit in Europe takes
time off your "game clock". For example, you could spend
three game months waiting for an audience with the King.
Also, each ship you buy adds one month to your outfitting
time.
Once you board your ship, you have entered the Expedition Sequence. The expedition, marked on the screen by
a compass with a red arrow, may travel on land or on
water. While in this sequence, the screen always shows
the number of men remaining in the expedition, weeks of
food, and the amount of goods and gold. You can, at any
time, stop your expedition to check your maps. The game
has two map sizes. The playfield in which you are currently
traveling is reduced on the expedition map to show a much
larger area (the game map you see in Europe is reduced
several times again, allowing you to view the whole
Western Hemisphere).

The last sequence appears when you enter a village. In
the Village Sequence, the playfield seems to "blow-up" and
suddenly you (again, as a full-sized animated character)
are on the edge of a village with the natives (also full-sized
characters) all around you. This also happens if you are
ambushed by natives. In the Village Sequence, your single
animated character represents you and all of your men,
no matter how many your expedition contains.
Since this is a "real-time" simulation game, you will
notice that time passes while you are exploring, food is being eaten, and your men mysteriously die. Time does not,
however, pass while you are in a village, looking at maps,
or in the transfer menus. If you march your men through
swamps or mountains, additional men may die from injuries incurred while fighting.
When you are moving your expedition on land or in a
village, you have three speeds from which to choose:
Cautious, Moderate, or Reckless. Reckless means, as you
might guess, acting without regard for safety or life. If you
use this speed when traveling over land, particularly in
swamps or mountains, it will increase the loss of your men.
Reckless is the speed to use if you are fighting natives, but
your men will have to rest frequently if you drive them too
hard.
Moderate is the best speed for moving over land. You
can move your men at this pace for long periods without
Continued on page 40

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

This issue our survey asks the readers of
CGW where they buy their computer
games, and how many games (on average)
they buy each month.

Our first question deals with the different
categories of computer games. If you
remember the list published in the last issue
(April 1984), there are roughly five different
categories of computer games: adventure
(role-playing); wargame; arcade; abstract;
and sports and other strategy.
Adventure computer games include:
Zork; Ultima; Wizardry; and Suspended.
Computer wargames include: Robotwar;
Cosmic Balance; Eastern Front; Combat
Leader; Close Assault; Operation Whirlwind; and North Atlantic '86. Computer arcade games include: Choplifter; Lode Runner; Pac Man; Lunar Leeper; and Frogger.
Abstract computer games include: Sargon;
Fortress; Pensate; and other chess and

backgammon style games. Sports and other
strategy computer games include: Computer Baseball; Facts in Five; Cartels & Cutthroats; and M.U.L.E.
The above list is a short guideline. See the
April 1984 issue for additional titles and
details.

Part I (Question 1)
Write the letter of the one type of computer
game that's your favorite (you play most
often):
A. Adventure
B. Wargame
C. Arcade
D. Abstract
E. Sports/Other

2. Direct from software publisher
3. Mail order house
4. Computer hardware & software store
5. Computer software store
6. Hobby or game store
7. Other type of store (department, toy, etc.)

Part III (Question 8)
Write the number of the one place you buy
your computer games from most often:
2. Direct from software publisher
3. Mail order house
4. Computer hardware & software store
5. Computer software store
6. Hobby or game store
7. Other type of store (department, toy, etc.)

Part II (Questions 2 - 7)

Part IV (Question 9)

Check each of the following places from
which you buy your computer games
regularly (at least once a month):

Write the number of computer games you
buy every month (average).

Part V (Question 10)

Use R.I.D. card in the
back of magazine
to respond to this
survey.

Write the number of computer games you
copy from someone else's disk or tape that
they've purchased.
Thanks for participating in this survey.
We'll have the results of last issue's survey,
as well as this one, in the next two issues of
CGW.

ENCHANTER

As told by Scorpia

Back from the depths of space at last, I see! Well, your
favorite chair (and brew!) is waiting; you'll need a breather
before embarking on your next journey: an adventure into the realm of magic and wizardry, a trip to the world of
... the Enchanter!
So there you are, spellbook in hand, fresh from a summons from the mighty Circle of Enchanters, wondering if
you should have listened to Momma and gone into
alligator-wrestling. Fear not! While destroying the evil and
powerful Krill is no mean feat, it only looks impossible!
However, time passes in this game rather quickly, so you
best get a move on (no, NOT west!).
Before you go running off to the castle, it's a good idea
to check out the countryside very thoroughly. You're going to be needing food and drink, and Krill is not noted for
his hospitality to his enemies. So stock up on supplies while
you can. Then, it's off to see the Wizard! Well, perhaps not
quite. There ARE one or two things you need to do before
you finally have a showdown with Krill. The first one is getting into the castle itself, but that isn't hard. Check your
spells, because that's all you'll have to rely on in this game,
and you should have the gate open in no time. Once inside,
take your time and explore the environs carefully. You'll
want to find a comfy place to spend a night or two; who
knows, you might even have some sweet dreams as well!
Actually, you can sleep just about anywhere, but some
places are better than others.
As you map out the castle and adjacent areas, you will
come across a number of strange creatures. Some are
helpful, some hostile, and a few are only red herrings. The
general rule of thumb is: if you can't do anything
with/about it, forget it. Just remember it's important to talk
to the animals!
On your way to your confrontation with Krill, you will
be picking up a few scrolls. Almost all will be useful to you
in one way or another, so Gnusto them as you find them.
Of course, not all the scrolls will be easy to come by! For
instance, there's a scroll in the Control Room that seems
impossible for you to obtain safely. Naturally, it's also one
of the most important spells in the game. How can you get
it? Well, you'll need a little help from a friend. Think about
it, slowly, and the answer may come to you.
Then there's that box in the closet! All tied up with
magical string, and no apparent way of getting it open.
You're just dying to know how to get rid of the string, right?
Well, think sharp, and don't be afraid to make a sacrifice
or two on this one! While we're still talking about

mysterious objects, there's that jeweled egg in one of the
towers (shades of Zork I!). There's two ways of getting it
open, but both will produce the same result, namely confetti. Don't be alarmed, you have some friends who can
help you with this problem as well.
There are also some very interesting places in the castle, as well. The dungeon, for instance, should be given a
good look. The Gallery is another room that bears close examination. However, you will probably want to stay out of
the temple, at least for now. And then there's everyone's
favorite, the Guarded Door. You'll get by with a little help
from your (slightly greedy) friend.
Everyone always wants to know about the Translucent
Rooms. The first thing to do is look at the book in the
library; it makes for informative reading. Then you need
a map and something to doodle with. Once you have those,
it's a matter of careful timing, so you might want to plan
your moves out ahead of time. It's best to save the game
first, though, or you might find yourself branded a menace
to society!
Another problem everybody asks about are the Endless
Stairs. Well, they really are endless! You could go up or
down them for hours and hours, and not get anywhere.
Which means, of course, there's a lot more here than meets
the eye! This, in fact, is the last puzzle of the game to solve
before meeting Krill. The solution is a long and complex
one. Before you do anything, however, you might want to
memorize a few spells, just in case. You never know what
might happen!
So, at last you stand in Krill's sanctum! Of course, you'll
have to take care of a couple of his friends before you can
deal with the wizard himself. But if you came properly
prepared, that shouldn't be too hard. In fact, if you've gotten this far, you probably have the means of banishing Krill
once and for all. And there's no margin for error here, no
time to lose; wait too long, and you'll miss your chance to
save the world. So cast your spells carefully!
Ah, victory! However, don't go sitting on your laurels just
yet, my friend! There's more work to be done, as you'll find
out next time, when you move up to the rank of.... Sorcerer!
While you worry about that, I'll give out some
miscellaneous clues to other adventure problems that have
some people stumped.

❑ ❑ ❑
ADVENTURE: Can't do anything with the snake?
You'll get past with some help from a little friend. BLADE
OF BLACKPOOLE: Carnivorous plant giving you fits?
Find something it wants to eat, and be sweet about it. INFIDEL: Can't get the scales straight? It helps to be in your
cups. WIZARD AND THE PRINCESS: So you have no
money for the peddler? Somewhere, over the....
** IMPORTANT NOTE! **
Once again, my mailing address has changed (don't groan!). This
one, however, should last quite awhile longer than the others! The
new address is:
Scorpia P.O. Box 338 Gracie Station NY NY 10028
In the meantime, if you sent mail to the other address (the one
given in my Starcross column), don't worry; that box will be good
until the end of June. Sorry for all the switching around, but things
should be stable from now on. Thanks for your patience! (And don't
forget you can reach me on the Source at User ID ST 1030, and on
CompuServe page GAM-310).

UNIVERSE: A DUAL REVIEW

NAME:
Omnitrend's Universe
TYPE:
Interactive Adventure
SYSTEM:
Atari
FORMAT:
4 Disks (48K)
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHORS: Thomas R. Carbone
William G.M. Leslie
III
PRICE:
$89.95
PUBLISHER: Omnitrend Software
West Simsbury, CT
For the past several months CGW has
received R.I.D. cards requesting a review of
Omnitrend's Universe. We knew little
knowledge about Universe prior to these requests, so we were curious. Before we could
investigate, two unsolicited reviews came in
on the game. With reviews in hand we took
a look at the game itself and have come to the
conclusion that Universe is quite a work.
Here then, if you will allow us, are two views
of the Universe.

Review by
Nick Fitzsimmons
UNIVERSE.... the very name evokes an
image of a vast, unlimited, all-encompassing
grandeur.... like looking up into the starry
sky.
It takes a certain amount of nerve to name
a computer game UNIVERSE. Particularly when you are a new company, and are
writing it for the Atari computer, which
some people consider to be an "off-brand."
I mean, really, who are these people
anyway?
Well, ladies and gents, these people are
from OMNITREND, and they picked the
right name and the right computer. Despite
limited promotion to date, Universe has
already acquired an avid following that may
rival the fanatics who have made Zork a
household word.
Before you ask yourself "Why on earth
would I spend $89.95 on a game?," let's see
what it includes. To begin with, the packaging and documentation is superb. Packed in

a box suitable for shipping sheet metal, the
first thing you notice upon opening the box
is the padded 8 1/2" x 11" three ring binder;
containing four disks. The binder is printed
with a nicely understated Universe logo,
and is designed to be used upright as an
easel. Once inside the binder, you want
documentation right? Well you certainly get
it. A total of 75 pages of it, all neatly
separated by tabbed dividers and including
twelve pages of quick reference cards.
You no doubt will have noticed by now
that I haven't discussed what the game is
about or even what type of game it is. At this
point, I'm still not sure what type of game
it is. I'm tempted to call it either a simulation or a role-playing game. However, when
I was forced to describe it to someone else,
I resorted to, "Well, it's like life."
In the introduction, there appears a brief
history of the Local Group star cluster that
could have been written by Larry Niven or
Robert Heinlein. The Local Group is accessible from Earth only by the use of the
Hyperspace Booster, an alien device
discovered more than 200 years ago. Unfortunately the Booster is one-way only, and so
the colonies of the Local Group are dependent upon ships from earth for new
technology.
However, all is not well. Some planets in
the Local Group are beginning to regress.
Slavery and piracy are beginning to appear
on some of the less-developed worlds. And
three of the monthly ships from Earth have
failed to appear. Panic is near.

Fifteen days ago it was announced that
there appeared to be evidence of a
Hyperspace Booster somewhere in the
Local Group. You have decided to take out
a loan for a ship and crew to go look for it.
Unfortunately, operation of a starship
costs money. Even while you are searching,
you have to earn a living. As in real life, you
have a number of options. Most likely you
will want to start as a trader, since that requires the least capital and expertise. And,
you will have a large market available. The
Local Group consists of 21 star systems containing nearly fifty planets, of which more
than twenty are habitable. If you have
money to burn (and you won't, at first), you
can get into mining. Of course, every free
trader will always have room for a few
passengers. But watch out for pirates. If
things get desperate, you can always
become a pirate yourself.
I have found Universe to be an absorbing
game. I expect to be at this for at least
another six months, and to be perfectly
honest, it's easy to lose sight of the original
objective (finding the Booster) and become
totally involved in interstellar trade (or
piracy).
OMNITREND also appears to be
dedicated to user support. Purchase of
Universe entitles the user to two free hours
a month on a special Universe bulletin board
which allows them to pass on tips and news,
as well as to make suggestions to OMNITREND about the game. And here is
where OMNITREND really outdoes most
other companies. Since I mailed in my warranty card in December, 1983, I have received no less than three unsolicited
replacement disks, two of which were updates based on suggestions found on the
bulletin board.
There is still one problem yet to be corrected with the program. As of this writing,
it was still impossible to create player ship
disks with either the Percom or the Trak
disk drives. OMNITREND says that they
are working on a fix for this, and everyone
will receive a replacement disk when the fix
is finished. However, at this point the solu-

tion is to create ship disks on another drive
such as the Atari 810 or the Indus GT. The
game itself plays fine on any drive that I
have tested. An additional note — Universe
seems to run with no problems on the
operating system found on the Atari 600XL
AND 800XL computers.
In conclusion, this is a "must have" game
for those of you who are interested in complex simulations and role playing. The
graphics are excellent, the game play is
realistic, and the basic premise makes sense.
And, what else can you say abut a game in
which you can have up to 16 years t pay off
the loan on your starship and then buy
another one.

Review by
Hosea Battles Jr.
Valtus smiled in satisfaction. This had been
a profitable venture after all. His spaceship,
Altus V, proudly painted with the pirate insignia was a worthy investment indeed. He
watched as the last of the prisoners and goods
were brought over as the empty shell of a once
proud spaceship floated away. Leaving orbit,
he set course for the Prisa Starsystem. If he
found no clue to the location of the
Hyperspace Booster there, he would still make
a profit with the goods he had acquired.
Upon entering orbit, his scanners revealed
two ships in orbit. One was immediately identified as a trader. Greed overtook better judgement, and he attacked, ignoring the unidentified ship. As he closed in for the kill, his ship
shuddered under the impact of several
missiles. His shields had failed. As all went
black, he thought about how close he had
come to being very richhh....
This is exactly what happened to my best
ship in OMNITREND'S (*this is exactly
what happened to my best ship in Omnitrend's Universe. Luckily, I had made a
backup copy of the ship, having learned my
lesson earlier when forced to start over from
scratch and rebuild.
Playing Universe is simple. Always making the right decision is hard. Once you have
borrowed the money from the bank, the next
step is to buy a spaceship design. This design
is an empty shell. You will have to purchase
hulls and additional equipment to run the
ship. The bank provides you with some
essential equipment, but leaves off equipment you may find necessary. There are ten
hull designs from which to choose, ranging
in price from 11,900 credits to 56,025 credits.
Consider the price and number of hull spaces
a particular design can hold. You will need
additional hulls to add other essential equipment as the game progresses. Ask yourself
the following questions: How many hull
spaces does the ship design have? What other
equipment might I add later and how many
hull spaces will it take? How much money
will be left if I buy a particular good design?
How much money will I need to buy goods
on the planet Axia to trade? Do I have enough
money to buy crew, provisions, armor, programs, and most importantly Ore IV? This
last will depend on whether you want to be
a trader, a miner, or a pirate.

SHIP TYPES
This is the most difficult part of playing the
game—deciding whether to be a trader,
miner, or pirate. I have tried all three, and
eventually called Omnitrend for help. If you
decide to be a miner, you'll find the initial
cost to be large. Mining equipment is very expensive. After getting the equipment, you'll
warp to the planet you choose to mine, go to
the mining systems menu, and begin. You
may now find you don't have enough Ore IV
to operate the equipment.

If you decide to become a pirate, you might
have better luck. If you're able to buy sufficient weapons; attacking and boarding a ship
are the next problems. The only way to get
products off a ship is to board it. Before boarding can take place, a ship's engines must be
destroyed or the crew of the ship must drop
below ten. The next step is to send crew over
with armor in a docking module to board and
defeat the other crew. If you're not outnumbered, you can take the ship. The
graphic display of this is excellent, you see
the battle section by section as your crew
progresses. If you take a trader, your crew
will take many products which will make
you money.
According to Omnitrend, the best ship
type is a trader. You should buy at least 15
crewmen, so that you can launch shuttles to
planetary surfaces. The most important thing
to remember is that each planet has its own
sophistication level. To trade and make
money, you must take goods from a high
sophistication planet to a lower sophistication planet (but not more than nine levels
lower). Any lower than nine levels and they
won't buy your products because they won't
know how to use them. Additional money is
made from transporting passengers. Eventually you'll make enough money to buy
more equipment and Ore IV and venture fur-

there out in the galaxy in search of the
Hyperspace Booster.

TIPS
Here are some simple rules to follow in the
game:
1. Buy a ship with enough hull spaces so
that you can add additional equipment
later.
2. Become a trader.
3. In the beginning buy no weapons. If attacked, you can run away with no
damage.
4. Buy only the minimum amount of
equipment, crew, programs, and armor
needed to run the ship.
5. Buy plenty of Ore IV, but leave enough
money to buy trade goods on planet Axia.
6. Back up your player disk OFTEN!!
Once you die, the computer reformats the
disk, destroying your player characters.
You then have to start over from scratch.
7. Explore the galaxy. Look for clues that
will lead you to the hyperspace booster.
8. Travel to planet Zeath in the Prisa
system with trade goods and passengers
from Axia. Do this about five times. You
should then have enough money to buy
additional equipment and Ore IV to
search the galaxy.
9. The most important point: read the
directions and study the appendixes. You
won't get very far if you don't

CONCLUSION
Omnitrend has said Universe II will be
coming soon. It will add options not available
in Universe. We could possibly see a module
to upgrade your ship to a new design, not
available in Universe. Universe is an excellent interactive space adventure with 3D
graphics that will give you months of enjoyment and headaches. I can't wait for
Universe II and, with luck, maybe I'll have
solved Universe by then.

First Star Software licenses
BOULDER DASH rights to Micro
Lab for $1.3 MILLION in the industry's largest third party licensing
agreement. Micro Lab will produce
and distribute the game in versions
for the C-64, Adam, Apple, and
another as yet unspecified system.
Gamestar, Inc. announced the
release of two new games using their
"Player Perspective Graphics". Currently available for the C-64 and the
Atari home computers, the two new
releases, ON COURT TENNIS and
ON FIELD FOOTBALL will soon be
available for the Apple.
The hero of Muse Software's Castle Wolfenstein takes on a new wartime mission in Muse's follow-up
release, Beyond Castle Wolfenstein.
In the original game, the player
assumes the role of a GI who has one
gun and ten bullets as he begins to
make his way through an ancient castle to escape Nazi interrogation and
torture. In the sequel, the same
soldier is sent behind enemy lines to
infiltrate Hitler's Berlin Bunker for
an attempt on the Fuehrer's life.
Activision is releasing their THE
DREADNAUGHT FACTOR for the
Atari home computer. Suggested
retail price is $34.95.
Datasoft, Inc. announced that the
Boston-based Gillette Company has
acquired a 40% equity interest in their
corporation, with options for the remaining 60% over the next four
years. According to Patrick Detchulm, founder and chief executive
officer of Datasoft, the new affiliation
with Gillette will enable Datasoft to
continue its strong growth trend by
introducing new products with
widespread consumer appeal.
SEASTALKER, the first in a series
of text adventurers for ages nine and
above, has been released by Infocom.

SEASTALKER is an adventure in the
tradition of Jules Verne's "20,000
Leagues Under The Sea,"but instead
of reading pages from a book, you
become the main character.
Available on most popular computers for $39.95.
The first annual "The Day Before"
National Nuclear War Card Game
Tournament is over: as expected,
there were no winners. Everyone
was destroyed. The destruction of the
world took only 23 hours. Just under
1500 megatons of nuclear warheads
were dropped on targets, and 687
million people died. About 5 PM on
Sunday (MST), Detroit started the
final holocaust when they were
wiped out by a 100-megaton bomb
fired by Las Cruces. The last survivors, down in the salt mines of
Detroit, fired off their last missies at
San Jose, Las Cruces, and Cotati, wiping out the first two. Then San Jose
and Las Cruces fired their stockpiles
at Toledo, Norman, and Cotati,
destroying Cotati. Cotati fired its
retaliation at Tempe and Norman,
obliterating Norman. Norman reflexively hit Tempe and Toledo, finishing
off Tempe. And finally, Tempe sent
all remaining missies at Toledo,
finishing the carnage.
As the last survivors (for a few
minutes, anyway) the group at
Toledo won gift certificates, and the
coveted "Supergerm" travelling
trophy which will be awarded each
year to the final survivor. The cities
which participated (in the order that
they died) were: Atlanta, GA; Colorado Springs, CO; Long Beach, CA;
Royal Oaks, MI; Oklahoma City, OK;
Pacific Palisades, CA; Moore, OK;
Pembroke Pines, FL; Midwest City,
OK; Detroit, MI; San Jose, CA; Las
Cruces, NM; Cotati, CA; Norman,
OK; Tempe, AZ; and Toledo, OH.
There were 65 people involved. The
game was played by exchanging the
moves by Electronic Mail through
three different computer networks:

Compuserve, The Source, and MCI
Mail. For information on next year's
tournament, contact Rick Loomis at
Flying Buffalo, Inc., (602) 966-4727.
Penguin Software has announced
the release of Transylvania for the
Macintosh and also a version for
double-resolution Apples, including
the new Apple IIc. The doubleresolution version will retail for
$34.95 and the Macintosh version
$39.95. The next two programs
Penguin Software will release for the
Macintosh are PENSATE and
XYPHUS, a new fantasy role-playing
game. Each will retail for $39.95.
Avalon Hill Game Company announced the formation of a new
education division, Intelligence
Quest Software. The initial titles
handled by the new division will include STOCKS & BONDS, FACTS IN
FIVE, DIVEX, and ABC
CATERPILLER.
Three companies, Mind Games
Inc., H.A.L. Labs, and Software
Entertainment Company , have joined forces to form a new venture called The Software Consortium. "In
forming this new organization, we
have taken a step towards offering
better quality, service, and product
selection to everyone from
distributors to end-users," said Greg
Sengall, The Software Consortium's
president. "By centralizing many of
our operations, we'll be able to enjoy
the advantages that go with being a
large company, while at the same
time, preserving the integrity and
quality of product that's generally
associated with the smaller software
houses." The Consortium's initial offering includes STELLAR 7, VINDICATOR, ELECTRONIC
PLAYGROUND, THE DESECRATION, SUPER TAXMAN 2,
SHEILA, STELLAR TRIUMPH, and
THE SWORD OF KADASH. The
Continued on page 43

MIG ALLEY ACE
David Patton

BASIC INFORMATION
Mig Alley Ace
NAME:
Arcade
TYPE:
Atari
SYSTEM:
Disk
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
Andy Hollis
AUTHOR:
PUBLISHER: MicroProse Software
Hunt Valley, MD

The year: 1950. The place: Somewhere over Korea. Your
mission: engage and destroy the enemy.
Mig Alley Ace (MAA) puts you in the cockpit of a variety of Korean War planes that you can fly against the computer, against a friend, or cooperatively with a friend
against against the computer. Your objective is simple:
shoot your opponent out of the sky.
Dogfight arcade games in the late 1970 ' s typically
featured two player action with a two-dimensional, side
view of the battle. As far as realism went, the planes might
as well have been gangster cars or even abstract icons.
MAA goes well beyond this type of game — presenting a
through-the-canopy view.
Game options include selecting the mode of play (solo,
head-to-head, or cooperative) and selecting up to three additional wingmen per team. You can also select any of the
five scenarios and one of four levels of difficulty. Press
START and you're airborne.
The screen is horizontally split in half so that each pilot
has a view from his own cockpit. As a "nice touch" the
sky changes in brightness as you fly either away from or
toward the sun. Below the sky is a solid green field
representing the ground. And, at the bottom of the screen,
the instrument panel gives information about planes which
are behind you, your speed, altitude, ammo, and throttle
power. The only things of any consequence that are missing from the instrumentation are an attitude indicator and
fuel gauge. The attitude indicator would have been nice
as the unbroken green landscape below lacks landmarks
to provide visual orientation.
One feature that distinguishes this game is that it is
designed for two joysticks per player. If only one joystick
per player is available, the players use the joysticks and
keyboard. Pushing your main joystick causes you to either
dive, climb, or bank (depending on the direction you push),
and the trigger fires your gun-cannon. Pushing your secondary joystick (or designated keys on the keyboard), controls the throttle; with the second trigger being your "eject"
button.
A full range of maneuvers is allowed: Immelmanns,
loops, Hi-Yo-Yo's, and High-G turns. Basic turning, climbing, and diving are easy, but accomplishing the more difficult maneuvers takes practice (as it should).
The "feel" of your plane is generally good, with the dives
and climbs directly affecting your speed. A sharp dive increases your speed, becoming harder and harder to pull
out of. During climbs, you gradually loose speed unless
you increase throttle to compensate. A slight bank causes
a slow turn, a sharp bank causes a fast turn. Banking too
much can even cause you to fly upside down. And, if you
combine a dive and a bank, you run the very real risk of
going into a tail spin and crashing.
Gun fire is also well handled. You have a limited number
of bullets and an effective range of about 2000 yards. A
push of the trigger button sends tracers streaming in front
of you. If you change the attitude of the plane, the bullets
continue to go in the direction they were originally fired.
Continued on page 40

A Review by James A. McPherson
of evil, from which he uses the spells to rule
evil armies that are destroying the world of
Questron.
It is said that a serf will rise from humble
beginnings to destroy Mantor in battle ....
(Quick Watson, the game is afoot!)
So you sell your oxen for 57 gold pieces
and, since you only have rawhide armor and
three months worth of provisions, you first
stop in Geraldtown to buy a weapon—and
the quest begins.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Questron
TYPE:
Fantasy Role-Playing
SYSTEM:
Apple II
# PLAYERS: One
PRICE:
$49.95
AUTHOR:
Charles W. Dougherty
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

If you are in need of a new and challenging role-playing game similar in play to the
Ultima scenarios, then look no further.. .
Questron is here.
Questron's game structure and style is
under license from Richard Garriott, so be
prepared for a game that utilizes game
basics that are in demand by the adventure
consumer. But don't expect a copy. The
land of Questron looks strikingly different.
As does its' villages, castles, and especially
the dungeons. But first lets discuss your
quest.

You begin this quest as a lowly serf who
lives on the outskirts of Geraldtown. You
have heard of other villages, outposts, great
cathedrals and dungeons with horrible
monsters, but so far have not ventured very
far from Geraldtown. There have also been
rumors of a mighty castle with an army of
guards, a fortune in treasure, and MESRON
the Great Wizard.

These rumors also say that MANTOR, the
Evil One, has escaped this castle, fled to
another world and returned with a book of
powerful magic. He has settled in the land

When you first boot up Questron, a portion of the land appears with Geraldtown
near the center. A joystick is used to move
about the surface. To the left, on the screen,
is a list of all of the commands which can
be accessed. From this list you can, for instance, choose either "wear" or "arm" to
pick which armor or weapon you want to
use. Just because you buy a weapon or armor does not mean it automatically is
usable. Directly below this list is another
shorter list that tells you how many hit
points, gold, food, and time you have left.
These items will change as you move or
fight, so keep close watch to make sure you
always have enough hit points and food.
The bottom portion of the screen shows
your current action (i.e. go north, etc).
One of the commands also allows you to
bring up a screen that lists your attribute and
inventory status. When you begin the game
your attributes are all set at fifteen. Your inventory list will include armor, weapon, and
magic spells (if any).
As you travel in the land of Questron you
will come across towns, cities, cathedrals,
and a castle. Later you will enter the
dungeons. During these travels you can talk
to merchants, farmers, and other folk (talking with them can sometimes help you in
your quest). When you encounter someone
or something in your travels it is often wise
to "speak." If you choose to fight initially
you could, at times, lose some valuable information or item.
One of the first problems this reviewer ran
into was how to get hit points. I received
gold whenever I was a victor from a fight
but was at a loss on the hit points. I finally
entered one of the cathedrals and approached the priest behind the altar. He asked for
money and I obliged, but nothing seemed
to happen. So I explored the area. I was told
not to enter one room if I was a sinner, I
entered anyway. Inside I found holy water,

which I picked up. I found that when I
drank the water my hit points went up. But
if you don't pay the priest and go into the
holy water room you will become trapped.
In another part or the cathedral is a priest
who, for fifty dollars, will let you play an arcade skeet-shoot game. If you do well your
dexterity will increase. You can keep playing the game but each time you have to get
a better score than the last or you will lose
dexterity points. Other cathedrals have
similar benefits.
Spend the first part of the game
strengthening your character and increasing your hit point reserves. In your wandering you will eventually come across the castle, but there is no need to immediately explore it (I know—you will anyway). Mesron
will call you to the castle when he feels the
time is right. A weak character may not last
long in the castle. When you fight an opponent, the outcome depends on your attributes (strength, stamina, agility), the
weapon in your hand, your armor, and the
strengths and weaknesses of the creature
you are fighting. Ongoing battle status is
described at the bottom of the screen. There
are over 100 different types of creatures inhabiting Questron (each is described in
detail in the rulebook). Each type looks different, reacts differently, and is best attacked with certain weapons.
There are other forms of transportation
besides "Shank's Mare" (your basic
transportation). You just have to have
enough money to afford them. There are
swamps to cross and mountains to climb
and the right form of transportation will get
you through each. But, be advised of the
deadly fog. If you enter it you can never be
sure of the direction you will go or the
creatures you will meet. In your travels you
may also come across a sailing ship, but the
only way to get to it will be to traverse a large
fogged-in area. The ship is a prize worth
fighting for, but make sure that before you
enter the fog you have plenty of food, hit
points, and patience.
You are probably wondering when I'm going to get to the dungeons. I've been saving
them for last. There are three dungeons that
have to be conquered. They must be conquered in a certain order. At first, there will
be only one dungeon you can enter due to
Continued on page 39

This time I will discuss three different
groups of games that represent some exceptional products.
A few words about pricing. Generally you
get what you pay for. Most products are
priced fairly, but unfortunately there are
some exceptions. The major software companies usually have a single fixed price,
such as $34.95, on the majority of their software. Too often the quality varies widely.
So, before you buy anything, read the
reviews of the software for your computer.
There can be significant differences between the SAME game on different computers. If you can, try to see a demo of the
product. Be suspicious of advertisements,
especially if they don't show actual pictures
of what it looks like on the screen.

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

Roy Wagner

I have a few comments about the pricing
of some companies which produce some
very good programs for the C64. When Atari
started losing money trying to sell their
machine, someone came up with an excellent idea. If you can't get them to buy
your computer, get them to buy your software. With that simple idea, Atarisoft, (a
division of Atari Corporation) is showing
a good profit. Commodore will soon be producing software for other computers also.
The Atarisoft products are good. I think they
did an excellent job of converting Dig Dug
and Donkey Kong from the arcade to the
C64. But I think their retail price of $44.95
is too much! A price of $35 would be more
reasonable. I was very pleased that their
games are cartridges rather than disk, making them available to anyone with a C64.
You can expect to pay about $5 more for any
cartridge game.

All of you that have Commodore 64s (C64)
should now be quite happy with your
choice. The computer and its peripherals
are low priced and the company behind the
computer is economically sound. And, the
recent management changes should be good
for all of us. All other magazines have been
mentioning the proposed new variations on
the C64 called the 264 and 464. These
models have been indefinitely removed
from consideration for production. May
they rest in peace, and upgrade models compatible with the C64 be designed.
The best thing about owning a C64 is all
the new software that is becoming available
for it. The quality of currently available software is excellent and the variety good. Nearly all of the new software from major software companies is now being offered in
three flavors: Commodore, Atari, and Apple. The new programs coming out for the
C64 show that programmers are now beginning to use the features of the C64 that make
it such a powerful and versatile computer.

Another company that converted from
the arcades to the home computer is Parker
Brothers. Their games Frogger, Q-Bert, and
Popeye are also on cartridge and even
higher priced at $49.95. These companies
probably feel justified in charging higher
than typical prices because these games are
the "original" arcade versions. They are
probably committed to paying much higher
royalty rights to the original designers
because these games are proven successes.

Spinnaker produces some very good
software—fun and educational—with excellent graphics and sound. However, I
highly recommend you look and listen
before you buy. Their pricing structure offers a wide and reasonably fair range, but
some of their games are very limited in
playability for price. I have been disappointed with Cosmic Life, Fraction Fever,
and Jukebox. The others that I have seen are
well done and offer good variety. They
cover their intended subject well. Make sure
that subject, and underlying educational
value of the game, is what you want. I
recommend Story Machine (for 5-8 year
olds), In Search of the Most Amazing Thing
and Trains. The latter is an excellent simulation. It is like playing with a model train and
learning about supply and demand at the
same time.

THREE OF A KIND:
CHESS IS THE FIRST
Three outstanding computer chess programs are now available for the C64. Chess
7.0 (C7.0) from Odesta ($69.95), How About
a Nice Game of CHESS! from Odesta ($29.95)
and Sargon II from Hayden ($29.95). Sargon
II is very disappointing. The conversion was
very awkwardly done, and using it requires
constant reference back to the skimpy
manual. Moves must be made using chess
notation (A2-A4, etc). The graphics and colors are well done, but the user options are
minimal and hitting the wrong key will often
produce unexpected results. It does
however, play a good game of chess.
C7.0 (CGW 3.3) and Chess! (a subset of C7.0
containing nearly all features) are certainly
the best chess programs available for the C64.
The manuals are very detailed (64 and 96
pages respectively), explaining all aspects of
the program's capabilities in great detail,
along with discussions about chess in
general. Both programs are menu driven
with little need to refer back to the manual.
Moves are made using the cursor and only
acceptable moves to legal positions are
permitted.

Options are easily selected from the menu
next to the game board. These options include changing sides, pieces, or positions.
The playing level of the computer can be adjusted from taking one second/move to letting it "think" until you tell it to move (hours,
even days). You can take a move back, replay
it, rerun the game from the start, break from
rerun and resume where you left off, or
restart (throwing the chess board in the air
and starting again). You can also ask for advice or switch sides if the game gets too
tough. These features are available with both
versions.
The extras you get with C7.0 are deeper
levels of play, ability to play blind chess
(where you don't see the pieces), ability to
Continued on page 38

into a snag in almost every move, but in a
remote game that's no problem because I
have plenty of time to fix it. These problems
would kill a live game. A DM can put a lot
more imagination into a remote game
because he or she has more time. I don't
have to just hit the party with a random encounter to buy time for myself."

TELE-GAMING
Patricia Fitzgibbons
With a sense of anticipation, I logged onto my favorite local bulletin board system.
I knew that my Dungeon Master had probably posted a new move, and that our party of adventurers could expect trouble. We
found it.
As you approach, you see that this is
no natural creature, but the creation
of some wizard. It seems unwilling or
unable to stray far from the outcropping of rock (which, at this distance,
you can tell are the ruins of some
man-made structure). The ground is
littered with the skeletal remains of
the creature's last meal. Aragorn tries
to communicate with the monster.
Oultar seems confused, dazed. Suddenly, the skeletons come to life!
Some are wearing armor; most are
carrying weapons. One wields a
bright, shining sword. In shock,
Lastel mutters something. The
skeletons do not seem bound to this
place as is the hairy creature. They
are coming at you.

There was nothing we could do but fight.
While my comrades readied their weapons
or prepared spells, I knocked an arrow and
attempted to get a clear shot at the gruesome
undead. Somehow, most of us survived this
encounter. But what about the next time?
Our game, which the Dungeon Master
("DM") calls "a hybrid of D&D, Runequest,
Champions, and others," is run via a gaming message board on the Lyceum BBS in
Long Beach, California. The game was
organized by Michael Daniels, a twentyeight year old city employee who has been
involved in fantasy role-playing for the past
six years. This is his first "remote" game.
According to Michael, the BBS game
helps him to polish his face-to-face game:
"I'm working on my own game system, and
this lets me get all the bugs out of it. I run

Players in BBS games usually leave new
turns twice a week. The DM then assesses
the moves and posts a response. Time
delays in BBS games can help the DM and
the players to think through their moves,
communicate with each other by private
electronic mail, and even look up monster
descriptions in a gaming guide. Further, if
a player misses a turn, the game is still there,
waiting, when he or she returns. For
Michael Daniels, this means that: "The
game is there whenever you want it, instead
of being something you have to budget time
for. Since I find it just about impossible to
get a group together for a live game (most
of the people I know are too busy), the BBS
game is perfect for me."
Michael's game began in mid-January
when he left a message soliciting players on
the Lyceum's bulletin board. He posted
several informational files about his game
in a special discussion area on the Lyceum,
and quickly organized a party. Michael's
files are typical of those found on many
gaming BBSs. First, he outlined the general
rules to be used in the game, and explained
what a prospective player needed to do to
join. Then, he described his "world" of
swords and sorcery set in the ancient Currium Province of the Kingdom of Alarond.
Thus far, his stalwart group of adventurers
has travelled from the dissolute City of
Haven into the mysterious Iron Mountains,
in search of a magical axe.
The players have gotten to know each
other through private mail and through occasional in-person gatherings. Even though
they have had opportunities to continue the
game face-to-face, they prefer sticking to the
bulletin board. Again, this is because the individuals each have different work
schedules and interests, and enjoy the flexibility of a remote game.
Another experienced DM who runs a
message board fantasy role-playing game is
Tom Wooley from Dallas, Texas. One of his
favorite gaming locales is the Asgard BBS
in Ft. Worth. There are seven games currently held on Asgard; Tom started his
group last December. On a busy board like
Asgard, players who cannot access the
system except during prime usage hours
(evenings and weekends) may miss moves
and have to drop out. One of Tom's players
is from Shreveport, Louisiana, and, for a
while, he was the leader of the party. Thus,
really dedicated folks, even those who have
to call long distance, can still participate fully in a BBS game.
Tom listed several disadvantages involved in playing via a BBS: "The best
boards for RPG'ing are always the busiest,
so you can't access as freely as you would

like. Also, players are not able to pick up
non-verbal signals from their comrades or,
more importantly, from the DM. And,
there's always the problem of being dependent on hardware: if the computer goes
whacko or the phone screws up, it's goodbye game!"
The benefits, of course, are many of the
same mentioned by Michael Daniels. Tom
likes the time he has to plan his next move:
"You can read the message, think it over,
even interact with others. Then you can
make a final decision as to what you want
to do rather than making a snap judgment
and regretting it moments later when someone else says, 'Why didn't you .... ?"'
From a player's perspective, BBS games
offer an opportunity to meet new friends
and drop in or out of games. Although a
good DM feels a strong sense of responsibility to all of his or her party members, players
can be very discriminating about which
games they want to join or quit.
Mary Kelly, a twenty-seven year old computer programmer from Dallas, has played
in a number of BBS games. Her current
favorite runs on the Teledunjon III system.
She addressed the issues of game failures:
"I have seen board games die due to loss of
DM interest as well as lack of player participation. I don't think this happens any
more often than it does in 'real life,' though.
Board stability can be a problem, too. One
BBS I know has suffered several crashes
recently." Yet, Mary still prefers remote
games. She explained further: "I can work
the game into my own schedule. I have a
chance to meet people whom I might not
otherwise meet. I don't have to lug my gaming books and equipment around. Finally,
and perhaps most importantly, players' personalities don't get in the way!"
Every experienced fantasy role-player
has, at one time or another, run into "personality clashes" among players and DMs.
Sometimes combat situations can seem all
too real or players become angry if they feel
that the DM has made an unfair decision.
The distance involved in remote games
helps diminish this problem. Generally, if
a party member is unhappy about how a
game is going, he or she simply drops out
of sight and the DM quickly finds a replacement. Because of the number of games
available, players can shop around for a
game that suits their interests. DMs can be
selective about whom they allow to join
their games, and can work out a relationship
with the BBS' sysop so that the DM has a
free hand on the gaming board.
Although BBS games frequently come
and go (depending on system stability and
callers' interests) there are always several
message board games running on CompuServe's Garners' Special Interest Group
("GameSIG"). One of these ongoing adventurers, "Quest for Andelaine," is the
thoroughly researched and finely-tuned
creation of N.T. Nelson, a thirty-four year
Continued on page 39

that basis. Another approach to the market
is the technical approach. This approach
studies the historical cycles of the market,
notes the seasons when the commodity's
price is perennially high and buys and sells
on that basis.
A combination of these two approaches
will prove to be most effective. The fundamental approach should be used to
discover a potentially good investment and
the technical approach to help determine
the contract month to invest toward. This
combination keeps a portfolio in balance
and gives a specific date to liquidate without
worrying about whether an investment has
reached its summit or not. (Note: This
system was good enough to net my first
million early in my third game of Tycoon,
so I know it works.) The second rule is to
learn how to cut your losses. Because so
much depends on cash flow and appreciation, it doesn't pay to try to ride out a bad
trend.

TO MARKET, TO MARKET, TO BUY
A FAT PIG
by Johnny Wilson
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# Players:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Tycoon and Baron
Strategy-Financial
Many
Disk
1
Jim Zuber
Varies with system
Blue Chip Software
Woodland Hills, CA

The Financial News trumpeted a sudden
decrease in the number of corn fed hogs in
the U.S. and my greedy fingers quickly
dialed in the command to contact my
broker. The projected sudden drop in supply couldn't help but skyrocket pork bellies'
prices higher than ever. I purchased all the
pork contracts my cash flow would allow
and held my breath until the next week. I
breathed a sigh of relief as I viewed the revised prices. I'd guessed correctly and
would shortly make a killing in the market.
Tycoon is a superior cousin to the
Millionaire stock market simulation from
Blue Chip Software (reviewed in CGW 3.2).
The program is both similar and improved.
It is similar in that the basic mechanics of
the game are the same, simply adapted for
the commodities market rather than the
stock market. The player sees a graph for
general market conditions, a random graph
for commodities that may or may not be
owned by the player, a synopsis of the
Financial News, graphs for the player's own
holdings, a table of prices and, finally, the
command menu. It is improved, because the
program is more user-friendly. In Tycoon,
the player need only hit the first letter of any
activity on the command menu in order to

access it, as opposed t typing in the whole
word in Millionaire. There is also much improved and simplified presentation of
research data. There are five graphs
available to chart the progress of each commodity: an oscillator graph to show the net
change in total contract prices, an average
graph to show a three week averaging trend,
a standard scatter plot graph (as in
Millionaire), a point and figure graph to
demonstrate upward and downward price
trends, and a historical graph to show annual cycles.
Players will probably enjoy Tycoon more
than the other two games, as it moves faster
(due to being able to use accumulating cash
immediately without having to liquidate investments) and as it has more options (one
can actually "sell short" when the market
is likely to go down—"selling short" is using your credit to promise to sell stock or
commodity options today that you won't actually buy until a later day, after the price
has gone down, hence earning the difference in prices.) The game seems realistic
in that it takes a combination of fundamentalist and technical approaches to be successful. I list the fundamentalist approach
first, because designer Jim Zuber has so
chained the price probabilities of the program to the "news" that one cannot possibly
succeed without taking the fundamental
law of supply and demand into account
(Dan Bunten discussed "continuous" probabilities of this type in CGW 2.6, p. 16). The
first rule of thumb in Tycoon is to pay attention to the news, decide how the news
will affect the supply or demand for a particular commodity and then, buy or sell of

Baron, on the other hand, is not a fast moving game. Even though the stated goal of the
simulation was to squeeze 60 months of real
estate into a one hour session, the game
mechanics drag. Once again, the basic
design is similar. The player sees a general
graph, a random graph, the news, graphs
on his holdings, the prices and the command menu. Baron, like Tycoon, is also
more user-friendly than Millionaire in its
command functions.
The listings in Baron are much more interesting, however, than the price listings
in Tycoon or Millionaire. Baron's listings
offer a general description of the three possible types of properties (residential, business
and undeveloped land). If the player is interested in a specific property, it is possible to get a detailed description of the property and the financial information
concerning it. Baron also has random
events which can cost the property owner
a month's profit. These are done very
"tongue-in-cheek" and are a marvelous
asset to the game. Some examples are: a tenant that goes mad, a pool light that nearly
electrocutes an apartment's tenants, and a
tenant's cat who trips over a damaged area
and may sue.
Baron seems to be a fine tutorial on learning about real estate speculation, but lacks
an important mechanism as a game. A game
demands some chance for success, no matter what the circumstances. Baron gives this
chance in "hot" and "mixed" markets, but
there is no offsetting mechanism for the investor in a "down" market. In Tycoon, there
is the chance to sell short, once one has attained a certain level. In Millionaire, there
is the opportunity to purchase put options
at a certain level. In Baron, it looks as though
the option to invest in alternate investments
Continued on page 38

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other garners around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk. PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE OR ATARI VERSION WHEN
ORDERING. $15.00
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISKS
Diskette #1 contians the source code for the twelve entrants in CGW's Second
Annual Robotwar Tournament. Diskette #2 contains the seventeen entrants in
the recently completed Third Annual Robotwar Tournament. Muse Software's
ROBOTWAR required to use these diskettes. Please specify which diskette
when ordering. $15.00 each or $25.00 for both.
CGW BASEBALL DISK
Contains the four teams of the All Star League reported on in 3.3 (AL West All
Stars, Al East, NL West, and NL East); the six teams of the 1982 Winter League
(see 3.3), the eight teams of the Greatest Baseball Team of All Time
Tournament, and a reprint of the results of The GBTOAT tournament from
issue 2.3. SSI's Computer Baseball Apple version required to use data disk.
Apple version only. $15.00
Send check or money order to: Computer Gaming World, Disk Order Dept.,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. California residents please add 6%
sales tax. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

The question becomes, how can you improve your chances of getting your money's
worth in software? My advice is to use good
indicators. For example, consider the
source when you hear about the play value
of any game. Avoid making purchases based
solely on the input of "interested" parties.
Following are what I consider to be either
weak or, at best, irrelevant indicators. First,
the name of the publisher — buying based
on the theory that this new game must be
a good one because these are the folks who
brought you your second-most favorite
game ever, doesn't wash. That's like saying
you're ready to buy the next book published
by Doubleday because you liked the last one
they published.

Atari
Playfield
David Stone

In this issue we welcome a new Atari columnist, Dave Stone. Our thanks to Allen
Doom who wrote the Atari column for over
a year.

As all Atari home computer owners know
(or at least feel deep in their hearts), Atari
is the best overall game machine on the
market for the serious gamer: one hundred
twenty eight colors, multiple graphic
modes, player/missile (or "sprite") graphics,
four voice sound, smooth scroll, redefinable characters, ports for controllers
(such as joysticks, paddles, trackballs, and
light pens) and so many peripherals
available that if we bought only half of what
we wanted, it would make our initial investment seem trivial. I'm not saying that the
Atari is faultless—just that the hardware is
there for the gifted software designer/programmer to make him/herself rich and
famous. Or, for the mediocre, unimaginative programmer to make a modest living.
And there is the rub.
The wide range in the quality of software
available is incredible. On the one hand, the
more the better; on the other hand, people
are buying a lot of mediocre programs in
search of the good ones. Who hasn't been
burned by a bad purchase? Look in the back
of your disk or cartridge holder. See any
dust-covered "old friends" there whose play
value isn't worth the time it takes to load
them?

Another irrelevant indicator is the ad. OF
COURSE the ad says the game has stunning graphics, amazing music, and hours of
fun in store for you. What did you expect
it to say? ".... the game is a clone with many
of the features of the original missing." Ads
are a good way of finding out what's new,
not for what's a good buy. I love the art and
imagination that goes into some of the ads.
Now that many of the software publishers
are being handled by major Madison
Avenue ad firms, look for the ads to be more
persuasive than ever. However, if you
believe everything you read, please write to
me in care of CGW, I've got some real estate
for sale in Southern Florida that you'll just
love.
Trying the game out in a store is a good
indicator, right? Wrong. It may be okay for
some games, but others, like M.U.L.E., Zork
and Legionnaire (just to name a few) are too
subtle and too complex to sell themselves
well in a five minute demo.
Yet another weak indicator: "I saw this
game in the arcade or on an Apple (or C-64
or whatever)". Too many weak translations
and implementations have led to some
rather dissatisfied Atari game players. Most
often the cause of this is that the programmer didn't take advantage of the power of
the Atari hardware (see comments about
Apple to Atari translations below).
Now for the strong indicators: A good
review in a magazine like CGW. Reviewers
want to build a readership and that means
building trust. At best, a reviewer never lies,
at worst, he pulls a punch or two (usually
rationalizing that the game may not be his
cup of tea). Read between the lines. Don't
rule a game out just because it got a bad
review, but consider why the reviewer was
"down" on the game. Also, study the Game

Ratings in CGW's Reader's Input Device.
Buying only games that score 7.00 or higher
hedges your bet considerably—but
squelches the thrill of being the first one on
your block to have the game. However, you
may not always agree with the consensus
(for example, in the last R.I.D. I was shocked and dismayed to see one of my
favorites—Mr. Robot—at the bottom of the
heap.)
Another good indicator: the name of the
programmer or designer. The guys who
write software tend to be like mountain
climbers. They don't like rescaling the same
peaks. They always seem to be setting new,
tougher challenges for themselves. This
usually translates into more sophisticated,
more playable games. If you like the last
game by an author, chances are his new one
will be a topper.
Finally, as car ads used to say, "ask the
man who owns one." This is probably the
most reliable way of judging if a game's for
you—short of borrowing it from a friend for
the weekend.
Selecting software that satisfies is basically the buyer's problem: caveat emptor.
Publishing software that satisfies is the programmer's and publisher's responsibility.
I'm grateful that so many software companies support the Atari. But let's face facts,
they don't do it to fulfill altruistic urges.
They do it because they want to make a lot
of money (just like the rest of us).
However, if they plan to make money
AND stay around in the long term, they
hopefully realize that they must deliver a
product that satisfies Atari owners. Which
brings me to the point: my dissatisfaction
with games that have been translated from
the Apple to the Atari with little consideration for the differences in the two systems.
Three areas in particular rankle me: input, sound, and color. Forcing the player to
type in single letter commands, or even
complex commands, is really inexcusable
in most action, or multi-player games. Atari
owners all have the same type of joystick
(unlike Apple-owners). Considering games
such as M.U.L.E. (from Electronic Arts) or
Ali Baba (from Quality Software), you see
good examples of how complex input can
be implemented for joystick control. Now,
someone might say, ".... nothing is wrong
with keyboard input. Atari owners are
spoiled." Maybe so. But shouldn't the computer be the one doing all the work while
the human is having all the fun?
Next, the Atari's built-in sound generation
capabilities are far superior to the Apple's.
Atari owners expect more than a "
crackle-pop-dinkety-dink-dink " when a bomb explodes or a goal is achieved. We expect
brilliant sound effects and musical motif's
that identify characters or events (like the
notes that announce the Shadow is coming
in "Shamus" by Synapse). We expect catchy
theme music (like the tune that plays durContinued on page 35

BROADSIDES REPLAY
by Jay Selover

Welcome, sports fans, to another fascinating "what if' replay
of history. Today's question is, "What if the Bonhomme Richard
had been commanded by a landlubber like me instead of by John
Paul Jones?" Now, with the help of SSI's Broadsides, we can find
out.
Broadsides is a very good tactical simulation of ship-to-ship combat in the "Age of Fighting Sail". Each player controls one ship,
and uses the keyboard or a paddle controller to give commands
to the crew of his ship. The graphic display gives information about
each ship (current speed, damage, crew, etc.) on the right third
of the screen, and the rest of the screen shows an overhead view
of the two ships as they move. The game action is almost arcade
quality, as the two ships are constantly moving and you can input an order at any time.
While it plays like an arcade game, Broadside is designed around
an accurate simulation. When an order is given, there is a delay
(which can be varied to reflect crew quality) before the order is
actually executed on the screen. There are three types of shot you
can use for your cannon load, and you can target either the
enemy's hull or sails. There is even an entire subroutine for boarding actions and hand-to-hand fighting while the ships are grappled. All in all, it really is a very good simulation.
And so, to the battle. We used the shipyard to create replicas
of the Bonhomme Richard and the Serapis. Both were good, solid
frigates (the Bonhomme Richard was actually a converted merchant ship). On paper, the Serapis looks a little better; it has 20 more
"hull points" and a normal top speed which is 0.5 knots faster. The

American ship does have one advantage; a crew of 420 as compared to 270 on the Serapis. The other big advantage that the
Americans had historically was the ability of John Paul Jones, and
we have wiped that out by putting me on the ship instead.
Historically, this is the battle where the Bonhomme Richard was
challenged to surrender early in the battle and John Paul replied
with "I have not yet begun to fight!" The time is 6:00 AM, August
14, 1779.
0600: We emerge from a fogbank and suddenly, there she is! The
Serapis is 400 yards off our port beam. Her first broadside misses
even as I'm barking orders to the crew. We'll use chain shot on
her sails first to cut her speed advantage. I order a turn to port and
back the sails. This should let the Serapis scoot by us as we cut
across her stern. We exchange broadsides and I get 8 points but
the Serapis scores 16.
0605: The Serapis has jogged away so we get one free shot (8
points), but she's sped up so that she will be long gone by the time
we cross her path. I desperately call for more speed and order solid
shot loaded in the guns; she's getting too far away to use chain shot
0615: She's fired 5 times in the last 10 minutes but scored only
2 hits (8 points). I've finally brought my starboard broadside to bear
and hit on 2 of 4 attempts; one for a healthy 14 points. We start
a long turn to starboard, circling the enemy.
0630: After trading several ineffective broadsides, the Serapis
is beginning to find the range. She's slowed as she turned into the
wind, but has kept a broadside toward me. She's firing at my hull,
and scored three hits in a row (32 points). I've missed my last 8

shots, either because I didn't have her in the play of my guns or
because I misjudged the range.
0655: As we continued our turn into the wind, we lost headway; but the Serapis has disengaged! She's been winning the duel
for the last 25 minutes with 6 of 12 shooting (40 points) to my 6
of 14 (31 points). Her sails don't look that bad but I've lost 26 percent of my hull. I'm down on points, 90 to 61.

1100: We emerge from another fogbank, and there she is again!
She's 350 yards to port. She gets 22 points in the first two minutes,
but I'm more prepared this time and retaliate for 21 points of my
own. I had already decided how to handle another engagement,
and immediately order a turn to port, full sails, and a load of
grapeshot in all guns. We'll board her and use our numbers (now
409 to 258) to overpower them.
1110: She's outfoxed me again. She cut to starboard quickly and
then backed sails. I can't turn fast enough to hit her and go right
by. As we cross her stern, I have a perfect opportunity to rake her
deck with grapeshot, but we miss!
1125: We switch to solid shot but only get 4 points on 2 hits as
we sweep around to starboard to line up for another run at her.
She was really slowed down by her last maneuver and is just now
building speed.
1145: We haven't fired for 15 minutes, as we head straight for
her; I anticipated her turn better this time. We've taken considerable hull damage in the last 20 minutes (6 hits in 9 shots; 42
points).
1152: We hit her broadside and grapple after taking 3 rakes on
our final approach. My 389 men engage 255 on the Serapis. In
a furious battle, my men are doing very well but the Serapis is
working hard to disengage the grapples.

1250: After one hour, we stand at 257 to 80 in the crews, but
the Serapis has gotten off the last grapple and we drift apart. My
nose is into the wind, I have no way to make headway, and I am
faced into her full broadside. Four hits and down I go!
Well, I'm no John Paul Jones, but I actually came close. Had the
crew of the Serapis dropped to 65 (an additional 15 crew lost in
the boarding action), it would have been 75 percent of her crew
lost and she would have surrendered to my crippled ship. Oh well,
I'll get her next time.

the
game

learnig
Bob Proctor

Since starting The Learning Game, I have
become a magnet for games for young
children. This is a very important area and
one which is rapidly fulfilling its potential
— this column was created to cover the field
but I only have six a year! Furthermore, a
study of the ratings on the RID's shows that
TLG scores better when the subject is a
game for high school age and older. Assuming then, that readers have a preference for
adult games, I will limit the number of times
we discuss games for the young to once or
twice a year. If you disagree with this, please
let us know.

NAME:

Early Games For
Young Children
TYPE:
Preschool Skills
SYSTEM: Apple II/IIe, Atari,
C-64, IBM, TRS-80,
VIC
FORMAT:
Diskette
AGES:
2 to 6
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Counterpoint
Software
Minneapolis, MN
The best selling Apple program for preschoolers, it's selling moderately well for
other systems too. I attribute this to two
reasons: it got to market early and it offers
a lot of variety for the money.

That still leaves me with a great pile of
games that deserve an evaluation.
Therefore, here's the first annual TLG Summer Shopper's Guide of software for gradeschoolers and pre-schoolers. These are
games which will keep young minds active
during summer vacation, or (just maybe)
keep young mouths quiet when you need to
get errands done. They are presented
roughly in order of intended audience,
youngest first.

EGFYC has nine different games which
cover counting, number and letter recognition, matching, simple, addition, typing and
drawing pictures. There is a menu in which
pictures of the games appear one after the
other; a push of the spacebar will "choose"
the game on-screen. The games are good at
building skills but the graphics (low-res) and
sound are uninspiring, to say the least.
Based on the reactions of my test group (admittedly a jaded bunch), the game won't get
much replay unless no other choices are
available.

Learning With Leeper
NAME:
TYPE:
Preschool Skills
SYSTEM:
Apple II + or IIe
Diskette
FORMAT:
AGES:
3-6
# PLAYERS: 1
$34.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA
Here's a better choice for the very young.
It has great high-res animation and sound
and enough variety to keep kids enthralled
for hours. It requires a joystick; a disadvantage if you don't have one, but joysticks are
easier to use for the youngest garners. LWL
also has a simple pictorial menu (see photo)
so that children can switch through the four
games freely once the program is running.
In one, you must pick the pile of bones that
matches the number of puppies. In Balloon
Pop, you match letters and shapes. If you
don't miss any (of about 12), you are rewarded with a brief arcade style balloonpopping game. A third game involves
guiding a frog — being chased by a slow
snake — through a series of mazes. The last
"game" is free-drawing and very nicely
done. The joystick moves a paintbrush and
a button controls the flow of paint. Four
cans of paint in the corners allow you to
change colors. This approach is natural and
easily learned and the drawings are very
colorful.

Stickybear
Bop/Stickybear Basket
Bounce
Arcade
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
Apple II/IIe
FORMAT:
Diskette
3 and up
AGES:
# PLAYERS: 1
$39.95 each
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Xerox Education
Publications
Middletown, CT
NAME:

Here are two pure arcade games that are
easy enough for three-year-olds and entertaining enough for their parents to play.
They have great high-res animation and
good sound, full of bears, balls, ducks, rabbits, planets, stars and hats. They both have
several levels; in BOP, some are shooting
galleries, others involve dodging sandbags
dropped by Stickybear from his balloon. In
BASKET BOUNCE, Stickybear tries to
catch falling objects in his basket. These
games establish Stickybear as a fun companion, which is a useful lead-in to the
Stickybear games which teach (see below).
These are quality products with great
graphics; they include posters and stickers
which generate enthusiasm in this age
group. The only drawback is the cost of buying multiple programs.

Stickybear
Opposites/Stickybear
Shapes
Pre-school Skills
TYPE:
Apple II/IIe
SYSTEM:
Diskette
FORMAT:
3 to 6
AGES:
# PLAYERS: 1
$39.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Xerox Education
Publications
Middletown, CT

NAME:

In SHAPES, you can play 3 different
games: pick the missing shape, match the
shapes and names, or find the flashing
shape in a picture which has all five shapes:
circle, square, triangle, diamond, and rectangle. In all three, a correct answer is
rewarded with a short animated sequence.
These are so entertaining that most kids will
sit through them over and over, which provides good reinforcement.
OPPOSITES is not quite so much a game.
Each picture illustrates two opposite ideas:
up and down, light and dark, fast and slow.
You can flip the picture back and forth from
one to the other. As you do, Stickybear runs
up and down stairs or turns the lamp on and
off.
Like the earlier programs for NUMBERS
and ABC's, these two games have very
clever graphics and animation and include

posters, stickers, and picture books. They
are very entertaining (for their age group!)
and are easy for young children to use once
the program is running.

Early Games Music
Musical Notes
Apple II/IIe, C-64,
IBM
Diskette
FORMAT:
4 to 12
AGES:
# PLAYERS: 1
$29.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Counterpoint
Software
Minneapolis, MN
Early Music Games is another game from
Counterpoint that stresses variety. With it,
you can play music, record the music you
create, and play back your creation. This
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Continued on page 36

Chancellor of the Exchequer
by Stewart MacKames

TRADE, ETC ....
NAME:

Chancellor of the
Exchequer
TYPE:
Historical Economic
Simulation
SYSTEM:
Atari
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
R.C. Chiofolo
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Mach-Ina
Coral Gables, FL

The rabble have gone to the streets in
response to the shortage of food. London is
in chaos, and a reluctant Parliament has
ordered the bulk of the British army home
to deal with the crisis. Riots in Manchester
have resulted in eleven dead and hundreds
injured. The Prime Minister, Lord Liverpool, has just announced that the Corn Law
will not be repealed and, further, that a
series of six new laws have been passed to
stop these "rabble rousing Radicals!". An attempt has been uncovered to assassinate the
entire Cabinet, seize the Bank of England,
and establish a provisional government. In
your few short years as Chancellor of the
Exchequer you have seen Great Britain go
from victory over Napoleon's France to
hunger and panic. And this was only your
third turn....

In MACH-INA's new game, Chancellor of
the Exchequer(CE), you are given the task of
taking Britain's 1805 economy and developing it into a well balanced, dynamic whole.
As the first paragraph might suggest, the
historical figures did not have an easy time
of this, and neither will you! The initial
situation is one which can foster rapid
growth and a self sustaining cycle of industrial and social development, or lead to
a dismal and bloody disaster with you as the
one the angry mobs are demanding. Which
of these two extremes shall be most closely
approached will be determined by the decisions that you make.
Beginning in 1805, and continuing in five
year turns until 1915, CE gives you twentytwo turns in which to develop eight uncoordinated regions into a modern state. Your
goal is to merge each of these regions as

functioning parts of Great Britain's
economy and to accumulate at least 55,000
pounds Sterling. To merge a region into the
Great Britain display, it must meet strict requirements which are dependent upon the
number of ports, canals, and railroads the
province contains and how much trade it
does within its borders and with other
regions (modified by the difficulty level
selected). Each of these regions begin with
a certain level of resources which could include farms, coal mines, or iron mines. They
also begin with a certain amount of
transportation (ships or trains) and possibly
manufacturing (factories). It is in the way
you manage these resources and your
transportation, and the locating of your factories that the outcome of the game
depends.
Of your eight regions (South England,
Cornwall-Anglia, Midlands, Wales-Bristol,
Lancaster, York, Northumberland, and
Scotland) only three are self sufficient, having regional sources of food, coal, iron, and
sufficient transportation and manufacturing to use them. All of the others produce
one or more of the resources or are centers
of manufacturing dependent upon the
others for raw materials. You must take
these regions and, by trading their produced raw materials from one to another, so
distribute them that your production
capacity will be able to efficiently produce
the equipment needed to boost production
in the mines (drills), raise farm productivity (tractors), and increase manufacturing
capacity (steam engines). Added to this, you
must build an adequate number of ships and
trains, and the canals and railroads for them
to use in order to do this. The final word is
that the key to success is trade.

Each turn is divided into five stages, and
between each you are given an opportunity
to trade. Each item traded, whether within
a region or from one to another, uses
Transportation Points and money.
(Transportation Points are generated by the
ships or trains in the province.) Before the
first stage, Produce, it could be necessary to
trade money from one region to another in
order to pay the workers and to buy any
surplus crops produced or the less expensive
American cotton.
Between the first and the second
stage, Manufacture, you must transfer all of
the goods produced to the regions in which
they will be used. This must be done even if
they are to be used in the region which produced them. The only exception is the food
consumed by the populace, as this needn't
be processed. This is the most important segment of trading taking place in the turn, so
take your time. Your ability to produce commodities and to use these to develop your
regions, and whether or not your people will
starve is dependent upon the decisions made
at this time. Are the resources distributed in
proportion to what you want to make in each
of your industrial regions? If not, then you
could find yourself wasting precious
resources or manufacturing ability.
After the Manufacture stage, and before
the Consume stage, you must trade the crops
and goods which which are to be consumed. Failure to have sufficient food in a province will cause starvation, and the goods
need to be distributed in such a way so as to
gain the greatest return. It is during the Consume phase, that goods are traded with the
local populace and with the colonies.
Before the next stage, Allocate, the tools,
ships, locomotives, factories, or arms produced are trades to the regions which will
use them. You might, for example, trade tools
from the industrial region of Lancaster to the
mining region of Wales-Bristol so that drills
for the coal mines or tractors for its farms
could be built. During the Allocate stage you
are able to transfer the population of each
region into the various sectors (farming, coal
mining, iron mining, manufacturing,
transportation, the military, or Australia) so
that there will be efficient use of the population, avoiding unemployment. This is important, as unemployed workers tend to create
civil unrest (remember the first paragraph?).

Before the final stage, Develop, the money
needed to buy the ports, canals, and railroads
available in the next phase must be sent to
the developing region. There is no joy in having built ships or trains for a region and then
being in the middle of the Develop stage
before noticing that you can't afford the
canal or railroad needed. (If possible, you
should avoid the possibility of clogged canals,
or derailed trains, as either will cause a
stupendous waste of money.) Also, as you
would expect, trains can not be used in a
region until a railroad has been built.

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Every region is initially assigned levels of
three factors: Social Level, Technological
Level, and an over all Development Level.
Both the Social level and the Technological
Level of a region are dependent upon its
Development Level. And, between the three
of them, they affect most of the game functions to one degree or another.
The Social level, when combined with a
region's population, helps to determine the
demand of the locals for consumer goods. It
is also used to determine how many people
are able to be employed in the farm and mining sectors, and the amount of machinery
usable in the mines.
A region's Technological Level, along with
the current year's date, determines the price
received for the finished goods. It is used to
set the limit of tractors which may be used
by a given number of farmers, and the
number steam engines which can be used by
the factory hands employed. Finally, as the
Technological Level increases, the amount
of manufacturing able to be done by the
regions factories also increases.
Finally, a region's Development Level,
besides determining the level of the other two
factors, is the factor which sets the price paid
to the miners, the factory workers, and for
a region's surplus crops. This tends to
counter the other two factors which cause
the economy to grow, making a balanced
system which should, if handled right, favor
the side of growth. The most important
feature of the Development Level is that a
region must reach a certain level before it can
be merged with the Great Britain display.
Not too difficult a task for the more
developed regions, but for backwards
regions it can prove difficult.

BASIC STRATEGIES
There are three critical problems which
confront a player. The first of these, in
chronological order, is potential starvation
in many regions. In the early part of the
game, the majority of the tool production
should go to making tractors. Also, you
should buy every surplus crop available, as
they will only get more costly as the game
progresses. Over all, a two to one ratio of
farmers to tractors will insure an adequate
supply of food even in the worst of turns.
While this may seem impossible at first, it
will eventually be possible as your well fed
factory workers produce an ever increasing

number of tools for tractor production.
The second problem which will be faced
is the shortage of transportation. With the increase in crop production and the increase
in the output of mines, you will soon find
yourself with surplus materials unable to be
traded. The tempting solution to this is to
build trains, as these generate more transportation points than ships. This, however,
should be avoided early in the game, as the
cost of the trains will drain your infant
economy and can only run where railroads
have previously been built (an option only
available in the more developed regions).
Ships are definitely the preferred choice
early in the game, as they can be used in or
transferred to any region. Some provinces
can build ships more cheaply, so pay careful
attention to the cost in each region.
Raising the overall amount of Manufacturing Points is not subject to any easy solution.
The regions will reach maximum employment levels early, after which only two
methods will be available: raising the
Development Level, and therefore the
Technological Level of a province; and
building more steam engines for its factories.
While either will work, the latter has a
distinct disadvantage in the first turns of the
game. Building steam engines too early will
drain the supply of tools for tractors and
drills, without which the supply of coal and
iron will be inadequate by 1815 and the spectre of starvation will return. The conflicting
demands for tools can be best solved by
specialization, with each of the primary
manufacturing regions making tools for
goods, or drills, or steam engines. This, of
course, must be moderated by the demands
caused by the first two problems.

CRITIQUE
CE is an enjoyable game, which could have
been made better by making it more user
friendly. The first problem is in its instruction booklet. Most of the information needed is there, but finding it may not always be
possible. To counter this problem, the pro-

gram does includes a very good Help option.
There is also an analysis section which will
evaluate your progress on a region by region
basis, stating the overall efficiency of the
region and which sectors need further
development.
This latter feature is most useful due to the
second factor in the struggle between you
and the computer; the need to record the information on the regional displays for use
from one stage to another. Each stage requires information from all eight of the
regions in order for you to make adequate
decisions. Unless you make a chart for all of
the regions which can be altered stage by
stage, the only alternatives are to use their
print screen option (which only works with
Epson° format printers) or to have an excellent memory. The lack of either of these
latter two options will slow the game play
down considerably.
My final complaint concerns the programs
graphics, or rather the lack of them. The entire game is text and charts, with little use of
graphics. The simple use of a map of Great
Britain, showing the regions, their resources,
and their levels of development would have
been both useful and added to the game's
aesthetic appeal.

CONCLUSIONS
In the final analysis, Chancellor of the Exchequer will succeed or fail as a game you
would like, based upon your enjoyment of
economic simulations. Judged as such, the
quality of the simulation and the challenge
to your ability to succeed greatly out weigh
any of its negative aspects. If, on the other
hand, you have become jaded by the smooth
flowing, less demanding games now
available on the market, and are not very interested in the economic difficulties in a
developing early industrial nation, then this
game may not be your cup of tea. In my case,
even as I write this I am plotting ways of
building Scotland into the economic center
of Great Britain. After all, what does England
have to trade half so dear as Scotland?

UNDER SOUTHERN SKIES

NAME:

UNDER SOUTHERN
SKIES
TYPE:
Strategy/Wargame
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
Owen P. Hall, Jr.
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, Maryland
Captain Hans Langsdorff lowered his
binoculars, his red eyes burning from vainly
trying to pierce the gray mist. He blinked
his eyes and returned to scanning the
horizon. There he was. The verdammt
Englishman was creeping out of the mist to
attempt another futile assault on the GRAF
SPEE.
Under Southern Skies (USS) is a combina-

tion strategic and tactical level game of
naval warfare, with the action taking place
in the South Atlantic shipping lanes. USS
may be played either solitaire or as a two
player game. In the two player game,
however, many players will feel like the German player doesn't have enough to do, as
there is only one German warship. Nevertheless, the German side is challenging to
play in the strategic version.
The game mechanics start out bearing a
resemblance to an earlier SSI game,Pursuit
Of The Graf Spee. Once one gets to the tactical display, however, there is a great deal
of difference. USS has added a silhouette
for both the attacking ship and its target and
a radar screen to show the relative positions
of the ships in the engagement. When there
is an air attack, the screen shows the planes
moving toward the GRAF SPEE'S
silhouette. When ships are sunk, the screen
shows an explosion on the target silhouette.
USS also allows the players to establish the
game within a more flexible time frame than
the earlier, more historically bound, game.
USS is extremely interesting and
challenging to play. It does suffer from some
problems, however. Many of the problems
with the game begin in the weak documentation. For example, the documentation for
the operational commands doesn't tell the
German NOT to type the parenthesis

around the x,y coordinates when the
prompt for Order 5 (Altmark Movement) is
given with the x and y placed in parentheses. In our first game, one German captain spent nearly one half hour trying to get
the program to take his order. A similar
misunderstanding arises in the tactical
rules. The use of the parenthetical expression (Graf Spee only) after command 4.1.3
(Fire Main and Secondary Guns) makes it
appear that the only armament available to
the allied player is his torpedoes. I hesitated
much too long to use my main guns during
my first game because I didn't think my
shells could actually penetrate the Graf
Spee's armor. The parenthesis should only
follow command 4.1.2.
A more significant problem than
documentation is to be found in actually
playing the tactical portion of the game. If
a ship's bridge is hit and sustains maximum
damage, control of the ship is supposed to
be transferred to the aft tower. Yet, the program has no order for allowing this procedure to take place. If the Allied player
orders the ship to maintain course, he is told
that he cannot do this because of the loss
of the bridge. If he tries to change course,
he can't do that either, of course. Unfortunately, the only command that works in
this situation is the one to disengage. This
is a frustrating glitch, as I would often rather
sink than disengage in the tactical battle.
The strategic hints on page 14 of the
documentation are generally helpful. The
German will normally be able to elude the
British if he avoids high density coastal
areas. The Allied player should note,
however, that since fuel availability plays
an important factor in the game, it is important to patrol the neutral ports. In the tactical game, the book is right in suggesting
an aggressive offensive stance. The Allied
must follow the suggested NELSON tradition, but remember to change course at least
ten degrees after the Graf Spee fires on him.
This will cause the German captain to have
to retarget his guns. While allowing the
Allied player to keep his general vector aimed at the Graf Spee during the entire tactical
game.
USS is a fascinating game to play. As a
miniatures fan, I've always been interested
in games which involve "blind play" and
USS does a very good job in this (Exception:
Once the Allied commodore orders an air
strike, the alert German captain will know
where the Allied ships are, since the program does not erase the positions at that particular point. However, once the Allied commodore is in that position, it most likely
doesn't matter what the German captain
knows about enemy positions.). Indeed,
USS's strategic game could serve as a very
good referee for a miniatures campaign
within the South Atlantic. In that case, of

course, the letters representing various
ships on the strategic display could represent task forces, too. It would certainly save
a lot of book work to let USS referee the
strategic movement.
USS has a few relatively minor problems
as enumerated above, but it makes up for
them in the graphic presentation. As a
visiting friend who played the game said,
"You really feel like your at the 'Con."' USS
is a versatile, interesting and challenging
game if one is willing to overlook spelling
errors, an occasional visible line number
from the program and the flaws mentioned
above.
Johnny Wilson

MOVIE MAKER

NAME:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
AUTHOR:

Movie Maker
Atari 48K
Disk
Interactive Picture
Systems
PRICE:
$ 60.00
PUBLISHER: Reston Publishing
Company
Reston, VA

Movie Maker (MMTK) is a one-of-a-kind
program for developing your own
computer-animated visual sequences, or
"movies". This program places you in both
the director's chair and at the artists drawing board. You devise the action, set the
scenes, create the actors, props, and
background, and playback your creation as
a complete movie.
MMTK is comprehensive in the tools that
it provides for creating and manipulating
shapes and animating them. Plus, it includes a disk full of demo movies that were
obviously done with the aid of a professional
artist. Because the program allows you to
do so much (there are over fifty commands
or key stroke sequences to select from), there
is much to be learned before you can turn
loose your imagination to create a finished
product.
The publishers call Movie Maker a "tool
kit" but it's more like a combination construction set and tool kit for both building
and refining (or tinkering with) animated

shapes. The kind of animation you create
is similar to a flip book (you know, where
you flip the corner pages of the book and
still characters seem to move). Of course,
the sequences you create with MMTK are
much more than line drawings on still
backgrounds. Much of the computers ability
to manipulate images and color in memory
is brought into play.
The instruction booklet for MMTK is
almost ninety pages. And, everyone of them
is packed with important information on
how to work the program. Even though
there's an exercise to introduce you to the
program, there's no way to create anything
of value without several hours of studying
the manual, and many, many more of experimenting. These do not have to be grueling hours, but they must be spent nevertheless. NOTE: In early editions of the program the documentation contained a
disconcerting error in the introductory exercise. After completing step 5 on page 4
(typing "DOG" and pressing return), a
screen full of dog shapes did NOT appear
as the documentation indicated. If you have
this early version you must next press the
arrow keys to move the lighted Selector Bar
over the word "COMPOSE" then press
return. The screen full of dog shapes should
appear.
There are four main modes in MMTK:
Compose, Record, Playback, and Smooth.
In Compose you create the components of
your animation masterpiece, in Record you
put the pieces together in an animation sequence, in Smooth you sit back while the
program smooths out the animation and
eliminates the flicker, and in Playback you
view your completed movie.
Within each of the main modes there is
a myriad of sub- utilities and commands for
creating and manipulating the graphic
elements that make up your movie files.
Some of the features are: drawing with the
joystick using a specified color, creating a
window so you can move an image or
duplicate it, instantly creating a mirror im-

age of your shape, zooming in to magnify
the image, and defining a series of shapes
as an animation sequence. Other features
in the Compose mode include changing colors, swapping colors already on the screen,
defining speed of frame change, erasing,
and restoring erasures.

Features of the Record mode include
several of animation commands (such as setting frame rate and setting the number of
times an animation sequence is to repeat)
and a full range of editing commands for
easily accessing and editing any part of your
movie. The Record mode is also where you
add the sound. Considerably less can be
done with the sound than graphics. You
cannot create new sounds; you can only
select from the 32 provided (eight per each
of the Atari's four voices). However, sounds
from different voices can be be played
simultaneously.
Actually making a simple movie would go
something like this. First, you plan the basic
movie: characters, storyline, setting. You
then follow a series of steps to draw the
characters in different positions that, when
later "flipped", will give the illusion of motion. Next, you define the background.
Then, you record each of the characters, one
after the other, to make a composite. Finally, you add enhancements such as text and
music then smooth it all out and there you
have it, ready for playback ....a movie.
Got that? .... No? Well, let's try it with a
more concrete example. Let's say you
wanted to make a short movie of a girl
throwing a pie into a boy's face. First, you
plan — asking all the questions a professional animator would ask (and answer)
before putting pencil to paper. For example, do they enter from the left, or right, or
are they both already on screen at the beginning? What do they look like? How big are
they? What are they wearing? Next, you
define the actors as shapes. In our movie
there are three "actors": the girl, the boy,
and the pie.

You must draw each actor in each position that it will assume during the movie.
To animate walking, for example, you must
define the actor with the left foot forward,
feet even as if in mid stride, and right foot
forward — with arms moving appropriately in opposition to the foot movement. While
this part of the task is by no means easy, it's
not as difficult as it sounds because MMTK
allows you to do things such as duplicate
shapes then make changes to them. In our
movie, for example, we could draw the basic
boy walking in mid stride, duplicate him
twice, then make appropriate changes by
erasing and re-drawing his arms and legs.
For drawing the pie, we would need to
define the pie in a horizontal position, at
forty-five degrees, in a vertical position, and
splattering in a vertical position.
Next, comes the background (things that
don't move in the movie). On a special
background page, you would draw the setting. For our movie we could make the setting a picnic. This means drawing bushes,
perhaps a picnic table, and any other props
that might add to the picnic atmosphere.
Okay, here's what we have so far: Three
boy shapes — each in a different walking
position that makes up a walking sequence;
several girl shapes — in a sequence of walking positions and movements for picking up
the pie; and, the several pie shapes in a sequence that includes being level, in flight,
and splattering positions.
Now, we're ready to "record". Recording
is a process of defining where and when on
the screen each of the shapes that you've
drawn will appear. The limitation here is
that MMTK allows only 300 frames of
animation (or 300 "pages" if you're still
thinking in terms of the flip book analogy).
You activate the record mode, select your
shapes one at a time and add them as a sequence to the movie. In our Pie Movie, we
might start out with our picnic background,
then add the boy walking to the position
where we plan for the pie to hit him. We'd

then back up to the beginning of the movie
and add the girl going through her motions
of walking to the the picnic table, moving
her arms as if lifting the pie and throwing
it. Then, we'd back up to the beginning one
more time and add the pie shapes that we
defined earlier. Finally, we'd send the completed composite through the Smooth mode
to get rid of the flicker that occurs during
"crude" animation.
Now, as hard as it may be to believe, in
the above description of "The Making of Pie
Movie", I made the process much simpler
than it actually is. But at last.... Tah-Dah !!!
.... we have a movie. Now we can have some
fun with it: changing colors, adding sound,
adding text, changing the size of the
characters (for example, we could make our
pie double size with just a few key strokes),
adding new positions to our shapes to make
the action seem more realistic. Adding additional characters/shapes. MMTK encourages you to experiment.
One thing to keep in mind as you create,
experiment, and have fun is that MMTK
allows you to go only as far as your own artistic talents will take you. If you already
know how to apply drawing techniques
such as size, perspective, shading, contour
lines, overlapping, and foreshortening, then
you're over a great hurdle in creating attractive movies. However, if you don't know

how to draw, this program won't make you
look like a better artist than you really are.
If you're a dabbler who is looking for a
simple drawing program that's easy enough
for junior to use, MMTK is probably not that
program — instead, try "Paint", also
published by Reston, or some similar drawing program. (Although, rumor has it that
Reston is developing an "easier to use" version of MMTK that allows input via a Koala
Pad.)
If you're a programmer looking for a utility for developing animation routines that
can be handily incorporated into your
games, MMTK is not that program either
— although the documentation does mention that a "professional" version of MMTK
is available for just such a purpose.
So, who is MMTK for? Let me suggest
some possible uses of the program: presenting "attract" animation in stores or at a convention booth; passing time creatively; making personalized, animated greeting cards
to send to fellow Atari owners; showing off
what your Atari can do while entertaining
friends. In other words, if you have a need,
or desire, for presenting non-game, impressive animation sequences, then MMTK
won't let you down. But, to fully enjoy
MMTK you must have the deep personal
conviction that "getting there is half the
fun".
David P. Stone

BRUCE LEE

Bruce Lee
Arcade
Atari now,
Apple, PC, Jr, C-64
coming
Disk and Tape
FORMAT:
Ron J. Fortier
AUTHOR:
$34.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

I don't know what "martial arts" is, but
I know what I like. And, I like Bruce Lee(BL).
It delivers all the foot kicking, fist jabbing,
quick ducking action-packed adventure
you'd expect from a good grade B, martial
arts movie.
The objective of this game is to find and
destroy the wizard and claim his infinite

wealth and immortality (you might ask,
what good is one without the other?) Along
the way to the Wizard's you continually
must battle a ninja (attired in a traditional,
all black costume) and a Green Yamo (a
scantily-clad, green sumo-like wrestler).
The Bruce Lee character is pink with
black hair and pants and no shirt; and, as an
added "nice touch", he wears black gloves.
He advances from room to room (twenty
screens in all) by leaping up and taking
lanterns that hang from the ceilings. This
opens the way or turns off perils such as
deadly "pan" lights, "electrical charges" in
narrow passages, and "t'sung lin", exploding bushes that suddenly appear then
disappear.
After booting the disk, you are forced to
sit through 12 bars of an Oriental theme
song (this is, perhaps, the only part of game
that I found truly irritating). Then, the action begins. You are at the wizard's oriental fortress, a place where Fuji-type mountains tower in the background. Almost immediately, a ninja appears, advancing
toward you and brandishing a bokker (a
hardwood stick meant for maiming). You
draw back, turn and charge! You go into a
flying kick, stunning the ninja and sending
him back a few feet. You repeat your kicking assault and the ninja disappears.
Enter the Green Yamo. This over-weight
fella' is anxious to do a break-dance on your
face. Despite his apparent weight, he's fast
and can do everything Bruce can, except
climb and duck. However, to even things
out, his legs appear to be just a little longer
(or faster?) than Bruce's. This means you
can't kick a Green Yamo around the way
you can a ninja — unless you land the first
foot. This makes for a fair, but tough, fight.
There's more to BL than kicks and chops.
Good defense counts, too, just like in "real"
martial arts. For example, when trapped
between a Green Yamo and a ninja, a good
strategy is to duck quickly and let the
Yamo's running kick hit the ninja. Another
defensive strategy is to leap up and climb a
trellis to safety. (During the leaping

maneuver, "Lee" looks more like a
"Nureyev".)
BL offers some nice player options not
commonly found on arcade-type games:
you (as Bruce Lee) against a computercontrolled Green Yamo and ninja, you and
another player taking turns being Bruce, or
you against a Yamo controlled by another
player (in this case, the Yamo can climb a
trellis to give chase). Also, there's a unique
option for left-handed joystick control of a
right-handed joystick.
All player movements are under joystick
control. The range of maneuvers includes:
running kick, chop, duck, jump, and leap.
Learning the moves is easy, mastering when
to use them is the challenge. There's good
correlation between joystick movement and
on-screen character movement; however,
once or twice during the play of the game
Bruce became "stuck" on a trellis. At first
I thought I was going to have to restart the
game, but the Green Yamo came along and
kicked me down.
You score points by entering new rooms,
gathering lanterns, delivering blows to the
ninja and Yamo, and by destroying the
wizard. Plus, you gain an extra Bruce Lee
at 40,000 points and every 30,000 points
after that. Your score is continually updated
at the top of the screen. Sorry, no high score
save to disk.
You start out with five "falls" (read
"lives".) You loose one fall after sustaining
several blows from either the ninja or the
Green Yamo. The ninja disappears after two
blows, the Green Yamo after three. Within
a few seconds their identical replacements
appear.
I'm sure there are some who will object to
this game's violent nature and still others
who will object because it tends to celebrate
a man who was allegedly a part of the drug
culture. Those points may be arguable, but
what's clear is that BRUCE LEE is good
arcade-type game for anybody who's looking either for some solo action or for some
fun head-to-head (foot-to-gut, fist-to-face,
etc.) fighting.
David P. Stone

CHIVALRY

NAME:
Chivalry
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS: 1-4
AUTHORS: Richard Hefter
J. & S. Worthington
PRICE:
$49.95
PUBLISHER: Xerox Education
Publications
Middletown, CT

Lady Jennifer pulled back on the reins of
the team and attempted to back the wagon
under the miller's window. "Oh, dear!"
milady exclaimed in frustration, "there goes
another sack of flour. The miller really
ought to make them of sterner stuff." Seeing his precious flour dissemble in the wind,
the miller decided to give Lady Jennifer a
piece of his mind, nobility or not. "You
clumsy oaf! I'm ruined!" Lady Jennifer went
on to win the game, even after failing in
some of the arcade games within the larger
game. That is one of the best points about
this family game. One doesn't have to
master every phase of it in order to win.
Even the least coordinated member of the
family can win.

Chivalry is a family game built around the
medieval ideal of noblesse oblige. It is a
series of arcade games and mini-adventure

scenarios built around a boardgame format.
Unlike many games which use both a board
and the computer, the computer portion of
the game contains some very fine graphics.
In fact, the game could actually be played
without the board, but the players would
lose some of the enjoyment of immediately
being able to compare the progress of their
token with the tokens of the other players.
The board also assists the players by visually
directing them toward the goal (The Black
Knight's Castle) and providing a sense of accomplishment when they get by an obstacle.
Perhaps, one of the best things in the
game's favor is that one doesn't have to
master each feature within the game in
order to advance or even, win. My nine year
old daughter (Lady Jennifer) gets very
frustrated with arcade games of the traditional sort where one must master one
screen before moving on to the next. In
CHIVALRY, one loses a turn or goes back
some spaces, but is never completely
defeated by a screen. This does a lot for
morale, especially for some of us who will
never be known as coordinated. Another
positive difference between Chivalry and
traditional arcade games is that each screen
is a completely different game with a different challenge. The hill may seem to be deja vu of DONKEY KONG or CANNONBALL BLITZ, but the mill (described above),
the archer's meet, the dart game at the Den
of Thieves Inn, the willow path and the
laurel maze are entirely different. My personal favorite involves jousting at either the
Templar's Castle or the Lists.
of course, Chivalry is also an educational
game. Besides the background color of a
historic period, the game facilitates learning in at least one other way. Each player
must read a large text description of his
move and his challenge on the screen. The
text is easy to read and is surrounded by
pleasant graphics. The text appears on the
screen in short panels. Panels linger long
enough for most players to read them and
faster readers may take advantage of the
"fast text" feature of pressing the space bar
to advance to the next panel. In this way,
slow or beginning readers are not
embarrassed by missing any of the important information, clues or instructions presented in the
panels. The improving reader, however, has
the incentive of learning how to speed up
the game. If the panels are still moving too
fast, the player may pause the game by
pressing the escape key.
Another possible educational feature is
that of making decisions. Several of the
mini-adventure scenarios require the player
to make a choice. For example, a noble arriving at the Market are invited to choose
between a fine wine, a common food and a
bear potion. Seeing a bear cave two spaces
ahead, the precocious adventurer will buy
the bear potion. The astute noble will also
listen to passerbys about bandits, special

numbers, and their fortune. If the adventurous noble can remember this information, it will help him/her at a later time.
Chivalry is a delightful family game. It is,
of course, to most adult computer games
what LIFE is to adult boardgames, extremely simple. Yet, it is a game that offers some
interesting challenges to adults, as well as
children. It will take several playing sessions
before even Dad has mastered all the screens.
Even then, it's nice to have a game that the
youngsters don't have to feel intimidated
about and are willing and even excited about
playing. Once they've played Chivalry, how
are you going to keep them away from Fantasy Role Playing? it's not going to be
possible!
Johnny Wilson

THE ALPINE ENCOUNTER

The Alpine Encounter
Graphic Adventure
Game
Apple II
SYSTEM:
Disk
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS: 1
$59.95
PRICE:
AUTHOR:
Carol Anderson
PUBLISHER: Ibid, Inc.
Hartford, CT
NAME:
TYPE:

The Alpine Encounter is a graphics adventure game, the first in Ibids' Vodac Adventure Series. Some background information,
as well as a telegram from your boss, Freedman, await you as you open the box.
You learn that, at the Peking Imperial
Museum, two people broke in and stole a
vase dating back to the first Ming Dynasty.... While, six thousand miles away at a
military installation in the Rockies, a second
pair of men snuck into a secured portion of
the base, broke open a large military safe
and removed a large blue envelope, stenciled with "Stealth Missile". The men escaped
from the room of the installation in a
helicopter.
Then you are brought back to the present
with the following message from your boss.
You, Agent 456, must immediately
fly to Alpenburg and check in at the
Alpenhof Ski Resort. You are then to
contact Agent 487 regarding Vocac's
involvement in a conspiracy which
would give Vodac world domination.

Agent 487 is operating under cover as
an exchange student at the resort. You
have only twelve hours to complete
your mission.
As you boot your disk, you find yourself
standing in front of the Alpenhof Ski Resort.
First check in at the front desk. Otherwise
you will not be able to wander through the
hotel in search of clues (the hotel premises
are only available to paying guests).
At various times throughout the game,
you will come in contact with the main
characters. When you meet them be friendly
and ask them questions. For, only by interviewing the characters can you hope to find
the clues, solve the mystery, and foil Vodac.
To get more background, you might want
to go to the hotels' newsstand and buy a
paper.
After you search (map) the hotel, you probably will want to try your skill at the
animated skiing sequence (you do need to
ski to complete the game). There is a beginners and an expert slope (you can choose
either one at the beginning of the run). This
was a nice change of pace which was made
additionally interesting by the fact that you
are being shot at while skiing down the
slope.
A short distance down the ski slope, you
will arrive at the ski chalet. You can either
ski there or be carried there for medical services like I did (I didn't get too far down the
mountain before I crashed into a tree).
Search the ski chalet and pay particular attention to the radio room.
A nice feature in this game is that your
interaction with the characters will affect
in some ways the plot line. The changes appear subtle, and tend to change the timing
of certain events, but it gives the story a little of the uncertainty found in real life.
An intermediate level game, The Alpine
Encounter has detailed graphics similar to
other current graphic adventure games. The
animated ski sequence fit well into the story
line. I especially liked the character interaction and the ability of either you or the
character(s) to follow each other around. It
sometimes felt as if there was more than just
a computer behind the scenes controlling
the action.
James A. McPherson

PLANETMASTER

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Planetmaster
Strategy
Apple
Disk
Gary Cuba
$24.95
Magnetic Harvest
P.O. Box 255
Hopkins, S.C. 29061

Planetmaster Jasper's ubiquitous smile
was eclipsed by a dark cloud of displeasure
as he stepped over the lifeless carcasses of
the jaghers. "What a miscalculation!" he
muttered across his protruding lower lip, "I
never would have guessed they were too far
from the tetoles." He picked up the spoor of
the surviving pair of jaghers and prepared
to herd the almost extinct predators into the
next zone. A wry smile crossed his face as
he realized that herding these two creatures
into a safer environment was roughly
analogous to that classic planetmaster of
Terran fame, Noah.
Planetmaster is a complex and challenging simulation. It will thrill those who have
read the science fiction of Piers Anthony
and Frank Herbert with their plots revolving around the necessity of conservation for
survival. In Planetmaster, the player is given
the opportunity to select six endangered
alien species and transport them to a terraformed, dodecahedronal Space Sanctuary Satellite (SSS). The SSS is the player's
own eco-system to manage to the extent of
his ability on one of five levels of play
(Novice Planettender, Journeyman
Planetkeeper, Professional Planetkeeper,
Advanced Planetologist, and Planetmaster).
Each turn of the game represents one
season of a planetary year with four
seasons. The player determines the length
of the game in years (five is the recommended length) and has the option of continuing
with the same species at the end of that
number of years.
The game begins with the player selecting
the six endangered species he/she would
like to attempt to preserve. It is at this point
that the game makes its most extensive use
of graphics. The game offers two different
graphic views of the virtually unlimited
number of species available. Unfortunately, all of the species look suspiciously canine
to this reviewer. It is only after the selection
process that one can find out the vital information on the species' dietary habits. The
dearth of information available at the selection stage limits the initial phase of selection
to that of a guess. Fortunately the author indicates modifications that can be made to
the unprotected program so that a specie's
biological characteristics (including diet)
can be viewed prior to selecting species.
While admitting that this may increase the
educational value of the game, the designer
notes that this modification removes some
of the challenge of the game.
In the next phase of the turn, the placement phase, the player must research by
means of several different descriptions and
tables. Here the player must balance the

temperature, rainfall and genetically
engineered crop production of the available
zones with the particular needs of each
species. The player must balance the need
for one species to have optimal temperature
and crop production of its primary food
group with the need of a predatory species
to be in proximity to its prey. I found that
this is the point at which it helps to take
notes. Since you don't want to have to flash
up the species' description during each
seasonal change, it helps to write down the
preferred diet characteristics of each
species. Also, I found it to be helpful to try
to place the species in a zone with approximately the same temperature as their optimal point and where the first listed food
on their diet flourishes. It was also helpful
to note on a separate chart the seasonal fluctuations of each food during the early years
of the game in order to anticipate where I
could move species for maximum advantage at a later point in the game, but an
analogous season.
Next is the results phase. At this point, the
player gets to see how each individual
species is surviving within the assigned
zone. The player must note the satisfaction
index, the percentage of dietary efficiency,
the demographics of births, deaths and starvation, and crop production or hunting success/failure. On this basis, the player is
assigned a percentage score for the season's
work and this is averaged into a cumulative
rating. The cumulative rating will eventually determine the success or failure of the
player (85% is considered successful at any
of the 5 levels). After this rating is displayed,
the game either: 1) moves on to the placement phase of the next season; 2) gives the
player a final rating; or 3) invites the player
to continue the game with the same species.
Those who insist on the pyrotechnics of
game design (intricate graphics, sound effects and "real time" simulation) won't find
any bells and whistles in this game. The major graphics displays are relatively static and
uninteresting because the species' sketches
are not dissimilar enough and the graphs
don't fluctuate enough in a successful game
to be interesting. However, those who find
excitement in weighing data, mentally
debating numerous possible decisions and
making those "god-like" decisions of
simulated life and death will find Planetmaster to be a game to be played over and
over again. Educators will enjoy using the
game as an introduction to the idea of ecosystems and wildlife conservation. The
simulation not only sensitizes the player to
the idea of wildlife preservation and
management, but teaches the basic principle of ecological interdependence.
Planetmaster Jasper's face began to shine
with the brightness of his characteristic
smile. The pride of fatherhood beamed from
his tanned visage as he admired the
newborn jagher pups. "Noah," he thought,
"didn't have anything on me."
Johnny Wilson

ATARI PLAYFIELD (Cont.)
ing Datamost's "Tails of Beta Lyrae"). It's
true that some translations do put the sound
through the TV speaker. But the TV speaker
should be made to do more than go "dinketydink-dink". The Atari has four voices—they
should be used.
Third sore point: color. Hi-res animation
that exploits the full potential of the Apple
invariably loses something in the translation: usually, red/orange. Due to different
hardware methods of handling color,
straight translations are less colorful on the
Atari. This is not because the Atari can show
fewer colors, but because the programmer/publisher decided that a straight
translation was "good enough" for the Atari
owners.
Some might ask "what's the big deal about
losing a color like red, at least the game was
translated? Anyway, it's not the programmer's fault if the Apple can show red in the
hi-res mode ad the Atari can't.
Well, first, the big deal about losing red
is that it's often difficult to distinguish objects on the screen when they're all purple,
green, black or white. Even though a hardware limitation is never the software
designer's fault, what IS his or her fault is
failing to take advantage of the built-in
features which ARE there, like
player/missile graphics and display
interrupts.
Of course, it costs MONEY to re-design
a game to capitalize on a different computer's special features. But, the publishers
who do straight translations don't seem to
have any qualms about charging us just as
much as if they'd written the game from
scratch. Publishers should be able to make
a fair profit, but not by serving warmedover, bland versions of Apple games to Atari
owners.
One way to let the publishers know how
you feel about mediocre translations or the
kind of games and features that you'd like
to see, is by sending back the warranty card
with the information on the "Comments"
line. "Warranty card??" you say? Yeah, you
know, those little cards that fall out of the
software packages, then get set aside or used
as a bookmark. The warranty card is a direct
line between you and the publisher. When
the publisher receives your card, he knows
he's getting a suggestion from a "known
purchaser" of his products. That's a powerful incentive for him to listen. (Smart companies know that if they don't listen to the
market place they'll soon go out of business.)
So, take a minute to fill out your warranty cards and write in your comments. The
publishers want to produce games that sell.
But, first you've got to tell them the kind of
game you want to buy. If you don't like
straight translations, say so. If you want
more "two-player-at-the-same-time" (also
known as "head-to-head") action games, jot
it down. If you want more cooperative (instead of competitive) games, jot that down.
If you want to get what you want, you've
gotta' speak your mind!

LEARNING GAME (Cont.)
can be accomplished with the use of a
simulated musical keyboard or by directly
entering the notes by musical notation. If
you feel embarrassed by your own compositions, there are eight tunes "pre-recorded"
on the disk. There are also guessing games
to test your knowledge of notes and tunes.
Children who can't read yet will have to be
taught which keys control the game by
someone who can read the manual as there
are no clues on the screen. Otherwise, this
is an easy program to use.
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Facemaker
Memory game
Apple II/IIe, Atari,
C64, IBM
FORMAT:
Diskette
AGES:
3 to 8
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Spinnaker Software
Cambridge, MA
In this loosely-structured "game", you
build a cartoon face by choosing among predefined eyes, nose, ears, mouth and hair.
Once your creation is complete, you can
animate it. Using a "programming
language" with one-letter commands, you
can make the face smile, wiggle its ears,

stick its tongue out, and several other things.
The result is a brief animated cartoon with
appropriate sounds.
The younger kids usually collapse from
hilarity at this point, but older people will
want to go on to the last phase. Now the
computer programs your face and you must
copy the same sequence of expressions. It's
a lot like the game of "Simon"; as long as
you can repeat the sequence, the computer
keeps adding more. The object is to see how
long a string you can remember and repeat.
Obviously, FACEMAKER gives practice
on memory and concentration. More than
most games for pre-schoolers, it provides
lots of examples of important computerrelated concepts such as programming,
menus of objects, and using the cursor to
"point" and select. Do you suppose they'll
do a version for Macintosh?

Spellicopter
Word Recognition/Spelling
Apple II/IIe or IBM
SYSTEM:
Diskette
FORMAT:
6 and up
AGES:
# PLAYERS: 1
$34.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: DesignWare
San Francisco, CA
This is a good word recognition/spelling
game. Using keyboard or joystick, you must
pilot your helicopter through an obstacle
course of mountains, clouds, balloons, and
hang-gliders to reach the secret letters. The
letters are scrambled, you must pick them
up in sequence to spell the secret word
which fits in the sentence at the bottom.
There are 40 groups of 10 words each
already on disk — ranging from CAN to
OUTRAGEOUS. Even better, you can make
up new lists of your own so
SPELLICOPTER can be used to practice
any words (in any language!).

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
AGES:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Troll's Tale
Adventure
Apple II + $ or IIe
Diskette
7 and up
1
$29.95

Sierra On-line Inc.
Coarsegold, CA

Here's another great adventure game for
those who are just learning to read. It is very
similar to Dragon's Keep (CGW Vol. 3, No.
4) but uses a slightly "older" vocabulary (second grade). This time we're exploring a
fantasy underground empire. A naughty
troll has taken 16 treasures from the Dwarf
King; we're trying to help him get them
back. Besides reading practice, the game
gives practice in reasoning and logic. Mapping skills are not necessary to enjoy the
game but they are encouraged. A large
paper map is included, but it is incomplete
and must be finished by the player. Sixteen
colored stickers are used to mark the locations of the treasures. Keyboard skills are
NOT required; the entire game uses only the
spacebar and the RETURN key. Another
winner from Sierra On-line!

NAME:
TYPE1:

NAME:
Police Artist
TYPE:
Face Recognition
SYSTEM:
Apple II/IIe
FORMAT:
Diskette
AGES:
7 and up
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Sir-tech Software
Ogdensburg, NY
Sherlock Holmes noted that almost all of
us can see, but very few can observe. Here's
a game that will help you learn this skill. The
basic idea is to take dozens of hairstyles,
chins, eyes, noses, and mouths and mix
them in any combination. Using this
graphic "vocabulary", this game lets you do
one of three things. Police Lineup gives you
a quick look at a face and then challenges
you to pick it out of a series of faces. Police
Artist lets you look at a face and then try to
reconstruct it piece by piece. In both games,
increasing skill levels means more choices
and greater similarity of choices. Off Duty
lets you construct any combination of
features you want. Kids get absolutely
hysterical when they try to create a portrait
of Mom or Dad. Police Artist is a better
choice for eight years and up; Facemaker is
a bigger hit with five and under.

TO MARKET (Cont.)

COMMODORE KEY (Cont.)

was intended to function in this way.
However, there is really only one reasonable
investment within that option, investing in
second mortgages. Investing in second mortgages is a reasonable hedge against the
downtrends in the real estate market if interest rates are high. But, that kind of investment won't accomplish much when both
the market and the mortgage rates are
down. I question whether it is probable that
the housing market would be down at the
same time as interest rates are down, yet
Baron afforded me that frustrating environment. I would certainly like to see some of
the figures on the data collection for the correlation between interest rates and the
market. It certainly seems to this reviewer
that the real estate market rises in inverse
proportion to mortgage interest rates.
All three of these simulations have an
educational value toward understanding
our economic system. All three are
fascinating games for one player to play. I
prefer the games in the following order: Tycoon, Millionaire, and Baron. This order
reflects the flexibility in investment
strategies open to the player. Those who
prefer long-term holding strategies will
prefer them in opposite order. Blue Chip
Software still needs to design a simulation
where multiple players can participate in the
same market environment. But until such
are available, these will do very nicely.

look at the moves the computer is looking at,
and the ability to save and restore games
from disk. It comes with several games and
chess puzzles. With Chess! (the subset version) you get a thorough set of tutorials on
all phases of the game which are selected
from a special menu. These include practice
on moves just learned. This version is excellent for any beginner.
Considering these three, Chess! (the subset)
for $29.95 is clearly the champion. I have
seen the manual for Sargon III for the Apple. It appears that it's capabilities are very
similar to Chess 7.0 and lower priced at about
$49.95. However, it is not yet scheduled to
be released for the C64. Don't wait for it, enjoy Chess! now for $29.95.

SECOND—WE HAVE FLIGHT
If you are interested in flying an airplane,
then there are three outstanding flight
simulators available for you and your C64.
All three properly use the joystick to control
the plane's actions. The first is IFR (Instrument Flight Rules) from Academy Software
($39.95). This was the first of it's kind
available for the C64. It offers a full set of instruments that lets you takeoff and then
navigate, using only instruments, across
challenging terrain to one of four available
airports. The simulation is realistic, but flying by just a set of gauges is not that much
fun.
The second two, Flight Simulator II and
Solo Flight, will be reviewed by me in the
next issue of CGW.

THIRD—WE HAVE ROLE
PLAYING ADVENTURES
In the beginning, we had the Temple of Apshai from Epyx/Automated Simulations
($39.95). It was first available for the Commodore Pet/2001 series of computers with
the C64 version significantly better. Then,
along came Telengard from Avalon Hill ($23
on cassette, if you have time for it to load,
$28 on disk). And finally we have Ultima II
($69.95) a big price for a very big game.
(Ultima I will not be released for the C64).
Temple offers great graphics (though slow
to display) and great sounds. The game includes over 200 rooms and 20 different types
of monsters. Two other expansion modules
are available if you want more of the same
— Upper Reaches of Apshai and Curse of Ra.
Your character can be created by distributing
up to 20 points to the attributes of intelligence, intuition, ego, strength, constitution, and dexterity. First time adventurers
can let the computer generate a character's
attributes and starting amount of silver. The
next step is supplying yourself with armor,
weapons, and various magic potions and
salves. This is done by bargaining with the
storekeepers, which can be quite humorous.

You are then sent off to explore the four
levels, being able to cash in your treasures
and save the game anytime you exit these
levels. The manual is very descriptive.
Telengard is very similar to Temple but has
50 levels, each with 40,000 rooms (so they
say). There are ten different monsters with
varying levels of strength. Your starting
character is created by distributing up to 18
points (it does accept more) to the attributes
of strength, intelligence, wisdom, constitution, dexterity and charisma, but you are left
to gather all your needs while wandering
about. As you wish, you can stop at an inn
to leave off your treasures. Your basic goal
is to get points and survive. The game has
many random events (good and bad) and is
very fast paced. You are required to read
screen messages quickly, before they disappear, and respond equally fast. The
graphics are good but, as with Temple, the
drawing of the walls takes some time. And
if you wish, you may save the game to continue another day while in any inn. If you
survive, the game can last for many days of
playing.
Ultima is certainly the most extensive and
comprehensive role playing adventure game
available for the C64. There are not rooms,
but rather smooth horizontal and vertical
scrolling areas of water, grass, swamp, forest.
You walk all throughout villages, towns,
castles, dungeons and towers. The latter two
are displayed in perspective. You can also
travel to eight other planets, the sun, and to
five time periods. For getting around you can
walk or use a horse, frigate, plane, or rocket.
(I said it was extensive!) There are ten types
of residents to fight and four other types to
transact with for information necessary to
complete your quest.
Your character is created by distributing
a total of ninety points to the attributes of
strength, agility, stamina, charisma, wisdom,
and intelligence with a minimum of ten
points per attribute. You then get additional
points in specific attributes by selecting a
race (human, dwarven, elven, hobbit), a profession (fighter, thief, wizard, cleric), and a
sex (male or female). Your character requires
food to survive and specific items to accomplish the tasks necessary to defeat the
evil enchantress. These items are bought,
stolen, or won by battling those who wish
you harm. The manual is very well written
and the game is very enjoyable, challenging
and humorous.

AND THE WINNERS ARE
If you want the best of what is currently
available then I recommend Chess! (the
Chess 7.0 subset), Flight Simulator II, and
Ultima II. You may have noticed that the last
two are the most expensive. But, it is far better that you spend more for these and get a
lot of game for your money than buy any two
others and pay as much (two good, but
limited, games will easily cost you $70).
These games will give you many many hours
(even years!) of enjoyment.

TELEGAMING (Cont.)
old operating room technician from Riverside, California. N. T.'s complex game
system includes an original computer program which he uses to determine combat
results.
N.T., who is known by the handle
"Allowyn" on GameSIG, organized his
game by first uploading five detailed text
files to GameSIG's online reference library.
These files included an introduction to his
world and the events leading up to "the
crisis that is now upon us," a description of
spells available to player characters, and a
list of various character skills. N. T. filled his
group with excited players as soon as they
had a chance to read his introductory files.
Here is an excerpt from "one man's tale of
the destruction of Andelaine and the fall of
the Order of Light":
Adventurers, beware! There are
forces loose upon this land; forces
whose malevolence is unparalleled in
all of recorded history. Do you
despise life so much that you would
pit your paltry weapons and insignificant magic against that which strives
to conquer all? You do? Then let not
this harbinger of mankind's doom
stay you from your quest, for all men
know that it is ill-advised to meddle
with fools. But then, I am not long for
this playground of horrors, so wait a
bit, live a while longer, and let this
tired old man tell you of that from
which I flee, and which you seek.
Eighty winters I have seen, and how
I wish that the fates had been kind
and cut my thread at seventy-nine....
Since January, N. T.'s players have ventured forth into danger twice weekly by
posting their moves on GameSIG's message
board. His group consists of players who
live all across the United States and Canada,
and includes novices as well as seasoned
FRPG'ers. "Andelaine" is N.T.'s first experience with running a message board
game. However, he is also simultaneously
DM'ing this same scenario for a "live"
group of friends.
I asked N.T. to compare his two gaming
groups. His reply raised several interesting
points: "The two games are as different as
night and day. All of the players in the live
game have 'died' at least once. The battles
in the live game are more devastating, and
the players make a lot more fatal mistakes.
I think that some of this is attributable to the
individual players, but most of it is the time
factor for making decisions. The live game
has, predictably, moved further along, and
there is a lot less second-guessing and
recriminating among the players. Also, the
clues in the live game have to be much more
obvious than in the board game since the
players cannot re-read the moves. The
moves in the live game tend to be much
more forthright and daring, with less concern about dying."

Again, the issue of time delays cropped
up. N. T. agreed with his fellow message
board DMs that remote games allow for
more extensive analysis before moves are
posted. And, he felt that the pace, since it
is less demanding, helps the neophyte
gamer to avoid "panic moves." However, N.
T. commented that there are problems in the
slower play-by-message games: "A game
that you could run through in a couple of
months of once-a-week sittings, live, may
take many months to complete on a BBS.
This brings player turnover into issue much
more. It can kill a game if you don't have a
good starting team. The interaction between
players in a message board game also tends
to homogenize the players' moves
somewhat. A player may not post a good,
radical move for fear of being ridiculed on
the board, in public, over a period of days.
Nevertheless, the time between moves
allows the DM to modify the system to take
into account the new twists that the players
come up with—twists that the DM never
considered."
Message board games such as N.T.'s save
participants the costs of real-time online
games. By signing onto a system, quickly
downloading the latest messages, and composing responses offline, players can limit
their CompuServe connect charges to just
a few dollars a week. Players who are willing to spend more money, and who want the
"feel" of live interaction, have the option of
meeting in GameSIG's multi-user conference area ("CO") for lengthy strategy
discussions. If asked, the DM attends these
conferences to answer questions.
Fantasy role-playing is now no longer
limited to in-person sessions. Tele-gamers
have the opportunity to create or join exciting online and message board games with
FRPG'ers who live thousands of miles apart.
The success and popularity of this mode of
play is evidenced by the fact that new games
are constantly being advertised on BBSs
throughout the country, and more BBSs are
being set up for the express purpose of providing a "playing field" for groups fantasy
role-players.
To help you find a game, here are the
modem numbers of some gaming bulletin
board systems:
Lyceum—(213) 594-9062 (Long Beach, CA)
Teledunjon III—(214) 960-7654 (Dallas,
TX)
The Keep—(408) 688-9629 (Aptos, CA)
The Safehouse—(612) 724-7066 (Minneapolis, MN)
Asgard—(817) 498-1746 (Ft. Worth, TX)
CompuServe's GameSIG is located on
page GAM-310, and you can find out about
subscribing to CompuServe by calling
(voice) 800-848-8199.
As always, I welcome your comments and
suggestions. You may write to me on CompuServe at 76703,657 or via U.S. Mail to:
Patricia Fitzgibbons
195 Claremont Avenue #115
Long Beach, CA 90803

QUESTRON (Cont.)
the others having "locked doors" It is in
your hands to find the keys. (I bet you can't
guess where they are).
I enjoyed the dungeons most of all. Gone
are the straight walls with no life.
Questrons' dungeons are in 3-D with rough
stone walls and ceilings. They really look
like dungeons. The doors, corridors, and
stairwells all look believable. You are not only able to look down all the long halls but,
if a creature approaches you from the
distance, you can begin firing at it long
before it gets within hurting range (You, of
course, must have in your possession a
weapon like the bow and arrow, as a sword
will not work further than one space away.
You have to complete all three dungeons
before you are able to battle Mantor (if you
give looking for them on land, remember
that it is an island you are on).
Questron is one of the few games I have
played that makes it well worth while playing to the end. The end does not fizzle. If
you complete Questron you will really enjoy an ending fit for a king.
Need I say more? The instruction booklet
gives you some tidbits of data and historical
notes but as always most of the questions
you have are left to be answered during
game play. The game is enjoyable to play
and the differences from the Ultima type
game do make Questron refreshing. I await
the sequels.

SEVEN CITIES (Cont.)

MIG ALLEY (Cont.)

wearing them down. Moderate in villages means "ready
for action". Bump into several natives and your men will
draw swords! On rivers, moderate speed is the same as
reckless, but with no added attrition.

This calls for realistic strategies such as "leading" the
enemy when firing (that is, shooting where he's going to
be rather than where he is), waiting until the enemy is
within close range, and conserving your ammo.

Having gained experience in the historical Americas, I
felt ready to tackle the next feature of the game, the Random World Generator. This procedure takes about 15
minutes, but creates land masses with swamps, native
villages, mountains, plains, forests, and rivers that have
never been seen before. This sophisticated algorithm does
not merely drop mountains, rivers, villages, etc. just
anywhere on the land, but follows established geological
rules of plate-techtonics and consults a cultural dissemination model for its work. You can even make copies of your
random world and exchange them with your friends.

You can chose from five different air battles. In each you
fly a different type of plane on a different kind of mission.
In the Battle for Pusan (September 1952) you fly an F-80
Shooting Star against enemy YAK-9 fighter/bombers. In
the Sunchon Airdrop (October 1950) you pilot a machinegun armed C-119 transport plane while being accosted by
YAK-9's. In both Operation Strangle (June 1951) and in
Sinuiju Airfield (January 1951) you fly an F-86 Sabrejet
against superior MIG-15's. And in the game's namesake,
Mig Alley (December 1950), you pilot an F9F Panther
against MIG-15's. The game documentation gives you just
enough background on each of these battles, and on the
Korean War in general, to make it interesting without bogging you down in unnecessary detail.

When a change is made from one sequence of the game
to another, I was never left without a relevant message on
the screen. There was never the usual Please Wait!, but pertinent information. All disk interaction was very fast, with
the drive actually being noticed very seldom. The transfer
menus all have appealing graphics designating the ships,
the native villages, the expedition, the caches, the gold
mines, the forts, and the missions. This made the menus
not only informative at a glance, but enjoyable.
Excellent graphics give this game realism with easily
recognized symbols for mountains, trees, swamps, and
villages. The vegetation even changes colors as the seasons
progress! The villages have different scenes depending
upon their size—from the simple tepees of the small hunting tribes to the step-pyramids of the Aztec and Incan
civilizations. In the historical world, most of the major
rivers are represented, as are the Great Lakes, the Great
Plains, the Grand Canyon, and the major mountain ranges.
Gold mines (the term denotes any large treasure find) are
even accurate in historical location. Topographic data
depicting terrain, elevation, vegetation and rivers were particularly pleasing to view in the summary maps which
show all of the territory explored. Just let the "demo" run
and watch the complete map of the Western Hemisphere
written to the screen....truely impressive!
Also, since SCOG is so believable as a historical and
geographic simulation, it can be used quite easily as an
educational tool. It doesn't teach, but rather allows the
player (young or old) to learn while enjoying the game. My
son had a great time reenacting the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Surprisingly, the amount of game time it took him
to follow their path was very close to the actual historical
time.
Seven Cities of Gold has such a varied offering that it
is difficult to say just which aspects are best. Its mechanics
run smoothly and add to the overall feeling of the game
rather than act as the artificial actions found in some
games. The color and variety of the graphics convey information in an eye pleasing manner. The total effect is the
creation of a game which will continue to be enjoyed by
the entire family for a very long time.

In general, you must perform realistic combat
maneuvers to win in each of the different scenarios. That
is, you make turning, diving, and climbing decisions based upon the type of aircraft that you are flying and the type
of aircraft you are flying against. For example, you can turn
faster than enemy bombers, but trying to out turn a MIG-15
is virtually useless — only fancy maneuvering and evasive
action will do. Other realistic tactics include deliberately
stalling (allowing the enemy to rapidly overtake you) or
bailing out if your plane is damaged.
The screen flashes red when you're hit. If you plane is
severely damaged, your power drops to zero. Your only
hope is to try to ditch or to bail out. If the conditions are
wrong, your ejection is fatal. However, even if they're right,
you can still be notified that you were captured (and
therefore, lose).
After you are shot down, you automatically assume control of another surviving plane in your squadron. You will
get between 1200 and 2400 points per successful mission
based upon the time used and the scenario's difficulty level.
You are also rated as Novice, Wingman, Pilot, Ace, or
WGFP (World's Greatest Fighter Pilot).
Each scenario ends in either a victory, loss, or "no
result". A victory gives points to the plane that did the
shooting, a loss reduces your number of lives, and no result
gives no points. That means that, if you get shot down, your
opponent gets victory points. But, if you bail out successfully, you do not loose a life. This scoring systems adds to
the fun and logic of the play.
While this game lacks too many features to be called a
true flight simulator (it has no attitude indicator, no
"weather problems", no runways, no player control over
ailerons and rudders, etc. . .), the excellent aerial dogfight
action and Korean war setting make it worthy purchase
for both the war gamer who is looking for a good arcade
experience and for the arcader who is ready to go to war.

I

I

TAKING A PEEK (Cont.)
SPITFIRE SIMULATOR: A combat flight simulator which has moving 3-D targets representing actual
enemy aircraft types. The views
seen by the user are like those from
gun camera pictures taken from
fighter planes in WWII. Apple.
$40.00.

Quality Software
21601 Marilla St.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
THE RETURN OF HERACLES:
"An exploration of Greek
mythology translated into modern
electronics" is how Quality Software describes the game. And the
description is accurate. The
player(s) take on the roles of Greek
heros/heroines as they seek to fulfill
the the tasks assigned by Zeus. An
eleven page glossary as well as
character charts for the over 250
different creatures you can encounter are provided in the
documentation. Apple, Atari, C-64.

Rainbow Computing
8811 Amigo Ave.
Northridge, CA 91324
STELLAR DEFENSE: "Star Trek"
type game with lots of little extras.
You fight against the Sadic Empire
as well as the Machiavellian Cartel
(Nicolo would have been proud) as
you attempt to make the galactic
zone "safe for democracy". Ok, so
it's a bit corny, but the game itself
is nice if you like "Star Trek" type
games. Apple.

Sierra On-Line
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA
WIZTYPE: Typing game using the
Wizard of Id characters. Cartoon
gags add extra life to the game.
There are six modes and twenty
levels of play. Several Systems.

Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd. Bld. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983

RAILS WEST: A economic game
in which players deal in the financing and building of American
transcontinental railroads. The
play of the game involves accumulating cash, stocks, and bonds
so as to control viable railroads.
This is first and foremost an
economic game, not a game of running the railroads. Great education
values. Review coming. Apple and
C-64. $39.95.

TG Software
1104 Summit Ave., Suite 110
Plano, TX 75074
DROIDS: Arcade game in which
you zap berserk droids on your
spaceship. Seven play levels. ROM
cartridge. Atari and Vic-20.
NIGHTSTRIKE: A
shot-emufkygainwhcour
mobile anti-aircraft tanks can move
around to avoid the enemies bombs
while you shoot them down. ROM
cartridge. Atari and Vic-20.

Synapse Software
5221 Central Ave.
Richmond, CA 94804

ZAXXON: The C-64 version of the
popular arcade game. Good
graphics and sound as in other
versions.

SLAMBALL: Scrolling pin-ball
type game. Play-field is about four
screens high. One joy-stick controls
all paddles. C-64.

Gamestar
1302 State St.
Santa Barbara, CA 93101
STAR LEAGUE
bBeASr-EandpLt:zlsxc
game with graphics and sound as
best features. Two player game
good, but computer seems
unbeatable. C-64.
LOR Inc.
Pt.4, Box 4363
Rigby, ID 83442
TERRAIN: Two player only tank
arcade game. Basic graphics but
with cute touches. C-64.

DataSoft, Inc.
19519 Business Center Dr.
Northridge, CA 91324

THE DALLAS QUEST: Adventure game based upon the well
known TV series. Fun game with
good sound (Dallas theme in four
voices) and scrolling graphics.
C-64.

Access Software
925 East 900 South
Salt Lake City, UT 84105
BEACH HEAD: One or Two
player arcade game. Multiple
screen with exciting animation
and sound. Screens include antiaircraft shooting, ship to ship firing, and many others. C-64.

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

INDUSTRY NEWS (Cont.)
games will be available for the Apple
and C-64 computers.
Strategic Simulations have announced the winner of their two Fortress contests. Dion Dosser of
Reseda, CA won the Atari contest
and Brent Bordic of Kingwood, TX
won the Apple contest. Perhaps
CGW should have a Fortress contest?
What do you think?
SSI translations available now or
very soon include: Fighter Command
(C-64; Atari later); Geopolitique
(C-64); Cosmic Balance (C-64); Fortress (C-64). Objective:Kursk, Gary
Grigsby's new game for the Apple
and Atari should be out by the time
you read this. War in Russia is
scheduled for an end of June release
for the Atari and Apple at $79.95.
Look for Baltic 85 in late July. Note:
In order to play RDF it is no longer
necessary to buy Germany 1985.
Atari owners can look for the following games now or soon: Questron, 50
Mission Crush, Broadsides, Galactic
Adventures, Computer Baseball,
Computer Ambush, and Reforger 88
(a Fulda Gap game by Gary Grigsby).
According to a recent study by
TALMIS, Inc., a market research
company for the personal computer
industry, 25% of all U.S. households
contain at least one member who
uses a personal computer at work or
at school. More than 20% of all
households with children have at
least one child using the computer at
school.

Screenplay has released INSTITUTE, a psychological drama for
the Apple, Atari, and C-64. In true
Freudian fashion, the clues to your
escape can only be found through a
series of four dreams, induced by a
mysterious red powder. In the Institute, you may find yourself in a
prehistoric jungle, of aboard the
doomed Titanic. Each dream provides you with information and items
you will need to escape. List Price:
$29.95.

There were 312 RIDs turned in by press
time for this issue.
Newly rated games and updated game
ratings are listed with bold type in the table
on page 47.
According to the results from RID #13 the
average age of a CGW reader is 32 years. By
coincidence the editor of CGW is 32 years old.
Talk about writing for a narrow audience! The
range was 5 years old to 67 years young.
The average reader of CGW spends $54 per
month on computer games. The breakdown
by machine was: Atari — 45%; Apple — 43%;
C-64 — 9%.

GAME RATINGS
The table on page 47 includes games
evaluated by our readers. For a game to be included in this listing it must first have been
offered for rating in our regular RID rating
system. Games offered for evaluation are
those covered in the magazine and/or those
having a good sales record during the time of
evaluation. Once offered for evaluation, the
game must have been evaluated by a sufficient
number of readers to be included in the
results. Any game not evaluated by at least
10% of the respondents was not included in
the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible)
to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were asked
to consider such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging, documentation);
GAME DESIGN (design, playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the game wear well?)
Several people have asked about games that
are offered for ratings more than once over
the course of several issues. We usually re-rate
the top ten each time (and sometimes other
games as well). Please rate the game each time
we ask (not just the first time you notice it in
the R.I.D.).

RID #14 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles
are listed for evaluation. Please take time to
evaluate these games and articles. Use the
guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave
blank any game which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself, not your opinion of the game being
reviewed. Enter a zero for any article that does
not interest you.

INSIDE INDUSTRY SURVEY
Questions 1 through 10 relate to the INSIDE
THE INDUSTRY survey questions as detailed on page 12 of this issue. Part I requires that
you place the appropriate letter in the space
for question #1. Part II requires that you check
the appropriate numbers on the R.I.D. card

(2-7). Part III requires that you write the appropriate number in the space for question #8.
Part IV requires that you write in the number
of computer games that you buy per month
in question 9. Question 10 relates to Part V and
asks for the number of games copied per
month.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 46 for details on the Reader Input Device

